AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations CONTINUED UPON The Thirty-eighth,
Thirty-ninth, Fortieth, Forty-first, and Forty-second (being the five last)
Chapters of the Book OF JOB: Being the Substance of Fifty-two Lectures or
Meditations.

By JOSEPH CARYL, Minister of the Gospel.

JAMES 5.11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord, that the Lord is pitiful, and of tender mercy.

LONDON, Printed by M. and S. Simmons, and are to be sold by Robert Boulter at
the Turks-head near the Royal Exchange. 1666.

TO THE Christian Reader: TO Those especially of the City of London, who have
been THE PROMOTERS Of this WORK.
SIRS,
THE end of a thing (says Solomon, Eccl. 7, 8.) is better than the beginning
thereof. Not that all things end better than they begin: some persons begin
well, and some things are begun well, which end, and are ended not so well,
that I say not very ill.

Through the All-disposing providence of God, and the importunate call of not a
few worthy friends, I began this Work; and now, after twenty-four years travel,
making twelve stages (in so many parts, the whole is come forth) I am come to
the end of it; And truly, I might justly be reproved, at least, for dullness and
indiligence, or counted a very slow-paced Traveller, had I spent that
twenty-four years (the best of my time and strength) in measuring so short a
journey. But, as I have this to say toward an Apology for my overlong stay in
this work, that I have had frequent diversions, for a considerable part of that
time, quite from it; so the whole time which I have spent in it, has been but
a diversion, or time (I hope, honestly) stolen, either from my rest, or from
that which was my more proper work

And, now that I have, at last, ended what I began, all that I shall say of it,
is, that I have ended it. Whether I began it well, or have ended it well, and
whether or no the end be better than the beginning, is not for me to say.
Should I say, that I began it well, and have ended it well, or that the end is
better than the beginning, it were a piece of most immodest pride; and should I
say the contrary of both, or of either, it might deservedly be called more than
a piece of proudest modesty. Such as it is, from the beginning to the end, it is
what my weakness, with the strength of Christ given in; what my small
industriousness, with the blessing given down from above, could attain unto.
And I humbly give thanks to the Father of lights, from whom every good gift,
and every perfect gift comes, for any light received or held out toward the
understanding of this Book; in which (who sees not?) there are many things (as
the Apostle Peter says of Saint Paul's Epistles) hard to be understood, so hard
to be understood, that, though I am confident (through the grace of God with
me) I have not wrested them to my own hurt, or the hurt (much less destruction)
of others, (as it is there said, the ignorant and unstable do the other
Scriptures, to their own destruction) yet I am not ashamed to acknowledge, that
I fear I have not attained so clear an understanding about some of them, as to
clear them (which has been my desire) with satisfaction to the understanding
of others. However, if what I have attained to, may be in any measure
serviceable to the Church of God, or helpful to any poor soul in an afflicted
condition (such was Jobs) I have reached one great end aimed at; and if God
have any glory by it, I have reached the greatest end which can be aimed at.
And though the work should be found to have many defects, possibly mistakes, in
it, yet the ingenuous Reader will heartily interpret them, or charitably cover
them, knowing that failings are common to humane frailty, in the best of men,
how much more in the meanest of them! And I shall account it a great kindness,
if I may be friendly minded of those defects; that so, if ever any of these
Pieces shall be admitted to come out again, an amendment may be made, and the
Work grow up to more perfection.

This last Part, now coming forth, contains the whole transaction (from first
to last) between God and Job, none speaking but they two, and Job but very
little. Elihu having finished his speech in the close of the thirty seventh
Chapter, the Lord himself appeared at the entrance of the thirty eighth, in a
Majestic and tremendous manner, bespeaking Job out of a vehement and
tempestuous whirlwind; and taking up the same argument which Elihu had so much
insisted upon before, for the conviction of Job, carries him in discourse,
quite through the universe, thereby farther to convince him, by the view and
consideration of his mighty and admirable works of creation and providence, how
ignorant and weak he was in himself, how altogether unable and incompetent to
contend with God, and therefore how rash and inconsiderate he had been, in not
submitting (how great soever his sufferings were) more quietly to him. And, as
Elihu said (Chap. 35.11.) That God teaches us more than the beasts of the
earth, and makes us wiser than the fowls of Heaven: so doubtless, one great
scope which the Lord had in his eye throughout that discourse, was to teach
Job, and with him us, that his care was much more over him, and is over us,
than over the beasts of the earth, or the fowls of heaven. And hereupon having
showed his own infinite power and wisdom, as also his goodness and tender
compassions, in providing for all sorts of irrational living creatures, he left
Job, and leaves us to make the Inference, how watchful he is over, how
respectful to man, a rational as well as a living creature. Our blessed Savior
preaching upon the same subject to his Disciples, expresses the Inference
(Mat. 6.26.) Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they
reap, nor gather into barns, yet y^^ heavenly father feeds them: are ye not
much better than they? And again (verse. 30.) Wherefore it God so cloth the
grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven: shall
he not much more cloth you, O ye of little faith? Jesus Christ saw it
necessary to make these express applications to his Disciples, who, at that
time, were both of little faith, and of little understanding. But here the Lord
left Job (a wise and knowing man) to pick or spell out his meaning, and make
application to himself, while he told him so particularly, how his providence
at once overruled and maintained, The roaring Lion, the wild Goat, the wild
Ass the stubborn Unicorn, the strong Horse, the mighty Behemoth among the
beasts of the earth; the devouring Raven, the proud Peacock, the foolish
Ostrich, the swift winged Hawk, and the high-soaring Eagle, among the fowls of
the air; as also, the formidable Leviathan, among, or rather representing all
the fishes of the Sea.

Job having with steady, yet trembling attention, heard all these words spoken
to him, with irrefragable authority, by the Lord himself out of the whirlwind,
sat down convinced, that surely the great God, the Creator of the ends of the
earth, who had so exact an eye upon all those creatures, both for the
continuance of their species or kinds, and the preservation of their
individuals or particulars, could not possibly cast off the care of mankind,
nor of him in particular, no nor put any man to any hardship or suffering, but
for some great end or ends, glorious always to himself, and in the issue good
for the wise and patient sufferer. He was also convinced, that himself not well
understanding the mysteries of providence (nor indeed could any more fully
understand them, than he did the mysteries of creation, or the manner how God
laid the foundations of the earth, and shut up the sea with doors; he, I say,
not well understanding the mysteries of providence, was convinced that he) had
done very ill, to make such long and loud complaints about it, that is, about
the severity of Gods dealings with him; as if like an enemy he intended him
nothing but pain and sorrow, by the pains and sorrows which he endured.

Thus, at last, Job began to see, that as being himself Gods creature, God
might do with him what he pleased; and, that God, being his absolute Sovereign,
could not wrong him, whatever he was pleased to do with him: so that, forasmuch
as God was so careful of, and kind to those inferior, reasonless creatures,
there was no shadow of a reason, why he should have the least jealousy of Gods
kindness to him and regard of him, much less make such an outcry, that God was
unkind to, and regardless of Him, whom he had not only ennobled, as the rest of
mankind, with reason, but renewed by grace, and filled with the holy fear of
his great and glorious name.

These impressions being made upon Job, by the mighty power of God speaking to
him out of the whirlwind, he presently cried out as fast against himself, and
against his own ignorance and rashness, as he had done before concerning the
harshness of his sufferings under the hand of God; confessing (chap. 40.4.)
Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? And (chap. 42.3, 6.) I have
uttered that I understood not, things too wonderful for me, which I knew not;
wherefore, I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes.

Job being thus humbled and melted down, Job who was lately in the dust of
dishonor and almost in the dust of death, being thus brought to the dust of
repentance; the Lord suffered him not to lie long there, but quickly raised him
up out of all his sufferings; and, passing by all his mispeakings, while
sufferings lay heavy upon him, he (The Lord) passed sentence upon, or gave
judgment against Eliphaz and his two friends, as not having spoken of him the
thing that was right, as his servant Job: and not only so, but commanded them
to do him right, by acknowledging that they had wronged him; why else were they
ordered by the Lord to go unto him as a mediator for their peace? why else were
they ordered by the Lord to bring their sacrifice unto him, that he offering it
up, and praying for them, the wrath of God which was kindled against them,
might be quenched, and they received into favor? All these offices of love Job
freely did for them; and no sooner had he done them, but God heaped favors
upon him, doubling his former substance, and causing all his former friends,
who had carried it unfriendly, unhandsomely toward him, and would not own him
in the day of his distress, to hasten their addresses, to bring him honorable
presents, and redintegrate their broken friendship with him. In all these
things God blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning, and he found
by comfortable experience (which was mentioned at the beginning of this
prefatory Epistle out of Solomon's Ecclesiastes) that the end of a thing is
better than the beginning of it; the latter end of his life being fuller of
peace, riches, and honor, than the former; and he not ending his life in this
world, till he was full of days, fuller of grace, and fully fitted for an
endless life in glory.

Thus, as in the foregoing parts of this book, we have heard of the patience of
Job, so in this we may see (as the Apostle James says, chap. 5.11.) the end of
the Lord. But what was that end of the Lord? Any man of ordinary capacity,
reading the holy story, may resolve it in the common way, that, The Lord gave
Job twice as much as he had before that (being restored) his seven thousand
sheep were multiplied to fourteen thousand, his three thousand camels to six
thousand, his five hundred yoke of oxen to a thousand, and his five hundred
she-asses to as many. This end of the Lord with Job is obvious, and runs in
sight to every Reader; nor can it be denied, but that this was a very good and
an honorable end: yet, behold, the Lord made a much better, and more
honorable end for Job than this. This was the end of Jobs cross; that, was not
only so, but also of his controversy. Satan charged Job as an Hypocrite, his
friends joined with Satan in that, yet stayed not there, they charged him
likewise as Hetorodox, as a man not only unsincere in his profession of
religion, but unsound in the principles of it. The Lord made an end for Job in
this matter also, abetting his opinion in that great and difficult problem of
providence rather than theirs, giving him the day, and putting the crown of
victory upon his head in that dispute, while he said to Eliphaz and his two
friends, Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job.
This, this was The end of the Lord. To hear this gracious determination from
the mouth of the supreme and infallible moderator of all controversies, was
(without controversy) a thousand times more pleasing and satisfactory to Jobs
spirit, not only than the double cattle, which the Lord gave him, but, than if
the Lord had given him all the cattle upon a thousand hills; or than if all the
fowls of the air, and fishes of the sea, had been given to him.

In this end of the Lord for Job, we may see not only that the Lord is
infinitely wise and just, but (as it follows in that place of the Apostle
James) very pitiful and of tender mercy. The Lord shows himself very pitiful
and of tender mercy, when he puts an end to the crosses of his servants, by
doubling their outward comforts; he does so too, when he puts an end to the
controversies of his servants, by vindicating their credit, and making it
appear, that they have spoken of him, and of his ways, the thing that is right,
or more rightly than their opposers and reproachers. This example of the Lords
pity and tender mercy in doing both for Job, may strengthen our faith in
believing that he will, and lengthen out our patience in waiting, till he does
make both these desirable ends for all those, who like Job have lay'n long
under the pressing burdens of hard afflictions, and harsh constructions.

Now, that the Lord would finish this work of mercy, and cut it short in
righteousness, wiping tears from off all faces, and taking away the rebuke of
his people from off the earth, by a timely restitution of them to their lost
enjoyments, and blasted credits (which yet will not be fully done, until the
times of the restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of
all his holy Prophets since the world began; that the Lord (I say) would finish
this work) should be our uncessant cry to God in prayer, for all his sorrowing
Jobs, even for all those, who are any where companions in tribulation, and in
the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ. To his blessing, and the effectual
working of his holy Spirit, I commend you in the perusal of this ensuing
commentary, that, reading ye may understand, believe, and profit to
sanctification, consolation, and salvation, according to the will of God, and
the hearts desire of,

May 10th 1666. Your affectionate friend and servant, JOSEPH CARYL.

Reader,
BY reason of the Authors absence while the greatest Part of the Book was
doing, the following faults have past, which thou art desired to correct.

Errata.
Page Line Error Correction. 3 23 each to to each 259 22 those these 267 22
Lightning Hightning 289 13 he blot it out 350 3 Indea Judea 351 35 Bengata
Bengala 352 12 2d 22d 354 10 have has 354 13 not so so not 369 14, 15 As was
showed before blot it out 394 26., 448 38 she he 455 9 our their 468 1 forbids
forbad 477 12 not blot it out 615 14 probably probable 620 14 his horns blot
out, his 620 15 his claws blot out, his 645 2 they blot it out 650 20
understand understood 659 26 and to be blot it out 696 7 a no 714 32 have has
728 20 with blot it out 746 12 them him 746 17 with any ay with 750 4 refuge
refuse 770 34 Observation Information 797 13 will willed 806 36 fervency blot
it out 822 27 taken taking 831 36 follows followed 842 37 this the 843 23
means meant 846 4 extraordinary extraordinarily 846 33 repents repented 876
13 shows showed 876 13 directs directed 880 16 his blot it out 881 1 as was
932 24 and so 942 10 take one instance for all blot it out 944 13 are is 944 25
he has they have 969 19 or and 980 4 do does 1009 26 first blot it out.

Omissions.
Page Line 202 28 after water, add, First, of the waters in the clouds from
those upon the earth. Secondly, of those upon the earth into the several parts
of it. 455 24 after come, add, she had not been reproved. 714 7 after to,
add, do 769 16 after exercise, add, us. 777 13 after fear, add, not. 786 6
after omnipotency, add, I know. 809 19 after hence, add, some. 817 8 after
ear, add, has often. 372 9 after him, add, when he asked him whether he
would do it? 876 1 after it, add, even Heathenish. 885 6 after and, add, as.
923 20 after accepted, add, them. 939 20 after and, add, that I. 964 9 after
ye, add, then. 972 14 after is, add, said. 997 10 after sex, add, yet.

AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations UPON The Thirty-eighth,
Thirty-ninth, Fortyeth, Forty-first and Forty-second (being the Last) Chapters
of the Book of JOB.
JOB, Chap. 38. Verse. 1, 2, 3. 1. Then the Lord answered Job out of the
whirlwind, and said,

2. Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?

3. Gird up now thy loins like a man: for I will demand of thee, and answer
thou me.


THis Chapter begins the last Act, or Conclusion of that great Disputation
between Job and his three Friends, held forth in this Book. We have heard Jobs
three Friends strongly charging him: We have heard Job stiffely defending
himself: We have heard Elihu, though moderating the matter between them, yet
sharply reproving him. Elihu was indeed a quick, but a necessary reprover,
provided and sent by God:

First, To calm and cool Jobs spirit, di^quieted by enduring sharp afflictions
from the hand of God, and heated by hea^ing those sharper accusations from the
tongues of men.

Secondly, To reclaim him from those over-eager defenses of his own integrity,
and likewise from those over-passionate complaints ab^ut the dealings of God,
to a better and more submissive temper of spirit toward him, as also to lower
thoughts of himself.

Elihu fell upon the useful point, and hit (as I may say) the Nail on the
head, he struck the right Vein, and met with the peccant Humor: yet being
young, and wanting gravity to set all home, and make it work; or, to make the
impression deep enough upon Job, it was but need that God himself should second
him, and he did it to purpose, or with full effect; pressing the same
Arguments, for the main, which Elihu had begun; yet so, that we may manifestly
discern a wide difference, whether we respect words or things, matter or
manner, between men, how much soever assisted by the spirit of God, and God
himself in speaking.

Here the Eternal God Jehovah, having seen his faithful servant, and stout
Champion Job, contending and wrestling long with Satan, his professed enemy,
and with his harsh and censorious, though both professed and real Friends,
foreseeing also that if Job and his Friends (who had also been provoked by
Elihu) should have proceeded to answer him, a new broil must needs begin; God
(I say) who never fails, nor forsakes his in their extremity, or in time of
their greatest need, seeing and foreseeing all this, stepped in most seasonably,
and most graciously to undertake the decision of this great Controversy
between Job and his Friends, in person, raising a stormy Wind, as a witness of
his mighty presence, or to testify who was there, as also (though with a
Fatherly love and affection, yet) impartially and plainly to convince Job of
his error, showing him wherein he had offended, and bringing him at last upon
his knees, in a self-abhorrence and repentance in dust and ashes.

Thus God the chief Judge, the great Arbitrator, and Determiner of all doubts
and questions, and of all matters and things; the great God (I say) declared
himself, to whom Job had made so many appeals, whom he so earnestly desired to
take further and fuller cognizance of his Cause, He, even He comes forth as a
just and righteous Judge, and lets him and his Friends know his mind and
judgment in the case. So then,

The Question ventilated in this Book, is not stated according to the judgment
of a man, who is subject to error, but according to the infinite wisdom and
understanding of the great God, who searches the heart, and knows all
secrets, who is light, and in whom there is no darkness at all.

And indeed, in the latter part of this Book, we may well conceive God himself
speaking, he speaks so like himself: For here the understanding Reader may
perceive a wonderful copiousness of speech, and largness of discourse,
strengthened with the exactest and weightiest reasons, set forth with such
variety of matter, with such gravity of expressions, with such pressing queries
and and interrogations, that it very much excells all that had been spoken
either by the Disputants or the Moderator.

And such was the condescension of God, that he seems to take the words out of
Elihu's mouth, and urge over his Arguments anew, before he would give the final
sentence in this case; from which, as there could be no appeal, so, in which,
there could be no mistake. All this the Lord contracts into two Orations, or
Speeches, each to of which Job Answers, and subscribes by an humble submission.

The first of these Speeches, is contained in this thirty-eighth Chapter, and
to the end of the thirty-ninth: To which God calls for an Answer in the two
first Verses of the fortieth Chapter; and Job gives his Answer in the third,
fourth, and fifth verses of that Chapter.

The second Speech or Discourse of God with Job begins at the sixth verse of
the fortieth Chapter, and is continued to the end of the one and fortieth
Chapter; to which we have Jobs Answer at the beginning of the forty second
Chapter, to the end of the sixth verse; and then the Chapter closes with Gods
special and irrefragable Judgment upon, or determination of the Question
between Job and his Friends, as also with a description of Jobs blessed
restoration after his fall, to a higher condition of outward prosperity and
tranquillity than ever he enjoyed before. Thus you have the sum of what is
behind of the whole Book.

This Chapter with the next hold out the Lords first Argumentation or di course
with Job, and in it we may consider three things.

First, The Preface or Introduction, in the first, second, and third Verses of
this Chapter.

Secondly, The Speech it self, to the end of the thirty-ninth Chapter.

Thirdly, Gods demand of an Answer, or that Job should give him an account of
himself, or of what he had said at the beginning of the fortieth Chapter.

The words under present consideration are a Preface or Introduction, leading
to the whole business, and in them we may consider three things.

First, The Historians transition, or, an Historical transition, (verse. 1.)
Then the Lord answered Job out of the Whirlwind, and said. This the Historian
or Penman of this Book inserts to connect the matter of this Chapter with that
which went before; he connects the discourse of Elihu, which ended at the
thirty-seventh Chapter, with the discourse of God at the beginning of this:
Then the Lord answered Job out of the Whirlwind, and said.

Secondly, We have here what the Lord said, in form of Preface, leading in the
intended matter; and that,

First, By way of reprehension, or by a chiding Question about what Job had
said (verse. 2.) Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
This is it which the Lord said, when he began with Job; Who is this that
darkeneth counsel, by words without knowledge? As if he had said, let me see
the man, or, who is the man that speaks thus? I know there is a Question (and
I shall speak somewhat to it afterward) Whether these words were directed to
Job or Elihu; yea, some Question, whether this whole Chapter be not intended to
Elihu rather than to Job, (I shall answer that Question also afterward) but I
give it now in the analysis of the context, as I pu^pose, God willing, to state
it when I come to the Answer of that Question: And therefore I say the reproof
falls upon Job, whom God thus bespake, beginning with a chiding, Who is this
that darkneth counsel, by words without knowledge?

Secondly, by way of provocation to answer; or, we have here the Lords command
given Job to prepare himself for an Answer, as well as he could, to what
himself should say (verse. 3.) Gird up now thy loins like a man, for I will
demand of thee, and answer thou me. As the Lord reproved and chid him for what
he had said, so the Lord exhorted and encouraged him to set and fit himself the
best he was able, to answer what himself had to say unto him.

Thus we have the intendment of these three Verses; and if you would have in
one word, a Prospect of the whole following Discourse, of God with Job, the Sum
of it may be given and taken thus:

That as Elihu before, so now the Lord would have Job know and confess that no
man must presume to be so bold with him as to question his doings; that is the
great mark at which God aimed in all he said to Job. And the confirmation or
proof of it is taken up from this unquestionable ground; No man must Question
any thing which God does to him or with him, for this very reason, Because God
does it; or, because God often alone, always in chief, has done and does all
things. God is the alone Creator of all things, he has given all things their
Being, he has put all things into the Order in which they stand, and he
preserves them in their standing; and if any evil befall man, the hand of God
has done it much more than the hand of any man: what then has any man to do
to question his doings?

Now that God alone has created and does order all things, he himself proves,
by calling Job to show where he was When the Foundation of the Earth was laid,
and Bounds were set to the Sea, etc. and so proceeds to assert and hold forth
his sole Power in furnishing the Earth with Beasts, the Air with Fowls, and the
Sea with Fish.

The Lord having thus given Job to understand, that the whole World is his
Work, and that he gave Being to all the Creatures in the World for the help of
man, without the help of man, would have him thereby also understand and be
convinced, that he and all men ought to adore, and quietly submit to his
providential workings, or the products of his Providence all the world over.

That Is (as was said) the general Point carried through this whole Discourse of
God with Job, the particulars whereof yield much matter both of Meditation and
Admiration. I begin with the Preface: Verse. 1. Then the Lord answered Job out
of the Whirlwind, and said.

In this Verse we have three things.

First, The Person answering.

Secondly, The Person answered.

Thirdly, The manner of his Answer.

The Person answering is, the Lord; the Person answered, is Job; the manner of
the Answer is, out of a Whirlwind; Then the Lord answered Job out of the
Whirlwind.

In the first word of the Text, we have (that which our Translation makes
emphatical) an intimation of the time or season of this Divine interposition;
then the Lord answered, etc. The Hebrew Text does not express this Adverb of
time, there it is only, the Lord answered, but we well supply it, rendering,
then the Lord answered; as if the Penman had said, at that very nick, instant
or juncture of time, the Lord came in; the words were no sooner out of the
mouth of Elihu, he had no sooner concluded his speech with Job, but the Lord
began, and answered Job; and if the Lord had not just then interposed, possibly
Job might have replied, and a new heat might have risen, to the increasing of
his troubles, and the inflaming of all their Spirits (as was hinted before)
therefore the Lord to stop all further proceedings, or speech between them two,
began presently to speak himself. Then the Lord answered. Take this Observation
from it; The Lord will appear in the fittest season.

It was time for the Lord to appear, lest this poor man should have been
utterly swallowed up with sorrows, and overwhelmed with his affliction, or
lest he should have been drawn out too long and too far in his bitter
complainings and impatiency. The Lord is a God of judgment; blessed are they
that wait for him (Isa. 30.18.) He is a wise God, and knows how to time every
action; he knows when to appear, when to show himself. As he himself will not
contend for ever (Isa. 57.16.) so neither will he let others contend overlong,
least the Spirit should sail before him, and the souls which he has made.
This is a comfortable truth with respect both to Nations, and Persons, both to
the case of the Church of God in general, and of every believer in particular.
The Apostle Peter having counseled the afflicted to humble themselves under
the mighty hand of God (1 Pet. 5.6.) adds this encouragement (in the next
words) to do so, that he may exalt you in due time: though not in your time,
nor at your day, the day when you would have him do it; yet he will do it in
time, and in due time, that is, when it shall be most fit and best for you.
Thus he appeared to and for Job in the Text, when the sorrows of his heart
were enlarged, and when he had most need of such an appearance. The Lord knows
how at any time, and when it is the most proper time, to relieve his servants.
Then The Lord answered Job.

The word here used is Jehovah; and several of the Learned take notice, that it
is here used with a special significancy: for in the discourses of Job and his
friends throughout this Book, other names of God are, if not universally, yet
mostly used, as Elshaddai, Eloah, etc. In the first Chapter indeed, where God
is spoken of by the divine Historian or sacred Penman of this History, he is
named Jehovah, as also in some other such like places; but in the body of the
dispute not so: And two reasons may be given of it.

First, The name Jehovah imports the Being of God; and therefore God himself,
being about to speak of his giving a Being to the whole Creation, and to
several sorts of creatures, he is most properly represented by his name
Jehovah, which, as it implies that he is the First Being, the Fountain of his
own Being, or that he is of himself, so, that he gives a Being to all things,
and that in him (as the Apostle told the great Philosophers of Athens, Acts
17.) we live, and move, and have our being.

Secondly, The Lord (though he came in a Whirlwind, yet) manifested himself
in a clearer light to Job, than ever he had done before. Now, as in the third
of Exodus, when the Lord sent Moses to the people of Israel to bring them up
out of Egypt, to Canaan, (which was a great work, one of the greatest that was
ever done in the world, and in which the Lord made the most glorious discovery
of his Power, Justice, and Mercy; when God I say, sent Moses upon this service)
he said unto him (Exodus 6.2, 3.) I am the Lord, I am Jehovah, and I appeared
unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob by the Name of God Almighty; but by my
name Jehovah was I not known to them. God being about to make himself more
known in the world, than he had been to that day, by his dreadful plagues upon
Pharaoh, and the miraculous deliverance of his people out of Egypt (as he said
( chap. 9.16.) And in very deed, for this cause have I raised thee up, for to
show in thee my power, and that my name may be declared in all the earth. The
Lord, I say, being about to do these great things for the manifestation of his
own greatness) gave this charge to Moses at the sixth verse of the sixth
chapter before mentioned; Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am
Jehovah, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, etc.
Thus in this latter part of the book of Job, the Lord being about to loosen the
bonds of Jobs affliction, and to ease him of his burden, as also to declare and
manifest himself more clearly to him than formerly (as he confessed ( chap.
42.5.) I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear; but now mine eyes have
seen thee) he therefore assumed his great name Jehovah. Then the Lord Answered
Job, etc.

But some may say, Job had not spoken lately, much less last. Elihu spoke out
six whole Chapters since Job spoke a word; and though Elihu gave him the
liberty, yea almost provoked him to speak, yet he laid his hand upon his mouth,
he spoke not a word. How then can it be said, The Lord answered Job? To avoid
this difficulty,

Some render, Then the Lord answered concerning, or about Job; And these turn
the whole discourse of God in this and the next Chapter upon Elihu, in favor
of Job. I shall touch upon that opinion and interpretation (as was said)
afterward: but at present affirm, that Job was the person to whom the Lord
here directed his Answer; and to take off this doubt, how the Lord could be
said to answer Job, when Job had not spoken last, but Elihu,

I answer (as upon a like occasion it has been elsewhere showed in this book
chapter 3.2.) that sometimes in Scripture, a Speech begun is called an Answer,
where nothing had been spoken before, to which that speech could be applied in
way of answer, Matthew. 11.25. Matthew. 17.4. The reason of this Hebraisme, is
because such as begin to speak, do either answer the necessity of the matter,
or the desire of the hearers; and so they give a real and vertual, though not a
formal Answer. Yet there are two considerations, in which we may apply the word
Answer, formally and strictly taken, to Job.

First, If we consider Job's wishes and requests.

Secondly, If we consider Job's complaints, and (though the word be somewhat
hard) his murmurings: The Lord may be said to answer Job, as to his wish,
desire, or request; because Job had earnestly desired and requested more than
once, that God would take his Cause in hand, or that he would have the hearing
of it. Thus he spoke at the third verse of the three and twentieth Chapter: O
that I knew where I might find him, that I might come even to his Seat: I would
order my Cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments. Zophar also, one
of Jobs friends, made the same request concerning Job (Chap. 11.2.) O that God
would speak, and open his lips against thee: As if he had said, Eliphaz has
been speaking, and Bildad has been speaking, and I am now about to speak, but
O that God would speak. It was the wish of Job that God would speak, and it was
the wish of this his friend, and now behold God appears, possibly beyond their
expectation, though not beside their wish; for it is like they had not faith
enough to believe that God would answer those wishes. So then, God may be said
here to answer, because (as it was prayed) he now took the matter into his own
hand, and in person (as I may say) argued the Case with Job, and finally
determined his Cause.

Hence Note; The wishes, requests, and prayers of good men have sometimes been
heard, though they were over-bold in making them, or had no clear ground to
make them.

Job had no rule for such a Petition, that he might presently have a trial at
the Tribunal of God; yet God was so gracious as to answer him in it, not only
to his reproof, but to his comfort. The Name of God is, O thou that hear
prayer, (Psalm. 65.2.) If carnal men have their extravagant prayers and wishes
granted, it is in wrath; but if the Lord grant the passionate prayers and wishes
of a godly man, it proves, though sometimes a present affliction, yet always,
upon one account or other, a mercy in the issue. When the lusting Israelites
wished for flesh, the Lord heard their wishes; take Quails your bellies full,
till they come out at your nostrils; but while the meat was in their mouths,
the wrath of God fell upon them. If the Lord grants what lust asks, such pay
dear for what they have for the asking. It has been anciently said, Multi
irato deo exaudiuntur.
many have their prayers heard in mere anger; so are all theirs who pray for
what they have not, in mere discontent with what they have. The Lord heard Job,
and not in anger, but in favor and condescension to him. Now if some not well
grounded nor warranted requests of good men may be granted and answered (the
Lord pitying their weakness, and eyeing their uprightness) in favor; how much
more may they be confident, that their gracious and humble requests, such
requests as are every way suitable to the Word and Will of God, shall be
graciously answered!

Secondly, The Lord answered, as the Prayer and Wish, so the Complaints of Job;
He had complained sometimes (though he were a mirror of patience) impatiently.
These complaints the Lord answered, but it was with severe and sharp reproofs,
as we find in the next verse.

To conclude this query, we may say, God had two great ends or designs in
answering both the wishes and complaints of Job.

First, That he might humble and convince him, that he might stop his mouth and
silence his complainings for ever, as he did most effectually.

Secondly, That after his humiliation, and repentance, he might justify and
acquit him, and also restore him to his former comforts and enjoyments, as he
did most mercifully. This being the design of the Lord in speaking to Job, what
he said, may well be called an Answer.

But how or in what manner did the Lord answer him? Surely, in such a manner,
as never man was answered. The Lord answered Job Out of the Whirlwind.

He answered him (as we say) to some Tune. A Whirlwind makes strange kind of
Music. A Whirlwind is a sudden mighty loud-blustring Wind, taking away, or
bearing down all before it. A Whirlwind is a Wind which moves whirling, and
gyring about all the points of the Compass, no man knows where to have it, nor
how to shelter himself from it. I have had occasion to speak of the Wind, and
of the natural ordinary Whirlwind in the former Chapter. But here is a Whirlwind
extraordinary, if not supernatural. There Is much questioning among some
Interpreters how we are to conceive of this Whirlwind. I would answer that
point a little, and then give some account, why the Lord spoke to Job out of
such a Whirlwind.

First, Some affirm that it was only a Visional Whirlwind: As if the Lord
appeared (as it were) in a Tempest or Whirlwind to Job in a deep sleep, such as
was upon Adam (Genesis 2.21.) when the Lord took one of his ribs, and made the
Woman. In such a deep sleep, say they, Job saw a Whirlwind, and heard the Lord
speaking to him out of it: As Ezekiel, who in a Vision looked, and behold a
Whirlwind came out of the North; as we read in the first Chapter of that
Prophecy, ( verse 4.)

Secondly, Others conceive that it was not a Visional, but a Metaphorical
Whirlwind, or a Whirlwind in a figure; and we may give you a threefold
Metaphor, or three things, to which this passage of Providence may allude to a
speaking out of a Whirlwind.

First, God answered Job out of the Whirlwind; that is, when there was a great
bussle or storm among the Disputants, conflicting about Jobs case; one moving
this way, another thar, all being tossed about (as it were) with the wind of
their several opinions in ventitalating his condition. Out of this Whirlwind it
was (say some) or while all were thus discomposed in their spirits, and could
not compose the matter in difference between them and Job, during this hurry or
troublesome state of things and minds, the Lord arose and answered Job.

Secondly, The Lord may be said to answer Job out of the Whirlwind, because he
spoke to him angrily, displeasedly, and reprovingly. Anger, especially the
Lords Anger or Displeasure, is often in Scripture compared to a Storm or
Tempest: As if this Whirlwind were nothing else but a sharp angry chiding. When
a man chides, we say, The man's in a storm; and we may say with reverence, when
the Lord speaks chidingly (as he did to Job) he is in a storm, or (according to
the Text) speaks out of a Sto my Whirlwind: Thus also, when the Lord speaks
pleasingly, and gently, then he may be said to speak in a calm. There Is a truth
in that.

Thirdly, The Lord answered in a Whirlwind; that is, while Job, both as to his
outward condition and inward disposition, or the frame of his spirit, was
evidently in a great storm or toss. For doubtless, his spirit was very stormy
and tossed up and down at that time, that is, much troubled and disquieted,
upon the with-drawings of God, and the unkindness of his friends. Now when Job
had this Sto^m, this Whirlwind in his spirit, the Lord appeared and answered
him. Thus some conceive it, though not a Visional Whirlwind, yet a Metaphorical
Whirlwind in those three senses opened. But

Thirdly, (with others) I take the Whirlwind here in proper sense, that is, for
such a Whi^lwind as is often heard and felt, sounding, blustering, and making
great disturbance in the air, blowing up Trees by the roots, and overthrowing
Houses to the very foundation. Ex nube obscura. Rab. Levi. Ex Nimbo. Bez. Ex
procella and venti turbine horrifico.

Eturbine, i. e. e nube e qua erupit turbo seu ventus turbineus. Pisc. Di nube
aliqua praeter naturae ordinem facta. Grot.

De ipsa caligine, in qua sc. videtur nobis Deus delitescere. Vatabl.


One of the Rabbis calls it a dark cloud; several of the Moderns express it by
a rainy or watery cloud, out of which issued that dreadful Storm, called a
Whirlwind. Doubtless, some sudden extraordinary Wind, exceeding the constant
order and common course of Nature, gathered the clouds at that time. Thus God
at once hid the glory of his Majesty, and testified it (much after the same
manner as he did at the promulgation of the Law upon Mount Sinai) when he
answered Job out of the Whirlwind.

But it may be questioned, why did God answer Job out of a Whirlwind?

First, Such a way of answering was most proper to the dispensation of those
Old Testament Times, when the Covenant of Grace lay covered with Legal Shadows,
and was usually administered in a clothing or show of terror; especially (as was
said before) at the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai (Exodus 19. Deuteronomy. 4.12.)
when, so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake
(Heb. 12.21.) And surely the Lord appeared and spoke very dreadfully to some of
the Prophets in those Elder Times; especially to the Prophet Habakkuk, who thus
reports the consternation of his mind ( chap. 3.16.) When I heard, my belly
trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones, and I
trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble. Now, Gospel Times
being more clear and calm, Christ speaks more clearly and calmly; as it was
phophesied ( Isa. 42.2, 3.) He shall not cry nor lift up his voice in the
street: (Christ did not speak out of a Whirlwind) A bruised reed he shall not
break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench; he shall bring forth
Judgment unto Victory: That is, he shall with all tenderness condescend to the
weakest souls, and deal with them most sweetly, gently, and compassionately.

Secondly, The Lord spoke in a Whirlwind, that he might show the greater State
and Majesty, to awaken Job yet more, or to make him more attentive; as also to
affect him yet more deeply with the apprehension of his Power and Glory; and to
leave a greater impression upon his spirit of his own vileness, weakness, and
nothingness. Job was yet too big in his own eyes, the Lord would annihilate or
make him nothing; the Lord would beat him out of all conceit with himself, out
of an opinion of his own integrity and righteousness, that he might see and
confess there was no way but to lie at his foot, abhorring himself, and
repenting in dust and ashes. Such to this day is the pride and stupidness of
man's flesh, that he hardly attends the Word or Works of God, unless awed by
some extraordinary Ministration.

Thirdly, We may conceive the Lord appeared and spoke in this Whirlwind,
Aerumnoso homini conformem exhibens aspoctum. Munst.
that he might therein suit his appearance to the state and condition of Job at
that time, or that he might (as it were) symbolize with Jobs troubled estate.
Job, as I touched before, was in a Storm, and now God declares himself in a
storm: and that is the reason, which some give, why the Lord appeared to Moses
(Exodus 3.2.) in a burning bush; it was (say they) that his apparition might
answer their present condition. The Children of Israel were then in the fire of
affliction, and entangled in the bush of cruel bondage, they were scratcht and
torn with briars and thorns; and the Lord spoke out of a burning bush to Moses,
as here to Job out of the Whirlwind.

Fourthly, and lastly; I conceive the reason why the Lord spoke o him in a
Storm, or Whirlwind, was to let him know that he was not well pleased with him,
but purposed to reprove and chide him. De turbine indignationis indice.
Though Job was a precious servant of God, yet God was not well pleased with
many passages under his affliction, and therefore he would not flatter but
humble him: For though Job spoke from an honest heart, and what he said was
truth, yet God did not like his manner of defense and pleading for himself: He
was not pleased to see him hold up the Bucklers so long, when he should have
laid them down rather, and submitted. David to show how greatly the Lord was
displeased with his enemies, tells us what dreadful effects followed the
hearing and granting of his prayer against them, ( Psalm. 18.7, 8, 9, etc.) Then
the Earth shook and trembled, the foundations also of the hills moved and were
shaken, because he was wroth; there went a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire
out of his mouth devoured, coals also were kindled by it: he bowed the Heavens
also and came down, and darkness was under his feet, etc. Thus the Lord
appeared in an Earthquake, in smoke, in fire, and darkness, to make the proud
opposers of his faithful Servant David, know how much his anger was kindled
against them. Thus also when the Lord revealed himself to Elijah (1 Kings
19.11.) its said, a great and strong wind rent the mountains and brake the
rocks; and after the wind, an Earthquake; and after the Earthquake, a fire,
before the still voice was heard: And why all this, but to show that the Lord
was highly displeased with the doings of the Kings of Israel at that time, and
with that idolatrous generation; therefore he appeared in such a dreadful
manner, while he purposed to conclude all in a still voice. Though the Lord was
not in the Wind, in the Earthquake, nor in the Fire, yet these were
forerunners of his appearance, and signified that the Lord would shake that
people with a mighty Wind and Earthquake of Judgment, yea even consume them
with the fire of his wrathful jealousy, for their superstitious following
after Baal, and deserting his appointed Worship. When the lusts of wicked men
grow fiery and stormy, God will convince them with fire and storms; and if his
own servants grow too bold with him, he will make them sensible of it, as here
he did Job, by speaking to them out of a Whirlwind; though he be intended to
speak to them at last as he did to Elijah, in a still voice, and to Job, with
favor and approbation.

Thus much for the opening of these words, Then the Lord answered Job out of
the Whirlwind, and said.

Hence Observe; First, The great goodness of God, who condescends or lets
himself down to speak and treat with dust and ashes!

What a wonder is it, that the Lord of Heaven and Earth, should admit, and
enter into a parley with man, who is but a well-shaped clod of Earth! Solomon
was in a kind of amazement at the mercy, when he said at the Dedication of the
Temple (1 Kings 8.22.) But will God indeed dwell on Earth! And may not we, that
God should come down to confer with an afflicted bedridden man on Earth! I know
some are of opinion, that the Lord spoke by an Angel to Job; however, here was
the Lords presence, it was Jehovah, who manifested himself to Job, what
Ministry soever he used: Thus the Lord is pleased often to interpose in the
case and cause of his afflicted servants, though we see him not, nor have such
formal apparitions, as here in the Text. The Lord, the high and lofty One, who
dwells in the high and holy Place, dwells also with him that is of a
contrite and humble spirit; and be dwells with him to revive him, (Isa.
57.15.) Therefore surely he manifests himself to him in his loving kindness,
which is better than life, and the very life of our lives. The Lord who has
Heaven for his Throne, and the Earth his footstool, says by the same prophet (
Isa. 66.1, 2.) To this man will I look, (and lest any should take this man to
be one of the mighty ones of this world, he gives us both a signal
specification, and clear character of this man to whom he looks) even to him
that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembles at my Word. And if
the Lord look to such a man, if he vouchsafe him his gracious ^ye, doubtless he
also reveals himself graciously and freely to him.

Secondly, The Lord came here to instruct and teach Job. Several persons had
dealt with him before, and they very worthy, good, and learned persons, and
they came with a purpose to do him good; yet all would not do: All that his
three friends said, who undertook him first in their turns, was to little
purpose in appearance. And though Elihu, a spritely young man, discoursed him
with much life and heat, yet neither could he do the business: Jobs spirit
began indeed to yield upon the last engagement of Elihu with him; yet he did
not convince him fully. God came at last, and he prevailed, he did the deed;
Then the Lord answered Job.

Hence Note, We need the teachings of God, besides all the teachings of men,
that we may rightly know him, and our selves, together with the intendment of
his dealings with us, and our own duty under them.

It Is the mercy of the New Covenant, that we shall be taught of God, and not by
man only nor alone. As here Job had three or four, so we may have thrice three
men toyling with us a long time in vain. The work is never well done, till God
comes; and though we have not such appearances of God now, yet he does the same
thing in effect to this day. This and that man, a thousand men, yea a man who
is an Interpreter, one of a thousand (as Elihu spoke) may be laboring upon the
conscience of a sinner, and never bring things home either to convince or
comfort him, till God is pleased to come in by the power of his blessed Spirit,
and then who can but be convinced and comforted! Hence our Lord Christ had no
sooner reported the Covenant Promise out of the Prophet, They shall be all
taught of God (John 6.45.) but presently he makes this inference from it, Every
man therefore that has heard and has learned of the Father, comes unto me.
We may say to all who are savingly wrought upon, as Christ to Peter, upon that
Confession which he made ( Matthew. 16.16. Thou art Christ, the Son of the Living
God) Flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but your Father which is in
Heaven.

Impossible est deum discere sine deo. Iraen. l. 4. adversus Haret. c. 10. A
deo discendum quicquid de deo intelligendum. Hilar. l. 5. de Trin.
It was said by one of the Ancients, it is impossible to know God without God.
And so said another, We must learn all that from God which we understand of
God. Unless God be our Tutor, we shall never be good Scholars. We know neither
God nor our selves, any further than God teaches us. Christ says, Be not
called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ (Matthew. 23.8.) There are
two sorts of Masters. 1. Ruling or Commanding Masters. 2. Teaching Masters. To
the former we are Servants, to the latter we are Scholars. In the eighth verse
Christ speaks of Teaching Masters, as of Ruling Masters at the tenth verse.
Now, when Christ would not have any man take upon him, or own the Title of
Master or Teacher, his meaning is, that no man should arrogate to himself the
honor of principal Teacher, which is the peculiar of God: but to acknowledge
that all man's teaching is nothing without Gods; as the Apostle also says (1
Cor. 3.) We must learn from God whatever we know aright, either of God, or of
our selves. Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, spoke much of God to Job, but Job was
never effectually humbled, till God spoke.

Thirdly, Note; As God here by his Word, so always the Word of God, is the
true determiner of controversies, and resolver of doubts.

No question can be truly stated, but by the Word of God. Rectum est index sui
and obliqui.
As the statutes of the Lord are right (Psalm. 19.8.) So they show what is
right, and what is not. A strait Rule declares it self to be strait, and
detects the crookedness of whatsoever is crooked. The last appeal in all things
doubtful is to the Law, ( Isa. 8.20.) To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they
speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light, or (as the
Margin has it) no morning in them. The Sun of righteousness has not risen
upon them who speak and hold unrighteous things. Search the Scriptures, says
Christ ( John 5.39.) or, as it is well rendered in the Indicative Mood, Ye search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life. Nor did they think
amiss in thinking so; but that which Christ secretly reproved, while he said
so, was, that they did amiss, or contradicted the Scripture in their lives,
while they boastingly thought so. Not what this or that man says, but what God
says, is the true ground of man's faith. Sumamus exlibris divinitus inspiratis
solutionem questionum. Theod. l. 1. Hist. Eccles. c. 7.
It was a worthy speech of Constantine in the Nicene Council, Let us take out
of that Book divinely inspired, the solution of our Questions. It is not what
the Fathers say, nor what the Pope says, nor what Councils say; but what the
Word of God says, that must be heard and relied upon for salvation. The Word
is the Judge, that is the rule of Judgment. As here, God was the personal
Judge of this, so his Word must ever be the Normal Judge of all controversies.

Fourthly, Note; The Day of Judgment is like to be a terrible day.

Here was a little day of Judgment, here God came to determine a matter
between Job and his three friends, and that was a terrible day; in it we have
an image or representation of the last Judgment Day; God appeared in a Storm,
in a Whirlwind: what think you will be the Lords appearance, when he comes to
judge the whole World! The Psalmist speaking of some particular day of
Judgment which should fore-run the general judgment, sets it forth in
dreadful Metaphors ( Psalm. 50.3, 4.) Our God (These are the words of Gods
faithful servants, assuring themselves of a gracious deliverance from the
cruelty of wicked men, by the goodness and mighty arm of God; Our God, say
they) shall come, that is, he shall certainly come, though he seem for a while
to defer and put off his coming; and shall not keep silence (as he has been
thought to do, either in not answering the prayers of his people, or in not
punishing the presumption of his and their enemies, as he also said he did at
the 21th verse of this Psalm) and then woe to the wicked, for, A fire shall
devour before him (God will then appear as a consuming fire) and a mighty
tempest (of wrath and indignation) round about him; (so that there can be no
escape either before or behind, on one side or the other: And then ( v. 4.) He
shall call to the Heavens from above, and to the Earth; that is, to the
heavenly and earthly Powers, as witnesses against the ungodly, and as aids and
assistants, that they may judge his people, that is, assert their integrity and
maintain them in it. Now (I say) if there have been or shall be such dreadful
appearances of God in this world, for the vindication of his people, and the
avenging of them upon their enemies; what will his appearance be, when in the
end of the world he shall come (as the Apostle Jade speaks ( v. 14, 15. of his
Epistle) with ten thousand of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which
they have ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him; That is, either directly, or reflexively, in
letting their tongues loose to speak against them. The Apostle Paul having said
(2 Cor. 5.10.) We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things, (that is, the fruit of the things) done in
his body, (that is, while he was in the body) whether it be good or bad; he
adds at the eleventh verse, Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men. As if he had said, We know that will be a terrible day, Christ
will come and answer sinners out of a Whirlwind, when he comes to Judgment;
and therefore We (being fully persuaded of this our selves) persuade men by all
means to believe and repent, and get the peace of their souls well and surely
settled upon good Gospel terms in this world, that so they may find peace in the
great Day of Judgment, which will be the commencement or beginning of another
world. They who know the terror of the Lord will both persuade others, and be
persuaded themselves to look after reconciliation with God, that when Christ
comes terribly, they may appear before him comfortably, or that he may not be
a terror unto them in that day.

Fifthly, Forasmuch as the Lord answered Job out of the Whirlwind (as was said)
to affect him with the awe and reverence of his great Name, while he was
speaking,

Observe; The Word of God is to be heard with reverence, with fear and
trembling, or with an holy awe of God upon our hearts.

Why did the Lord speak out of a Whirlwind? Surely, that Job might see his
distance, or that he was but as a feather, even like a rolling thing, or
thistle-down, before the Whirlwind, which the Lord could scatter and blow away
with the least breath of his mouth, as that allusion in the Prophet intimates (
Isa. 17.13.) And questionless all the wicked in the world, who contemn the Word
of God preached by his Ministers, Locutione domini blanda dulcedo ejus
ostenditur, per tempestatem vero potestas ejus metuenda monstratur. Greg. l.
28. c. 2.
will be blown away by it as thistle-down or a rolling thing before the
Whirlwind of the Lords fierce anger and displeasure; All such shall be carried
away with a strong irresistible wind, and cast into the bottomless pit of
perdition for ever. The Lord who sometimes speaks out of a Whirlwind, has a
whirlwind always at his command to scatter those like chafe, who obey not
what is spoken, as he threatened the enemies of Jacob (Isa. 41.16.)

Sixthly, From Gods speaking out of the Whirlwind,

Note; God is present with his in troublous dispensations.

It Is no argument, that God is not with us, when storms and whirl-winds are up,
whether with respect to Nations and Churches, or particular Persons. Do not
think God is gone because there is a storm. Read ( Psalm. 18. v. 6, 7, 8. Psalm.
23.4. Psalm. 91.15. Isa. 43.2, 3.) and you shall find that in the worst
appearances the Lord is present. The Prophet speaks it expressly ( Nahum 1.3.)
The Lord has his way in the Whirlwind, and in the storm, and the Clouds are
the dust of his feet. When and where it is dark and troublesome the Lord is
there, and there he is most; that is the Prophets meaning also, when he says,
The Clouds are the dust of his feet. By Clouds we may understand, not so much
the Clouds of the Air, as cloudy Providence; these are round about him, while
Judgment and Justice, yea while Mercy and Goodness are the habitation of his
Throne. And these Clouds may be called the dust of his feet in a Figure; we
know where Travelers pass often, their feet make a dust; now it shows that the
Lord does act much in the Clouds, that is in dark Providence, because it is
said, They are the dust of his feet, as if he moved so much and so long in
them, that he raised a dust with his motion. Do not think the Lord is gone,
when whirl-winds and storms, that is outward troubles, come. The Lord answers
out of the whirlwind as often as he answers us by terrible things in
Righteousness; and thus he often answers us ( Psalm. 65.5.)

Seaventhly, and Lastly, comparing the manner of Gods coming and speaking to
Job, with his intent in coming and speaking to him. The manner in which God
came and spoke was in a Whirlwind; but what was his purpose? was it to blow
the poor man away? no; it was but to himble him, and then to comfort and
restore him.

Observe; The outward appearances of God are often very terrible, when he
intends nothing bu^ mercy and love to his people.

What more dreadful than a Whirlwind? yet Job found this storm ushering in a
sweet calm and a most comfortable sunshine. Job said ( chap. 9.16, 17.) If I
had called, and he had answered me, yet would I not have believed, that he had
hearkened to my v ice, for he breaks me with a tempest, or a Whirld-wind. Now
the Lord came in a Whirlwind, and Job finds the quite contrary: God came in a
Whirlwind, not to break him, but to bind him up; not to condemn him, but to
convince him; not to discourage him, but to comfort him; comfort comes out of a
storm. Thus comfort has come to many a poor soul, and it comes thus
sometimes to the whole Church of God. When Jacob was in a stormy condition,
because of his brother Esau, then the Lord came to him ( Genesis 32.) but how came
he to him? one would have thought, that Jacob being in such a condition, the
Lord who came to comfort him, would have taken him by the hand and embraced
him, or walked aside with him, and told him, I am come to help thee, and deliver
thee; be of good cheer, let not thy heart be troubled at the approach of thy
bloody brother, for I am with thee. One would have thought (I say) the Lord
should have treated him in some such manner; but what says the text? (v. 24)
there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day. Poor Jacob was
tugging, and swetting all night, as if he would sweat his heart out; here was a
strange kind of greeting; it is not said the man saluted him, or spoke a kind
word to him, much less complemented with him, he only wrestled with him; and
when he had toyled a geat while, he put his thigh out of joy^t (which was very
course usage) and only said Let me go (which was very course language) yet the
Lord came at that time with a full purpose to bless him, and deliver him out of
the hand of Esau. Then be not afraid of storms, for the Lord has sunshine in
his heart, when there is nothing but a storm in his face. The Lord may come to
you in poverty, and sickness, he may chasten you with pain upon your bed,
Perpetuum deo est vulnerare quos vult sanare, percellere quos vult consulari,
ostendere se maximum cum vult and optimum demonstrare.
and the multitude of your bones with strong pains, till you say as Hezekiah in
his sickness ( Isa. 38.13) I reckoned till morning, that as a Lion, so will he
break all my bones; and yet intend so much mercy, that you shll say (as David,
Ps. 35.10.) All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which
deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him, yea, the poor and
needy, from him that spoileth him. The Lord has gracious purposes toward his
people in saddest appearances. Then the Lord answered Job out of the
Whilrl-wind, and said; What said he? His saying was as stormy as his appearing,
Verse. 2. Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?

This Verse and ths next are a Preface to what God had further to say unto his
afflicted servant Job. The former verse was the Historians Preface, these two
are the Lords.

Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge? We have here,
First, A check lighting somewhere, Who is this?

Secondly, We have the matter for which this person is checked, and that is for
darkening counsel.

Thirdly, We have that by which he is charged to have darkened counsel, and that
is, By words without knowledge; and his ignorance or want of knowledge is
implied, as discovered in speaking, or rather complaining so much concerning
his own sufferings, and the severity of Gods dealings with him, whereby he had
at once cast a cloud upon the Justice, and reflected upon the goodness and
mercy of God.

Whose is this? The words may be taken, First, as a bare enquiry after he man,
Who is this? what man is this? as Saul spoke of David after the victory which
he had got over Goliath, Whose son is this youth? (1 Samuel 17.55.) but that I
conceive is too flat and lean a sense in this place, as if the Lord did only
make enquiry after the man. Therefore,

Secondly, These words, Who is this? carry in them a rebuke, who is it that
has done this? As if God pointing at Job, had said, is it you? I could not
have believed that my servant Job would have so much forgotten himself, or have
been so bold with me, as to reflect upon my just, though severe proceedings, by
his weak reasonings, which faith only can make him understand aright. Such
Questions in Scripture often carry a rebuke in them, yea,

Thirdly, more then a rebuke, they carry a slight or contempt of the person
about whom the question is put. As when men presume (as some blasphemously have
done) to say, Who is the Lord? What is the Almighty that we should serve him?
they speak contemptuously and slightingly of God: So when God speaks thus to
man, who is this? he may be said to speak slightingly of man. Again, as when
man, speaking of himself, says (as Psalm. 8.4.) What is man that thou art
mindful of him! he slights or vilifies himself; so when the Lord says, who is
this? or who is the other? it carries the same sense. Interrogations are quick
sharp speeches, and usually those speeches are quick and sharp which begin with
an Interrogation; and doubtless this Interrogation has a double sharpness, or
two stings in it.

First, Of rebuke or reprehension. Forma ipsa interrogationis, qua nullum
exprimitur proprium nomen solet ad contemptum pertinere and exprobrationem.


Secondly, Of a slight or diminution. Job, though indeed a man of an excellent
spirit, had been too bold with God, and therefore no wonder if God spoke
(though he contemned him not) contemningly to him, Who is this?

Yet here it is questioned who the person was, whether Job or no, that is aimed
at or intended in this rebuking or contemning Question.

There are two opinions about it, and the matter is carried on both sides (as
one expresses it) by no inconsiderable Arguments.

First, Some conceive, Elihu was the person concerned in this Question, Who is
this? and they give several reasons for it; I shall only mention two. First,
because he was the man that spoke last; we had him speaking six Chapters quite
through, while Job spoke not a word; and therefore say they, it seems most
probable, that when God came to speak, he would undertake him that spoke last.
Who is this?

Secondly, Because Elihu had not carried the matter so clearly and fully with
Job as he should, but had failed, though not as Jobs three friends had done
before; and that therefore as the Lord reproved and taxed them by name in the
42d Chapter, so here Elihu is taxed more covertly, for obs^uring his Counsel,
Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge? These are the
two chief Arguments which fasten the rebuke upon Elihu; and there are many
learned Interpreters who carry it so, affirming that the whole discourse from
the beginning of this 38th Chapter to the end of the 39th is directed to Elihu;
and that God spoke not to Job till the 40th Chapter. Yet some others say God
reproved Elihu in this second Verse only, and spoke comfort to Job in the
third; Gird up thy loins like a man; and these interpret the first words of the
Chapter, Then the Lord answered Job cut of the Whirlwind, thus, he answered
for Job, not to Job, as if the word Job were to be taken in the dative Case,
signifying favor and respect from God to him.

But, by the favor of these learned Authors, who give this Interpretation, I
shall rather adhere to those who affirm (and they are not a few) that the
person here concerned and spoken to was Job himself, and I shall give you three
or four Reasons of it, and so pass to the opening of the words.

First, Because the first Verse tells us expressly, that the Lord answered Job
out of the whirlwind; and that Interpretation which says, he answered for, not
to Job, is a little strain to the Text. Now the Lord speaking so expressly to
Job in the first Verse, it is very congruous, that he should speak to him in
the second, and not divert his speech from him to another person in the next
words that he spoke.

Secondly, Job himself took these words to himself in the forty second Chapter,
at the third Verse, where he acknowledged that indeed he had spoken darkly, I
have uttered things that I understood not, things too wonderful for me, which I
knew not; he took (I say) the reproof contained or couched in those words to
himself, which is a clear argument, that they were directed to him.

Thirdly, If we consider the whole frame of the Lords discourse afterward,
beyond this preface, we shall find that he is not speaking for Job against
Elihu, but for Elihu against Job, that is to humble Job; and therefore the Lord
does join in with Elihu, and uses the very same Arguments in the main (as will
appear in opening the Chapter) which Elihu had insisted upon, namely from the
works of God in the Creation, and his wonderful wisdom in ordering those works
in Providence. So that the dealing of God with Job in these Chapters (as to the
subject matter of it) very consentaneous or like to the matter which Elihu had
handled and insisted upon, especially in the later part of his speech to Job;
and therefore it does not seem probable that God would reprove him for what he
had spoken.

Fourthly, the manner of this rebuke seems to fit Job very fully, for therein
he is not charged with any falsity or gross mistake (he indeed having spoken of
God and the things of God, of his own innocence and piety, with the rewards of
both, truly and worthily) but only with obscuring and darkning the things
which he had uttered. His speech bearing much of the Image of his own troubled
spirit and troublesome condition, was somewhat troubled and confused. Therefore
I conclude that the person spoken to and reproved in this second verse was Job,
not Elihu; Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge? and
it being resolved that he was the man, let me (before I proceed to the matter
of this reproof) give out this brief Observation.

We have heard at the eighth Verse of the first Chapter, how God spoke of Job,
and now consider how God speaks to Job; There the Lord approved him highly, as
not having his like or second on earth for well-doing; here the Lord reproved
him sharply, for undue-speaking.

Hence Note; As God will not conceal the praises of his servants when they do
well, so he will not conceal their faults, nor forbear to reprove them, when
they either do or speak amiss.

When Satan came upon that solemn day, and stood before the Lord, God said unto
him, Have that considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in all the
earth, a man perfect and upright; so perfect and upright both in his walking
with me, and in his dealing with man, that he has not his fellow? Thus God
spoke of him as to his former state. But now after Job had spoken long in this
dispute, and had let fall some unwary and unbecoming speeches, see how God
speaks to him, Who is this? as if he had been a man scarce worth the naming or
speaking to. God will not flatter his Servants; if they do or speak what is not
right, they are like to hear of it. Wherein he had spoken what was not right,
or what his fault was, appears in the next words, Who is this That darkeneth
counsel by words without knowledge?

Words against knowledge are the worst words that can be spoken; the Lord did
not charge Job thus far: words without knowledge are very bad, and thus far the
Lord charged the words of Job, as also with that which is an unavoidable effect
of such words, The darkening of c^unsel.

Counsel, in the general nature of it, is light desired and held out; to give
counsel is to give light in and about any matter. And therefore surely he that
darkeneth counsel, commits a very great fault, yea, a solicisme or absurdity in
morals. Counsel is the election or choice of proper means to a good end; or,
Counsel is go d advices given, and (ought to be) received about things to be
done. Hence the whole directive part of the Word of God is called Counsel (
Psalm. 73.24. Prove. 1.25, 30.) The doctrine of Reconciliation unto God by Christ
is called, The Counsel of Peace (Zech. 6.13.) David, speaking of wicked proud
men says ( Psalm. 19.6.) You have shamed the Counsel of the poor, because the
Lord is his refuge: As if it were poor counsel, and such as wec may be ashamed
of, to advise any to put their trust in God. They darken Counsel indeed who are
ashamed of it, or who shame it.

It is questioned, whose counsel, or what counsel Job is charged by God with
darkening? There are two opinions about that.

Quis ost ille qui sermonibus ^^peritis offundit tenebras consilio divino.
Tygur.
First, Some expound it of Jobs own counsel, of that counsel which he gave, or
held forth about the matter under dispute, that is, his sense and judgment in
it.

Secondly, The Counsel which he darkened, was (say others) the Counsel of God,
or his purpose and intendment in the sufferings of the righteous, and in
suffering the wicked to prosper for a season. These works of God are a great
secret, and therefore may well be expressed by the word Counsel. Consilium
absolute positum pro consilium Dei, ut sermo pro sermo Dei. Drus.
And usually when the word Counsel is put absolutely and alone, it is to be
understood of the Counsel of God. Yet I conceive we may very well join these
two opinions together, and say, Job darkened his own counsel and the counsel of
God too; he delivered his own mind and sentiments so darkly (the delivering of
a man's mind is his counsel) about the counsel of God, that he rather obscured
both, than cleared either. And there are several things wherein Job may be
charged to have spoken obscurely. Did he not darken the counsel of God, when he
complained so very much and so often of his afflictions? Did he not darken his
own counsel, and the counsel of God, when, as if the dispensations of God were
every where alike to all, he said ( Chap. 9.22.) God destroys the perfect and
the wicked. If the scourge slay suddenly, he laugheth at the trial of the
innocent? Did he not darken counsel when he said, God dealt with him as an
enemy, o^, as with an enemy? Surely he did not well attend the counsel of God
in afflicting him, while he made such constructions of his affliction. The
things which Job spoke were true, yet Job delivered himself so darkly that his
friends mis-understood him; they understood him, as if he meant that God dealt
in his providence with the righteous as with the wicked, and were to the
wicked as he is to the righteous, that is, as if he had no more regard to any
godly man, than to a wicked man in afflicting him. In these (and some other
things) Job did not sufficiently explain himself and he exceedingly stumbled
or offended his friends and hearers, and so might be said to darken the counsel
of God, that is the purpose of God, or what God has in his counsels concerning
his people, when under his afflicting hand. All such like passages falling from
Job, the Lord might call a darkening of his counsel, or the casting of a cloud
upon his righteous dealings, and at least an intimation that God had done him
wrong. Words of such a tenor and tendency are justly charged to be words
Without knowledge.

Not that Job spoke altogether ignorantly, understanding neither what he said,
nor whereof he affirmed, as the Apostle charged some, who desired to be
teachers of the Law (1 Timothy 1.7.) the Text cannot be so taken; but his words
and affirmations were such as did not hold out a clear light of knowledge,
either in his own understanding, or at least not to the understanding of his
hearers. Thus Elihu charged Job (Chap. 35.16.) He opens his mouth in vain, he
multipileth words without knowledge. To speak one word without knowledge is too
many; what is it then to multiply words without knowledge? He multiplieth words
without knowledge, that is, he has not given his sense and meaning in many
things clearly, as he might and should. Here the Lord seems to take up the same
charge against Job; Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without
knowledge? God consents with Elihu, as to the matter of his reproof; Elihu
telling him, that he had multiplied words without knowledge; and God telling
him, that he had darkened counsel by words without kowledge. Words ought to
give light to the things we speak of or about; what we speak should be for the
clearing up both of our own counsel and the counsel of God. So that it was a
very great failing in Job, to darken either his own counsel or the counsel of
God, by words without knowledge. Out own counsel should be delivered plainly,
and so should the counsel of God much more. It is sad to gather clouds or raise
a mist about our hearers, when we are professing to hold out the light. To
puzzle and am^^e those whom we undertake to teach, is one of the worst
accidents ('it is too too bad when it is the intent) of a Teacher. And therefore
Job (though he had no intent to do it) is justly reproved for doing it; Who is
this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?

These wo^ds (as was said) being at best an enquiry after the man, or a
citation to appear and answer,

Note; God will bring every man to a reckoning for what he has done and siad.

God would not let his servant Job pass; he censured Job that Job might censure
himself; and points at him, that he might even see himself pointed at. As if he
had said; What! is this my serv^^t Job? is it he that I heard speaking at such
a rate of impatience and obscurity? I could not have thought that he would have
uttered such words about my ways and works, either toward himself or others.
Every one of us (says the Apostle, Romans 14.12.) shall give an account of
himself to God. Some have more to account for than themselves ( Heb. 13.17.)
but all must give account for than themselves; Give an account of thy
stewardship (Luke 19.2.) will be said one day to every one. To be a Steward is
the special office of some men in reference to men, but it is the general office
of all men in reference to God. They cannot stand in the day of account, who
have not repented of the evil they have done, nor rested on Christ by faith for
the doing away of that evil. For the Lord will say to one, who is this that
has perverted my Truth? to another, who is this that has disobeyed my
Commands? to a third, who is this that has distrusted my Promises? to a
fourth, who is this that has been so unthankful for my Mercies and Favors? He
will also say, who is this that has oppressed his Neighbor? and, who is this
that has been self-proud and wanton? The offender must appear, and so will his
offenses. Yea, a citation will come out, as against all those who have against
knowledge refused to walk in the light of Gods counsel, so to all those (as
here to Job) who have darkened counsel any way for want of the light of
knowledge. And who can stand in any of these accounts, either for not doing
good, or for doing evil, without a Mediator, upon whose account alone we are
accepted. Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?

Secondly, Taking these words as an humbling rebuke upon Job for his
over-boldness, in speaking of God and his ways;

Note; God will humble all men, his own people especially, and make them know
themselves.

God will make all men know who they are, who himself is, and what they have
done or spoken. When the Scripture says, who is this? and what is man? When
the Scripture asks what, or who we are? it is either to abase the pride of
man, or to convince him of his base fear of the proudest men, as appears
specially in these two Scriptures. When good men are over-troubled at, or
afraid of the power of man, then the Lord chides and shames them with this
question ( Isa. 51.12.) Who art thou that thou should be afraid of a man? As
if he had said, what a fool art thou, what an ignorant creature are thou; the
Lord spoke there to his own people, and to them altogether, as is they were but
one man) Who art thou that thou should be afraid of a man that shall dye,
and of the son of man that shall be made as grass, and forgettest the Lord thy
Maker? What a kind of creature art thou, to set so much by a man (let him be
who he will) that thou should be unduely afraid of him, who by nature is
like thy self, frail and mortal, is if thou had nor the immortal God thy
Maker for thy helper and defender! They act below men, who over-fear men, while
they are in a way of duty to God. Who art thou, etc.

Secondly, The Scripture uses such questions when man is over-bold with, or
not enough in the fear of God (which is the case here in the Text) If any man
entrench upon the prerogative of God, he is like to hear of it, with a Who art
thou? The Apostle ( Romans 9.20.) by way of prevention, represents man so bold
with God, as to darken his counsel, even his eternal counsel, by words without
knowledge; Thou will say then unto me, why does he yet find fault? who has
resisted his will? When God, to show his unquestionable Sovereignty, says,
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated: I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy; Then man begins to complain of God, and thinks he has cause for
it: But says the Apostle, Who art thou that reply against God? shall the
thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Whenever
man give occasion to say, that he fears man too much, or God too little; he is
like to hear these rebuking and humbling questions, Who is this, or, Who art
thou? Many have too high thoughts of others, and most of themselves, as if they
were (as we say) somebody, that is, more than anybody, as if they were of
some greater worth, or had some greater worthiness, than their neighbors. Now,
whosoever have too hign thoughts either of others or of themselves, they
always have too low thoughts of God; and therefore God, to show them their
vanity, that all men are but emptiness, yea very nothingness compared with him,
makes the best of men strike sail, or, God shoots down their top-sail, with
such questions as these, Who are you? and, who is this?

Thirdly Note; We may quickly darken the counsels of God while we think to
explain them.

Job had no intent to darken the counsel of God, yet he did it, Some make it
their business (when they speak of the counsels of God) to darken them and
raise a dust; these are either angry with the light, or envious at it, and
unwilling that others should enjoy it. Some Patrons of Popery, the better to
make their own excuse for obscuring or hiding the Scriptures in darkness from
the People, have not feared to charge them with darkness and obscurity. And
others by their ill and unskilful handling of the Scriptures have brought
darkness and obscurity upon them. Though the Scriptures have many dark places
in them, yet woe to those who say the Scriptures are dark; and let all take
heed of darkening them, for they are the counsel of God. It is an easy matter
to paddle in a clear stream, till it runs muddily; but it will not be for any
man's ease or peace to do so in the clear crystal streams of the holy
Scriptures. It is the unhappiness of some that they cannot but speak and write
about the counsels of God obscurely; and there are others who glory that they
can. It was said of a dark Pen, Dum legi v^luit quae scripsisset, intelligi
noluit quae logerentur.
that While he would have that read which he had written, he would not have
that understood which was read; and while some would have that heard which they
speak, they speak as if they would not have that understood which is heard. It
is a great sin purposely and designedly to darken the Counsels of God; and it is
a failing and an affliction to darken them, though we (as Job did not) design
it not. We should labor to deliver our minds plainly concerning the mind of
God, that what we utter may not be sound a darkning of his Counsel, but as much
as in us is, a clearing of it. Counsel (as was touched before) is the giving of
light in dark cases; and therefore we should enlighten Counsel.

Two things are the grace and excellency of a spaker:

First, To speak boldly and freely, to speak the truth out, not to clip nor
straiten it.

Secondly, To speak plainly, to open the truth, and not to intricate nor
involve it. Both these are comprised in one word, by the Apostle (2 Cor. 3.12.)
where he says (as we translate) therefore we use great plainness of speech;
but the Margin has great boldness of speech: the same word in the Greek
signifies both plainness of speech and boldness of speech; and these are the
two great virtues and ornaments of him that speaks. Both these are again
implied in that direction of the Apostle (1 Pet. 4.11.) If any man speak (about
the things of God) let him speak as the Oracles of God; that is, let him speak
as becomes him that has to do with the Oracles of God, reverently, freely, and
boldly; not as if he were speaking the opinions of men, much less, Old Wives
fables. Or let him speak as the Oracles of God (speak) that is, plainly,
clearly, not as the Oracles of the Heathens (spoke) darkly, doubtfully. Let us
take heed of wrapping up the truth of God, or entangling it, in uncertain
expressions, which may be interpreted either way, or to quite contrary
purposes: there is a great danger in this. We may give our selves some scope,
or take more liberty, when we are debating about worldly matters, or disputing
the subtle questions and curiosities of Schoolmen: But when we have to do with
the Secrets and Counsels of God, then let us beware and be sober. Some speak as
rashly and inevidently of deepest Gospel Mysteries, as they talk of other men's
crotchers, or as of their own trifles.

Fifthly, Consider, How did Job darken the Counsel of God? It was by words
without knowledge.

Hence Note; The ignorant are very apt to speak amiss of the things and
Counsels of God.

If Job, who had so great a measure of knowledge, darkened the Counsel of God
by words without knowledge; what will they do that have upon the matter no
knowledge at all? The Apostle speaks of such as more than darkening, even as
wresting the Counsel of God (2 Pet. 3.16.) In Paul's Epitles (says he) are some
things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest,
as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. Some things
in the Word are hard to be known, and they are made harder by such unlearned
ones, as utter their own notions of them, by words without knowledge. It Is very
true, that many learned men have wrested and perverted the Word of God, and
some of them have employed their learning on purpose to wrest and pervert it;
but they that have not a comperent degree of learning and knowledge, what can
they do else but wrest and darken the Word of God? I intend not humane learning
merely, in Arts and Sciences, though there be great use of them; but I mean
especially Holy and Divine Learning. They that are not taught of God, nor have
the light of God in them, cannot but darken the things and Counsels of God, how
much humane learning soever they have. The Prophet foretells us of Christ
speaking thus of himself, as the great Prophet, ( Isa. 50.4.) The Lord has
given me the tongue the learned, that I should kn w how to speak a word in
season to him that is weary; that is, to those who are wearied (not with bodily
labors and travels, but) with soul-labours and travels, about the pardon of
their sins, and the favor of God to their souls. He that speaks a word
effectually for the refreshing of such weary ones, must open the Counsels of
God to them; and he that does so, must have the tongue of the learned, that is,
a tongue taught of God how to speak, else he will never be able to do it
knowingly, but through the darkness of his own mind will darken the Counsel of
God concerning those dark souls, and so rather weary them more, than relieve
them out of their weariness. That the soul be without knowledge is not good
(Prove. 19.2.) that is, it is very bad, (such Negatives in Scripture intend their
contrary Affi^matives) and as it is not good, or very bad for themselves,
whosoever they are, so it is not good for them with respect to others, who are
called to declare the Counsels of God to others. Souls without knowledge cannot
open, but are apt to darken the Soul-counsels of God.

Sixthly, Inasmuch as God reproved Job for this,

Note; God will not take it well, if we speak improperly, darkly and unsafely
of his Matters and Counsels, though our minds be honest, and our meaning good
in what we speak.

We had need be cautious what we say, and not talk at random about the things
of God. Job, a holy and a wise man, had a peal rung in his ear, for speaking
words without knowledge, words not duly poized and placed. There are some who
will catch at, and take hold of every slip of the tongue, they will make a man
an offender for a word, which has no real ground of offense in it; (as the
Prophet spoke, Isa. 29.11.) God may justly make a man an offender for a word,
which he thought was without offece.

Lastly, Consider, when God came to reprove Job, he did not charge him with iny
ill intentions, but with ill expressions. He indeed had darkened his Counsel by
words Without knowledge, but God did not say he had a purpose and a mind to do
it; nor did he say, that Job had spoken lastly, but that he had spoken truth
obscurely. The Lord did not object hypocrisy or impiety against him, but
imbecility; as not having handled the Judgments of God, nor delivered his own
judgment clearly and prudently enough; but had hudled and put things so
passionately and confusedly together, that some could not tell how to
distinguish them from blasphemy.

Hence Note God will not charge any man beyond his fault.

If he did it in a heat of passion, God will not deal with him, as if he had
done it in cold blood (as we sy) or with a settled resolution. The Lord will not
call a slip of the tongue an error of the mind, much less a minded nor. God
know the intent and purpose of every man that speaks; he weighs not only our
actions, but words; he knows not only what we say, but why, and with what aims
we say it: and therefore he never urges any man's sin beyond it self. Job had
darkened the Counsel of God only by words without knowledge, therefore God would
not charge him to have darkened his Counsel, knowingly, or against the light of
knowledge. Yea, notwithstanding this fault, the Lord having reproved him for
it, proceeds presently (as some interpret the next verse) to comfort and
encourage him.

Verse. 3. Gird up now thy loins like a man. As if the Lord had said, thou have
spoken thus and ths of my Counsels, now give me an account of what thou have
spoken; Gird up thy loins like a man. Cinctus lumbonum erit pro (...) Coc.
To call a man to gird up his loins, is to bid him be in a readiness, or to
prepare himself for any work. The strength of a man is in his loins, and they
who are weak, are said to be loin-lesse. To gird up the lions, is a powerbial
speech, and may be used to a man who wears the shortest garments, yea to him
who is naked. Hence the Lord bid Job to gird up his loins, who possibly was so
weak, that he could not stand upon his legs; or possibly had no long garments
at all. There is a girding the lions with sackcloth, that is, with sorrow,
implying the work of repentance and mortification ( Isa. 22.12.) In that day
did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness,
and to girding with sackcloth. The two Witnesses of Christ are said to
prophecy in sackcloth one thousand two hundred any sixty days (Rev. 11.3.) to
note that they were in a sad or sorrowful conditoin all the days of their
Prophecy: Thus Jobs loins had been girt a long time. But, Again, There is a
girding of the loins with joy: Thou have put off from me my sackcloth, and
girded me with gladness (Psalm. 30.11.) Also, There is a girding of the lions
with strength ( Psalm. 17.39.) Further, we may take notice of a fourfold use in
Scripture, of girding up the loins.

Cingulum amkulaturi.
First, There is a girding up the lions for travel, or when a man is to take a
journey. Thus Elisha said to Gehazi (2 Kings 4.29.) Gird up thy loins, and take
thy staff in thy hand, and go thy way, etc. It was a fashion in those Eastern
Countries where they wore their garments long and ordinarily loose, to gird
them up in travel.

Secondly, Cingulum ministraturi.
There is a girding up the loins for serving or waiting; so Christ expresses
it ( Luke 12.35.) Let your loins be girded about, and your lamps burning, and
ye your selves like unto men, that wait for their Lord. And he says at the
37th vcese, Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord when he comes, shall
find watching: Verily, I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make
them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them; that is, he will
be ready to do them offices of love, as it were, in person; which is an
expression of the greatest condescension: For when Christ would set forth the
common custom among men, he says ( Luke 17.7, 8.) Which of you having a
servant plowing or feeding Cattle, will say unto him by and by when he is come
from the field; Go, and sit down to meat, and will not rather say, Gird thy
self and serve me, etc. Girding is preparatory to serving or waiting.

Thirdly, Cingulum operaturi. Accinctus dicitur qui industrius and discinctus
qui negligens est. Drus. Accingere se ad opus aliquod.
It notes in Scripture preparation for any labor or work that we are called
to, whether of mind or body. He is always girt, that is ready for work, and
industrious at it; whereas careless and idle persons, are always ungirt, and
so unblessed. When Jeremiah was called to that great work of the mind or inner
man, the Lord said to him ( chap. 1.17.) Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and
arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee. A Prophets work begins at
his heart, and ends at his tongue, yet for that his loins must be girt.

Fourthly, Girding up the loins, Cingulum pugnaturi. Antiquitas cingulum
consecravit. Mart.
notes a preparation for Battle and War: Thus David spoke of Christ, ( Psalm.
45.3.) Gird thy sword upon thy thigh O most mighty. So spoke that King to his
proud Challenger, Let not him that girdeth on his armor, boast as he that
puts it off (1 Kings 20.11.) That is, let not him that prepares himself for
battle, carry it as he that hah won the day and got the victory. When the
Apostle describing our spiritual warfare, minds us to stand, having our loins
girt about with truth (Ephesians. 6.14.) he would also have us stand with our loins
girt for the truth; that is, as another Apostle speaks, ( Jude 3.) to contend
earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints; or to undertake the
defense and maintenance of the truth against all comers or opposers.

Girding in the Text is of this latter sort: Appara te ad suturam
disceptationem. Vatab.
Disputing is a kind of fighting and warring. Opponents and Respondents are
like Combatants. Arma te nunc armis tuis, sicut vir strenuus ad committendum
duellum mecum: Ecce venio ad literarum duellum tecum: Arma te scientiae armis.
Cajet. Signanter de praecinctione lumborum facit mentionem, quia per lumbos
carnalis voluptas intelligitur, quae praecipue inipedit spirituaalem auditum.
Aquin. In arcano sermon significat libidinis in lumbis residentis
compressionem. (...) Sonat virtutem and fortitudinem, and quod opponitur
blanditiis lenociniis and infirmitati faemineae. Ut vir, emphatice, animo
viriti, promptitudine virili.
Controversal Divinity is called Polemical Divinity. Disputes are Word-Wars.
And there have been as hot wars made by the Pen, as ever were by the Sword.
Thus the Lord seems to send Job a challenge to the battle by a further debate.
Arm thy self like a mighty man, get ready for the duel, for I am purposed to
try what a man thou art in arguing, or at an argument, I have heard thee too
stiff in complaining, or at a complaint.

Lastly, This girding up of the loins has (as some conceive) a spiritual
intendment in it, noting the mortification of lust, or of the sensual appetite.
They that go about any business for God, or with God, had need to have their
lusts subdued. Gird up thy loins Like a man.

That is, like a mighty man, a Giant, emphatically, as a man, with manly
courage and activity; show thy self what a man thou a^t, let me see what thou
can do, thou have heretofore braved it, and even challenged me, and desired
that thou might come to the battle; O that I knew where I might find him!
that I might come even to his seat (chap. 23.3.) Now then, Gird up thy loins
like a man, show thy strength, I mean to enter the list with thee, I have taken
up the glove, as it were, and am resolved to try it out with thee. Gird up thy
loins like a man, Do not play the child, do not trisle with me, do not think
that I come to trifle with thee.

Some carry the opposition thus: Gird up thy loins like a man, not like a
woman, who girds her self often for ornament only, and sometimes for
ostentation; but like a man, that resolves to go about his work, and make a
business of it; Thus, Gird up thy loins like a man. To do a thing strenuously
and with expedition, is the work of a man, who is neither recarded by
difficulty, not tired with labor, nor frighted with danger; therefore the Lord
counsels Job to gird up his loins like as men do, when they set themselves
about or undertake any great business; he would not have him do it, as tender
weak women, or as effeminate men.

Taking these words in the first notion, as an encouragement to Job, or as
comforting words (which I conceive to be a good sense)

Observe; God is ready to revive poor and afflicted souls when they are in any
distress.

He knows how it is with us, and he will not suffer any temptation to take hold
of us, but such as he will give strength to bear, and encourage us in the
bearing of it. He says to fainting ones (as here) Come gird up your loins, or
as ( Heb. 12.12.) Lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees.

Secondly, Take the words in that other general notion, God calling Job to a
great business, says, Gird up thy loins, prepare thy self.

Whence, Note; We need actual preparation before any duty, especially before
great duties.

Never go about any work without your loins girt. A man whose mind is ungirt,
is unready for any service, though he may have much outward readiness, and all
manner of accomodations for it. When we pray, we should gird up our loins to
prayer. The Prophet complained ( Isa. 64.7.) There Is none calls upon thy Name.
What none at all? Surely not so; they were not come to that height of
Profaneness, as to throw up, or to throw off prayer quite. Many among the
Jews, I may say all of them prayed, but they did not gird up their loins to
prayer: That Is fully the Prophets meaning, and alm^st his language in the next
words, There is none that stirs up himself to take hold of thee. It is not
enough to have a habit of grace, unless it be stirred up to duty, or unless we
bestir our selves in duty. The Apostle exhorts Timothy (2 Ep. 1.6.) Stir up the
gift of God that is in thee. If fire be not stirred up, it grows dead, and
gives little or no heat; it is so with our gifts and graces. Therefore in
prayer, in hearing the Word, etc. gird up the loins of your mind, if you would
either do any good in those duties, or get any. He that lies upon a sickbed,
must gird up the loins of his mind to beat his affliction; else he will never
profit by it, nor answer the ends of God in it. No grace can be exercised by a
soul ungirded: Therefore remember St. Peter's counsel (1 Ep. 1.13.) Gird up the
loins of your mind, be sober and hope to the end (hope perfectly) for the grace
that is to be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. Notat promptam
and ab omni alia cupiditat^ reductam spem. Coc.
As if the Apostle had said, ye can never act your hope to purpose, nor your
faith to purpose, unless you gird up your loins. Habits of grace are
unprofitable to us, without this actual preparation and excitation of grace. It
is our duty ( Heb. 10.24.) to provoke (or stir up) others to love and good
works; much more is it our duty to provoke and stir up our selves.

Thirdly, In that he says, Gird up thy loins like a man:

Note; God would have us do our best, our utmost, in every thing we do; he
would have us put our selves out in every duty.

Solomon advises ( Eccl. 9.10.) Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with
all thy might; that is, do it like a man, vigorously, strenuously, do it with
both hands, Quit you like men in doing it, be strong, as the Apostle exhorts (1
Cor. 16.3) To do the work of the Lord negligently and slightly, with half a
heart or no heart, with half a hand or no hand, scarce with a little finger,
with half strength, or no strength, this is not to do it like a man. We should
be in doing, like the Sun in moving, which, says David (Psalm. 19.5.) As a
Bridegroom comes out of his chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run a
race. If we would run our race like a strong man, strongly and prevailingly, we
must be sure to do two things:

First, We must lay aside every weight, and the sin thut does so easily beset
us (Heb. 12.1.)

Secondly, We must (as here the Lord directs Job) gird up our loins, and
buckle to it.

Fourthly, As these words carry in them a kind of Irony, or divine scorn put
upon Job by the Holy God; Come let me see what a man thou art; thou have spoken
often what thou would do, and what thou would say, if thou could have thy
option, thy wish; now thou have thy wish, let me see what a man thou art, thou will surely appear a brave man by the time that I have done with thee.

Hence Note, God will make men see how unable they are to deal with him, when
it is best with them, or when they are at the best, even when their loins are
girt.

Every man at his best estate is altogether vanity: How vain then is man at his
worst! Job was low and in a bad condition, as to his outward man especially,
when God dealt with him, and how did he carry it, in the day when God dealt
with him? Did his heart endure, or were his hands strong (as the Prophet spoke
to those, Ezekiel. 22.14.) Did he carry it like a man? In one sense not, but like
a child, he had not a word to speak; Once have I spoken, but I will speak no
more; yet it must be confessed, he never carried it so like a godly man, as
when, like a child, he had a word to speak. God will make man see what a
nothing he is in his best condition, when girt and prepared, when armed
(Cap-a-pe) all over, for any service for God; even then, man is a vain thing
without the present assistance of God; what is he then when he is to contend or
plead with God! If the whole world should lay their forces, or, as we say,
compare notes together, what could they do in dispute with God? They that think
they touch the clouds with their heads, would moulder as dust at his feet.

That such was the contention to which the Lord here calls Job, and bids him
gird up his loins, or be in a readiness for, appears plainly in the next words.

I will demand of thee, and answer thou me. As if the Lord had said, Thou
gave me my choice (So Job did chap. 13.22.) whether I would be Opponent or
Defendant; well then says God, this is my choice, I will oppose, and do thou
answer.

I will demand of thee. That is, put questions to thee; and we shall see
presently how thick questions or demands came upon him like hail-shot, and he
had not a word to answer, though God required it.

And answer thou me. Mr. Broughton renders, And let me see thy skill. (...) Et
notifica mihi.
The word is, Instruct me, or Make me to know, Wise me (as we say) I would fain
be informed by thee, teach thou me, notify the matter to me, as the word may
be translated. I will demand, and answer thou me. The Lord did not call upon
him for Answers, as to be informed by him, Sunt quaedam interrogationes, quae
non fiunt ut sciatur veritas ab in^errogante, sed ut extorqueatur a respondente
vel certo prodatur ignorantia respondentis cujusmodi esse solent magistratuum
and magistrorum interrogationes.

Ironia continuatur. Non enim eo interrogaturus crat ut disceret, sed ut
doceret, vel ut Job intelligeret and fateretur se ignorare. Coc.

Ironia sed amica, ^ua Jobum vult in viam reducere. Merc.


but only to convince him that he could not answer him, as he confessed at the
fifth verse of the fortieth Chapter; Once have I spoken, but I will not answer:
nor indeed could he. To all the demands which the Lord made afterward, he made
no answer at all; so that these words, Answer me, or Instruct and inform me,
are a gentle irony, whereby the Lord would make him know himself, or be
sensible of his own ignorance or small seize in knowledge; and thereby
convince him, that he had done rashly, in desiring and wishing for such a
debate or hearing of his cause. The Lord was pleased to rebuke him thus
secretly, or in a figure, and not to fall upon him in plain downright terms. O
thou weak and ignorant creature, who have presumed to appear before me, and try
thy cause with me: Now, Go to, Let me see what thou can do, show thy best
skill, put forth thy utmost strength of argument, in reasoning about or against
my dealings with thee. Thus the Lord might have confounded him; but he was
pleased to carry it in a milder way, yet in a way as effectual to humble and
meeken Jobs spirit. God needs not press man by power, he can do it by reason or
force of argument, and so stop his mouth for ever. The Apostle says ( Romans
3.19.) All the world shall become guilty before God; and in the same Chapter he
says, God shall be justified in his sayings, and overcome when he is judged.
The Lord always does things with so much justice, and speaks with so much
reason, that no man is able to answer a word, or reply upon him. And though he
might silence or stop any man's mouth, by his mere Command and Authority, yet he
condescends to do it rather by reason and demonstration, lest any should say,
or complain, they were rather overpowered by the greatness of his Majesty,
than cast by the right and equity of his Cause. Thus we see how the Lord in
this Preface prepares Job to hearken to those demands that he had to put to
him, and to answer them if he could; but Job (alas poor man!) had not a word to
answer any one of those demands, which the Lord put to him, either in the
following part of this Chapter, or in the next.

JOB. Chap. 38. Verse. 4, 5, 6. 4. Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations
of the Earth? declare if thou have understanding.

5. Who has laid the measures thereof, if thou know, or who has stretched
the line upon it?

6. Whereupon are the foundations thereof set, or who laid the cornerstone
thereof?


IN the former Verse, God told Job what himself would do, or in what method he
would proceed with him; I will demand of thee (says the Lord) or I will put
the Question to thee: In this verse the Lord begins to make his Demands, to put
Questions to Job, and calls for his Answer; these Demands or Questions contain
the confutation of Jobs former complaining speeches against, or, at least,
about the dealings of God. The first Question we have in this fourth verse;
Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the Earth?

For the clearing of this whole discourse, in which the Lord puts Questions or
Demands to Job, I shall first consider the general scope of them all, and then
the special matter contained and couched in the present context.

The scope which God seems to have in pressing Job with these Demands or
Questions, may be threefold.

First, That by arguments from the less to the greater, he might show Job, that
he was not able to comprehend the reason of his mysterious providential
workings toward the children of men, seeing he could not give a reason of his
sensible and natural works.

Secondly, That Job being put to confess his ignorance about worldly or natural
things, he might be brought to have low thoughts of himself, and (as he did
indeed at last in Chapter 42.) to abhor himself, repenting in dust and ashes:
Therefore, Beatus Job post interrogationem verberis discutitur interrogatione
sermonis. Greg.
as one of the Ancien^s says upon this place; After God had a great while, as
it were, debated with him, and questioned him by his rod, he now debated with
him by word, putting Questions to him.

Thirdly, The Lord came thick and threefold (as we say) upon Job, with these
searching Questions, thereby to convince him, that if by his own mighty power
he had made, and by his wise providence had ordered the whole course of Nature,
and all the parts of it, so exactly; surely then Job might collect and conclude
that God in his administrations toward him, a particular single person, must
needs carry all things in wisdom and with justice. And, that if God did show
forth so much wisdom and faithfulness, in making, and in ordering the world,
which was made for man, and for him among others of mankind; then much more was
the providence of God rightly and duly administered unto all men, and him. If
the Lord took such care of the Earth, when he had showed his power in making of
it; if he took such care about the bruit beasts and other creatures of the
Earth, Si propter to mundus tanta fruitur providentia quanto magis ipse.
which are the stock of it; then doubtless he took a due care of man, and of
him in particular, man being the chief part of this lower creation, and Job
being a principal one among the sons of men.

More distinctly. In this Context, and those which follow, about the works of
God, the conviction arises three ways upon Job, or God deals with him by a
threefold argument; and all to humble him, and bring him upon his knees.

First, By comparing the eternity of God with Jobs time, who was but of
yesterday; therefore says he, Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of
the Earth? As if he had said, pray how old are you, that you should take upon
you to contend with me, about my dealings with you? As the Jews said ignorantly
to Christ, whose day Abraham saw by faith, and was glad, Thou art not yet fifty
years old, and have thou seen Abraham? (John 8.57.) So the Lord might say in
the fullness of his knowledge, to Job, Thou art not yet a hundred years old,
sure; Where (then) wast thou when I laid the foundations of the Earth?

Secondly, The Lord sets before Job his own Omniscience, and thereby convinces
Job of his ignorance, or of the little knowledge, as well as experience, that
he had of things done long before: Declare (says God) if thou have
understanding, at the fourth verse; and if thou know, at the fifth verse. As
if the Lord had said, I can declare these things, I know these things; what is
thy knowledge about them, in comparison of my knowledge? thy light is but
darkness, and thy knowledge ignorance, compared with mine; therefore presume
not.

Thirdly, The Lord convinces Job by his helplesness to him, both in the Works
of Creation and Providence; thereby setting forth his own Omnipotency, together
with Jobs impotency; which was such as contributed nothing either to the
Creation, or to the Government of the World. Where wast thou, when I laid the
foundations of the Earth, and did all these things? Did thou come to give me
either counsel how to do them, or lend me thy hand in the doing of them? Surely
no; I did them alone, thou wast not in being, thou art not from the beginning.
Thy knowledge is very small, and thy power and strength smaller, as to the
bringing about of any of these things; therefore see thy vanity, in speaking
thus complainingly, about my dealings with thee.

From and upon all these considerations, the Lord would have Job sit down and
acknowledge, that it must needs be extreme rashness in him to find fault with
any of his Dispensations, or plead with him about them: The general argument
may be framed thus;

He is blameworthy, that finds fault with or complains about any thing in the
Government of God, or will adventure to dispute, and debate with him about it;
unless he have somewhat like the Eternity, the Wisdom, the Might, and Power of
God.

But Job thou have nothing like the Eternity of God, for thou art but of the
other day; thou have nothing like the Omniscience of God, for thou art ignorant
of what God has done, and destitute of counsel what to do thy self: Thou have
nothing like the Power of God, the Arm of God, thou art weak, thou can not
make the least worm, the least fly; surely, then thou can do nothing toward
the making of a world: Therefore thou art blame worthy, for finding fault with,
and complaining about what God has done.

The first Proposition is fully implied, throughout the discourse. The
Assumption is expressed in many sharp and cutting queries, from the 4th ver. of
this Chapter, Where wast thou, etc. to the 34th of the next. The parts of this
Assumption are many; whereof the first treats of Creation, from this fourth
verse to the 22d; the second of Providence in general, chiefly in the Meteors;
from the 22d. verse to the end of this Chapter; the third, of special
Providence toward the Beast of the Earth, and the Fowls of the Air, from the
first verse of the 39th Chapter to the end.

So that, the proof of this Assumption, that Job had no hand, g^ve no counsel,
no furtherance, no assistance, in the Works of Creation and Providence; I say
this Assumption, contains the history of the greatest things in all the parts
of Nature: for whatsoever belongs to true Philosophy, may be reduced to it, or
clearly discovered in it; and herein we are taught the true use of Philosophy,
even to raise the mind of man to the contemplation of the Eternity, Power, and
Wisdom of God; as also of our own frailty, weakness, nothingness, and so to sit
down in an humble submission, to whatsoever the Lord does with us, or ours, in
this world.

So much of the argument and general scope of this whole discourse.

The Lord begins with the Work of Creation, thereby humbling Job to this
Confession, that he had nothing at all to do with it.

Verse. 4. Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the Earth? Quando
deus interrogat ubi eras? revocat in mentem Jobo quis sit, and ex quo, and quam
brevis aevi. Codur.
We have the Creation asserted in these words, and God is pleased to speak of it
metaphorically, by a comparison drawn from Architecture, or the model of a
Building: Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the Earth?

Eliphaz put a question of a near impo^t with this ( Chap. 15.7.) Art thou the
first man that was born? or wast thou made before the hills? Here the Lord
speaks the same language, Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the
Earth? Wast thou made before the World? Antelunares.
There was a sort of men spoken of by the Ancients, called (Proselunes) Men
made before the Moon, who boasted that they were a people before the Moon was
made: others said they were before the Earth. The Scripture tells us that man
was made out of the Earth; well then might the Lord demand, Where wast thou,
when I laid the foundations of the Earth? Wast thou before the Earth? Or before
the Moon? Where wast thou? Surely thou wast no where, thou wast not in being,
when I laid the foundations of the Earth; fo^asmuch as thy foundation is of the
Earth, thou art but dust of the Earth; therefore where wast thou when I laid
the foundations of the Earth? Thou had no Being then, unless in my decree and
purpose for the bringing of thee forth in thy season and generation. We may
say, every man was somewhere, when God laid the foundations of the Earth; he
was in the Purpose, Decree, and Counsel of God, which was from Eternity. Every
man had a being in the mind of God, when God laid the foundations of the Earth;
but where wast thou or any man, as to any existence, when I laid the
foundations of the Earth? Now if this be thy case, thou have no reason to be so
high and big in thy own thoughts, or to speak so discontentedly about my
dealings with thee. Do I need thy counsel in governing the World, who needed it
not in making the World? Where wast thou? etc.

And here we may take notice of the difference of Scripture language in this
point, with respect to our Lord Jesus Christ; and by considering the different
language of the Scripture concerning Christ, we have a clear argument to prove
the Godhead of Christ, or that he is God by Nature; forasmuch as he had his
existence, when God laid the foundation of the Earth. Hear what Wisdom,
substantial Wisdom, that is Jesus Christ, spoke of himself ( Prove. 8.22.) The
Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way (that is, in the beginning of his
ways of Creation) before his works of old; I was set up from everlasting, from
the beginning, or ever the Earth was. Where wast thou says God to Job, when I
laid the foundations of the Earth? But Jesus Christ the true Wisdom, says, he
was before the Earth was; When there was no depth, I was brought forth; when
there was no fountain abounding with water. While as yet he had not made the
Earth, nor the fields, n^r the highest parts of the dust of the World: When he
prepared the Heavens, I was there: When he set a compass upon the face of the
depth: When he established the Clouds above; when he strengthened the fountains
of the deep: When he gave to the Sea his decree, that the waters should not
pass his commandments: When he appointed the foundations of the Earth: Then
was I by him as one brought up with him; and I was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him, etc.

You see how the Spirit speaks concerning Christ, the true Wisdom, the
substantial Wisdom, he was before God laid the foundations of the Earth;
therefore he is God, he is eternal. But when God comes to speak to Job, a man,
he says, Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the Earth? (John 1.1.)
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was God; and by him all things were
made. Jesus Christ had a hand in making the World, in laying the foundations of
it, the work is ascribed to him. Here Is the glory of Jesus Christ above all
creatures, and this is an unanswerable proof of the Godhead and Divinity of
Jesus Christ; as it is of man's frailty, when the Lord demands,

Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the Earth? It Is as if the Lord
had said, Remember how short a time thou have been, how little a while it is
since thou came into the World?

There are two things which men should much consider;

First, How little a while they have been in this World.

Secondly, How little a time they have to stay in this World. Where wast thou,
When I laid the foundations of the Earth?

The Hebrew is but one word, Where wast thou, when I founded the Earth? (...)
In fundare me, vel cum fundarem.
we say, When I laid the foundations of the Earth? What Is a foundation? There
are four things to be noted about a foundation.

First, A foundation is the lowest part of a building. The Top or Head-stone
(Zach. 4.7.) and the foundation-stone, are at utmost distance; the one highest,
the other lowest, the one first laid down, the other last set up.

Secondly, The foundation is an unseen part of the building: we behold the
super-structure, the walls and towers, when raised, we behold the battlements
and pinnacles; but we cannot behold the foundation, that is an unseen part of
the building.

Thirdly, The foundation is the most necessary part of the building. There are
some parts of a building, which are only for ornament and beauty; there are
other parts of a building, which though they are somewhat necessary, yet not
much necessary; the building might stand without them, but a foundation is of
absolute necessity: there cannot be: continuing house without a foundation.

Fourthly, The foundation is the support of the whole building; that bears and
upholds all the rest.

But some may say, What are the foundations of the Earth?

I answer, A foundation may be taken either properly, or metaphorically;
formally, or allusively.

The foundations of the Earth are not formal, but metaphorical foundations:
It Is a speech borrowed from men, who must have a proper foundation for their
buildings. The Earth is not laid upon any formal, but it has a vertual
foundation. The Scripture says sometimes, that the Earth is founded upon the
seas, and established upon the floods (Psalm. 24.2.) yet in a proper sense, the
Sea is not the foundation of the Earth. It Is said also, ( Job 26.7.) He hangs
the Earth upon nothing. The whole bulk of Sea and Earth together, are one
Globe, one Building, formed and compacted together.

But the Earth may be said to have foundations, and that God has laid the
foundations of it; for this reason: Because the Earth is set fast and firm, it
is like a house that has foundations, not only a foundation, but foundations;
it stands most firm. A house builded upon a rock ( Matthew. 7.25.) stands fast
and immoveably in all weathers, because built upon a sure foundation: A house
builded upon the sands, falls, it has no sure foundation. The Earth is made
firm, strong, and sure, as those houses or buildings that are raised upon
rocks; and is therefore said to have foundations. Why is Heaven, or the state
of glory, called a City having foundations (Heb. 11.10.) but because the state
of glory, or that glorious City, is a firm state; or (as it is called in
another place ( Chap. 13.14.) a continuing City: A City which shall it self
continue for ever, and whose Citizens (without succession) continue for ever.
Now though the Earth be but a moveable tent or weak cottage, in comparison of
Heaven or our heavenly state; yet God in his infinite Wisdom and Power, has
formed and established it so firmly for the habitation of man and all inferior
creatures, upon its own center; that the Lord may truly be said to have built
it upon foundations, or to have appointed foundations for it: as it is often
expressed elsewhere ( Psalm. 102.25. Psalm. 104.5. Prove. 8.29.) as well as here.
Where wast thou, When I laid the foundations of the Earth?

The form of the words is considerable, in opposition to that opinion of some
of the Ancients, Aquin. in loc.
who attributed the site of the Earth, and of the other Elements, not to any
divine supernatural Power of the Maker, but to the very Nature of the Earth, or
the necessity of the Matter; according to which, heavy things tend downward,
and light things rise high; so according to that opinion, the Earth being a
heavy body, falls lowest, or took its place of its self. Now that this
opinion may be consuted and shut out of doors, the Lord compares his making of
the World, to the building of a house; which is ordered according to the reason
of the builder: so that though it be a truth in Nature, that heavy things fall
lowest, yet we are to ascribe all to the Wisdom of God, the Disposer of them;
who has done all things according to the pleasure of his own Will, and that
with such admirable contrivance, that man is not able to comprehend it; as the
last words of the verse intimate: Where wast thou, when I laid the foundation
of the Earth? Declare if thou have understanding.

But before I pass to those words in the latter part of the verse, I shall
gather up some observations from this former part of it; Where wast thou, when
I laid the foundations of the Earth? etc.

Hence Note, First; The time of man upon Earth, compared with the Eternity of
God, is nothing.

Where wast thou? David (Psalm. 39.4.) prayed that God would teach him how frail
he was, as to the duration of his life; and he adds in the next verse, Mine age
is nothing before thee. The age of man is nothing before God, if we consider it
as to its beginning, or if we consider it as to its ending. When began the age
of the most aged man? Are not all men of yesterday? God had an eternity of
Being, before man was upon the face of the earth. And what is the age of man as
to its continuance? As it began but yesterday, that is, a very little while
ago, or but the day past; so it may end to morrow, that is within a few days
to come, yea possibly before the next day or the morrow comes. Boast not of to
morrow ( Prove. 27.1.) both because thou know not what a day may bring forth,
nor whether, as to thee, a to morrow shall be brought forth. Death sweeps men
suddenly from the face of the earth; only the Lord always is, and is always
the same: All things change, but God is not changed: He is himself, and his
years fails not: Then what is man's age compared to God?

Note, Secondly; God is the first Being.

Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the Earth? God alone was
before all things; yet he was not at all alone: Anteomnia erat deus solus, ipse
sibi and mundus and locus and tempus and omnia. Tertul. adversus Praxeam. cap.
5.
For (as one of the Ancients says) He was to himself a world, place, and time,
and all things.

Thirdly; God is an Eternal Being.

It Is possible for one to be first, and not to be eternal. One man may have a
Being before another, and not have a Being from eternity; but God had an
eternal Being, before the world had a Being, or man any Being in the world.

There are Things of three sorts:

First, Such as have had a beginning, and shall have an end, and be no more.
Thus it is with all mere sensitive Creatures, the Beasts of the Earth, and
Fowls of the Air; they perish, there is an end of their being, when they die,
or come to the end of their lives.

Secondly, There are other things which have had a beginning, yet shall have no
end; As Spirits, Angels good or bad, and the souls of men: yea, the bodies of
men, though they are subject to, and are cut off by death, yet they shall
return again; and having been sown in corruption, shall be raised in
incorruption; and be clothed with immortality, which is a piece of Eternity.

Thirdly, There is a Being, which is without beginning, and without ending; and
that is Gods Being only, or the Being of God; who thus expressed himself to
Moses, I am, and I am that I am; (Exodus 3.14.) That word takes in all Time,
past, present, and to come; yea, past, present, and to come, are all one in
Gods Being ( Psalm. 90.1.) Thou have been our habitation, from generation to
generation: That is, We thy people, have always, or in all revolutions of
time, dwelt or sheltered our selves in thee: and then at the second verse, they
confess not only their being in him throughout all generations, but his most
blessed Being before all generations; Before Mountains were brought forth, or
ever thou had formed the Earth, and the World; even from everlasting to
everlasting, thou art God. The first Being is an eternal Being, and therefore
the Prophet says ( Isa. 57.15.) God inhabiteth Eternity. The Eternal dwells in
Eternity. But what is Eternity? One of the Ancients calls it, Aeternitas est
interminabilis vitae tota simul et perfect possessio. Boeth. de Consol. l. 6.
The perfect possession of a boundless or limitless life, whole, and all at
once. Eternity has no terms, nor bounds of beginning or ending: It Is a
possession of all at once, there is nothing past, or to come; but all is
always present to God.

Note, Fourthly; God is the fountain of all being, he has given a being to all
things.

The Apostle Paul (Acts 17.28.) discoursing with the Athenians, having said, In
him we live, and move, and have our being; convinces them further by that
saying of their own Poets, for we are also his offspring; We spring from him
as from a root or fountain. With him is the fountain of lives (Psalm. 36.9.)
even of natural life, as well as of spiritual and eternal: Every life, every
being, is but a stream issuing from Jehovah. And as every life is from God, so
also is the being of all things without life. The Lord gave the liveless Earth
its being, its beginning. Some Naturalists have asserted the eternity of the
World, and so the eternity of the Earth: They could not compass which way or
how the World could have a beginning, and therefore said it had none. Here we
have the Founder of the World, God himself, teaching man this Divine Philosophy
about the beginning of the World, and taking it to himself, I laid the
foundations of the Earth. When the Heathen Philosopher read what Moses had
written concerning the Creation of the World; Thus the Heavens and the Earth
were finished, and all the host of them (Ger. 2.1.) He presently said, The man
speaks wonders, but how does he prove what he has spoken? Where are his
demonstrations? He would put Moses to his proof: but Moses's proof was faith in
the testimony of God. Through faith we understand that the Worlds were framed
by the Word of God; so that things which are seen, were not made of things
which do appear (Heb. 11.3.) We understand the Work of Creation, yet not by the
strength of natural reason, but through faith; which gives credit to the Word
of God, and persuades the heart that the report therein made is a truth. Plato
in Timaeo.
For though some Philosophers have evinced by arguments grounded upon reason,
that the World was made; yet that it was made by the Word of God, either the
Essential Word, the Son of God spoken of ( John 1.1.) who is the efficient
cause of it; or by the Declarative Word, spoken of in this place of the
Hebrews, which was the means or instrumental cause of making the World ( Genesis
1.3, 6.) This, I say, cannot at all be understood by reason, but purely and
only by faith, because it is so revealed in the Scriptures.

Fifthly, In that the Lord here says, I laid the foundations of the Earth:

Observe; God has made the Earth firm and immovable.

The stability of the Earth is of God, as much as the being and existence of it
( Psalm. 104.5.) He laid the foundations of the Earth, that it should not be
removed for ever. There have been many Earthquakes or movings of the Earth in
several parts of it, but the whole body of the Earth was never removed, so much
as one hairs breadth out of its place, since the foundations thereof were laid.
Archimedes the great Mathematician, said, If you will give me a place to set my
Engine on, I will remove the Earth. It was a great b^ag; but the Lord has laid
it fast enough for man's removing. Himself can make it quake and shake, he can
move it when he pleases; but he never has nor will remove it. He has laid
the foundations of the Earth that it shall not be removed, nor can it be at all
moved, but at his pleasure; and when it moves at any time, it is to mind the
sons of men that they by their sins have moved him to displeasure. There has
been or will be a shaking of the Earth in mercy, for we have it in a promise (
Heb. 12.26.) Whose voice then (namely at the giving of the Law) shook the
Earth; but now he has promised, saying, yet once more I shake not the Earth
only, but also Heaven. Some understand this promise as fulfilled at the coming
of Christ in the flesh, at which time indeed there were notable and amazing
motions and alterations both in Heaven and Earth. Others expound it of the Day
of the ultimate Judgment; not a few of some great providential dispensations
of God, which shall shake not the Earth only, but also the Heavens, as taken in
a Metaphor for earthly and heavenly things, referring to the Church of God and
the Kingdoms of Men. I shall not interpose in this matter about the sense of
that Text: but only say, whatever the Apostle meant by Earth or Heaven, and
the shaking of it, yet this remains as an unshaken Axiom, that the Fabric of
the Earth (properly taken) stands fast: The Lord has laid the foundations of
it, that it should not be removed. David to show the stedfastness of his faith,
put that supposition ( Psalm. 46.2.) Therefore will not we fear, though the
Earth be moved. The Prophet also did the like, to assure us of the stability of
the Covenant of Grace ( Isa. 54.10.) yet we need not fear that either the Earth
shall be removed, or the Mountains depart. Such suppositions show indeed the
immoveableness of the Word which God has spoken, not the moveableness (by any
natural power or natural decay) of the Earth, whose foundations he has laid.
And hence the Psalmist argues the Lords faithfulness to his Word ( Psalm.
119.90. Non magis moveronaturaliter terra, quam quiescere coelum potest. Bold.
) All earthly things move, but the Earth wherein all these motions are made,
stands still (Eccl. 1.4.) The Earth can no more move, than the Heavens can
stand still. Some modern Philosophers have turned the scale of Nature, and
would persuade us that the Heavens stand still, and the Earth moves: but it is
good for us to stand to and abide by the Scripture, which tells us, the Earth
stands still and abides; or it abides, that is, it stands, as the Margin
explains it ( Psalm. 119.90.) And that it stands still or abides, not only
because it has still a being (as things in motion have) but because it is
still, or stands without moving, is so much my faith, as well as my sense, that
I see no reason to be moved from it.

Sixthly, The Power and Will of God are the only foundation of the Earth. It Is
said by the Psalmist, he has founded it upon the waters (as was showed before)
yet that cannot be meant properly; for how can water, a fluid body, naturally
bear up or sustain the Earth, a heavy body, and not at all boyant? We all see
it hangs or stands in the air. But what foundation can the air be to the
Earth, which will scarcely bear a feather. It remains then undeniable that the
Will and Power of God are the foundations of the Earth: Rationi nihil occurrit,
cui innitatur terra, si divinam exceperis voluntatem. Nazian. Orat. 24.
There Is nothing can be given or assigned in reason, if you look not to the
Will of God, for the foundation of the Earth. Besides that, there is no bottom
for it. One of the Ancients giving a description of the Creation, says, All
things are laid up in his Power and Will; these are the foundations, the stay,
and establishment of all things. Omnia reposita existimo in ejus potestate,
quod voluntas ejus sit fundamentum universorum. Ambr. l. 1. Hexam. c. 6.
And as it is so with respect to the standing of the Earth, so, with respect to
all those great things which God has promised to do in the Earth; the
foundation of them all, is his own Power and Will, or his Powerful Will. The
foundation laid in Election, and the foundation laid in Redemption by Jesus
Christ (other foundation can no man lay for all our spiritual comforts, present
privileges, and future hopes (1 Cor. 3.11.) These foundations, I say) were
laid in the Will of God, Lo I come to do thy Will, O God, (Heb. 10.7.9.) The
Will of God is the foundation and establishment of all things, whether Natural
or Civil, Spiritual or Eternal.

Seventhly, From the scope of these words we may

Observe; God who has made the Earth by his Power, does also govern it, and
man who inhabits it.

And therefore man ought to be quiet, and sit down in his governing as well as
in his Creating Will. To convince and persuade Job of this, is (as has been
touched) the purpose of God in all that follows. He that has made the World,
governs the World; and if so, shall poor creatures, you or I, or any other,
though a Job, find fault with his government of it? Will a Master Builder
suffer any one to find fault with his work, who understands not how to lay a
stone in it, much less to give the rule or direction for the whole work?
Forasmuch then as the Lord is not only the Master Builder, but the sole Maker
of this great House, the World, it becomes man, for whose use it was made, to
acquiesce or rest quietly in his Government of it. Surely, the Maker of all
things, has a right to dispose of all things; and therefore all persons are to
be satisfied in his disposal of them.

From the whole verse and the observations given upon it, take these Scripture
inferences.

First, The Scripture makes this inference from it; God is one, and there is
none like to him (Isa. 40.26. Isa. 46.8.) To whom will ye liken me? to whom
will you compare me? I am he that stretched out the heavens, and laid the
foundation of the earth. there is none like to him in Wisdom, none in Power,
who laid the foundation of the Earth. There was never such a visible piece of
work done in the World, as the making of the World; therefore the^e is none
such as the Maker of the World. The hypocrite is brought in dreaming that God
was altogether such as himself (Psalm. 50.21.) And it is, as it has been, the
common guise of Idolaters, to think that God is no better than their Idol. But
what the Lord by his Prophet ( Jer. 10.11, 12) taught the captive Jews to say
to their great Lords the Babylonians, the same has he taught us to say to all
Hypocrites and Idolaters: The gods that have not made the heavens and the
earth, shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens: Then
presently follows (as in Job) He has made the earth by his power, he has
established the world by his wisdom, and has stretched out the heavens by his
discretion. As if it had been said, Will ye imagine that the Idols which you
have made, are like him, who made you and all things? And it is considerable,
that whereas the whole Prophecy of Jeremy is written in the Hebrew Tongue,
this eleventh verse, which holds out at once a testimony and a threatening
against those Idolaters, is written in the Chaldean Language, with which the
Jews by their long Captivity in Babylon were well acquainted; that so the
Babylonians might hear of it, and know that the God of Israel, who made heaven
and earth, was altogether unlike their gods, who did never so much as arrogate
to themselves any hand in, much less, the sole power of making heaven and earth.

Secondly, Take this Scripture inference. Seeing the Lord has laid the
foundations of the earth, by his own Power and Wisdom, then, He is the
Proprietor of the whole earth, or the whole earth is the Lords proper
possession (Psalm. 34.1.) The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; the
Lord made it, and it is his. He was not called, nor set a work to build this
great House for another; but he made i^, as by his own power, so for his own
pleasure; all the inhabitants of the earth are his tenants: and not only the
earth, but the whole stock and furniture of it is his: For as the Lord made the
earth, so all that the earth is stored with. Thus spoke Abraham (Genesis 14.22.)
to the King of Sodom, who bid him take the goods to himself: I have lifted up
my hand unto the Lord, the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth: that I
will not take from a thread even to a shoe latchet, etc. As if he had said, The
Lord who is possessor of heaven and earth, is my portion, my possession; and he
can give me enough of the earth, yea he will give me heaven also: therefore, I
will not take any thing of thine, lest thou should say, I have made Abraham
rich. The Lord, who is possessor of the earth, can give his people what earthly
portions, or possessions of the earth he pleases. And let us remember, what
earthly portions soever we have in this world, we have no reason to boast;
seeing all is the Lords, and we are but his stewards and tenants at will. And
because it is the Lords earth which we possess, let us also remember to pay our
rent, our quit-rent to him, that is, thanks duly and daily; lest we provoke him
to distrain upon us, or to take the forfeiture, and turn us out of all. Many
hold lands from great Lords, to pay only some small rent or service, in a way
of acknowledgement; O let us remember to pay our rent to our Great Landlord,
The Lord of the whole earth. They who acknowledge, what they have is his, or
that they have and hold all they have of him; will honor him with what they
have, even with their substance, and with the first fruits of all their
increase, (Prove. 3.9.)

Thirdly, We may infer; Seeing God founded the earth, He is also the Ruler of
it. And that the Lord rules the earth, is a mercy to all men on the earth. The
Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice (Psalm, 97.1.) That is, men of the earth have
cause to rejoice, because they have God, who is infinitely both wise and good,
to rule them. The Lord is King over all the earth; sing ye praises with
understanding (Psalm. 47.7.) And surely they who understand what a King he is,
will praise him.

Fourthly, We may be encouraged to go unto God, or apply our selves to God,
about all things here on earth, seeing ^e has laid the fou^dations of the
earth. The Lord having invited his people to ask him things to come concerning
his sons, and concerning the work of his hands, to command him (Isa. 45.11.)
adds this in the next words, as an encouragement to do so; I have made the
earth, and created man upon it: As if he had said, Ask of me whatever you would
have me do, or would have done on earth; for I am he that created the earth. It
may help our faith much, when (as David expresses it, ( Psalm. 11.3.) the very
foundations (of earthly things) are destroyed, to consider that God laid the
foundations of the earth: In such a case it may be said (as it follows there
in the Psalm) What can the righteous do? but may it not be said even in that
hard case, when foundations are destroyed, What cannot the Lord do, who laid
the foundations of the earth? This argument the Psalmist also uses ( Psalm.
124.8.) Our help stands in the Name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.
Though earth and heaven shake, and seem to be confounded or mingled together,
yet he who made heaven and earth without help, can give us help, or be our
helper. If our help stood in the best of men made of earth, they might fail us;
but while our help stands in him that made the earth, he will never fail us,
for he has said he will not ( Heb. 13.5.) and their experience who have
trusted the Lord, has said it too ( Psalm. 9.10.) This is the great privilege
of all that believe, they may address to God by Christ for any thing in this
earth, because he is the Maker of it; and having made it by a word speaking,
what cannot he do for them, if he speak the word?

Fifthly, Let us be much in praising the Lord for his wisdom, power, and
greatness, all which gloriously appear and shine forth in his laying the
foundations of the earth. David makes this a special part of Divine praise (
Psalm. 136.6.) We should not only praise the Lord for the great things he has
done on the earth, but for this, that he has made the earth. The work of God
in laying the foundations of the earth, calls as loudly for our praise, as any
thing (except our redemption from the earth ( Rev. 5.9. chap. 14.3.) which ever
God wrought upon the face of the earth. The making of the earth calls us to
praise the Lord:

First, Because he has made so vast a body as this earth is, or because he
has made such a large house for us.

Secondly, Because he has founded it so miraculosly, hanging upon nothing that
appears, but in the air; yet standing more firmly than any house built upon a
rock.

Thirdly, We should praise the wisdom of God, that has formed it so exactly,
and adorned it so richly: It Is not a house huddled and clapped up together,
without skill or art, though it was made word a word speaking in six days, yet
it was made with infinite wisdom, as is more particularly held out ( v. 5.)
where the Lord speaks of laying the measures thereof, and stretching the line
upon it; as also of fastening the foundations and laying the c^rner-stone
thereof; all which ^^ew it is not a house clapped up in haste, but made with
admirable exactness: so that (as it is usual when great houses are built) there
were great acclamations made at the building of it; as we have it the seventh
verse of this Chapter, then the morning stars sang together, and all the sons
of God shouted for joy, to see such a magnificent pile reared up.

Lastly, Take this inference; If the visible world be such a building, what is
the invisible world, the City having foundations, which God has prepared for
those that love him?

Thus much of the first part of Jobs Conviction, he had nothing to do in laying
the foundations of the earth, and he had as little in setting up and finishing
that goodly structure, as will appear in that which follows.

Yet before the Lord proceeded any further to question Job about this great
work of Creation, he requires or calls for his answer in the close of this
fourth verse, to the question propounded in the former part of it; Where wast
thou, when I laid the foundations of the Earth?

Declare, if thou have understanding. God challenges Job to answer: The Hebrew
is, If thou know understanding. And so the word is used ( Isa. 29.24.) where
we render, They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, or (as
the Margin has it) shall know understanding. Again, Huram said (2 Chronicles.
2.12.) Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that made heaven and earth; who has
given to David the King a wise son, endued with prudence and understanding; The
Original is thus strictly read, Knowing prudence and understanding. Daniel
spoke in the same form ( chap. 2.21.) He gives wisdom to the wise, and
knowledge to them that know understanding. To know is a work of the
understanding: No man knows any thing, but by the help of his understanding.
The understanding is the first or Master-wheel in that noble engine the soul of
man; and when rightly informed and enlightened, all the other wheels or
faculties of the soul move aright, unless over-poized by passions and
self ends. Every rational creature has an understanding, yet every rational
creature does not know understanding, that is, does not, is not able to speak
knowingly, or to use and act his understanding knowingly about every matter.
The Lord supposes Job might be defective here, and therefore bespeaks him
thus, Declare, if thou have understanding, or know understanding: As if he
had said, The things which I question thee about, may possibly be too high or
too big for thy understanding, Si peritu^ sis tantarum rerum. Vatab.
such as possibly thou can not reach. And hence, some render or rather
paraphrase the Text thus; Declare, if thou art skilful in such great things as
I now speak of: If thou art so wise as thou seem to be by thy former
contesting with my provide^ces, declare thy wisdom in this point, wherein I
know thou will but declare thy ignorance, thy infancy, or inability to speak,
as one speaks: Thou will show thy self but a child, while thou go about to
resolve this question. An experienced Architect, is not to be corrected by a
Novice, who never took tool in hand, nor has ever read line about that Art:
Will thou therefore, who art made of the earth, undertake to reprehend my work,
who made the earth, in ordering and disposing the condition of man on earth?
Declare, if thou have understanding.

Note, First; The right declaring of any thing, is a work of the understanding.

A man must see into a matter, by the eye of his mind, before he can duly
declare his mind, sense, or sentence about it. A fools bolt (we say) is soon
shot; his tongue runs before his wit: but a wise man will not declare (no man
can declare well) before he understands: His wit keeps pace at least with his
tongue; He that answers a matter (says Solomon, Prove. 18.13.) before he
hears it, it is folly and shame to him. It is so also him that hears it, if
he answers it before he understands it. Declare, if thou have understanding.

Note, Secondly; Some works of God are such and so high, that no man has
understanding enough to reach or declare them.

Declare, if thou have understanding, how the foundations of the earth were
laid. Man knows not where he was, not what he was, before he was: how then
should he declare how any thing was done by God before he was? The great thing
which God would inform Job in, is the same which the Apostle would inform us
all in ( Romans 11.33, 34.) while he brake out as a man amazed at the sight of a
tremendous gulf in this passionate Exclamation, O the depth of the riches both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments and his
ways past finding out! for who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has
been his Counselor?

The Lord having put this question to Job about the Creation of the Earth in
general, proceeds more distinctly, to put him questions about that work in
allusion to buildings.

And here are four things in these two verses which have a twofold respect to
buildings: Here are two things which have respect to the form and symetry of a
building: And here are two things which have respect to the strength and
firmness of a building.

The form, symetry, and right order of a building, is laid down in the fifth
verse, where the Lord speaks of the measures of the earth, and of stretching
out a line upon it. The measuring of a building, and the stretching out of the
line upon it, respect the right ordering and modelling, or the due frame of the
fabric.

The two other things that concern the strength of a building, are the laying
of the foundation and the fastening of the cornerstone; both these we have in
the sixth verse: Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid
the cornerstone thereof? So then, we have here these two great and necessary
concernments of a building:

First, The due form.

Secondly, The firmness of it.

When a builder intends to raise a fabric, he first considers and measures
the ground or plat where he intends to build: With respect to this, says God,
Who has laid the measures thereof?

Secondly, When he is building, Ad amussi eriguntur parietes.
he uses his line to keep the work level and right: with respect to which God
says, Who has stretched the line upon it?

Thirdly, The builder, that his work may be substantial, will be sure to fix
his foundation sure: in respect of which, the Lord enquires of Job; Whereupon
are the foundations thereof fastened?

Fourthly, The builder will be very careful to set right the cornerstone which
holds the walls together: with respect to which he demands an account in these
words, Who has laid the corner stone thereof?

Verse. 5. Who has laid the measures thereof? That is, taken the measures of
the earth: These measures respect the quantity or dimensions of the earth, its
length, breadth, and thickness; these were laid merely according to the good
pleasure of God, which no man is able to give a reason of; and therefore, he
adds, if thou know. The word which we render laid, implies a laying with
art, as also with care and diligence; in all keeping a due decorum or
proportion, respecting the length, breadth, and deepness of the building. God
used this word when he spoke to Moses about the fabric of man's body (which is
a little world, a compendium of the greater world) ( Exodus 4.11.) Who has made
man's mouth? or who has made the deaf or the seeing? etc. The Text is, Who has
laid man's mouth? Who has laid it in that due proportion, or so placed it, that
it may fit with the whole, and every member, that it with the eyes, ears, etc.
may stand in perfect order, both for use and ornament? Thus the Lord has laid
the measures of the earth; He measured out the several parts of it, where the
valleys should be, and where the plains; where the hills and mountains, and
where the rivers and channels: He measured all these, that is, he disposed them
in a comely order. There is a great appearance of the wisdom of God in settling
every thing in its proper place, that one may answer in proportion with
another; the perfection and beauty of the whole arises out of the symetry and
proportionableness of the parts. Who has laid the measures thereof?

Further, This laying the measures, notes, as the exactness, so the greatness
of the work. In Scripture language, a building of measures, or an house of
measures, signifies a great house or building ( Jer. 22.14.) Woe to him, that
says, I will build me a wide house and large chambers: Doman commensuratam.
Sept.
The Hebrew is, an house of measures, that is, of a great measure. The
Septuagint render it, a measured house, a house having a due proportion of
longitude and latitude, of height and depth. When the searchers sent by Moses
came back and reported the state of the land which they had viewed, we saw
(said they) men of a great stature, (Numb. 13.32.) The Text is, men of
measures, vast and tall men. Little things have little need of measuring, and
it is scarce worth while to do it: But as great things are greatly to be
admired, so they are worthy to be measured. How great, how marvelous is that
mystical City and Temple, whose measures were taken and showed to Ezekiel in a
Vision ( chap. 40.41, 42.48. v. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.) Such is the earth in
greatness, that God only, who is himself altogether immeasurable (and therefore
greatest of all) can lay, and has laid the measures of it. Who has laid the
measures thereof?

If thou know. The Lord puts this supposition again to his question; as
before, Declare, if thou have understanding, so here, if thou know. Some
read these words ironically, thus, Declare, Quandoquident scitus es. Jun.
for thou (doubtless) know, who has laid the measures thereof. Thou art so
wise and skilful a man, that surely thou can declare this secret. Mr.
Broughton hits the same sense; For thou will be skilful, that is, thought
skilful, and taken among men for (no babe) a knowing man; (...) Mensurare
sumitur pro mensura activa, qua aliquid monsuramus, aut pro re ipsa mensurata.

Mensuras ejus puta, circumferentiam seu latitudinem and diametrum sive
profunditatem. Pisc.


and therefore can give me a good account of the measures of the earth, both
as to its circumference and diameter; that is, what the compass of it is, and
what the depth through the middle of the earth is. Thus the words carry in them
a cutting irony, the matter being so much beyond Jobs knowledge, of which the
Lord says to him, For thou know; which we render, If thou know? But the
Hebrew particle ((...)) is rather and oftener (I suppose) used in a causal, than
in a conditional signification.

Here it may be said, what difficulty is there in this Question, Who laid the
measures of the earth? Job might easily answer, God laid them. Therefore I
conceive, not only, yea not so much, who laid them, as how they were laid, or
what they are, is here intended.

The most learned and studied Mathematicians could never give a right measure
of the earth, nor yet agree about that matter. They measure it first as to the
depth of it, what the diameter of the earth is from top to bottom; but they
differ much in opinion what the depth or diameter of the earth is: Some have
reckoned it three thousand and fifty miles. Others have said it contains six
thousand and seventy miles. And a third sort have concluded that it is seven
thousand one hundred and seventy miles. Thus they guess, but could never yet
come to know the true measures of the earth in deepness. And if we consider the
Perimiter or circumference of the earth, there has been as much variety of
conjecture about that. Some of the learned have reckoned the earth fifty
thousand miles in compass. Others make it thirty and four thousand six hundred
twenty five. A third computation gives it to be thirty one thousand and five
hundred miles. There are who have brought it down to twenty two thousand five
hundred; yea, to twenty thousand and four hundred miles. And they who are
judged most exact among the Moderns, have reduced the account of the compass of
the whole earth to nineteen thousand and fourscore miles. Thus the learned and
wise men of the world, after their greatest studies, know not what the
measures, the just measures of the earth are, nor how they were laid: And
therefore God might well say to Job, Who has laid the measures thereof, if
thou know? Who ever could say to this day without mistake, what the measures
of it are? (...) Sumitur pro filo, quod Latomi utrirque ^ffixum extendunt in
longitudinem muri: App^llatur linea, vel quia ex lino fit, vel quia figuram
rectam efficit, quae etiam linea dicitur. Bold.

Artifices, ne quid indecenter fiat, aut sine proportione regulam adhibent ad
omnia dirigenda.


That is one thing. A second follows Or who has stretched the line upon it?

As if he had said, Who has made the earth so exactly? To do a thing in print
and to do it by line, are proverbials of the same signification.

The line is an instrument of great use in building. Carpenters and Masons must
have their line and plummet, else they cannot keep their work even. Now says
the Lord to Job, Who has stretched the line upon it? The Lord still pursues
the allusion to a building.

To stretch forth the line, signifies in Scripture:

First, The exercise of power. And then, Who has stretched the line upon it,
is, Who has ordered and governed the earth? The Apostle Paul spoke of the
line, and of stretching forth the line in this sense (2 Cor. 10.8.) where
having said, that he had power from God, a spiritual power, not for
destruction, but for edification; he presently adds ( verse. 13.) But we will
not boast of things without our measure, but according to the measure of the
rule (or line, as we put in the Margin) which God has distributed unto us; for
we stretch not our selves beyond our measure: That is, we are not greedy of,
nor do we grasp more power than is given and allowed us of God; nor will we
exercise our power further than Christ has appointed and commanded us. This
stretching forth of the line is the exercise of power, and that is a
metaphorical sense of it.

Secondly, To stretch the line, is to build, or to make preparation for
building ( Zech. 1.16.) Thus says the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with
mercies; my house shall be built in it, and a line shall be stretched forth
upon Jerusalem. Again ( chap. 4.10.) Who has despised the day of small things?
for they shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel.
When the Lord would assure his people that Jerusalem should be restored, he
does it by promising the stretching forth of the line, and the sight of the
plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel, commanding, overseeing, and directing the
work. The line and plummet being of much and most necessary use for the right
setting of a building, signified that God was about to build.

Thirdly, The stretching forth of the line upon a place, with some addition,
notes the destruction of it, or the pulling of it down (2 Kings 21.13.) I will
stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of
Ahab: That is, I will make her desolate, as Ahab and Samaria were; and so the
latter part of the verse expounds it; and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth
a dish, wiping and turning it upside down. Again ( Isa. 34.11.) I will stretch
forth upon it the line of confusion and the stones of emptiness: That is, It
shall be utterly ruined. And ( Isa 18.2, 7.) Woe to the land shadowing with
wings, etc. that says, Go ye swift messengers to a Nation meted out and
trodden down. The Hebrew is, Ad gentem quae conculcatur and destruitur a deo
lineatim, i. e. paulatim destinitur cum modo and ordine.
Go to a Nation of line, (as you have it in the Margin) that is, to a Nation
who have the line stretched ou^ upon them for desolation; not a line stretched
upon them to build them, but to destroy them; a Nation who are or shall be
broken down, as it were by line; they shall come to perfect ruin, or ruin shall
come on them in full perfection. As when the Lord will build, he does it by
line, that is, exactly and fully, even with a divine skill; so when he will
destroy fully, he is said to mete out for destruction. We have the word used
both with respect to destruction and edification, to building up, and pulling
down, in that one place (2 Samuel 8.2.) where it is said, that David smote Moab,
and measured them with a line, casting them down to the ground; even with two
lines measured he, to put to death, and with one full line to keep alive; and
so the Moabites became David's servants, and brought gifts. Some understand this
act of David in measuring the Moabites with a line, strictly and literally;
that David having made a full Conquest of their Country, did cause it to be
measured with a line, and then appointed or allotted two thirds of the Land,
together with the inhabitants, to ruin and destruction; receiving only the
third of the people to mercy, and reserving only a third part of the Land to be
planted by them. Others take it only allusively, that having conquered them, he
used them and their Country at his own pleasure, as we do that which we measure
out by line. But whether we take David's measuring the Moabites with a line in
the one sense or in the other, it fully reaches this third notion of it under
hand.

Here in the Text when the Lord demanded of Job, Who has stretched the line
upon it? It is as if he had said, Show me, if thou can, who has given this
great building, this fabric of the earth such symetry, such a proportion and
evenness, that no fault or flaw can possibly be found in it. From these two
figurative expressions in the fifth verse, implying the exactness of the earths
frame,

Note; The frame of the world is every way, and in every respect proportionable
and beautiful.

It Is done (as it were) by measure and line. The Lord is infinitely above the
use of measures or lines, yet condescending to our understanding, he gives us
to know that it is as perfect a piece as if he had done it by measure and by
line. Survay the whole world, or any part of it, is it not a most exact piece?
The heavens are as the roof of the house, the earth as the floor and foundation
of it; those elements air and water, as the walls and sides of it: The lower
parts of the earth are as pillars and bases, hills and high mountains appear
like emboslements of the earth to the eye of the beholder. What can be added,
whether we consider the compleatness of the whole, or the symetry of the parts?
Have we not reason to say admiringly, or to cry out (as Psalm. 104.24.) O Lord,
how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all; the earth is
full of thy riches: so is the great and wide sea, etc. Our hearts should be
drawn up by all the works of God to admire his workmanship. That thy name is
near thy wondrous works declare (said David, Psalm. 65.1.) speaking of the Works
of Providence; and that the name of God is near his Works of Creation declare
also, his name is written upon them, that is, his power, wisdom and goodness.
And therefore when we behold this Wo^k of God in special, his laying the
measures of the earth, we should admire both his goodness, wisdom and power.
There are five things in this part of the Creation, the earth, as expressed to
be done by line and measure, which may raise up our admiration of God.

First, The greatness of the work: It is a vast piece, or pile, a huge fabric,
though but a point to the Heavens. We admire great buildings; but what are the
greatest buildings upon earth, to the earth it self, which the Lord has built!

Secondly, The harmony or uniformity of the building, and so the beauty of it.

Thirdly, The compactness of the building, as knit close together, and so the
firmness of it.

Fourthly, That all was done in so short a time. We say, Rome was not built in
a day. Solomon was seven years in building the Temple (1 Kings 6.38.) And he
was thirteen years in building his own house (1 Kings 7.1.) And doubtless,
Solomon laid out all the power and skill he had for the setting up of those
buildings: But behold a greater building than either the Temple which Solomon
built for God, or the house which he built for himself, set up (as we say) in a
trice. The Lord finished all his work in six days, and that part of it, the
earth, in one: Nor did the Lord take either six days to finish the whole work,
or one to finish any one part of it, because he needed so much time to do it
in; but because he would not do it in less.

Fifthly, The Lord did all this without the use of any instrument, rule or
compass, axe or hammer; though here is mention made of a measure and of a line.
The skilfullest A^chitect cannot raise up any considerable building without
these; though he has the platform and idea of it in his head, yet take away
his line and his rule, and he can do nothing. But such is the glorious skill
and power of God, that though he is pleased to speak of a measure and of a
line; yet we must not be so gross, as to think that he made use of any. The
whole work was natural to God, and therefore he needed no artificial helps; nor
was any instrument employed in it, but only his own creating word and will.
Some faithless Atheists of old (and possibly there are such at this day) asked
in scorn with what tools and instruments, with what ladders and scaffolds, this
building was set up: But let us at once pity such in their unbelief and
horrible profaneness, and labor to edify or build up our selves in grace and
holiness, in the faith and fear of his great Name, who built this world without
tools or instruments, without ladders or scaffolds.

Secondly, As our hearts should be drawn out in admiration, so in thankfulness,
forasmuch as God has made such a world for us: he has laid the foundations of
the earth, he has measured it out, and stretched the line upon it, that we
might have the use of it, that we might tenant and inhabit this house. Man is
the chief inhabitant of the earth; that other creatures dwell there, is for the
service of man: then let us be thankful. Our greatest cause of thankfulness is,
that the Lord has made another house for us, of which the Apostle professes
his assurance (2 Cor. 5.1.) We know, that when the earthly house of this
Tabernacle (whether of our body, or of the body of this world) is dissolved, we
have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. O
how should we rejoice in, he thankful for that house! But that we have this
inferior house built for us (which is also a building of God, an house not
made with hands, but purely and immediately by the power of God) is and should
be continual matter of great thankfulness.

Thirdly, Seeing the Lord has thus laid the measures of the earth, and
stretched forth the line upon it; seeing he has made such an exact building
for us, this earth: let us walk exactly and orderly upon this earth, which he
has made. As he has laid his measures in framing the earth, so we should keep
our measures in living upon the earth. He has stretched out his line upon it,
and we should take heed that we do not exceed our line. God has given a line,
by which man's conversation should be squared as exactly as any building is or
can be by line. As the work of God for us is beautiful, so should our works be.
We (as to our spiritual state) are a Creation, a new noble Creation: And
certainly, he who made the earth, this old outward Creation in such exactness,
has also made the new Creation, our spiritual heavenly state much more (if
more may be) exactly; he has made it by measure and by line. Let us therefore
walk, and speak, yea, and think, by measure and by line; let us appear and
approve our selves as the building of God, as the work of Gods holy Spirit,
fair and beautiful. Many profess godliness; but do they appear as Gods
Workmanship, as if God had stretched his line, and laid the measure of the New
Spiritual Creation upon them? Believers are the Workmanship of God (Ephesians. 2.10.
(...).
) and so they should appear as) created in Christ Jesus unto good works; which
God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. The Apostle says (
Phil. 1.27.) Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, whom ye
believe in. The Gospel is an exact thing, ordered in all things as David spoke
of it (2 Samuel 23.5.) under the notion of the everlasting Covenant. Now, says
St. Paul, Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ; let it be
an orderly conversation: I may say also, let your conversation be such as
becomes the earth ye walk upon; that is an accurate frame, the Lord has made
it in measure, and stretched the line upon it: Let us take heed we be not found
walking besides that line, those measures which he has given us.

Fourthly, If God has been thus exact in framing the earth, as it were, by
line and measure for us; if he has given us so perfect a piece to inhabit and
dwell in while we are in this sinful state: What do you think is that paradise
which he has prepared for us in our sinless state! What are the measures of
our heavenly City! What the lines that have been stretched out upon those
eternal Mansions! If visible things which our eye sees, are so taking; what
are things invisible! And if this earth which we tread on, be a Looking-glass
(as indeed it is) wherein we may see the wisdom and power of God; what will
heaven be? How will that reflect the wisdom, power, and goodness of God? If
this world be a beauty, and is therefore expressed by a word in the Greek
signifying beauty, (...).
comeliness, decency; what will that world be which is to come! Thus much of
the exactness of the building. The next verse holds out the strength and
firmness of it.

Verse. 6. Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? Or who has laid the
cornerstone thereof? Two things make a building strong and firm.

First, The fastening of the foundations.

Secondly, The right laying of the Cornerstone.

We had the laying of the foundations at the fourth verse, here we have the
fastening of them. If a foundation be laid loosly, the building will not stand.
Christ in the Parable ( Mat. 7.27.) speaks of a foundation laid in the loose
sand, that could not make a firm building. But the house which had its
foundation laid on a compacted rock, or had the rock for a foundation, stood
fast in all winds and weathers. The Lord has not only laid the foundations of
the earth, lis qui nos percunctantur cuinam corpori veluti subjecto fundamento
tam immensum hoc terrae pondus innitatur, dicamus oportet, quod in manu terrae
sunt omnes fines terrae. Basil. in Psalm. 94.

(...) Immersus, inf^ous, impressus, hinc (...) o^^ulus quod digito vel potius
digitus ei infigitur.

(...) Basis columna ^ui aliquid innititur, imponitur atque ab ea gestatur.


but has fastened the foundations; he has built upon a Rock. You will say,
what is that rock-like thing upon which the foundations of the earth are
fastened? I answer, it is nothing but the power and will of God. The will and
power of God are the pillars or bases upon which the earth is fastened and made
sure for ever.

The word which we translate foundations, is often in Scripture rendered sockets
(Exodus 26.19. chap. 35.11. chap. 38.27. Cant. 5.15.) Now sockets are places cut
in timber and stone, or cast in metal, in which the several strengthening
pieces of a building are fastened; and such is the foundation to a house, the
fastening of it. Foundations are laid in the ground, and beams are fastened
with sockets. Mr. Broughton translates; Whereupon are the foundations thereof
sunk fast. We usually say, we must sink a foundation: Foundations are sunk, and
then the Superstructure fastened on it.

Further, Take notice, The word which here we render foundations or sockets, is
not that which properly signifies a foundation: And from it the word Adon is
derived, which signifies a Lord, or Master, or chief among men; because Lords
and Princes are or should be as the sockets and pillars of a Nation, to fasten
and secure all in their places: and upon the fall of Princes often follows
the fall and ruin of Nations. The Spanish word Don, or Lord, is supposed a
derivative from it. Per literam, in fine additam praecedente Camets.
And from this Appellative, one of the proper Names of God is formed, by the
addition of a letter in the end: Under which royal Title he is represented to
our faith as the Lord and Upholder of all things. Some have observed, that God
is called by this Name one hundred thirty and four times in Scripture. All
which show, that he who is the Creator, is also the Sustainer and Supporter of
the whole fabric of Nature; such is the significancy of this word. Now when
the Lord asks, Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? There Is no
answer can be given to this question, but what was given to the former. God
has fastened them upon himself, in his power and will they stand sure.

Or who has laid the Cornerstone thereof? Or, Who has cast her Cornerstone?
As if he had said, Videntur obscure significari poli terrae. Grot.

Lapis anguli, i. e. qui positus est in angulo. Pisc.


Who made the parts of the earth to keep so close together, and to keep up one
another? This is another very considerable part in a building. As strong
buildings must have a sure foundation to hold up the whole; so they must have
corner-stones to hold the parts together. The cornerstone binds and
strengthens the fabric, as well as gives beauty and ornament to it.

There are two sorts of corner-stones:

First, There is a cornerstone laid below or beneath in the earth with the
foundation. The Master Builder is very careful to set that right.

Secondly, There is a cornerstone laid upon the foundation, or in the joining
of the walls, both below as soon as the building appears above ground, and up
to the top or utmost height of the building. Our Lord Jesus Christ is expressed
in Scripture under the notion of a cornerstone as to both these uses.

First, He is the cornerstone laid below in the earth with the foundation (
Isa. 28.16.) Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a
precious cornerstone, a sure foundation: In fundamentum fundatum. Quae sort
fundamenti repetitio significat infimam fundamenti partem (...) out potissimam.
So we translate this latter part of the verse. Some others render it thus, A
cornerstone founded upon a foundation; implying, that Christ is the lowest,
the chiefest and firmest foundation stone, as well as a tried precious
cornerstone. The Apostle affirms both these of Christ in one verse ( Ephesians.
2.20.) Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets (not upon
their persons but doctrine, which is Christ) Jesus Christ himself being the
chief cornerstone: Christus dicitur caput anguli quod non solum sit
principium, sed f^rtis spiritualis aedificii. Nyssen.
In whom all the building fitly framed together, grows into an holy Temple in
the Lord. Again (1 Pet. 2.4, 5.) To whom coming, as unto a living stone,
disallowed indeed of men; but chosen of God and precious: Ye also as lively
stones are built up a spiritual house, etc.

Some conceive, that in this place, the Lord fore-shewed Job the Incarnation of
Christ, who is the true cornerstone, knitting all in One. For mostly, when the
Scripture would set forth the security of our salvation by Christ, it does it
by this resemblance: Upon him believers are founded, and in him fastened. If we
had not Christ a cornerstone for our salvation, it were not possible that our
salvation should be sure to us: The building cannot be fixed without it. Christ
is said to be our peace, who has made both one ( Ephesians. 2.14.) where the Apostle
speaks first of taking away the middle wall of partition, and then of making
both (that is Jews and Gentiles) one by Christ, the only corner stone. By one
and the same faith in Christ, two people, Jews and Gentiles, are joined in one:
As in the corner of a building, two walls always meet and are closed together
by the cornerstone. And as Christ is a cornerstone laid in with the
foundation, so he is a cornerstone upon the foundation in the continued rising
of the building, till raised to the top. As the cornerstone has its use in
any part of the corner, from the foundation to the roof, so it is placed in the
highest part of the building; There Christ is the chief cornerstone. The
Prophet speaks thus of Christ ( Zach. 4.7.) And he (that is Zerubbabel) shall
bring forth the head-stone thereof with shoutings, crying grace, grace unto it;
which seems to signify, that Christ should be manifested and brought publicly
forth, like the chief or uppermost cornerstone. The cornerstone is called the
Head-stone, because it is set above in the building; and it is called also the
Head-stone, because it is polished, and appears above the rest, like an head
above the body. Educet lapidem capitis. Heb. Quod instar capitis promineat, aut
quod emineat in supremo loco.
Thus you see the use of the cornerstone in Scripture, as applied to Christ,
in allusion to a building, for the security and firmness of it: the
cornerstone being that which binds the building, and fastens the contiguous
walls together. Here the Lord speaking of his framing the Earth, tells us of a
cornerstone, to show that the frame of the earth shall stand and continue
unshaken, and undivided. In opposition to this phrase, when the prophet
describes the irreparable destruction of Babylon, or that it shall be ruined
without recovery; he expresses it thus ( Jer. 51.26.) And they shall not take
of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for foundation; but thou shall be
desolate for ever, says the Lord. Babylon shall have neither foundation nor
cornerstone; as much as to say, it shall never be built. Magistrates and chief
Governors are also called corner-stones ( Psalm. 118.22.) The stone which the
builders refused, is become the head-stone of the corner. Which words as they
relate to Christ chiefly, so also to King David, as a type of Christ. The
Scripture in several other places gives that title to great men (1 Samuel 14.38.
Judges 20.2. Isa. 20. Zeph. 3.6.) In all these Texts Princes and great men are
called corners or corner-stones, because, as the cornerstone holds the wall
together, so they hold Nations (in their civil capacity) together. Who laid the
cornerstone thereof? says God to Job; Tell me who did it? Did thou do it?
Did Angels do it? Consider the greatness, the firmness of the work; and thou will be convinced, that it was I that laid the cornerstone thereof. So then,
the general sense of this verse is to show the stability of the Work of God.
Here are foundations, and foundations fastened in the wisdom and power of God,
who is an everlasting strength, the rock of ages (Isa. 26.4.) Here also the
cornerstone is laid, therefore all is sure and firm.

Now what did the Lord aim at in all this? Surely, it was not barely to
convince Job, that the earth was a beautiful piece, and a strong one: There was
somewhat else in it; and what was that? Even to convince Job, that forasmuch as
he could not deny, but this admirable and well ordered building, was the work
of God; that therefore he should sit down satisfied in all his other works. If
God alone perfected this work by his power, if he contrived it by his wisdom;
shall man find fault with any of the works of God? Does not he who put the
world into this beautiful frame wherein we see it, carry on all his works on
earth in beauty and order, though we see it not? And is there not a firmness
and strength in all his works? Is there not a measure laid in all his
providence, and a line stretched out upon all his dealings with the children
of men? Has he not fastened the foundations, and laid the cornerstone of all
his dispensations right? Job seemed to speak sometimes, as if the Lord had not
dealt with him in measure; nor stretched an equal line upon his proceedings; he
looked upon all as off the hooks, and out of course. Now, says the Lord, have
I laid the measures of the earth, and stretched the line upon it? Have I
fastened the foundations and laid the cornerstone thereof? Have I done all
these things; and do thou think that I will let the world in general, or any
man's case in particular, run to ruin; as if my works of providence had neither
foundation nor cornerstone? Remember, O Job, and well consider, that as when
in the beginning I saw the earth without form and void (Genesis 1. (...)
) I, by a creating word, commanded it into form and fullness: So when thou see
nothing but (Tohu and Bohu) confusion and disorder, voidness and darkness, in
the earth, even then I am laying the measures of Justice, and stretching the
line of Truth and Equity, upon all that is done or suffered; and will bring
forth my work in full perfection: Nothing shall be amiss, or out of order, when
my work is finished, how much soever it may seem to be amiss, as to beginnings
or present actings. Therefore, O Job, leave off thy complainings, and rest
quietly in my dealings.

Some have questioned the Natural Works of God, yet it is impossible to mend any
part, or the least pin of them. And it is as impossible for the wit and
understanding of Men or Angels to mend any thing in the Providential Works of
God. That Is the scope of this discourse, even that the consideration of Gods
power and wisdom in making the world, should b^idle our curiosity, and awe our
spirits, when they begin to quarrel with, yea, but to query about any thing
that God has done; though it appear to us altogether irregular and confused,
or as done without either line or measure. The Lords work is beautiful and
glorious, it is also sure and strong. As his Promise or Covenant is ordered in
all things and sure (2 Samuel 23.5.) So are his Providence too (for they are the
issues and accomplishments of his Promises) o^dered as to means, and sure as to
the end; They shall end o^ issue in b inging about the things which are laid in
the foundation and cornerstone of his purposes, counsels, and decrees; all
which work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the called
according to his purpose (Romans 8.28.)

And to convince Job from the Works of Creation, that he ought not only to
acquiesce or rest quietly under the Works of Providence, whatsoever they were,
but to rejoice in them; the Lord tells him in the next verse that there was
great rejoicing, yea, shouting for joy, when the foundations of the earth were
fastened, and the cornerstone thereof laid.

JOB. Chap. 38. Verse. 7. 7. When the morning stars sang together, and all the
sons of God shouted for joy.


THere are two opinions among learned Interpreters concerning the general state
of this verse:

First, Some here reassuming the first words of these questions proposed at the
fourth verse by God to Job, Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the
earth? etc. make this the second instance of Gods mighty power in the works of
Creation; Where wast thou, when the morning stars sang together, and all the
sons of God shouted for joy? As if the Lord had said, I have as yet questioned
thee only where thou wast when I made the earth, which is the most inferior
part of the world: But now I purpose to rise higher in my discourse, and
therefore I put these questions to thee; Where wast thou, when I set up the
morning stars, those sparkling lights, which shine to the earth, through the
firmament of heaven; as also the sons of God, those blessed spirits? all which
sang together and shouted for joy, at the appearance of my power and wisdom.

Secondly, Others connect these words in a continued sense and sentence with
the verse going before; Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the
earth? etc. at which sight, the morning stars sang together, and all the sons
of God shouted for joy. Taking the words thus, they carry an allusion to, or
are a similitude taken from noble buildings or structures, whose foundations
use to be laid with solemnity, and their corner-stones to be set up with
shouting and acclamation. That it was anciently customary, to make such
acclamations at the laying of the foundation of some eminent building, besides
what is clear out of humane Authors and Histories, we have several Scripture
evidences. The 87th Psalm throughout, setting forth the structure of the Gospel
Church, of the spiritual Zion, by way of prophecy, begins thus; His foundation
is in the holy mountains; there is the foundation of Zion laid: Then follows,
as at the second verse, The Lord loves the gates of Zion, more than all the
dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God!
Selah. As if he had said, there was a great acclamation, high praises at the
laying the foundation of Zion; with which the Psalm closes more expressly ( v.
7.) As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there: all my
Springs are in thee. Again ( Psalm. 118.22, 23, 24.) there is no sooner mention
made of the cornerstone (the stone which the builders refused is become the
head stone of the corner) but presently we have acclamations about it; This is
the Lords doing, it is marvelous in our eyes: This is a blessed work indeed,
This is the day which the Lord has made; we will rejoice and be glad in it.
That cornerstone of salvation Jesus Christ, being laid, as I may say, all the
stars sang together, and the sons of God shouted for joy; This is the day which
the Lord has made. If we go to those material buildings which were figurative
of the Church and Christ, we shall find the like ( Ezra 3.10.) When the Jews
at the return of their Captivity, began to build the Temple, the Text says at
the tenth verse; And when the builders laid the foundation of the Temple of the
Lord, then they set the Priests in their apparel; and with their voices, with
the Levits, and the sons of Asaph, to praise the Lord. As soon as the
foundation was laid, they were all in song, and raised up in holy rejoycings;
though some of the old men, who remembered the first Temple, wept when the
foundation of this was laid. That Scripture ( Zach. 4.7.) speaks of the same
thing, where the Prophet, in the Spirit, foreseeing the disappointments of all
the enemies of the people of God, thus triumphs over them by faith; Who art
thou, O great Mountain, before Zerubbabel? thou shall become a plain; he shall
bring forth the head-stone thereof with shouting. That is, the building of
Jerusalem, or the restoring of the Temple shall be brought to perfection; and
then they shall cry, grace, grace, unto it.

Now in allusion to the practice both of men in common, and of the people of
God in special, at the raising of great structures; the Lord tells us here,
that when he laid the foundations of the earth, and when he fastened the
cornerstone thereof, there was a Triumph made: Then the morning stars sang
together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy. Thus we have the state of
this verse, either taking it for another instance of the power of God in
creating the Stars and the Angels; or else subjoyning it as an acclamation to
the former instance of the power of God; the Stars and Angels rejoicing at the
laying of the foundations of the earth. And the general reason why the Lord
b^ings in the stars and the sons of God rejoicing at the laying the foundations
of the earth, and finishing that work, we may conceive to be this; that the
Lord would thereby convince Job of his murmuring and complaining, or of the
unquietness of his spirit under the works of his providence. As if he had said,
The stars and all the sons of God rejoiced at the founding of the Earth,
extolling the work, Monetur Jobus ut exemplo angelorum, dei opera miretur and
laudet, non sugillet. Scult.
and congratulating the appearances of my power and glory in it. Now, who art
thou, that when I have put forth my power and wisdom in this work of my
providence toward thee, thou should complain, and find fault with what I
have done, instead of resting and rejoicing in it! Surely, O Job, thou think
my works of providence are imperfect, though my work of Creation was not; but
consider, was the Creation in the very first part of it such, as caused all the
sons of God to rejoice, and will thou, who say thou art a son of God, sit
unsatisfied with any of my works? Thus the Lord handles Job, and from that
testimony which the stars and his sons gave of the Works of Creation, reproves
him for his unquietness under his Works of Providence.

So much for the general state of the words: Yet to clear them farther in
general, before I come to the particulars, there are three veins of
interpretation opened about them.

First, Some interpret this whole verse concerning the stars or the heavenly
bodies, not only taking the first part of the verse literally for the stars in
heaven; but by the sons of God in the latter part of the verse, they understand
the stars in a figure; as I shall show more fully, when I come to the opening
of those words. Thus they expound the whole verse concerning the glory and
praise which the stars in heaven gave to God, for the Work of Creation at the
laying of the foundations of the Earth.

Hieronymus. Gregorius. Beda.
A second sort of Interpreters expound the whole verse of the Angels, and not of
the Stars properly at all; they suppose the morning Stars to be Angels in a
figure, and the Sons of God to be Angels in the letter: and so expound the
whole verse of the Angels, as if the words were a description only of that joy
which the Angels of Heaven only expressed, when they saw God beginning the Work
of Creation, or laying the foundations of the Earth.

The third sort of Interpreters divide the sense, expounding the first part of
the verse properly for the Stars, those studs of light, with which the Heavens
are adorned, which (in their kind) are brought in singing at the Creation of
the Earth; and by the Sons of God in the latter part of the verse, they
understand the Angels, those spiritual substances, who are the Native
Inhabitants of Heaven; they especially are represented shouting for joy, when
that work was begun.

I cannot adhere to the first sort of Interpreters, giving all to the Stars,
nor to the second, giving all to the Angels (though that has many learned
Authors, who press it hard) but following the middle way, shall take the former
part of this verse, for the Stars of Heaven; and the latter, for the Angels in
Heaven.

(...) Sunt ste^^ae quaedam singulares, quae non aliis admistae, solae
feruntur. Sydora vero quae in aliquod signum stellarum plurium composita
feruntur. Macrob. l. 1. c. 14. Matutinas nominat meo judicio, quod sub auroram
magis splendere videantur Merc.
When the morning Stars sang together. There are single Stars, and Stars (as I
may say) in a combination, commonly called a Constellation. There is an Evening
Star and a Morning Star (which yet are but one) called by the Greeks (...), and
by the Latins Lucifer, The light bringer: because that Star appears very
bright immediately before daybreak, or before the Sun rises; and the same
Star which ushered or led in the Sun in the morning, comes behind the Sun in
the evening, and is then called Hesperus, The Evening Star.

Here the Lord speaks in the plural number, of the morning Stars, not in the
singular, of a morning Star. And the Lord calls them morning Stars (say some)
because the Stars appear most clearly, and shine most brightly, near the
approach of the morning, or break of the day.

Secondly, Others conceive them so called, Sydera summo mundi mane, lucentia,
mequ^ suo formoso splendore landantia.
because they were created or formed in the very morning of the World; they
were early made. For though (as I shall touch afterward) as to their
perfection, the Stars were made the fourth day; yet their Creation is
comprehended in the work of the first day, under those general words ( Genesis
1.1.) In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth; the Heavens
contained all the Stars in their materiality, though not yet formally produced;
for the Stars being but the thicker part of the Heavenly Orb, when the Heavens
were made, the Stars were also made: and may therefore be called Morning Stars,
as being made in the Morning of the World, early made.

Thirdly, They may be called Morning Stars, because they (according to their
manner) expressed their joy early or betimes in the Morning of the World, or as
soon as the Lord had laid the foundations of the Earth. Those things which are
done early, Qui mane aliquid aggrediuntur opus Matutini dicuntur. Nec minus
Aeneas se matutinus agebat. Virg l. 8. Idem est matutina astra laudant, atque
mane laudant. Sanct.
are done in the morning; and they who do things in the morning, have the
denomination of the morning upon them. The Poet anciently said Aeneas was
(Matutinus) A Morning Man, because he was early at his work; so these may be
called Morning Stars, because they were early at work, singing the praise of
God. Thus the reason why the Wolf has this Epithet, An Evening Wolf, is
because he does his work, he comes forth for his prey, in the evening ( Hab.
1.8. Zeph. 3.3.) In the former Prophet, the Chaldean Horsemen are compared to
Evening Wolves, for fierceness; and in the latter, the Judges of Israel are set
under the same comparison, for blood-sucking cruelty. And as thus, upon
different accounts, some are called Morning Men, others Evening Men; so it is
upon no good account, that any are called Night-men, though the general reason
of it be the same with the former, because they do their bad work, or works of
darkness, under the shadow and favor of the Night. The Thief, the Murderer,
the Adulterer, are Night-men, all these are wont to do their work in the Night
( Job 24, 13, 14, 15, 16.) Thus there are men of the Night, men of the Evening,
and men of the Morning, or Morning Men. In this sense the Stars may be called
Morning Stars, because they were so early at that best work, the praises of
God. When the Morning Stars (...) Gerundium est a (...) quod inter ali^ canere
significat, unde (...) c^ntus. Drus.
Sang together.

Singing is an act of the voice; and as there is a natural singing (that of
birds) so an artificial. But how could Stars sing, either artificially, seeing
they have no reason, or naturally, seeing they have not so much as a life of
sense?

I answer, It Is frequent in Scripture to attribute acts of life to liveless
creatures, and acts of reason to those things which have no sense. The Earth is
somewhere said to mourn ( Isa. 33.9.) The Trees of the Forest, as also the
Hills and the Valleys are said to rejoice and sing for joy ( Psalm. 65.12, 13.)
And in the same sen^e the Stars are here represented singing; and in what sense
they may be said to sing, will be further showed afterward: Nor did they only
sing, but they sang Simul unico concentu, unico consensu.
Together.

There was a kind of concord and harmony in their singing; they sang, as I may
say, with one consent, or in consort. Some translate They sang alone; That is,
when there were no other creatures to j^yn with them, yet as soon as they were
in being they sang alone. The word sometimes signifies only, as well as
together (chap 34.29. Ezra 4.3.) They did not sing every one of them alone, but
they all sang alone without any other creatures to join with them. Thus they
sang both alone and together.

Hence Note, First; Singing is an act of divine worship and praise.

They sang to the glory of God.

Note, Secondly; Singing is an expression of joy.

Is any one merry (says the Apostle ( Jam. 5.13.) let him sing. Though there
are mou^nful songs, and some sing in the very heaviness of their souls; yet
properly, singing imports rejoicing. When Christ told his Church ( Cant. 2.1^.)
The time of the singing of birds is come, his meaning was, rejoicing time is
come, sorrow and mou^ning are fled away.

Thirdly, In that singing is attributed to the Stars,

Note; Liveless creatures rejoice and set forth the praises of God, as they are
able.

David says, All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord (Psalm. 145.10.) All thy
works, that is, the very lowest and least of thy works, even the clods of the
earth, shall praise thee; how much more the Stars of Heaven! We find all the
creatures called to sing the praise of the Lord quite through the 148th Psalm,
Praise him Sun and Moon, praise him all ye Stars of light: There Is the special
instance of the Text. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament
shows his handiwork (Psalm. 19.1.) There is a kind of dutiful conspiration
among all Creatures, even among the inanimate Creatures, in their places to
praise God. And if you ask how they praise God? or how they sing? I answer in
general, after their manner, More suo.
as they are able, or as is suitable to their condition. The Stars sing not
formally (and yet some say, there is a harmony in the motions of the Heavens;
which being so constant, concordant, and uniform, has a kind of Music in it)
but though they cannot praise God formally, yet,

First, They do it Materially: That is, they are that matter, In caelestibus
corporibus amplior occurrit dei collaundandi materia; ideo and illis cantus seu
laeta proclamatio seu ovatio figurate tribuitur. Merc,
for which God is to be praised, they being such excellent and noble creatures.
The work praises the Workman. That which is well done, commends the Doer of
it, though all tongues be silent. In this sense, the Stars sing the praise of
God: They sing the praise of God, as they are the objects of his praise; or, as
they provoke Men and Angels to praise God for making them.

Secondly, They praise God Vertually, or equivalently, they show how
praiseworthy God is.

Thirdly, When we say the Stars praise God, it intimates, there is so much
excellency in the Works of God, that if the Stars could speak, they would
declare and show forth his praise. When the Disciples of Christ rejoiced, and
praised God with a loud voice, for all the mighty works which they had seen;
saying, Blessed be the King that comes in the Name of the Lord, peace in
Heaven, and glory in the Highest (Luke 19.37, 38.) The envious Pharisees did
not like the Music, and therefore said to him from among the multitude,
Master, rebuke thy Disciples (verse. 39.) To these morose Masters, Christ
answered ( verse. 40.) I tell you, that if these should hold their peace, the
stones would immediately cry out. As if he had said, you labor in vain to
suppress or hinder the testimony given me by my Disciples; for if they should
be silent, the stones would cry shame of them, for neglecting their duty: and
God would rather cause senseless creatures to proclaim his praise, in giving me
an honorable testimony, than I should want it. Now as there was such a worth
in the work of Redemption, and in all the works of the Redeemer, while here on
Earth, that the stones would have showed forth his praise, if men had not: So
there is such a worth in that Work of God, the Creation of the Earth, that
rather than God should not have the glory of it, the Stars would have done it
by breaking out into joyful singing.

Lastly, As Birds praise God by their singing, so Stars may be said to sing the
high praises of God by their shining, by their brightness, by their motion, by
their influence; for all which God is to be praised and glorified.

And hence we may infer, If not only irrational, but inanimate creatures sing
the praises of God, at least, by giving occasion of his praise; then how much
more should men set forth his praise, who are not only living, but reasonable
creatures! and if creatures without life and reason should provoke mankind in
general, as having life and reason to praise God; how much more, should godly
men be provoked by them to sing his praise, they having not only life, which
Stars have not; and reason, which Birds and Beasts have not; but grace, which
the most of men have not! Among visible creatures, Men have most reason
(because they have reason) to praise God, and among Men, Godly Men have most
reason to praise God, because they have Grace. And therefore as soon as ever
David had said, All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord (Psalm. 145.10, 11.) he
adds in the next words, and thy Saints shall bless thee, they shall speak of
the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power. As if he had said, As all thy
works, O Lord, praise thee, so Saints (who are the choicest pieces of thy
workmanship) have cause to do it, more than, and above all: they cannot but be
speaking and talking of thy Kingdom and Power, which are very glorious. Upon
which account, the tongue of Man, especially the tongue of a Godly Man, is
called his glory; I will sing and give prais^ (said David, Psalm 108.1.) even
with my glory. What is that? his tongue, the chief bodily instrument of divine
praises. The Stars in their courses once fought against the enemies of God (
Judge. 5.20.) and they always in their places sing the praises of God: Let it
not be said that Saints are silent.

So much of these words, as the Stars are taken properly.

There are some (as I said before) who take these Stars metaphorically or
figuratively for the Angels, and then their singing is proper; and there are
two reasons given, why by the stars in this place, we should understand the
Angels.

First, If we consider the truth or course of the History, because the Earth
being created the first day, the Stars were not in being till the fourth day;
unless we comprehend them (as was said before, as to their matter and reallity)
under those words of Moses, In the beginning God created the Heaven and the
Earth: but as to their appearance and formality, so they were not till the
fourth day; and if so, how could they sing the praises of God at the laying of
the foundations of the Earth? A second reason is given from this Chapter,
because God speaks of the Stars afterward ( verse. 31, 32.) Can thou bind the
sweet influences of Pleiades (the seven Stars so called) or loose the bands of
Orion, etc. Here the Lord treats with Job about the Stars in proper sense,
therefore probably the Morning Stars here mentioned, are not to be taken
properly, but tropically, for the Angels.

And the Angels may very well be called Stars, or Morning Stars, by a Metaphor,
because of their spiritual beauty and excellency, in which they outshine all
the Morning S^ars, yea that special Morning Star, commonly known by the Name of
Lucifer, or Light-bringer. Though the Angels have not a visible bodily beauty,
yet they have a better beauty than any body. It Is said of Stephen (Acts 6.15.)
when he stood before the Council, They beheld his face as it had been the face
of an Angel. Angels (being Spirits) have no visible faces; but because Angels
are, in their nature and qualities, beautiful creatures, therefore Stephen
having an extraordinary beauty stamped upon him, is said to have the face of an
Angel. And as beautiful persons may be said to look like, or resemble Angels;
so Angels may be said to look like, or resemble Stars. The Church for the
luster of her graces, is said, to look forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon,
clear as the Sun (Cant. 6.10.) and so may the Angels as the Stars. The Apostle
says of those false Apostles (who would needs be accounted Stars (faithful
Ministers of Christ) in the Firmament of the Church) they are transformed into
Angels of light (2 Cor. 11.14.) that is, they would appear like Angels of
light. The holy Angels are Angels of light. The seven Stars are the seven
Angels, says Christ, expounding the Vision to John (Revel. 1.20.) This shows
that Angels and Stars have a ve y great similitude; so that, as there in one
sense, so here in another, the Stars may signify the Angels. And the Angels
may very well be called Morning Stars, because they were the first of living
Cre^tures, their Creation being supposed to be (though Moses expresses nothing
of it) comprehended within that of the Heavens: In the beginning God created
the Heaven and the Earth, the Heaven and the heavenly Inhabitants, the Angels.
The evil Angel, the Devil, that fallen Angel, is also called, a Morning Star.
That Title Lucifer, Son of the Morning, which the Prophet bestows on the
Assyrian ( Isa. 14.12.) for his pomp and pride, properly belongs to the Devil,
the Arch-Devil, a fallen Angel, or the Primier of the fallen Angels: yea, Jesus
Christ himself is called the Day Star (2 Pet. 1.19.) and under another far
different expression) the Morning Star (Rev. 2.28. (...).
) and he says of himself ( Rev. 22.16.) I am the bright and Morning Star. Thus
Christ, who is the Angel of the Covenant, (...).
the Lord of Angels, the Creator of Angels, is called the Morning Star. All
these Scriptures bear testimony that it is not strange to expound Stars by
Angels.

And therefore, when the Lord says, The Stars sang together, according to this
interpretation (upon which yet I shall not insist, but leave the Reader to his
own opinion) it is but the same with that which follows in the close of the
verse, to which I now proceed.

And all the Sons of God shouted for joy. Acies Angelorum. Chald. Angeli mei.
Sept.
The Chaldee Paraphrase is express, that the Sons of God are the Angels,
rendering, The Armies of Angels shouted for joy. And the Septuagint are as clear
for it, saying, When all my Angels sung for joy; both leave out our
Translation, the Sons of God, and put that which is the Exposition into the
Text, the Angels of God. That the Angels are called Sons of God, has been
showed before ( chap. 1.6.) There was a day when the Sons of God came together
(that is, the Angels) and Satan (the evil Angel) came also among them. The
Devil, or evil spirit, thrust himself into the assembly of the good Spirits or
holy Angels, who are the Sons of God.

If any ask how the Angels are the Sons of God? I answer

First, Negatively, They are not the Sons of God, as Jesus Christ is. Angels
became the Sons of God in time; Jesus Christ is the Son of God from Eternity.
The Apostle ( Heb. 1.5.) puts the question, To which of the Angels said he at
any time, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? The Angels are the
created Sons of God; Jesus Christ only is his only begotten Son. Angels are
the Sons of God by mee^ grace and favor; the Lord accounting them as Sons,
accepting them as Sons, using and respecting them as Sons, as he does also all
true believers, who likewise are the Sons of God. But Jesus Christ alone is the
Son of God by Nature, or by an eternal generation, and was so declared in the
fullness of time, both by his Incarnation and Resurrection; which many conceive
to be the Apostles intendment, in those words, This day have I begotten thee;
taken out of the second Psalm, and quoted ( Acts 13.33.) as also ( Heb. 1.5.)

Secondly, In the Negative, The Angels are not the Sons of God by Regeneration,
nor by Adoption. Thus Believers only are the Sons of God ( John 1.12.) To as
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to
as many as believed on his Name. Believers are the Sons of God, regenerated and
adopted; Angels are not so. The holy Angels needed not Regeneration; nor as
they were created holy, so they fell not from that holiness in which they were
c^eated: and therefore Christ is not to them a Redeemer for their restoration,
but only a Head for their confirmation and establishment ( Col. 2.10.) As for
the Angels which fell, they are reserved in chairs of darkness to the Judgment
of the Great Day; they have ^o share in Redemption, their fall is
irrecoverable. Thus we see how the Angels are not the Sons of God. But how then
are they the Sons of God?

I answer, Affirmatively, The Angels may be called the Sons of God in a sixfold
sense.

First, As Adam is called the Son of God ( Luke 3.38.) in his primary
Constitution or by Creation; so Angels are the Sons of God, as they are his
Creatures.

Secondly, Angels are called the Sons of God, because of Gods great affection
to them, as well as his creation of them. Such as we much affect and love
intrinsically, we are ready to call our Children, Sons or Daughters: The Lord
bears abundance of love to the Angels, therefore he calls them his Sons.

Thirdly, If we consider their place or station: The Angels wait upon God, they
are near to him, they stand about his Throne as Sons, to receive his Blessing
and Commands.

There are three things specially considerable in the Angels:

First, Their Nature, so they are Spirits, or spiritual Substances.

Secondly, Their Offices, so they are the Messengers and Ministers of God.

Thirdly, Their Dignity or nearness to God, so they are his Sons. Christ the
only begotten Son, is in the bosom of the Father, (John 1.18.) that is, he is
nearest him, and has most intimate communion with him: The Angels are so near
to God, that (though they are not in his bosom, yet) they always behold his
face (Matthew. 18.10.) that is, stand in his presence, as being in high favor
with him; and are therefore in that respect called his Sons.

Fourthly, Angels may be called the Sons of God, because of that constant
uniform obediential frame that is in them, toward God. A Son honors his
father, (Mal. 1.6.) It should be the disposition, and in the heart of every Son
to do so. And seeing it is not only fully the disposition of Angels, and in
their hearts to do so, but they have always actually done so, (the holy Angels
may truly say unto God, as the elder brother is brought in saying to his father
( Luke 15.29.) Lo, these many years, even ever since the Creation, we do serve
thee; neither have we transgrest at any time thy commandment, either by leaving
undone what thou have bidden us do, or by doing what thou have forbidden us)
therefore Angels having the genuine spirit of Sons toward God, may in that
regard also be styled the Sons of God.

Fifthly, They may be called the Sons of God, because of their essential
likeness to God, or their likeness to him in Essence. God is a Spirit, he is
incorporeal; the Angels also are incorporeal, they are Spirits; though the
difference between God and Angels be as great as can be conceived, yea,
unconceivable; God being the Creating Spirit, and they but created Spirits; God
being an Infinite Spirit, and they but finite Spirits; yet the Angels bear a
resemblance to God in their essence, as well as in their qualifications, and
may upon that ground likewise be called the Sons of God.

Sixthly, Angels are called the Sons of God, because they imitate him. Do good
to them that hate you (says Christ, Matthew. 5.44.) that ye may be the Children
of your Father, which is in Heaven: that is, imitate God, carry it toward evil
men, toward men that are evil to you, or do you evil, as God does; and this
will be both an evidence, that you are the Sons of God, and God will honor you
with the Title of his Sons. The Angels imitate God in mercy, and love, and
compassion, as also in their good works, their ways being all holy, just, and
good, pure and righteous. Further they show much kindness and tenderness to the
children of men; they doubtless, are patient toward the froward, and do good
offices (as they are called and deputed) to those who deserve little good. Now
being like God by imitation, they may be called the Sons of God. Thus we have
some account in these particulars, why, or how the Angels are called the Sons
of God. But what did these Sons of God, the Angels, when Spectators of the
Worlds Creation? The Text tells us, Signanter astris tanquam inferioribus
laudem, Angelis tanquam superioribus attribuit Jubilationem. Aquin. (...) Est
(...) significatur apprabatio illius operis cum gaudio.
They shouted for joy.

Some put a difference between that which is attributed to the Stars (taking
the Stars properly) and the Angels; as if here it were spoken (signanter) by
way of excellency; the Sta^s did sing, but the Angels shouted. The word rendered
to shout for joy, signifies in general to make any great or loud cry, sometimes
for sorrow or consternation of mind; When the army of the M^dianites, amazed
wi^h Gideons stratagem of the pitchers and lamps, ran and fled, it is said they
cried, and their cry is expressed by this word ( Judges 7.21.) When an army
runs, they make only a confused noise or shout, for fear and sorrow. But mostly
and most properly, the word signifies to shout for joy, and in a way of
triumph, as when an army is victorious, and ready to divide the spoil; or as in
the time of harvest or vintage, when the fruits and good things of the earth
are gathered in: and such is the shouting here intended. The Angels, the Sons
of God, did not only sing as the Stars, when the foundations of the Earth were
laid; but they shouted for joy. It is but one word in the Hebrew, which we
render, shouted for joy. The Angels did not only approve, but applaud the
works of God.

Further, Consider the generality of this divine Plaudite, or applause, All the
Sons of God shouted for joy. As before the Lord says, The Stars sang together;
so here, All the Sons of God; not one of them was left out, every one bare a
part in this triumph; they all with one accord, with one heart, and one voice,
joined in it: All the Sons of God (there was not one dissenting voice) shouted
for joy. Hence

First, I might refute their opinion who denied Angels and Spirits, as the
Sadduces did ( Acts 23.8.) but I shall not stay upon that.

Further, It being said, All the Sons of God shouted for joy:

Note; The Sons of God, the holy Angels, are of one mind.

It is a most blessed sight and hearing, when all the Sons of God join in one
thing. It was not a part of the Sons of God, it was not here one, and there
another, but all of them. Behold (says David, Psalm. 133.1.) how good and how
pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity! The Angels,
who a^e Brethren, the Sons of one Father, did all join together in this duty.
The Apostle speaks concerning the Wo^k of the Ministry, (2 Cor. 6.1) We as
workers together, those words [with him] are put in by the Translators, and the
supply is to a very good sense: We as workers together with him, that is, with
God, For he is pleased to use his Ministers as Workers together with himself.
Yet it may well be understood concerning the Ministers of the Gospel, only,
joining in this one thing, that is, with one voice, or one cry, beseeching
sinners to be reconciled unto God (chap. 5.20.) and that, as it follows in
the close of this first verse ( chap. 6.) They receive not the grace of God in
vain. All Ministers should be workers together: As all the Angels were si^gers
together, and shouters together; so the Ministers of Christ should be workers
together. That which is the work of one, is the work of them all, and they
should all join in it. And how sad is it, to see those who call themselves, and
would be accounted the Sons of God, divided in their work and way! when one
rejoices in that which to another is cause of mourning; when one man's meat is
(as we speak proverbially) another man's poison; or one man's comfort, another
man's grief? How many are there who cannot join in rejoicing and thanksgiving
for works of God (I mean Providential Works) as eminent in their kind, as the
Creation Work, or the laying of the foundations of the Earth? That will be a
blessed day, when we shall see the full effect of that prophecy ( Zeph. 3.9.)
Then will I (says the Lord) turn to the people a pure (Lip of) Language, that
they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, with one consent or shoulder.
Here Is a promise of all as one, and of all with one consent, shoulder, inward,
outward man, associated in prayer, or calling upon the Name of the Lord; which
by a Synechdoche, includes all the parts, and takes in the whole compass of the
worship of God. The accomplishment of this prophecy, was the scope of
Apostolical Prayer ( Romans 15.5, 6.) Now the God of patience and consolation
grant you to be like minded one toward another; according to, or (as the
Margin has it) after the example of Christ Jesus; that ye may with one mind,
and with one mouth, glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. All
the Sons of God in the Text were of one mind, and had (as it were) but one
mouth, the joy of one was the joy of them all. All the Sons of God on Earth
have this principle in them, to rejoice in God, and to magnify God for his
mercy; only all have not the same light: They that have not an habitual
principle in them, to praise God in and for his works, are not of his family;
they are not worthy to be reckoned Sons of God, who have not a readiness, or
present disposition in them, to join with all, or with any of his true Sons, in
shouting for joy at his gracious appearances in his mighty works of mercy; as
also in humbling themselves together with them, at the terrible appearances of
his dreadful works of Judgment, or at the usual prognostics or forerunners
of them.

Again, Taking the Stars for the Angels, they were Morning Stars; the Angels
sang and shouted for joy, in the Morning.

Hence, Observe; The very first appearances of the power and wisdom of God in
his works, should put us upon the work of praise and rejoicing.

We say truly, better late than never; but it is best to be early, and with the
first, in a good work. David did not only awake early, or in the morning, to
praise God; but as the Hebrew may be rendered, he awakened the morning (Psalm.
57.8.) David was a morning man in praising of God; so were the Angels. It Is
healthful both for soul and body to be morning men, to be early, both in
praising God, and praying to him. God requires, and he infinitely deserves the
first fruits of our time, our youth, which is the morning of our life, the
first fruits of our age, should be dedicated to God ( Eccles. 12.1.) and so
should the morning, which is the youth (if I may so speak) of every day. Our
first thoughts should be of God and with God; as soon as we awake, we should
set open the door of our hearts by meditation, to let God in, and knock open
the doors of heaven by prayer and supplication to get in to God. It should not
be unlamented, that the course of most men runs so contrary to this; their
senses are no sooner loosed from the bands of sleep, but they let loose their
thoughts, and set the doors of their souls wide open to sensitive, sometimes to
wicked and sensual objects; and so shut out God and matters of greatest moment,
to and about their immortal souls. How unworthy are such of this blessed
relation, under which the Angels, those early praisers of God, are here
represented, Sons of God.

Thirdly, In that it is here said, All the Sons of God shouted for joy, that
is, all the Angels then created:

Observe; They who have joined in some outward worships of God, may yet fall
off and apostatize.

Here all the Angels of God joined in this thanksgiving at first, yet soon,
very soon after, a great part of the Angels rebelled against God, and became
Apostates; for presently upon the Creation of man, which was the sixth day,
there was a Devil, a Tempter, who overthrew man; yet here we have all the
Angels in a holy Quire. Hypocrites are forward to join in acts of praise, in
acts of prayer, in acts of hearing, who yet in time of temptation fall away,
and so fall into as bad a condition as the fallen Angels; of whom the Apostle
Jude says ( verse. 6.) that not having kept their first estate (or
principality) but leaving their own habitation (appointed them of God) he has
reserved them in everlasting chains (both of Providence and Justice) under
darkness, unto the Judgment of the Great Day.

Fourthly, Observe; The great business of Angels, and that which they are most
bent to, is to praise God (Psalm. 103.20. Psalm. 148.2. Isa. 6.3.)

And as at the birth of the World the Angels shouted for joy, so at the birth
of Jesus Christ (who was the Author of the second Creation, as well as of the
first) the Angels shouted for joy: suddenly there was with the Angel a
multitude of the heavenly host praising God ( Luke 2.13.) To praise God is
heavenly work, it is angelical work, the most proper work of the Sons of God. We
shall not always have need of praying, but we shall always have cause to be
praising and shouting for joy: This shout will remain to all eternity. Praise
is the most spiritual work, and requires the most spiritual frame of heart; and
therefore the chief of that work is reserved to an estate, wherein not only our
souls, but our bodies too, shall be altogether spiritual.

Fifthly, Note; The Work of Creation should continually call up our thoughts to
the praise of God, to sing and shout his praises.

Did the Stars (take them properly) and did the Sons of God (the Angels)
rejoice when the work first began? and is not the work to be rejoiced in now
it is finished? Though sin has sullied the work, yet the glory of God is still
transparent in it, the power, goodness, and wisdom of God are gloriously seen
in the things that are made ( Romans 1.20.) not only were they seen, but they
are ^een to this day. The creatures are still a glass wherein we may ^^hold the
invisible things of God, even his eternal Power and Godhead, so that they who
glorify him not in and for those works, will be found and left without excuse:
They are a book, a volume, consisting of as many leaves and lines as there are
distinct sorts of creatures, wherein we may read the great God plainly
described to us: and if so, let us remember our fault this day; Is it not our
sin and shame, that we are so little in admiring God for this work, which set
all the Angels in heaven a singing, a shouting, a wondering? There are several
things in the Works of Creation, which well considered, will soon provoke us to
singing and to shouting. First, The multitude of Creatures. Secondly, The
various kinds of Creatures. Thirdly, The beauty and excellency that is in the
Creatures. Fourthly, The profit and the usefulness of the Creatures. These laid
together, should draw out our praises, and cause us to exalt the power, wisdom
and goodness of God manifested in and by his Creatures.

Lastly, Consider what was i^ that caused the Angels to ^hout for j^y, when
they saw this wo^k of God begun? Surely it was the appearance or manifestation
of God, shining brightly in the Work of Creation.

Hence Observe; The discoveries of the power, wisdom, and goodness of God,
should stir up, and engage every man, and cannot but effectually stir up and
engage those who are wise and good, to rejoice in God.

Somewhat of God is stamped, or there are certain lines of his transcendent
perfections drawn upon every Creature; here a line of wisdom, and there a line
of power; here a line of goodness, and there a line of mercy; the sight of
these should cause us to shout for joy; especially, that this God, the Creator
of the ends of the Earth is our God for ever and ever, and will be our guide
even unto death. How many lines have we of God in the World, which we have not
read, much less studied and commented upon! In how many things is God visible,
and yet we see him not, nor acknowledge him as we ought? Take only these two
things by way of inference from the whole.

First, To be of a praising, of a rejoicing spirit, i^^o be of an excellent
spirit, of an angelical spirit. Let us imitate ^he Angels in praising God. The
Angels are called the Sons of God, because they imitate him; let us imitate the
Angels in praising God, so shall we approve our selves the Sons of God too.

Secondly, Consider, The Angels rejoiced at the laying of the foundations of
the Earth. The Earth was made for man; Heaven was the Angels habitation, they
were well provided for, if there had never been an Earth, they had been
provided for; yet they shouted for joy, when God laid the foundations of the
Earth for the use of man and beast.

Hence take this Inference; It shows a good spirit, to rejoice at the good of
others, or to be pleased with that which is beneficial to others, though it be
no benefit to us.

This argues an excellent spirit, an angelical spirit. Some if they are well
housed and provided for, care not whether others are housed and provided for or
no; nor can they rejoice at the good of others, but as their own good is
concerned. In glory we shall be like to the Angels, our very bodies shall be
like to the Angels, living without food, without sleep* without marriage; in
Heaven we shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage; but shall be like the
Angels. O let us strive to be like the Angels in our minds now, as we hope to
have our bodies like the Angels hereafter, even clothed (as the Schoolmen call
them) with angelical endowments. Unless our spirits are like the Angels here,
unless we have hearts like the hearts of Angels in this World, we shall never
have bodies like them hereafter, or in the World to come.

JOB, Chap. 38. Verse. 8, 9, 10, 11. 8. Or who shut up the Sea with doors, when
it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb?

9. When I made the Cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling
band for it.

10. And brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors,

11. And said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further; and here shall thy
proud waves be stayed.


THe Lord having questioned Job about the Fabric of the Earth, and showed the
triumph and acclamations of Angels at it, in the former Context: He next leads
him to the waters, or carries him to the Sea, there to consider his Works of
wonder. As Moses in the beginning of Genesis having summarily and in general,
spoken of the Creation of Heaven and Earth, descends to particulars; so here
we have the Lord passing from one part of the Creation to another; from the
Creation of the Earth, to that other great part of the Creation, the Waters, or
the Sea. Verse. 8. Who shut up the Sea with doors? etc.

In these words, we have

First, The Creation of the Sea.

Secondly, Its Constitution: both set forth by most elegant Metaphors.

The Creation or Production of the Sea, is shadowed by allusion to an Infant
breaking forth out of the womb ( Verse. 8.)

The Constitution or settlement of the Sea, is carried on in suitable Metaphors
to the end of the eleventh Verse.

Verse. 8. Or who has shut up the Sea with doors, when it brake forth? etc. We
have here,

First, The Birth or Nativity of the Sea.

Secondly, What God did with the Sea, when it was born, and issued out of the
womb: Then God shut it in with doors, and prepared garments and swaddling bands
for it; then he restrained the rage, force, and fury of it, and held it as his
prisoner or captive in bonds. As soon as an Infant is born, it is bound up and
swadled; and as soon as the Sea (as I may say) was born or come into the World,
God took order with it; and to keep it in order, he provided doors to shut it
in, and garments to bind it up with.

What the Scripture speaks of Gods coercing the Sea, may be reduced to two
heads:

First, To that restraint which he laid upon the Sea, presently upon its
Creation, some say the first, others the third day of the Creation; according
to that ( Genesis 1.9.) God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered
together into one place, and let the dry land appear; and it was so. Thus the
Lord reduced it to a certain place.

Secondly, To that restraint which God laid upon it, after this reducement,
that it should no more return, to overflow the Earth. Both these restraints or
laws put upon the Sea, are contained in this Context; the former of them in the
eighth and ninth verses: As soon as the Sea issued out of the Earth, God set up
its doors, and made it bands. The latter of these, the giving of a special Law,
that when it was shut in, it should no more break forth, but according to his
appointment, we have in the tenth and eleventh verses, where it is said, I
brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors; and said, hitherto
shall thou come, and no further; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed.

So then, here we have;

First, Bounds and limits assigned by God to that vast and unruly Element, the
Water, that the Earth might be habitable and useful both for man and beast. And,

Secondly, We have the Lord restraining all power or liberty (which naturally
it would have had and taken) to violate or break those bounds: For had not God
given the Waters of the Sea such a special command (though bounds had been
assigned them) they would quickly have broken their bounds.

These two orders of God differ much, though not in the time when they were
given out, yet in the nature of the thing; and both suppose the Sea in being,
when these orders were given out; For when it is said ( verse. 8.) It brake
forth, as if it issued out of the womb; this implies its birth and nativity:
and when God says, He shut it up with doors, this supposes, that it not only
had a being, but that it was violent and furious, and would have over-flowed
all, and regained as large a Territory as it possessed at first, when it issued
out of the womb of the Earth, even the face of the whole Earth, if the Lord had
not bridled and restrained it.

Yet further, and more distinctly to open the words in their Order.

Quis Haec vox recte (...) repetitur ^x versu 5. and 6. Drus.
Verse. 8. Or, Who shut up the Sea with doers? The disjunctive particle Or,
succeeds those disjunctives ( ver. 5, 6.) Who did this? Or, Who did that? Or,
Who a third thing, concerning the Earths formation? Here again, Or, Who shut up
the Sea with doors? The Hebrew is only, Shut up the Sea with doors; the word
who is repeated out of the fifth and sixth verses. The Lord by this query or
question put to Job, would then have him, and now us know, that it was himself
alone that did it: It was the Lord who bridled the Sea, and shut it up with
doors; As if he said, Where wast thou, O Job, when I did this great thing? as
thou gave no assistance toward the laying of the foundations of Earth, and
the fastening of the cornerstone thereof; so tell me what assistance did
thou give me in bringing forth, and settling the vast Sea: Or at least (if thou
can) give me an account h^w these things were done, and how they continue as
they were done by an everlasting decree: who has shut up the Sea with doors,
was it I or thou, or any other Creature? Thus the Lord still brings Job upon
his knees by humbling questions, knowing that he was not able to take any of
that honor to himself. He poor man had no more to do in this great work, than
he had in the former; and therefore he ought to submit to the works of God in
providence, whatsoever he was pleased to do, seeing all the works of Creation
were done by God alone, without his counsel or assistance. Who has (...) Saepe
est protegere; aliqui legunt ^bs^psu vel. circumsepsit, ac si esset a (...)
sopio, cum si^ a (...) tego obiego operio. (...) autem per samech significat
ungere. Drus.
Shut up the Sea with doors?

There is a twofold rendering of that word translated Shut up; We take it from
a root which signifies to hedge in, or compass about, as also to protect;
because those things which are compassed about with strong hedges, are under
protection, and safe from danger. Water being a fluid body, spreads it self
over all, the water cannot contain it self in it^ own bounds (fluids cannot)
but it must be bound, it must be shut in, or shut up. The Lord shut up the Sea,
as the waters of a great River are shut up by floodgates; or as the waters
upon which a Mill is built (some carry the allusion to that) are pent for the
service of it, and are caused by art to run gradually or by inches, as the
Master of that useful engine gives direction. Thus the Lord shut up the Sea.

The Sea is a great Convention or Assembly of Waters, as Moses spoke ( Genesis
1.10.) The gathering together of waters, the Lord called Sea: The Sea is a
confluence, or meeting of waters. There may be a great water, yet that not the
Sea; the confluence of all or many waters together, that is Sea. The waters
being thus gathered or assembled by the Lords Summons or Command, he hedged
them in, or shut them up.

Secondly, Others render, Who anointed the doors of the Sea, Quis valvat. maris
inunxit. Codur.
when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb. They who give this
Translation, derive the word from a root, which signifies to an^int. Some
Interpreters insist much upon this sense of the word, and I find one who
asserts it as the only sense of it in this place; Who anointed the doors of
the Sea, that is, the passages by which the Sea issued forth. And (says he)
the reason why other learned Interpreters pitch upon that Translation of
shutting up the Sea with doors, is because they knew not what to make of
anointing the doors of the Sea, nor to what practice such an expression should
allude, that the doors of the Sea were anointed: whereas indeed that notion of
the Word bea^s the fairest allusion and proportion to the Metaphor of
Childbearing, begun in this, and carried on (as it were) professedly in the
next verse, under which the Spirit of God is pleased to express the coming
forth, and original of the Sea: Now, says my Author, Quaerit dominus a Jobo,
quae lucina praesuerit parentis naturae puerperlo quan do est enixa mare. Id.
it is a thing commonly known both to Physicians and Mid-wives, that those
parts of the body by which the Infant comes into the world, u^e to be anointed,
for its more easy passage: Thus says God to Job, Did thou anoint the doers
of the Sea, when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb. It was my
Mid-wisery, my wisdom and skill, not thine, that brought the Sea into the
World, and gave it an easy birth, or delivered the Earth of it without hard
labor. This makes the sense of the whole Context run more clearly than our
reading of it. And so we have Sea-doors of two sorts in this Context: In this
eighth verse, the doors of the Sea are the doors by which the Sea came forth;
and in the tenth verse, we have the doors by which the Sea is kept in; whereas
according to our rendering, the doors in both places are interpreted as keeping
the Sea in; and so there would be a mention of the same doors twice; which
though it may be admitted, yet this latter seems to be the clearest, as taking
the first doors for those by which the Sea was let out, or had its birth, and
the latter, for those doors by which the Sea is kept within its bounds. Who
shut up the Sea with doors, When it brake forth.

(...) Exivit cum imp^tu.
The word which we translate to break forth, signifies in other places of
Scripture the breaking forth of a Child in the birth: David uses it ( Psalm.
22.9.) Thou art he that took me out of the womb; there it is taken (as
Grammarians speak) transitively, here intransitively, When it brake foterth,
noting a kind of rapture or violence; as when Tamar was in travel ( Genesis 38.27,
28.) There were twins in her womb; and it came to pass, when she traveled,
that the one put out his hand, and the Midwife took and bound upon his hand a
scarlet thread, saying, this came out first; and it came to pass, as he drew
back his hand, that behold his brother came forth; and she said, how have thou
broken forth? this breach be upon thee; therefore his Name was called Pharez.
Thus the Sea brake forth violently, as if it had issued Out of the womb.

Ex occulto divinae providentiae. Aquin. Creavit deus terram non inanem sed
gravidam aquis, quae licet eodem temporis momento (...)
What Womb? Some say of the Providence of God; say others, of the Decree or
Counsel of God; for that is the womb, out of which all things proceed: A third
says, out of the Power and Omnipotence of God: All these sayings are true,
either of these is as the womb out of which all things issue; but these, the
Providence, the Decree and Counsel, the Power and Omnipotence of God, are the
Common Womb, out of which all things issue; whereas here the Lord seems to
speak of some special womb, out of which the Sea issued. And therefore I rather
adhere to that Interpretation, which says plainly, that the womb out of which
the Sea is said to issue, was the Abyss or bowels of the Earth. The Sea brake
forth out of the bowels of the Earth, as out of a womb. The Earth is the Common
Parent, the Parent of the Sea; the Sea was created in the bowels of the Earth;
or the Earth was created big with the waters of the Sea, as a woman big with
child, and shortly after the Lord caused the earth, like a woman with child, to
travel and b^ing forth the Sea. So that the Lord does here more distinctly open
to us the manner of the Creation of the Sea, than in the first of Genesis. It
is true, the Element of Water has its seat naturally above the Earth, it being
the lighter Element; but as to the first conception of it, this Scripture
implies, that its place was within the Earth, and that it issued forth from the
Earth. The bowels of the Earth were the womb in which the Sea was conceived,
and out of which, by the Word of the Lord, it issued. The waters were not at
first created above the Earth (as some have affirmed) but they being created
with the Earth, and conceived within the Earth, brake out of the Earth, and
invested or covered it all over; and so continued in that condition till the
third day, and then the Lord commanded them to retire into certain vast
channels, now called Sea, that so the dry land might appear. Thus the Lord,
when the waters were issued forth, disposed of them in their proper place.
According to this Interpretation, we are to take these words of the time past;
Who is he that shut up the Sea with doors, when it brake forth? that is, after
it had broken forth, after it had issued out, Who was he that then shut it up
with doors? This description of the Nativity of the Sea, may be drawn out into
these conclu^ions:

First, The Earth and Waters were created both together.

Secondly, The Waters were at first created within the bowels of the Earth; for
says the Text, They issued forth, they brake forth.

Thirdly, At the Command of God, the Waters were brought forth out of the
Earth, as a Child out of the Mothers Womb (Psalm. 33.7.) He gathers the waters
of the Sea together as an heap, he lays up the deep in storehouses (Psalm.
104 verse. 5, 9.) Bless the Lord, etc. who laid the foundations of the Earth,
that it should not be removed for ever; thou coveredst it with the deep as with
a garment: the Waters stood above the Mountains.

Fourthly, The Waters being thus brought forth, did at first cover the Earth,
and so would have continued, if God had let them alone.

In the method of Nature things lie thus:

First, The earth is lowest, being the grossest element.

Secondly, The water rises above the earth, as being more pure than that.

Thirdly, The air is above the water, as being much more pure than the water.

Fourthly, The fire gets above all, as being the thinnest and purest of all the
elements; and therefore the water issuing out of the earth, would have
continually covered the face of the earth, if the Lord by his power had not
ordered it off, and shut it up with doors, when come off, according to our
reading the words in this verse, and according to the general reading of the
tenth verse; where the whole earth being covered with water, the Lord brake up
for it his decreed place, and there kept it fast. Thus David (Psalm. 104.7, 8.)
speaking of the waters above the mountains and overflowing all; presently
adds, At thy rebuke they fled, at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away;
they go up by the mountains, they go down by the valleys, unto the place which
thou have founded for them. There the Lord by David, as here by himself, sets
forth his mighty power, in the disposal of the waters to a certain place.

But if we take that other reading of this verse, Who has anointed the doors
of the Sea? then by doors we are not to understand that which stops the Sea
from overflowing the earth, as in the tenth verse; but for those passages at
which the waters brake out of the earth, as an infant from the womb; which
seems most distinct and clear.

And because the Sea is so huge a body, so great a part of the world, we may
(not unprofitably, I hope, before I pass from this verse) consider a threefold
representation of the Sea, or the Sea as a glass showing us three things.

First, The Sea has in it a representation of God himself in his divine
perfections.

Secondly, Of the World in its various motions.

Thirdly, Of the heart of man in its vilest corruptions.

The Sea carries in it, First, A representation of God himself; which may be
taken in four things.

First, In the hiddenness and unsearchableness of his wisdom ( Psalm. 36.6.) Thy
judgments are a great deep, or a sea; (Romans 11.33.) O the depth of the wisdom
and counsel of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! None can fathom this Sea, there is not line enough in the
understanding of Men and Angels to reach the bottom of God; he is a sea without
banks or bottom.

Secondly, The Lord is as the sea in his goodness, sending out so many sweet
streams, and feeding all the springs of the earth ( Psalm. 65.9, 10.) Thou
visitest the earth and waterest it, thou greatly inrichest it with the river of
God, which is full of water; thou preparest them corn, when thou have so
provided for it: thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly, etc.

Thirdly, As all the rivers come from the sea, and return to it, so all good
flows out and springs from God, and all the glory of his goodness should
return, or be returned to him in praises and thanksgivings.

Fourthly, The sea is such a vast body, that though it sends forth water to
feed the earth every where, and though all the rivers flow back into the sea,
yet the sea is not at all abated by the water that it sends forth, nor
increased by all the water that returns to it. So how much soever God gives out
to the creature (he gives out all) yet he is no more emptied by it than the
sea; and whatsoever returns the creature makes to him, they no more increase
nor add to him, than the sea is increased by the rivers falling into it: there
is no sensible appearance of the heightening of the waters of the sea, by the
greatest and vastest rivers that disburden themselves into it.

Secondly, As the sea is an Emblem of the Living God, in whom we live, so of
the world wherein we live.

First, The sea is a very unquiet part of the world. What storms, what tempests
are there upon the sea? what rage and fury in the waves of it? such an unquiet
thing is this world, hurrying up and down, and enraged often by storms and
tempests arising from the lusts and passions of men, even to the swallowing up
of all.

Secondly, The sea is very unconstant, it is now ebbing, and anon flowing. It
is so with this world, and all things in it; our comforts are sometimes
flowing, and sometimes ebbing; our peace comes, and anon it goes; we have some
good days and more evil; the days of darkness are many, and the best meet
with many of them in this world; the world is full of changes, the fashion of
it passes away.

Thirdly, The sea water is a salt water, an unpleasant water; and such is the
world, though many drink greedily of it, and would even draw it up, as the
Scripture speaks of Behemoth, drawing up Jordan. They who drink in worldly
things, as if they could drink up the whole world, yet drink but salt and
unpleasant water. A^gustine.
One of the Ancients notes it as a great mercy to man, that God does thus
imbitter the world to us, making it brackish and distastful. And indeed God
has on purpose tempered the things of this world, that they should not be too
sweet and luscious for us, or lest we should distemper our selves by them, or
surfeit upon them.

Thirdly, The Sea is an Emblem of the heart of man, especially of a wicked man's
heart. Man is a little world, and the heart of man has a sea of worldly
vanities in it ( Isaiah 57.20.) The wicked are like the troubled sea; and the
heart of a wicked man is the most troubled and troublesome part in him. The
heart unchanged, is like the sea:

First, For turbulency or troublesomness; what is more unquiet than the heart
of man? no such natural storms upon the sea; no such civil storms either at sea
or land, as there are carnal storms in the heart of man; what a stir, what
broils, does the heart of man make many times!

Secondly, The heart of man is like the sea, as it is salt, brackish and
bitter, through the hastiness and rashness of our spirits. The Prophet Habakkuk
calls the Chaldeans a bitter and hasty Nation ( chap. 1.6.) Hasty persons are
bitter persons, perverseness, peevishness and passions lodge in them.

Thirdly, The heart of man has waves in it, full of pride like the sea; what
sea has such proud waves as the heart of man has! O how do many even deifie
themselves, think and speak of themselves as if they were more than man! It is
said of the King of Tirus (Ezekiel 28.2.) that he set his heart as the heart of
God; how was that? not that his heart was fashioned like the heart of God, but
he was lifted up in a self-sufficiency, as if he (like God) needed no helper;
and as he thought, he ^ad no need of help from any, so he had no fear of hurt
from any. How often do such proud waves appear upon the sea of man's heart? and
who is there among the sons of men, but finds these proud waves of his heart
lifting him up beyond his sphere and condition? And who but God, can shut up
this sea with doors, when its sinfulness breaks forth, as if it had issued out
of the womb? But leaving these metaphorical seas, Acr mar^ impendet Graeci
optime (...) multae enim nebulae solent oriri super mare. Grot.

Cum mare aliis aquis tanquam vestitu and fasciis circumtegerem Jun. Quis illa
densa vaporum caligine tanquam fasciis illud involvit. Bez. Nubes passim a
poetis dicuntur atrae, nigrae spiceae, imo interdum tenebrae and nox. Sanct.
Nomen (...) ortumesta verbo (...) quod significatin volvere fasciis seu
linteolis, quemadmodum solent involvi recens noti infantes. Ezekiel. 16.4. Pisc.


I return to consider what the Lord said further, concerning the Sea Natural.

Verse. 9. When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a
swaddling band for it. As soon as the child is born and come into the world, the
Mother or Midwise provides suitable garments for it, and a swaddling band. Thus
the Lord continues the metaphor of childbirth; I, says the Lord, provided a
garment and a swaddling band for the newborn sea. And as the Text tells us,
that the Lord made the sea a garment, and a swaddling band, so it tells us what
they were: What was the garment made for the sea? The Cloud. When the Lord had
separated the sea from the earth, he made the clouds to cover it, as garments
do a child, that comes naked into the world; and the cloud is a fit garment for
the sea. Clouds are water condensed, and they dissolve into water, and here the
Lord having separated the sea from the earth, made the cloud, which is a kind
of sea, a sea in the air, as a garment to cover and keep it warm. And because a
newborn child, lest the limbs should not grow right, has not the liberty of
its arms and feet for a time; but is wrapped up with a swaddling band: therefore,
in pursuance of the Allegory, the Text speaks of a swaddling band prepared for
the sea, as soon as it was born. But what was the swadling-band of the sea? As
the matter of its garment is a cloud, so its swadling-band is thick darkness;
that is, say some, very dark clouds; making this latter part of the verse but a
repetition of the former: because clouds are dark in themselves, they are often
expressed by darkness, they are called black clouds, and dark clouds, yea,
sometimes clouds are called darkness. So that the cloud, and the thick
darkness, may be the same; only it is here expressed in different terms, to show
the exactness of the Lords proceeding, and the accurateness of his providing
for the due ordering of the unruly child the sea. And that the sea had at first
such a swadling-band, we find ( Genesis 1.2.) Darkness was upon the face of the
deep.

Hence, First, From the purpose of the Spirit of God, as we may well conceive,
in representing the sea in such a dress, a child in swadling-bands:

Note; God can as easily rule and bind the sea (a vast bulky body) as a mother
or a nurse can bind a little infant in swadlingbands.

And surely the Spirit of God would have us to take notice, that though the
sea, be indeed such a giant, such a monster, as will make a heart of oak shake,
or a heart of brass melt, yet what is it to God, but an infant? he can bind it
and lay it to sleep, even as a little child. And if the great sea be in the
hand of God as a little child, what is great to God! and how great is God! What
is strong to God! and how strong is God! What or who is too great, or too
strong for God to deal with? Cannot God, who has swadled the turbulent sea,
provide swadling-bands to wrap up the stoutest and most turbulent spirits of
this world? Job ^p^aking of himself, wondered that God should deal so with him
( chap. 7.12.) Am I a Sea or a Whale, that thou set a watch over me? The
sea is a boisterous creature, and had need be watched; Am I a Sea or a Whale,
said Job? Though a man be as a sea or a whale, God can watch him, and bind him
from doing mischief. Therefore fear not any power of the creature, though a
great sea, while your behavior is good; but fear the Lord, who binds the sea
to its good behavior. Nations are before him but as the drop of a bucket (Isa.
40.15.) A Nation confidered in it self, is a mighty sea, much more The Nations,
which indefinite is universal, taking in all Nations; yet they are all but as
the drop of a bucket: and how easily can we dispose of the drop of a bucket?
Even so easily can God dispose of those who are as the sea in opinion and
appearance.

Secondly, Consider what the Lord makes the swadling-band of the sea; some
strong thing no doubt: the Text tells us it is but a dark cloud or a mist
arising from the sea; these are the bands with which God binds this mighty
giant the sea.

Hence Observe, The Lord can make weak and improbable means to do and effect
the greatest things.

One would think we should have heard of some other matter, even of adamantine
chains, to bind the Sea with; but we see mists and fogs and clouds shall do it,
if God will. Mists are but vapors gathered up and thickened a little in the
air. Is it not a wonder, that they should get the upper hand of, and bind the
sea? so that as soon as a mist rises in the air, by and by the sea is still.
There is indeed a natural reason why, as calms are seldom without mists, so
mists can never be without calms; because mists cannot endure nor live in the
wind, much less in a storm, but must presently be dispersed or blown away by
it; yet it is much, that a mist, or a fog, or a cloud in the air, should have a
binding force upon the sea. This was the Lords work, to keep the sea quiet in
its place. And having considered this, we are called to consider another Work
of God, whereby he keeps the sea from roving out of its place, in the two
verses following.

Verse. 10. And brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors, etc.
Here the Lord speaks of the second state of the sea, according to one reading,
though according to ours of the first.

When the Lord had said, Let the waters be gathered together into one place, he
prepared a place to receive the waters; as when a man would have a place to
hold water, he digs or makes an earthen vessel or receptacle for it. So when
the waters issued out of the earth in their nativity, the Lord gathered them
together into a sea, and prepared a stupendous pit; or as some follow the
allusion here of a newborn infant wrapped in swadling-bands, he provided a great
bed or cradle to put it into. That vast concave into which the waters are put,
is somewhat like a cradle; those channels (I say) which God made for the sea,
are as the cradle wherein it is laid. The banks and shores are those bars and
doors with which the infant is kept in his cradle. What can be spoken more
significantly than these similitudes, to express the greatness of God, who
keeps in the sea by his power, and leads it forth gently into several creeks
and bosoms, for the safety of Naviga^i^n, and represseth its fury and violence
by the sands and shores? Thus says the Lord, I brake up for it my decreed
place, a hollow place, for the holding of the sea.

(...) Et fregi, i. e. decidi v^l decrevi^i per ill^ st^tuti^^ ^eum, q. d. de
i^^^ decretum meum co^stitui, cum ei limi^es sunt a me praefiniti. Merc.
Vocabulum terr^ recte hic suppleri, tum ipsa historiae veritas, tum p^opria
figniti^atio v^rbi (...) evincit: Itaque alii n^n recte cum v^rbo illo ^^^^runt
v^^m (...) in Hebr^^o def^^it prepositio (...) pro (...) Pisc. Cum difregi pro
eo (s^^ terra^^) decreto meo, i. e. Alveos velut ^unas exaravi and
circummu^i^i. Jun.
Some translate, And established my decree upon it; for the word place, is not
expressed in the Text, there it is only and brake up my decree; but it is more
clear to the general sense of the Text, and to the particular sense of the
Hebrew word, to interpret it, of breaking up a decreed place for the sea, than
of establishing a decree for the sea; which is a consequent of the former: and
therefore I understand it only of a fitting room for the sea, here called a
decreed place, or a place determined, a place not only sound out as convenient,
but determined and set; I brake up for it my decreed place, or my statuted
place, a place that I appointed by an ordinance of heaven, that place did I
break up for it; that is, I made a vessel or channel like a cradle, big enough,
and broad enough, and deep enough, to hold the vast waters of the sea. I brake
up for it my decreed place.

Note, First; The Lord who made the sea, made also a place for it.

The ordering and placing of all things is of God, as well as the making of
them; God has provided a place for every thing, and put every thing in its
place. God is the God of Order. And how comely and orde^ly are all things,
while they are kept in, and all persons while they keep in the place which God
has decreed for them, and put them in! The Elements do not ponderate, are not
burdensome in their place. The sea troubles us not while it keeps or breaks not
out from that decreed place, which God at first brake up for it. There is not
the least worm, but has a decreed place. And as God has appointed men their
time (there is a decreed time for their birth, and for their continuance in
life, they die also, and go out of the world in a decreed time) so there is a
decreed place for every man, and that twofold:

First, Of his habitation, in what part of the world he shall live ( Acts 17
26.)

Secondly, Of his station, or vocation, what part he shall act in the world, to
serve his generation, or to get his living. He that abides within the bounds of
his calling, abides in his place, though he every day move or remove from place
to place. It is best for our selves and for others also to abide in our decreed
places; as it is a mercy to us all, that the sea abides where God placed it. If
men break out of their places, they may quickly do mischief like the breach of
the sea: To prevent which God brake up for it his decreed place, and not only
so, but as it follows in the close of this tenth verse, Set bars and doors.

In the eighth verse we have only doors; he has shut up or anointed the doors
of the sea; but here we have bars and doors. It is an allusion to strong Cities
and Castles, or to great men's Houses, which have not only doors, but doors
barred and double locked. Bars strengthen doors, and keep them fast and sure. A
strong door, if not well locked and barred, may quickly be broken open;
therefore the Lord to make all fast, tells us that when he had put the sea into
his decreed place, that it should no more return to cover the earth at its own
pleasure, or according to its natural bent (for there is a desire, that is, a
natural bent in the sea to be overflowing all, and to repossess the place from
which it was at first withdrawn; the Lord I say tells us that) he then set
doors and bars to keep it in, and shut it up fast enough. And if you enquire
what is meant by these doors and bars, with which it is shut in? Some answer,
The sands of the sea, others the rocks, clifts and banks; these are bars and
doors by which the sea is shut in. But though these things are indeed as bars
and doors to keep the sea from returning again; yet that which is the great bar
and door, is the word of command from God, as appears fully in the next verse.

Verse. 11. And said, hitherto shall thou come, Et dixi, ei sc. prosopopeia.
Dicere dei est jubere and constituere quid fiat.
and no further. The Saying of God, is Gods Command and Law; And said. To whom?
To whom did the Lord speak? He said it to the sea; though a senseless creature,
a creature without reason, yea without life, yet the Lord said it, and he said
it to the sea, and he spoke it as angry with the sea. As if he had said, I see
what a raging creature thou art, what a froward ungoverned child thou art like
to prove; therefore I say, hitherto shall thou come, and no further. We may
take this saying of the Lord, under these two notions.

Hebraei (...) pro termino ponunt, ut apparet, Ezekiel. 41.15. ideo recte (...)
vertitur hoc usque. C^^t.
First, As expressing the firmness of what was done; He said, that is, resolved,
determined, and concluded, made it a Law, a Law like that of the Medes and
Persians, not to be reversed by any power.

Secondly, He said, as noting the facility of the work. When the Lord took a
course to shut up these doors, and to put on these invincible bars, what did
he? He said it, and it was as soon done as said; so that this word He said,
notes the infinite sovereignty and power of God, that by a word speaking the
matter was done; He said, Hitherto shall thou come.

The Lord gives the sea line; He makes it a prisoner, but not a close prisoner;
He gives it a great scope, large room to role and tumble its waves in; Hitherto
thou shall come, that is, hitherto thou may come. It is not a Command that
the sea should always come so far, but it is a dispensation or a permission,
that thus far the sea may come, but no further. As if the Lord had said, I have
drawn a line, and I have set a mark, I have given thee a bound, so far to go,
hitherto shall thou come, But no further.

Rabbi Levi.
The Hebrew is, Thou shall not add; Thou shall not go beyond the bound which I
have set thee, to destroy the earth. A Jewish Writer gives a double exposition
of this, But no further.

First, Of the waves and the waters in the midst of the sea. When waves rise in
the main ocean, how high they may rise and toss the sailing ship, we cannot
tell; but God knows.

Secondly, Of the waves roaring at the seashore. To both he says, Hitherto
shall ye come, and no further.

And here shall thy proud waves be stayed. Why does the Lord call them proud
waves? it is not because they are proud properly, but by a Metaphor; they lift
up their heads as proud men do, and are therefore called proud waves. Thus
Jethro spoke of Pharaoh and his host ( Exodus 18.11.) In the things wherein they
dealt proudly, the Lord was above them. Pharaoh and the Egyptians, like the
proud waves of the sea, thought to have swallowed up all Israel; but God made
the sea to swallow them up. Proud men, like mighty waves, think to swallow up
all; but He is above them, that says to the sea, Here shall thy proud waves Be
stayed.

The Hebrew is, And here it shall set it self against the pride of thy waves.
As if the Lord had said, if they come here, (...) Fluctus recte dicti, quia
volvuntur ventis. Et magnos volvunt ad littora fluctus. Dicuntur etiam (...) a
fragore vel quod franguntur in littora and scopulos, vel quod inter se
colliduntur.
my doors shall meet them, my commands like bars shall stop them, that they
shall not be able to go a step further; they shall not conquer my commands, nor
break down the doors, nor dissolve the bars, which I have set up. The word
rendered waves properly signifies a heap; because waves role in heaps one upon
the neck of another.

First, In that this Text makes so particular a description of the provision
which God made to keep the sea in order; as soon as it was born, he bound it up
in swadling-bands, and then brake up a decreed place for it, and there set up
bars and doors, that it should come no further. He put the sea under
confinement.

Hence, Note; The sea left to it self, would mischief all; the sea would return
and cover the earth quickly.

As soon as ever it brake forth out of the earth, it covered the earth; and so
it would do again, if the Lord should let it alone. David took special notice
of this work of God ( Psalm. 104.9.) Thou have set a bound that they (the waters
spoken of verse. 6, 7, 8.) cannot pass over, that they turn not again to cover
the earth. Which plainly implies, that the waters would turn again to cover
the earth, and so recover their first liberty, even to overspread the face of
the whole earth, did not God restrain and hold them in, as was showed before in
the general explication of this verse.

Secondly, Note; The creature can go no farther than God permits or suffers.

Rational creatures often go beyond the commands of God; but neither they, nor
any creature, can go beyond the counsel of God: They who transgress or pass
over the line of his revealed will, cannot pass over the line of his secret
will. The Lord secretly puts a stop to all creatures, as here, to the sea. How
extravagant soever men's spirits are, or their practices are, yet they are under
an overruling power. The sea has continued under this command ever since God
made it; it has gone no further than the Lord would. Though it be a truth that
the sea has broken visible and natural, yea artificial banks, and bounds, and
bars; yet it has never broken those special invisible banks, bounds, and bars,
Deus non sibi eas rerum leges fixit quas nequeat ad tempus cum libot mut^re.
which God has made for it, his decree. When God gave the sea visible banks,
and bounds and bars, he did not intend them for banks, and bounds, and bars to
his own will; and therefore he sometimes bids the sea go beyond and break its
visible bounds and bars. He commanded a general deluge in Noah's time; then all
was sea, no dry land appeared: And though we have the Lords promise that he
will never destroy the world, how sinful soever, by an universal deluge any
mo^e ( Genesis 9.11.) yet Histories and experiences have told us there have been
many particular inundations of the sea, breaking its anciently known bounds and
bars; nevertheless it never did nor ever shall break the bars of this word,
hitherto shall thou come, but no further. The divine pillar of this (Ne plus
ultra) No further, stands inviolable. If the sea break bounds at any time, it is
because God has given it a special commission to do so, for the punishment of
men, who break their bounds by sin. The sea is still Gods prisoner, and goes
not out of those doors which God has set up and barred, without his license;
it stirs not a foot from the decreed place which God broke up for it, but as he
lengthens its chain.

Thirdly, Note; To God alone that power belongs, which keeps the sea within
compass.

It is not the sands, nor the banks, nor the rocks, that can do it. The water
is a very barbarous and headstrong element, none can put a bridle into the
lips of it, but God himself. A late Historian, speaking of the siege of Rochel,
says there was a stupendous dike made, which might be called a bridle to the
sea: but God alone can make a bridle for the sea; his word in the Text,
Hitherto shall thou come, and no further, is the bridle. Some dispute whether
it be not a continued Miracle, that the sea is kept within its compass. We say
miracles are discontinued; and I conceive it is beside the nature of a miracle,
to be continual; yet, without dispute, it is a continued marvel or wonder, that
the sea is thus kept in; if the Lord should let it loose, if he should remove
the bar and unlock the door of that prohibition here given it, but one hour, no
natural doors nor bars could hinder it from returning to cover the face of the
earth. Take a few inferences from the whole.

First, The sea is Gods, and he has made it.

(Psalm. 95.5.) And he made it, as to declare his own glory, so to promote our
good ( Psalm. 104.25, 26.) The earth (O Lord) is full of thy riches; so is this
great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and
great beasts; there go the ships; there is that Leviathan whom thou have made
to play therein. O magnify God, who has made the sea so vast, so wide, so
great, yet so useful and commodious. As the sea is a terrible creature, so a
beneficial creature, bringing forth and feeding an innumerable company of
beasts, as the Psalmist speaks. We may as soon number the sands, as the shoals
of fish bred and nourished in those mighty waters.

Secondly, As the sea is the Lords, and he made it; so the sea is the Lords,
and he masters it.

(Psalm. 89.9.) Thou rulest the raging of the sea; when the waves thereof arise,
thou stillest them. Glorify the Lord in this. No earthly potentate can coerce
the sea. Xerxes presumed he could tame the He^espont, a little brook
comparatively to the Ocean, but it would not obey him; he disciplined it with
three hundred strokes for attempting his bridge of boats, but it would not
mend; he cast fetters into it, as if it had been his vassal, but it would not
be bound. It is God who binds the sea, That knows no Lord but him that made
both it and the dry land. It was proof enough of Christ's Divinity, that
rebuking the winds and the sea, there was a great calm. This made the men
marvel, saying, what manner of man is this (surely he is more than man) that
even the winds and the sea obey him (Matthew. 8.26, 27.) When some Courtiers
would have flattered our Danish King Canutus into a belief that his power was
more than humane, he commanded his chair to be set on the Seashore at the time
of flood; and sitting down, thus bespake that Element; I charge thee not to
enter my land, nor wet these robes: but the sea keeping on its course, he rose
up, and spoke in the hearing of all about him; Let all the inhabitants of the
world know, that vain and weak is the power of Kings; and that none is indeed
worthy of that Name, but he that keeps both heaven, and earth, and sea in
obedience.

Thirdly, Then tremble at the power of God, who can let the sea loose upon us
in a moment. We tremble at the sea if it break loose; then tremble at the power
of God, who can let loose the sea. It is he that calls for the waters of the
sea, and pours them out upon the face of the earth: the Lord is his Name.
(Amos 9.6.)

Fourthly, when the sea breaks bounds in any degree, either when we see a storm
at sea, or a deluge at land, let us go only to the Lord, who only can still
the raging of the sea, and put swadling-bands about it, even as if it were a
child. God alone is to be invocated, when the winds are tempestuous, and
threaten either a deluge at land, or a wrack at sea. Heathens invoked Neptune
and Aeolus. Popish votaries call upon St. Nicholas and St. Christopher. Let us
learn of the Disciples, who fearing to be swallowed up of a tempest, went to
Christ, and said, Master, save us, we perish (Matthew. 8.27.) The poor Mariners
in Jonah called every one upon his God ( Jorah 1.5.) but none of them called
upon the true God. It is Jehovah the Lord, the true God only, that raises the
stormy wind, which lifts up the waves of the sea; and it is he that makes
the storm a calm (Psalm. 107.24, 25, 29.)

Fifthly, If the sea, so vast and violent a creature receive the bridle from
God, and is bound up by him, even as an infant in swadling-bands; how much more
should man receive the bridle from him! The Lord says to the sons of men,
hitherto shall ye come, and no further; hitherto your works and actions shall
go, and no further: yet how do the men of the world overflow and break their
bounds! The prophet makes this application clearly ( Jer. 5.22, 23.) Fear ye
not me, says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence? which have placed
the sand for the bound of the sea, by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass
it; and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail;
though they roar, yet can they not pass over it: but this people has a
revolting and a rebellious heart, they are revolted and gone. As if he had
said, The sea does not revolt against my command, but this people does; they
are more unruly than the sea. All the wicked, at best, are like the troubled
sea, that cannot rest (as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 57.20.) How much worser then
are they than the sea, when they are at worst?

Lastly, We may hence infer for our comfort; If the Lord has put bounds to the
natural sea, what unnatural sea is there, to which the Lord cannot put bounds?
There is a five-fold metaphorical sea, to which the Lord has said, hitherto
shall thou come, and no further: Or, at least, he has said, though thou come
hither, thou shall come no further. This the Lord has said,

First, To the sea of man's wrath. The wrath of man is a grievous sea, and of
that David says ( Psalm. 76.10.) The wrath of man shall praise thee, the
remainder of wrath shall thou restrain. Let men be as angry as they will, let
them be as stormy as a sea; yet the Lord has said, hitherto shall ye come, and
no further: For ( Psalm. 65.7.) He stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of
their waves, and the tumult of the people. Yea, great men raging like the sea,
are sometimes stopped by very small matters, such as the sea-sands. The
Chief-priest and Elders of the people, were offended at Christ, and therefore
questioned his Authority; yet forbear to answer his question, as they had most
mind to do it, for fear of the people ( Matthew. 21.23, 26.)

Secondly, He bounds the sea of the devils rage. The devil is a sea in bonds.
We read of a special thousand years, wherein it is prophesied that Satan shall
be bound ( Rev. 20.2.) yet indeed he is always bound, else no man could live a
quiet hour for him, nor have any rest from his furious temptations and
vexations, but his professed slaves and votaries.

Thirdly, There is a sea of Affliction which we meet with in this world; the
Lord bounds that also, and says, hitherto it shall come and no further (1 Cor.
10.13) There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man. But
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able;
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to
bear it.

Fourthly, The Lord sets a bound to the sea of profaneness and ungodliness in
the world; that is a sea that would overflow all; and that is a sea, f^r whose
overflowing, we have cause to pour out floods of tears. Hence that prayer of
David (Psalm. 7.9.) O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end! Did not
the Lo^d put an end to the profaneness and ungodliness of men, they would be
endless in profaneness and ungodliness. The unj^st knows no shame (Zeph.
3.5.) That is, he is never ashamed of any injustice, but would go on to do
unjustly and wickedly (in infinitum) who knows how long!

Fifthly, The Lord sets a bound to the sea of error and false d^ct ine; the
Lord says, Hitherto shall thou c me, and no further. Error would be as
extravagant and boundless as the sea, if the Lord did not bound it. Epiphanius
in his treatise of heresies, alludes to this Scripture, for the comfort of
himself and others, when he saw such a high-grown sea of error broken in upon
the Church. As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do such ungodly men
withstand the truth of Christ; but (says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.9.) They shall
proceed no further. Did not the Lord give a stop to the spirit of seduction
that goes out from the Devil and the false Prophet, it would bring in a deluge
of delusions upon the whole world, and (as Christ himself has forewarned us,
Matthew. 24.24.) deceive if it were possible, the very Elect. But there is a bar
and a bound for this sea also; though they come hitherto, to this and that
person with their errors, to this and that point of error, yet they shall
proceed no further; and here, even here, their proud and poisonous waves shall
be stayed.

JOB, Chap. 38. Verse. 12, 13, 14, 15. 12. Have thou commanded the morning since
thy days? and caused the dayspring to know his place

13. That it might take hold of the ends of the earth, that the wicked might be
shaken out of it?

14. It is turned as clay to the seal, and they stand as a garment.

15. And from the wicked their light is withheld, and the high arm shall be
broken.


THe Lord in dealing with Job, had already put sundry Questions to him about
the earth, and about the sea, as has been showed in the former part of this
Chapter; here the Lords calls his thoughts up into the air, or bids him look
to the heavens, and duly consider the light of the Sun. In this the Lord
intends the same thing which he had done before, while he was questioning J^b
about the Earth and the Sea, namely, to humble him, and b^ing him ^o a full
submission, by showing him his weakness, and utter insufficiency, as also to
set forth his own wisdom, power, and greatness: Have thou commanded the morning
since thy days? etc. We may gather up the general sense of these four verses in
o^ this brief sum. As if the Lord had thus bespoken Job; If thou answerest,
that the things I have already questioned thee about, were before thy time, and
therefore must needs be done, without either thy counsel or assistance; then I
ask thee farther, Have thou ever hastened or retarded, have thou quickened or
stopped the rising of the Sun, at any time since thou wast born? or have thou
ever caused the morning light in any one of these Jew days, which thou have
seen, to spread it self far and near, even every where, to the uttermost parts
of the earth; that so those evil doers and night-birds, who being children of
darkness, cannot but hate the light, and love the works of darkness, might by
its rising be at once discovered and affrighted? This seems to be the purpose
and scope of God in these words. More particularly, Verse. 12. Have thou
commanded the morning since thy days?

That Is the first Question; Have thou since thy days, given the morning its
charge; to Mr. Broughton translates, implying, that every morning the Sun
receives as it were fresh orders from some hand or other? now, have thou given
out orders for ^^e morning light; Does the daylight obey thee? Does the Sun
arise at such times and places as thou have appointed? Have thou commanded it
(so we render) The word notes commanding with fullest authority, Verbum (...)
v^t^ jub^re, o^ess^, exhibere, sister^, in actum and ^o^spectum ed^c^re.
Imperium voluntatis effica^ intelligitur, quod statim sequitur eff^ctus.
a command to appear and be ready upon duty, a command to stand forth and do
what is enjoined. This word of command is most proper unto God ( Psalm. 33.9.)
He spoke the word, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast. The
command of God is a creating command, it puts things into act; his saying gives
them a being; his calling them to work, makes them work, or sets them a work.
Now, says God, Have thou commanded the morning? Have thou, O Job, such a word
of command upon any c^eature, for the producing of any effect, motion, or
action? Have thou commanded The morning?

A^anando latin dicitur mane, qu^d cum sole man^t dies ab^^ience.
By the morning, the Lord means the morning light. As if he had said, Have th u
raised the Sun out of its bed, and brought forth the morning? have thou, like
the Master or Lord of this great family, the World, called up thy servants, and
set up thy light for them to work by? have thou commanded the morning, that is,
caused the Sun to rise, which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and
rejoices as a strong man to run a race (Psalm. 19.5.) No, says the Lord, it
was not, it is not thou that command the morning, it is I that command the
morning. I commanded the first morning ( Genesis 1.5.) I said, Let there be light,
and there was light; and the evening and morning were the first day. It was I,
who the fourth day, said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven,
to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs and for seasons,
for days and for years. It was I that made two great lights (the Sun and Moon)
the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night,
(Genesis 1.14, 15, 16.) The first morning, and all the mornings, the light-bearer,
or the light-bringer, came forth and appeared at my command, not at thine. Have
thou commanded the morning Since thy days.

There is somewhat special in those words, Since thy days. We may take them
either of these two ways.

First, As if the Lord had said, Cum dixit, A diebus tuis, Ostendit id antequam
ille nasceretur factum esse, and perpetuum illum naturae ordinem in manu dei
esse non hominum. Merc.
Was there no morning before thy days? Or, Was there not a morning, before thou
had a morning in the world? Did the birth of the morning wait till thou wast
born? Did it not look forth, no^ appear, till thou did appear? Surely, there
were mornings, hundreds of years before thou had a morning in the world. The
morning did not stay for thee, nor for thy day.

Secondly, Have thou commanded the morning since thy days? That is, since thou
came into the world? have thou had the honor, privilege, and power to
awaken and call up the morning, as thou do thy household servants? Know, O
Job, that, as there was a morning before thou wast born, or had a day in the
world; so since thy day, thou have neither made the morning, nor raised up the
morning light; that power is now in my hand, as it was before thou wast in
being; thou art but of yesterday, of a few days: there was a morning before thy
days; and since thy days many have continued and come forth daily: yet not at
thy command, but at mine. As I brought forth the light in the first day of the
Creation, so the fourth day I created the Sun, into which I gathered the light,
and at whose rising the morning shows it self.

Have thou commanded the morning since thy days? It Is a daring Question; thou
have not, I have done it, and not thou.

Hence Note, First, What God will have done, he can command to be done, or it
shall be done at his command.

The Lord needs not labor to produce the most difficult effects; he can
produce them as a Lord, by a word speaking; he needs not entreat, nor treat
about the bringing forth of any matter, his will is enough to bring it forth.
What God will have done, shall be done. Thus it was at the beginning, when God
created all things, and gave them a being; and thus it has been ever since for
the moving of all things to their several ends, and issues, to this day; all
has been done by a word of command. David (Psalm. 148.) calling the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, to praise the Lord, gives that as the reason ( verse. 5.) for he
commanded, and they were created. Now, I say, as they were created at the first
by his command, so they shine forth every day by the same command ( Matthew.
5.45.) He makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good. He that has
power, usually says to a person that is unwilling to do a thing, I will make
you to do it; that is, you shall do it, whether you will or no. And it is said
by the Evangelist, He makes his Sun to rise, etc. which may seem to import a
kind of unwillingness in the Sun to bestow its light promiscuously upon the
evil as well as good (evil men are indeed unworthy that the Sun should shine or
the rain fall upon them) but God (who is infinite in goodness, and to show that
our good deeds should not be shut up or narrowed to those only who are good)
lays an irresistible and an indispensible charge upon the Sun, to rise and
shine with that indifferency to the good, and to the bad. The Sun would be
ashamed to shine upon wicked men, the Sun would even withold its beams, and
rays, and deny them light or any comfort, it would not make the earth fruitful
for them, had it not a command from the Lord: But having a command from him, it
cannot withold nor divert its light, no not from those who are children of
darkness, and have constant fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness.

It Is no small matter of consolation, to remember, that our God is a commanding
God, that he can command the morning: which as it is a truth, with respect to
the natural morning of every day, so to the mystical or metaphorical morning.
After a dark, black, and stormy night of sorrow and trouble upon his Church or
People, then the Lord can command the morning of joy and prosperity to arise
upon them and comfort them. It Is comfortable living under and obeying his
commands, who can command away our sorrows, and by a word speaking turn
midnight into morning, and the shadows of death into the shining light of life;
and therefore says peremptorily without ifs or ands (Psalm. 30.5.) Weeping (or
sorrow) may endure for a night, but joy (or singing) comes in the morning:
that is a morning in a morning. We may have a morning of Sun light, and no
morning of joy-light, as the Lord threatened his people in case of disobedience
( Deuteronomy. 28.6, 7.) In the morning thou shall say, would God it were even; and at
even thou shall say, would God it were morning, for the fear of thy heart,
wherewith thou shall fear, etc. Only God can make a morning of joy or inward
light, to rise with the mo ning light of the natu^al day; else we may have day
without us, and darkness within us; Sun-light but no soul-light. And such was
the intendment of that dreadful threatening against the wicked, last mentioned
out of Moses. Whereas the godly in their darkest ou^ward condition, are under
the sweet influences of that gracious promise ( Psalm. 97.11.) Light is sown for
the righte^us, and gladness for the upright in heart. And God can command that
light to spring even in the hour and power of darkness, as Christ expressed his
saddest day in this world ( Luke 22.53.) The light of every morning is called
the dayspring, at the latter end of this verse; and the Lord can make light
and gladness, or the light of gladness to spring up in our hearts, when and
where he pleases.

Secondly, Observe; The course of Nature in all its turns and changes, is moved
by, and obedient to the command of God.

As God commands the morning, so the morning fails not to come at his command.
When did you ever know the morning stop or stay a moment beyond the time, that
God commanded it to come forth. We could never say to the Chariot of the Sun,
as the Mother of Sisera said of his, Why is his Chariot so long a coming? why
stay the wheels of his Chario^? There was somewhat stopped Sisera's Chariot, that
it could not come; and God took off the Chariot wheels of the Egyptians, in the
Red Sea, and they drew heavily; yea, the Lord can take off the Chariot-wheels
of any, though they drive as furiously as Jehu, so that they shall not come at
their time: but who ever knew the morning stopped a minute or a moment beyond the
exact time at which it should come, or was expected? And as the Sun, so all
natural things, keep their course, and slack not at the command of God. No
creature disobeys the command of God but man, who of all creatures has most
reason, and is most obliged to obey it. God never said of the Sun, O that it
had hearkened to my voice; but the sons of men put him often to say so, as he
once did to Israel, his ancient people ( Psalm. 81.13.) How seldom do we keep
time with God! How seldom do we come or go, just at his call! I have called
(says Wisdom, Prove. 1.24, 25.) and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand,
and none regarded. God never looked, one day of the year, for the morning, and
it came not; but he has come three years (as the Parable of the Fig Tree
shows, Luke 13.) to man, looking for fruit, and has found none. Will it not
shame us, that the morning is obedient to the command of God, if we are not?

And therefore as the former note was matter of comfort to us, so this may be
matter of conviction to us, that the morning, that the Sun in the firmament (a
liveless creature) receiving a command, should constantly appear at the time
which the Lord appoints, and that we, who are living creatures, that we, who
are reasonable creatures, yea, that we, who have not only reason, but grace
(all believers have) should not be obedient to, and observant of the Lords
command, to come at his time, to appear at his call; how may it cause us to
blush for shame! The Prophet says, The Stork in the heavens, the Crane, the
Tu^tle, and the Swallow, these know the time of their coming; they come in
their season. I may say also, the Sun, Moon and Stars, those lights in the
heavens, know their season, and the time of their coming; they obey the command
of the Lord, and shall not we know the judgment of the Lord, and observe the
appointed times of our duty! which to observe, is as much our interest or
benefit, as it is our duty. As often as we see the morning coming according to
the command of God, let it provoke us to make have, and not delay, to keep his
commandments.

Thirdly, Have thou commanded the morning? that is, the morning light, to come
forth? No, it is I that have done it.

Hence Note; We are to acknowledge God as the Commander, yea, as the Former,
Maker, and Author of the light.

This command of God has respect, not only to his bringing forth the light
every morning, or to his bringing forth the morning light every day into the
world; but to his giving the light its being the first day of the world. God is
the Father not only of spiritual light ( Jam. 1.17.) but of natural ( Psalm.
74.16.) The day is thi^e, the night also is thine; thou have prepared the
light, and the Sun. This glory is ascribed to God by his holy Prophet also (
Jer. 31.35.) Thus says the Lord, which gives the Sun for a light by day, and
the ordinances of the Moon, and of the Stars, for a light by night. The Lord
gives these, as well as command these; and who but God can do either? None can
command the creatures unto their daily motion, but God; much less could any
command the creatures into their first being, but God. How wise, how great
soever men are, or seem to be in their own eyes or sight, they cannot make nor
bring forth the least ray of light; much less can they make such a world of
light, as God has made for the world. And surely there is no creature wherein
we may see and contemplate more of God than in the light, which he made the
first day, and now commands to make the morning day by day. Nor is there any
thing in the whole compass of Nature, either more comfo^table or more admirable
than the light. The commonness of it lessens our esteem of it; and because it
comes so constantly, and never fails, we are apt to look upon it as no great
matter, as no great mercy; whereas indeed the light is not only useful and
comfortable, but admirable; and that it deserves these three attributes, I
shall briefly show; by giving a touch at each of them.

That, light is an admirable creature, must be confessed, if we consider,

First, Its original, or the way of its production. The Apostle treating about
spiritual light, tells us whence the natural light came (2 Cor. 4.6.) God who
commanded light to shine out of darkness, etc. Light came, as it were, out of
the womb of darkness. Now that, out of darkness, black darkness, such a
beautiful child, such a goodly creature as light should be brought forth, is it
not mavelous? Yet thus it was, God commanded light to shine out of darkness.
The History of the Creation reports, There was nothing but darkness upon the
face of the earth, when the Lord said, Let there be light. Darkness is totally
contrary to light, it is the privation of light: Now, that the habit should come
forth out of the privation, light out of darkness, or life out of death, joy
out of sorrow, peace out of trouble, these are the wonderful works of God. And
we may comfortably meditate upon this, when we want any kind of light: Whence
did the Lord bring light at first? even out of darkness; therefore let us not
think any darkness of trouble, a le^t to the Lords production of light. When we
are in spiritual darkness (the state of nature is a state of darkness) that
does not hinder; the Lo^d can easily bring the light of the new creatu^e out of
it: and when we are in the darkness of any trouble, though it be thick
darkness, dark^ess (as Job spoke, chap. 10.22.) like darkness it self, and
where the light is as darkness; yet this does not hinder, the Lord can bring
light out of it. There Is the first wonder, the Lord brought light out of
darkness.

Secondly, Light is wonderful, in its operation, power, and efficacy, in that
it does so suddenly chase away, conquer, and overcome darkness. Light gets
victory over darkness in a moment. There Is no darkness can abide the face of
light. As soon as God commands the morning, let it be as da k as pitch, the
darkness must away, and fly before it. Da^kness cannot withstand light, nor
stand in the presence of it; there is no long dispute, light instantly gets the
hands, the day, of darkn^ss.

Thirdly, If we consider the pure nature o^ ligh^; it is as pure as purity it
self. Light has an inseparable and an insuperable purity; though it may be a
while ob^cured, yet it cannot be at all polluted. Philosophers have spoken much
about the nature of light, but none were ever able to comprehend it. Some said,
it is a habit or quality of a light some body; L^x diunt Physici est (...), seu
qualitas corporis ^ucidi.
yet none of their definitions reach it fully. They make it a quality; yet we
may conceive it is rather to be ranked and reckoned among substances than
accidents, it being a principal part of the Creation, and the express subject
of Gods work the first day of it.

Fourthly, The light is very wonderful in the changes and vicissitudes of it.
How it passes and repasseth, how it increases and decreaseth, how it comes
and goes, is an amazing consideration.

Fifthly, Though the light be in continual changes, yet there is nothing more
constant than the light, to its appointed time. Light never fails to come in
its season.

Secondly, That light is a most useful and beneficial creature, who can deny?
seeing without light the whole Creation were a nothing to us. What had the
world been to us, if God had not made light, and set up lights in it? The eye
of the body (which is the light of the body, Matthew. 6.22.) were of no use to us
without outward light. Till the Sun (which is the eye of the great world)
shines, the eye (which is the Sun of the little world) is no advantage to us.
There must be light in the air, as well as light in the eye, else the most
beautiful objects have no appearing beauty; and therefore the Lord made light
the first day, that by it, the beauty of the whole Creation might be seen.
Light discovers it self and all other things: Light illustrates all the works
of God, and sets them in our sight. And as all that God has done, would be
nothing to us without light, so we our selves could do nothing without light.
We cannot work at all, or very hardly, or very badly, without light; hence that
of David (Psalm. 104.22, 23.) The Sun arises; man goes forth to his work and
to his labor, until the evening. (John 9.4.) The night comes, wherein no man
can work. Night of any sort, is not for work, because it is dark; and therefore
they who work in the night, get artificial light to supply the want of natural.
When the plague of darkness was upon the Egyptians, they sat still, and no man
moved from the place where he was, till that plague was removed ( Exodus 10.22,
23.) And as we cannot do the work of our Civil Callings without light, either
natural or artificial; so we cannot do the work of our Christian Calling,
without spiritual light. When Christ the Sun of righteousness arises with
healing in his wings, then we go forth (to our spiritual labor as Christians)
and grow up as the calves of the stall (Mal. 4.2.) How long soever we live in
this world, we never go forth to that labor, till the Sun of righteousness,
the Lord Jesus Christ, arises upon us. It was said to those in the parable,
that were hired at the eleventh hour ( Matthew. 11.6.) Why stand ye all the day
idle. They of the eleventh hour were persons, possibly, very busy and
laborious as to their Civil Callings in the world, but had stood idle all the
day as to any spiritual work, as to any work of grace; they had not done God,
nor their poor souls, one stroke of work all that while, until they were
called, and the light of grace shined upon them. Jesus Christ is the light
which lightened the Gentiles, and the glory of Israel (Luke 2.32.) And
wheresoever he comes, The people which sat in darkness see a great light, and
to them which sat in the valley of the shadow of death, light springs up
(Matthew. 4.16.) And that a twofold light;

First, Light to be saved by.

Secondly, Light to serve God, or to do the work of God by.

Thirdly, How comfortable is the light! It Is so comfortable, that light and
comfort are often put for the same thing. God is the Lord (aith David, Psalm.
118.27.) which has showed us light; that is, the light of counsel what to do,
and the light of comfort in what we do, or after all our sufferings. Light is
not only a candle held to us, to do our work by, but it comforts and cheareth
us in our work ( Eccl. 11.7.) Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for
the eyes to behold the Sun. Hence that of David (Psalm. 65.8.) Thou make the
outgoings of the evening and morning to rejoice; that is, thou make men to
rejoice, they are glad, they rejoice in, or at the outgoings of the morning.
Man takes comfort at the first appearance of the light; light refreshes him at
its outgoings in the morning. And at the evening men rejoice too, for then
they go to their rest, being wearied with the labor of the day. Possunt exitus
matutini and v^spertini sumi pro hominibus qui h^bitant ubi exit dies and ubi
exit nox, i. e. pro Orientalibus and Occidentali^^^.
Or we may thus expound that Psalm, Thou make the outgoings of the morning
and the evening to rejoice; That is, thou make men who live at the outgoings
of the morning, and at the outgoings of the evening to rejoice. As if it had
been said, thou make the Eastern people and the Western people, all people
from East to West rejoice. And that which makes all people to rejoice,
naturally, is the rising of light with them in the East, and the coming of
light toward them in the West.

Thus we see what an excellent creature light is, both as it has a continually
renewed rising in the morning of every day, and as it had its first being in
the morning of the world, and both from the command of God. Whence take these
inferences.

First, When we behold the morning coming forth by the command of God; Let us
consider who God is, and what the beauty, and purity, the majesty, and
excellency of God are, who is clothed with light, and dwells in light, yea,
who is light, and in whom there is no darkness at all. There is not any one
creature, which God does so formally predicate of himself, as this of light. As
God is love (1 John 4.8.) so God is light, (1 John 1.5.) yet the light which
shines to us, the morning, which God has commanded for us, is but darkness to
God, who has commanded it. Light it self is darkness, compared with God; yet
it is the clearest shadow, the best resemblance of God in Nature.

Secondly, As we should consider the excellency and beauty of God in the
appearance of the morning, so his goodness, who has made such a creature for
us, who has also prepared so many vessels to hold it and hold it out, or to
dispense it to us. It Is God who has made those great lights, the Sun to rule
the day, and the Moon and Stars to rule the night (Genesis 1.16.) The day would be
night to us, if God had not prepared the Sun (for though there were three days
before the Sun was made, yet now it is the Sun which makes the day) and the
night would be nothing but darkness to us, if God had not prepared the Moon and
the Stars. How great then is the goodness of God to man, who has made light
for us, and who thus conveys and dispenses it to us according to our need,
both by day, and by night!

Thirdly, We should hence be minded to pay our debt of thankfulness to God
every day. History tells us, that the ancient Rhodians or inhabitants of the
Isle called Rhodes, erected a mighty Colossus (according to their heathenish
superstition) in honor of the Sun, who once a day at least opened his face
upon their Island, though it were over-cast with clouds, muffled up, and veiled
to all other parts of the world. Though, possibly, we do not see the face of
the Sun every day, yet we enjoy the light and influences of it every day. God
has commanded the Sun in the Firmament to attend us, to be about us, to
comfort us, every morning; and shall we be unthankful! If in a dark night a
friend will but lend us a candle and a lanthorn, we thank him; What matter of
thanks to God then should it be, that he has set up those candles, those
torches, those lamps of light for our comfort and guidance continually.

Fourthly, If God has commanded the light, so excellent a creature to serve
us, to be for our use, then let us make use of the light to serve the Lord in
and by; let us make use of natural light, that of the Sun in the air; and of
spiritual light, that of Christ the Sun in the Gospel, most of all. Let us make
use of natural light, as to civil, and of spiritual light, as to holy ends and
enjoyments; let no beam of light shine to us in vain. It is sinful, not to make
a good use of natural light, it is very sinful and dangerous not to make a good
use of spiritual, it is condemnation to refuse ^pi^i^ual Gospel light, and to
love darkness rather than the light ( John 3.19.)

Fifthly, Seeing the Lord ha h commanded the morning light for us, then by way
of retribution, let us shine forth in obedience to his commands, and be as the
morning light to glorify God ( Matthew. 5.16.) We that have light made for us,
should carry our selves like lights. The Apostle either commends the Saints at
Phillippi for shining, or commands them to shine as lights in the world (Phil.
2.15.) The Text runs in the Indicative Mood (by way of commendation) Among whom
ye shine. The Margin has it in the Imperative Mood (by way of command) Among
wh^m sh^ne ye as lights in the world. The Lord who has commanded the Sun to
^ise for our light, has commanded us to rise and shine as lights, and be as so
many Suns of light in the firm^ment of the Church, and in all places to which
we come. Therefore (as our blessed Saviou^, the light and life of the world,
has counseled us) Let our light shine (and so shine) before men, that they
may see our good works, and glorify our father which is in heaven (Matthew.
5.16) We that have light commanded for us every day, how should we be lights,
and go forth as the Sun, casting out our rays and beams, in a holy and godly
conversation! And while we go forth and walk in such a conversation, we go
forth and walk as the Sun in its strength, we enlighten all the world where we
come, and dazel the eyes of the wicked world, or of the wicked in the world.

Sixthly, How should we, who have light commanded for us, avoid all the works
of darkness; yea, We should (as the Apostle exhorts, Romans 13.12, 13.) cast off
the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light; we should walk honestly,
as in the day: As in the day which the light of the natural Sun makes, and as
in the day, which the light of the mystical Sun, our Lord Jesus Christ, has
made.

Seventhly, Remember, as God has commanded a morning for us here, so he will
command a light, or a morning, a morning light for all our actions hereafter.
As God has made the the light, so he will bring all things to light. Many now
live in the light of this world, whose works are in the dark as well as theirs
are works of darkness. Now as the Lord has commanded a morning to shine for us
to work by, so he will have a morning wherein all our works shall be seen (1
Cor. 4.5.) He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and the
manifest the counsels of the heart. Men may dig deep, to hide their counsels
from God; but God knows how to bring them and their counsels to the morning,
and will cause a light to shine upon them, though they have no light of truth
or righteousness in them. God will bring every work into judgment with every
secret thing (Eccl. 12.14.) We must all appear (says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
5.10.) or we must all be manifest; we must appear, and so must our works too.
Those works of men shall be light, as to their discovery, which are nothing but
darkness, as to their impurity. Those deeds which have no light in them, shall
come in the clearest light, and be plainly seen to the bottom, both by Men and
Angels. The Lord who has commanded this mo^ning light for us to do our work
in, will command another morning light to judge our works in, and to give us
the reward of them. And let all the wicked of the earth, to whom the morning of
any day (because they are in danger to be discovered by it) is as the shadow of
death (Job 24.17.) Let them (I say) consider how many thousand deaths that
morning will be to them, which will actually, fully, and impartially discover
all their wickedness, with all the secrets of it.

Lastly, Consider if the Lord has bestowed so great a mercy upon us, in
commanding the morning, or in giving us light, the light of the Sun; then let
us be minded, how great a mercy the Lord has bestowed upon us in commanding
the light or morning of the Gospel to come upon us. It was night with us, and
so it would have been for ever, for any means we could have devised or used to
help out selves out of it, till God commanded Christ, the bright Morning Star
(Rev. 22.16.) and Sun of Righteousness, to rise and shine upon us. How
unspeakable a mercy is it, that such a light should appear to us, who not only
were in darkness, but were darkness! If we account it a mercy, that God has
commanded a morning to shine to us; O what a mercy is it, that we have a Christ
to shine upon us! That the Day Star from on high has visited us! That he who
is the true light, that enlightens every man that comes into the world ( John
1.9.) has risen upon us, both to scatter the darkness of sin and ignorance,
and to cheer our souls with the sweet beams of his healing wings.

So much of the first part of the verse, Have thou commanded the m^rning since
thy day, (...) S^ir^ (...) au^^r^^. (...) Mane and (...) aurora d^ss^runt: Nam
prima dici (...) di^tum (...) h^c a nigri^ (...) specio ut vid tur. Nam (...)
res sub di^^rulo apparere in^ptur^ nigric^^^ vi^entur C^c. (...) E^t
nigresc^re, bin nigrescentem lucem scil. diluculum significat. Sol vary nec
uno loco oritur; quotidie ejus lo^^s mutatirut sol ascendit aut descendit in
signis Zodiaci. Merc.
And caused the dayspring to know his place?

That is, when and where it should break forth and appear every morning. The
dayspring is expressed by a different word in the original from the morning
light; it implies the first of the morning, when the air is darkish or
duskish; we commonly call it the gray of the morning. The word signifies to be
dark, or that darkness, which we call twilight. When the dayspring ushers in
the morning, there is a kind of dimness in the light. Now says the Lord, Have
thou caused the dayspring to know its place? have thou taught it, where to
show it self to the world? The Lord speaks nere of the dayspring, as if it
were a rational creature, that took instructions, or a word of direction, where
to begin the morning light. God, not man, has taught the dayspring to know
its place. We have a like expression ( Psalm. 16.11.) Thou will show me (or thou will cause me to know) the path of life. Thus the Lord makes the dayspring
know the path to its own place. The day never springs twice immediately in one
place, but is in a continual variation, as Astronomers with experience teach.
The place of the light or Sunrising differs every morning, and from thence
we have the difference of the days. The Sun passing through the twelve signs
of the Zodiac, beginning with Aries, etc. (I shall not trouble you with their
names, which have been devised and are used only for learning sake, the Sun, I
say, passing every year through these twelve Signs, all which Astronomers
present unto us under various forms or figures, such as themselves fancied most
useful to subserve the understanding of that Art) according to the situation of
these Signs, through which the Sun runs his course in the Heavens, the
dayspring to us on Earth changes its place every day, appearing sometimes
more southerly, and sometimes more easterly, as the Sun either ascends to the
Summer Solstice, at which time the day is at longest, and the night at
shortest, as about the eleventh of our Month called June; or when it descends
to the Winter Solstice, at which time the day is shortest, and the night
longest, as about the eleventh of our December. To which we may add the Suns
coming in its ascending course to the middle point of the heavens, which makes
the Vernal Equinox, at which time the day and night are of an equal length, as
about the eleventh of out March; as also the Suns coming, in its descending
course, to the other middle point of the heavens, which makes the Autumnal
Equinox, at which time the day and night are again of an equal length, as about
the eleventh of our September. Now according to all these variations of the
Suns motion, the dayspring varieth its place day by day; and the Lord enquires
of Job, how this comes to pass; Have thou caused the dayspring to know its
place? No, it is I that have made the dayspring to know its place, I have
appointed it those several stages where it shall rise to day, and where to
morrow, and where every day throughout the year; this is from my contrivement
and appointment, not from thine. Have thou caused the dayspring to know its
place?

Hence Note; First, It is the Lord, who appoints every creature its proper
place.

The beauty of the world, is from the order of the world; and that every
creature knows its place, makes the whole creation amiable. (...).
The World is expressed in Greek by a word noting the beauty, and order of it.
And that which renders the creatures not only beautiful but serviceable to
man, is the order they are placed in. The Sun keeping its appointed course,
makes Summer at one time, and Winter at another. The Sun ever moves in (unless
stayed by miracle, as in Joshua's time) but never moves out of its place. As no
creature is burdensome, so there is no creature unserviceable, when kept in its
place, as was surther showed ( verse. 10.)

Note Secondly, The course of times and seasons is firmly and inviolably settled
by the command of God.

This fettlement was made in the Creation ( Genesis 1.14.) And when the flood had
made (as it were) a confusion of the times, and seasons, the Lord renewed this
settlement ( Genesis 8.22.) While the Earth remains, seed time, and harvest, and
cold, and heat, and Summer and Winter, and day and night shall not cease. Read
this fully ( Jer. 31.35, 36. Jer. 33.20.) Sun and Moon know their time, and
it is God, who has taught them this knowledge, and given them this instruction.
The light keeps its time, though it changes its time every day ( Psalm.
104.19.) He appoints the Moon for seasons, the Sun knows his going down.
The Sun is instructed (as it were) where to rise, and where to go down. The Sun
follows the direction of God. There is no rational creat^re that does so
exactly follow the conduct of God, as the Sun. The Sun forgets not its duty, it
never mistook the hour either of its rising or going down (as we more largely
showed a little before) it never mistook a hairs breadth for place, nor a
moment of its time. And as it moves according to the command of God: so nothing
can stay its motion, but the command of God: And if He say, Sun stand thou
still, it will do so again, as in the days of Joshua.

Now if all creatures keep their station, and observe their motion according to
the instructions they receive from God, should not this be our instruction? If
God has caused the dayspring to know its place and time; if the Sun rise
where and when he would have it; Shall not we know our place and time? Shall
not we be where and when God would have us? As every thing, so every person is
most useful in his proper place and season. The Sun is therefore so useful,
because it knows and keeps both, carrying and distributing its light up and
down the world, to the sons of men, answerably to its instructions, and that
commission given it from above.

The Lord having put questions to Job about the direction of the morning light,
and by whom the dayspring is taught to know its place; proceeds to show the
work and effects of the dayspring and morning light. Have thou caused the
dayspring to know its place?

Verse. 13. That it might take hold of the ends of the Earth. In this verse we
have two things concerning the dayspring, or the light.

First, The powerful extensiveness of it. The light takes hold; there is its
power: It takes hold of the very ends of the Earth; there is its extensiveness.

Secondly, We have one part or point of the usefulness or beneficialness of
light, when it thus takes hold of the ends of the earth; this good it does, or
this benefit comes by it, the shaking of the wicked out of it. As if it had
been said, The dayspring takes hold of the ends of the earth, for this end and
purpose, that the earth may be freed from the wicked.

That it might take hold of the ends of the earth. (...) Vt apprehenderet. Rab
Sell. Jarchi.
That is, that the morning, or the dayspring might, etc. Some of the Rabins
refer those wo^ds, that it may take hold, not to the dayspring, but to Job. As
if the Lord had said, Can thou, O Job, make the day to know its place, that
thou might take hold of the ends of the earth, as I do, and shake the wicked
out of it.

But rather, as we, That the dayspring might take hold, Vt extrema^ terrarum
oras radiis quasi totidem digitis injectis prehendet. Bez. (...) Non tam phrasi
poetica quam Hebraismo alae tribuuntur terrae. Pined.
apprehend, and hold fast the ends of the earth. Mr. Beza expresses it in this
elegancy, The Sun sends forth its rays as so many fingers, to take hold of the
utmost verges or ends of the earth.

The Hebrew is, The wings of the earth; and so Mr. Broughton translates, To
hold the wings of the earth. By the wings of the earth, according to an
Hebraisme very frequent in Scripture, we are to understand the extreme or
remotest parts of the earth. And because the wings of a bird are stretched out
to the very utmost, when she flies, the Hebrews call that which is the extreme
or utmost bound of any thing, the wings of it; and hence, in their language,
the utmost part or hem of a garment is the wing of a garment, as here and
elsewhere, the utmost parts of the earth are the wings of the earth ( Isa.
11.1, 2.) He shall set up an ensign for the Nations, and shall assemble the
outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four
corners (or, as the Margin has it, wings) of the earth. Thus the Lord speaks
of the light, Have thou caused the dayspring to know its place, that it might
take hold of the ends or wings of the earth?

Hence Note; First, The Suns light is wonderfully extensive and diffusive.

The Sun has large arms, or rather long wings. Some hawks are called long
winged: The same we may say of the Sun, that has long wings indeed, reaching
to the utmost stretch, ends or wings of the earth. The prophet Malachi comforts
those that fear the Name of the Lord, with this promise, The Sun of
Righteousness shall arise (to them) with healing in his wings. The Sunbeams,
or the light that is conveyed in those beams, are compared to wings, and they
are spread to the very wings of the earth, and extend themselves over the whole
Hemisphere. The morning light like lightning, is diffused from East to West in
a moment. When it is day with one half of the world, it is night with the other;
but where the Sun comes, it gives light all over that half-face of the earth.
The Sun is an universal benefit, and therefore the most excellent outward
benefit. We say of every good thing, by how much it is the more common,
communicative and extensive, by so much the better it is. As evil, by how much
it sp^eads it self the further, by so much the worse it is; so good, by how
much the more it spreads it self, it is the better. As the natural light of the
day, so the spiritual light of the Gospel, is very diffusive. When the Gospel
was first preached by the Apostles of Christ (the dayspring from on high then
visiting the world) O how speedily did that take hold of the ends of the earth!
David (Psalm. 22.27.) speaking of the Prophetical Office of Christ, in sending
forth the light of his truth, says, All the ends of the earth shall remember
and turn to God. What caused the ends of the earth to remember? and what did
they remember? Surely it was the light of the Gospel, taking hold of the ends
of the earth, which caused the ends of the earth to remember God and
themselves; they saw their danger and their duty, and so turned to God. By the
ends of the earth in that place of the Psalm, we are to understand the
inhabitants of the utmost parts of the earth; who had never remembered
themselves, never considered themselves, never awakened out of sin, never
turned to God, if the light of the Gospel had not shined to them. The natural
light is not only very extensive, but powerful; and so is the light of the
Gospel, it goes to the ends of the earth with wonderful effects. The Apostles
had a Commission from Christ, like that which God gives to the Sun, to carry
their light, or to preach the Gospel to every creature. The Sun gives light and
influence to every creature ( Psalm. 19.6.) His going forth is from the end of
the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid from
the heat thereof: Nor shall any thing be hid from the light, heat, and
influences of the Gospel.

Secondly, The light is exceeding swift, and spreads it self far and near in a
moment.

Many can go far, if you give them time; but the light goes very far, even to
the ends of the earth (upon the matter) without time; it goes almost in an
instant, in the twinkling of an eye, it immediately takes hold of the ends of
the earth. As soon as the Sun arises, light appears, day breaks, and with an
unconceivable speed illustrates all places within its eye, or which lie open to
it. The body of the Sun moves fast, to a wonder, but the beams of the Sun move
faster. David (Psalm. 139.9.) speaks of the wings of the morning. If I take
(says he) the wings of the morning (that is the morning light) and fl^e to the
utmost parts of the earth, even there shall thy hand lead me, etc. The morning
light is winged, and moves with incredible swiftness. The Scripture speaks of
the morning light, with respect to its sudden motion, as if it were a feathered
or winged fowl, spreading its rays as so many feathers or plumes, over all at
an instant. Though darkness, thick darkness, has got possession of the earth
in the night, yet no sooner does the light glimmer above the Horizon, but
darkness is suddenly scattered. One would think there should be a great battle,
a long contest, between light and darkness, before light could conquer
darkness, and get it off the face of the earth; whereas daily experience
teaches us that the morning having once opened its eyelids, light gets an
easy victory, and sheddeth it self abroad every where without control.
Darkness is soon dispelled and driven out of the field by light. Darkness
cannot stand its ground before the Sun, who is Lord of the day, according to
the appointment of God.

Thus the dayspring takes hold of the ends of the earth. And if any ask, Why
does it so?

I answer, The dayspring is a great and a faithful servant to man. There are
many uses of light, many services, which the light does for us; I touched some
of them in opening the former Context. We have one especial use or service of
it expressed in the close of this verse; It takes hold of the ends of the
earth, That the wicked may be shaken out of it.

This latter part of the verse seems to have little cognation with, and to be
of a very difficult connection with the former; for it may be said, What has
this shaking of the wicked out of the earth to do with the light taking hold of
the ends of the earth? I answer, The light that takes hold of the ends of the
earth, is as a Sergeant to arrest and take hold of the wicked, and so is a
means to shake them out of the earth. The words may carry a double Metaphor,

Lux orat terrae tanquam pall^i apprehendit, and ita impios excutit. Rab. Solom.
First, To the shaking of a garment. When dust or moths, or any thing hurtful to
a garment, is found upon it, we shake it out. Thus the Lord sends forth the
morning light, to take hold of the ends of the earth, as of the ends of a great
garment, that the wicked, who are but as dust and vermin, may be shaken out of
it.

Secondly, The metaphor or allusion may be taken from a sieve. As the sieve is
shaken when we would separate the chafe, or that which is vile and worthless
from among the good corn; so the Lord by the light takes hold of the ends of
the earth, and shakes the wicked like dross or darnel, out of the company of
honest men. I, says the Lord ( Amos 9.9.) will sift the house of Israel among
all Nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve; yet shall not the least grain
fall upon the earth, that is, be lost or perish. But the wicked, who are as
chafe, shall be scattered, and perish for ever, when the Lord sifts them.

Again, These words, That the wicked may be shaken out of it, are by some
expounded actively; The dayspring takes hold of the ends of the earth, that
the wicked may shake (sc. themselves) out of it. For when the light comes,
wicked men do, as it were, shake themselves out of the earth; that is, they
hide themselves, and run their heads into a corner. They who in the night and
darkness go abroad doing mischief, following wicked purposes, when the light
appears, dis-appear, withdraw, and play (as we say) least in sight ( Job
24.13.) The wicked are they that rebel against the light, they hate it, cannot
endure it, they are like the wild beasts of the earth, that raven in the night,
but in the day couch in their dens and coverts, no man can tell where to find
them ( Psalm. 104.20, 21, 22.) Thou make darkness, and it is night, wherein
all the beasts of the forest do creep forth, etc. The Sun arises, they gather
themselves together, and lay them down in their dens. Thus the wild beasts are
shaken out of the earth, when the light appears, and so are wicked beast-like
men ( John 3.20.) Every one that does evil, hates the light. And as such hate
the spiritual light of the Gospel, so they do not very well like the natural
light of the day. Wicked men decline the light, and are called darkness, and
their works are called the works of darkness; and therefore when the Sun
arises, thieves, robbers, and all of those wicked trades, may be said to shake
themselves out of the earth. He that does evil, hates the light, he looks upon
light as an enemy.

Fourthly, These words, Mane judicia exercebantur. Drus. Grot. Sensus horum
verborum e, ut improbi die exorto trahantur ad judicia, ac ita terra
excutiantur. Pisc.
That the wicked might be shaken out of it, are rather to be understood of the
wicked, as often apprehended in the morning, for evil done in the night. When
the dayspring appears, it discovers wicked men, who being taken, examined, and
tried, are by the Sentence of the Judge and Decree of the Magistrate, shaken
out of the earth. God the Supreme Judge, seems to search the whole earth by the
Candle of the Sun, as he once threatened to search Jerusalem with candles.

Hence Note, First; Light is a discoverer.

Light makes all things manifest. As the light of the Word discovers the evil
that is in the works of wicked men, and makes that manifest; so the light of
the Sun discovers the persons of wicked men, and makes them manifest. We cannot
distinguish white from black, nor can we see where men are, nor what they are
doing, till light be-friend us. And as the natural light makes things manifest,
so much more does spiritual light, the light of Law and Gospel. By the power of
that light wicked men are shaken and driven out of their sins; by that light
they see, judge, and condemn themselves. And thus the wicked are indeed shaken
out of the earth, that is, out of their earthly state of sin and unbelief.

Secondly, Note; Wicked men and light, are at no good agre^ment.

He that will continue in any evil, bears no good will to any kind of light.
Odit lucem q^i turpiter agit.
There is nothing more uncouth and displeasing to a man that resolves to live
in sin, than the light of the Word, yea, many times, than the light which
shines in the air. Such say (as he of old) when the day begins to break, Lux
inimi^a propirquat. Virg.
Our enemy is coming. Common daylight (which is a great good) much more divine
light (which is a far greater good) is counted an evil, by evil ones. What
communion has light with darkness (said the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.14.) And as they
who are light, ought not to have any complying communion with darkness; so they
who are darkness, cannot have or hold any pleasing communion with light.

Thirdly, If we take these words as holding out one main design of the
Providence of God, in sending the light every morning; namely, that the wicked
may be shaken out of the earth. This shows that wicked men should be speedily
proceeded with, and the earth unburdened of them. The ordinary use of the light
is, that men may go forth to their labor ( Psalm. 104.23.) Now, as that is one
great use of light, that man may see his honest labor, and be guided to, or in
the works of his calling; so another great use of it is, to apprehend wicked
men, who do dishonest work, and bring them to judgment. David said ( Psalm.
101.8.) I will early, or, in the morning, destroy all the wicked of the land:
As soon as ever the light takes hold of the ends of the earth, if I can, I will
take hold of evil doers; that is, I will not delay, much less, stop the course
of justice against them that do wickedly. This was a kingly resolve, Early will
I destroy the wicked of the land. This was the Prophets counsel ( Jer. 21.3.)
Execute judgment in the morning, that is, with the first opportunity. It is
not good to be rash in judgment, nor is it to be slack in judgment. Wicked
men are a burden to the earth, therefore it is fit with the first (when there is
no other remedy) to unburden the earth of them.

There is yet another reading and exposition of this latter part of the verse,
taking the word rendered wicked, not for persons, Bolduc.
but for things, and then it is read in the Neuter gender, The light takes hold
of the ends of the earth, to shake wicked or evil things (that is, those things
which are noxious to the earth) out of it. The heat of the Sun rising upon the
earth, exhales and draws out hurtful vapors from the earth, which, abiding in
the bowels of it, would hinder its fruit-bearing, or make it barren. This sense
is prosecuted all along by some Interpreters, quite through the 14th and 15th
verses, but I shall not stay upon it.

The Lord having showed this use of the light which he commands every morning,
shows (in the next verse) some other uses or effects of it.

Verse. 14. It is turned as clay to the seal, and they stand as a garment. This
verse (says a learned Expositer) is so difficult, Locus difficilis est, and
quo in extricando, si aliquis dixerit aliquid vorisimile, a benigno lectore
respuendum non est. Sanct.
that he not to be refused, who offers any thing probable toward the opening
of it. I conceive it may best be understood as an Exposition of those words in
the former part of the 13th verse, That it might take hold of the ends of the
earth, it is turned as clay to the seal; that is, the earth is turned as clay
to the seal: for when the light passes through the air, it sets as it were a
new stamp upon the earth. And then the former part of the 15th verse, may be
taken as an Exposition of the latter part of the 13th verse, That the wicked
might be shaken out of it; and from the wicked light is withheld; that is,
they are utterly destroyed, and so shaken out of the earth.

It is turned as clay to the seal, (...) Sicut lutum sigilli, i. e. cui
sigillum imponitur. Genitivus adjuncti. Pisc.
and they stand as a garment. Here are two metaphors to set out the renewed
face of the earth, upon the rising of the Sun, or the appearance of the morning
light.

First, From clay, altered by the seal.

Secondly, From man's putting fresh garments and ornaments upon his body.

It is turned as clay to the seal. That is, The approach of light makes a great
change upon the face of the earth, even as if it had received a new or fresh
impression, as clay does from a seal. A piece of clay is a rude lump, without
form or figure; but if you take a seal and stamp it, that clay readily receives
any figure or coat of arms engraven on the seal; and so it is turned from what
it was in appearance. Thus the meaning seems to be this: The earth before the
Sun rises, is like a rude piece of clay (in the night we see no more beauty in
the earth, than if it had no beauty at all; go to a well composed garden, walk
there in a dark night, you cannot discern the figure of any border, nor the
rarest beauty of any flower, nor the pleasantest fruit of any tree planted
there, your eye cannot take in nor feast it self upon any of those delights,
while darkness covers the face of the earth) but when the light comes, Terra ad
Solis ex^ntum immut^ta, novas infinitus rerum asp^ctabilium formas, inst^rluti,
quod siguli a^bitrio effirgitur recipiet, quibus tanquam vesto versicolori
induatur. ^ez.
then you see the form and figure of every thing before you, then the earth is
turned as clay to the seal; the Sun, as it were stamps and impresseth a new
beauty and bravery upon it; and then the earth, which looked like a void or rude
heap, appears in its form and figure, whether natural or artificial. This sense
is much insisted upon in opening this Scripture; and it is a good sense, setting
forth that benefit of the light, causing the earth to appear in its prope^
shape, which night or darkness had hidden or obscured.

Hence Note; The shining of the light puts a new face, in appearance, upon the
face of the earth.

Things that appear not, are as if they were not. Nothing appears, but by the
light. This is most true of spiritual light; when that arises upon any place
or people, that place or people are turned as clay to the seal, only with this
difference, the natural light of the Sun does only manifest what figures or
stamps are already impressed upon the earth, it does not make any there, which
were not there before; but where the Sunshine of the Gospel comes, though it
were a place as rude as Barbarism it self, it is turned into another shape, the
people are quite another people in their manners and conversation. It was so
with this Nation, we were once as rude heathens as any in the world; but by the
light of the Gospel we were turned as clay to the seal; we received the figure
of Grace, the figure of Christianity. And at this day, in those places among
the Indians, where the Gospel has lately come, marvelous changes are wrought
upon them; they have another stamp upon their tongues, another kind of
language; another stamp both upon hand and foot, another kind of working and
walking than before. As the light of the Gospel discovers evil persons to
themselves (a natural man knows not of what shape he is, till he sees himself
in that light) so it makes them good, and puts a new stamp, a new figure upon
them; it makes them indeed new creatures, new men; they are turned (through the
mighty power of the Spirit accompanying that light) as clay to the seal. Such
(that is, as bad as could be) were some of you (says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
6.11.) but ye are washed, etc. that is, ye are now other manner of men than
once ye were. It is turned as clay to the seal, And they stand as a garment.

They stand; Who stand as a garment? The things of the earth, they stand to
look on as a garment. All things present themselves before us in a goodly hue,
when the Sun rises; then they appear in their beauty, the whole body of the
earth is then clothed to the eye of every beholder. Hoc hemistichium
impersonaliter accipio. Sistent sc omnes res tanquam cum vestimento, i. e.
ornatissina omnia lucis beneficio apparent, Coc.
As light it self is like a golden robe, which the earth puts off every night,
and puts on again every morning; so light shows us all those goodly things,
which are the earths robes, or with which the earth is clothed, as with a
garment. The earth is, not only as a thing without form, but as a naked thing,
as a body without clothing to appearance, till the light appears; but as soon
as the light appears, then whatsoever may be called the earths clothing, and
apparel, appears also.

If any would know more distinctly, what the clothing, apparel, or garment of
the earth is? I answer,

First, That may be called the earths garment, which grows out of it; the
grass, corn, herbs, flowers, trees, all these vegetables are as a garment upon
the earth.

Secondly, Not only vegetables, but animals, the beasts of the earth, are as a
garment to the earth ( Psalm. 65.13.) The pastures are clothed with flocks, the
valleys also are covered with corn. Corn is to the valleys, what flocks are to
the pastures, their clothing.

Thirdly, Artificial things, as well as natural, are also the earths garment.
All those fair buildings, Towns and Cities, all those goodly Edifices and
Palaces any where raised upon the earth, are they not as a garment to the
earth? so then fruits and flowers growing out of the earth, flocks and herds
living upon the earth, Vt ea mutata sicut argilla sigillari, sisterentur (illi)
vel^^ indumento (obducto) Jun. i. e. ut cohiberentur improbi a pergendo and
sceleribus suis promovendis, tanquam si obvolverentur panno vultus aut pedes
ipsorum ut sequ^ns versus amplius explicat. Jun. Vt mutetur ea sicut lutum cui
sigilluxi imprimitur; and sistentur (illi) tanquam (velati) indumento. Vt moris
erat velari sontes. Pisc.
houses and dwellings built on the earth, are a clothing to the earth; and they
appear to be so, by the coming forth and appearance of the light; that shows
the beauty and figure of the earth, the trimings and adornings of it: Those
things are to the earth, as a rich embroidered garment, and light manifests
them to be so.

There is yet another exposition of this 14th verse, They stand as a garment,
that is, the wicked spoken of in the latter end of the former verse, and are
there said, to be shaken out of the earth; who are also spoken of, in the
following verse, where it is said, Their light is withheld, and their high
arm shall be broken. These wicked ones, when the light shines, are made to
stand forth, as in a garment; That is (says one Author, noted in the Margin)
the wicked are then withheld from going on in their wickedness, or from
prosecuting and promoting their evil designs and pu^poses, as if their faces
were wrapped or muffled quite up with a garment, and their feet fast bound.
Another gives the sense thus; That they (namely the wicked) may be made to
stand as covered over with a garment. The custom of old, was to cover the
faces of malefactors, when found and declared guilty of horrid crimes.

Both these Interpretations correspond clearly with the Context, both before
and after; the Lord giving this as a special service, that the dayspring or
light does to mankind, the discovery and destruction of evil men; as will be
seen more fully, in opening the next verse.

Verse. 15. And from the wicked their light is withholden. It was showed before,
that this 15th verse seems to be an Exposition of the latter part of the 13th
verse. There it was said, The light takes hold of the ends of the earth, that
the wicked might be shaken out of it; here it follows, From the wicked, their
light is withheld; that is, wicked men, when the light has discovered them,
are withheld from their light, or their light is withheld from them.

But it may be enquired, What is this light called their light, which is
withheld from them?

I answer, First, The light of their prosperity and peace, the light of the
good things of this wo^ld.

Secondly, The light of the Sun, Deus lucem subducit impiis, i. e. vita illos
orbat; Frangitquo eorum superbiam and tyrannidem. Codur.
even that shall be withheld from them, they shall be shut up in close and
dark prisons and dungeons; they shall not have the light of the Sun, who have
abused that light, or have done such things in the dark, as the Sun would even
blush to look on.

Thirdly, The light of their life, or their life shall be withholden from them;
that is, they shall be put to death for their wickedness.

All these may be called their light, because they sometime enjoyed them; and
their light in all or any of these notions, is said to be withheld from
them, not as if they had a right to hold it longer, but because they would fain
have held it longer, if they might. Thus, from the wicked their light is
withheld; as if it had been said, they are totally and finally deprived of
all their good.

Now, whereas light in the sense opened, is called their light, that is, the
light of the wicked;

Note; Even the wicked have a title to light, or to good things.

God gives light or good things to the evil as well as to the good ( Mat.
5.45.) He makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good; even they who are
evil and are daily doing evil, enjoy the light of the Sun, and the light of all
outward good things, through the patience and goodness of God. Much more may the
godly when they see the light or good of this world, look upon it as theirs, as
a part of their inheritance here below. As hereafter all the godly shall have
an inheritance among the Saints in light, so many of them have an inheritance
of light here, the Sun is a piece of their portion. God having adopted them to
be his children, the Sun is a debtor to them, and they may reckon it among
their good things, though not as their good; God having provided better things
for them than the light of this world, or of any good thing, which they hold
only in common with the world. From the wicked their l^ght is withheld.

Note, Secondly; Wicked men forfeit, and so are deprived of the good things
which God gives to them.

The wicked cannot long, shall not always enjoy the good things of this world.
When wicked men abuse the light, especially when they resist the light of
nature shining into their consciences, and refuse the light of the Gospel
shining in the Scriptures and Ordinances, and resolve to walk on in the
darkness of their minds, then from them that light of comfort and prosperity is
withheld; yea, they are often thrust out of the light of the Sun, and out of
the light of this present life, into that inner darkness of the grave, and into
that outer darkness of hell ( Matthew. 25.30.) that is, into a darkness furthest
remote, or at greatest distance from light, even out of the reach of light.
Does God say to his own people when they sin ( Jer. 5.25.) Your sins have
withheld good things from you? Much more then shall the light and all good
things, or all the good things of light be with holden from the wicked, whose
whole trade and business lies in works of darkness, or in sinning against God.
It Is bad with man, when God withholds natural light, the light of the Sun, the
good things of this world from him; but it is infinitely worse with man, when
God withholds the light of the Gospel, and the light of his countenance, any
spiritual light or good from him, and shuts any up in the contrary darkness.
From the wicked light is withheld, And the high arm shall be broken.

Cadunt impii a foelicitate sua, and vires (id significat brachium excelsum)
debilitantur^^ redduntur infirmae. Vatabl. Brachium elatum est po^entia and
superbia impiorum. Pisc.
Whose high arm? Surely the high arm of the wicked; they shall be deprived both
of their light of comfort, and of their arm of strength: wherein,

First, They prided themselves. And

Secondly, Wherewith they oppressed others.

The former is the effect of their strength; the latter is the use which they
usually put their strength to.

Strength is often expressed in Scripture by the arm; read Psalm. 10.15. Psalm.
37.17. Ezekiel. 30.22. And a high arm notes great strength. The Lord is said to do
his great things with a stretched out (or a high arm.) Man's arm may here be
called an high arm, because the arm of man uses to be lifted up on high to
strike hard and home. The higher the arm is lifted up, the heavier it falls,
and the deeper impression it makes. To sin with a high hand, is in Scripture
language to sin presumptuously and audaciously. They sin with a high hand, who
sin against light, or in the face of counsel and reproof. And as they sin
mightily, or with all their might, who sin with a high hand; so they act
mightily, or with all their might, they lay on load (as we say) who resolving
to do any thing, have a high arm to do it wi^h. When the arms of wicked men are
high, they must needs act highly in wickedness. Now when any act evil to the
height, with heat and boldness, God will take a course with them; as it
follows in the close of the verse, The high arm, that is, such a high arm
Shall be broken.

It Is an allusion to the punishing of malefactors, Damnabitur ad mortem and
quidem cruciabilem, qualis est in rota fractio. Grot.
by breaking their bodies or bones upon a wheel. To be broken, is to be utterly
spoiled. A broken heart is a great mercy ( Psalm. 51.17.) but a broken arm notes
a great misery.

This Scripture threatens the high arm with breaking, yet it leaves us
unresolved, or faith nothing expressly, about these three Queries:

First, Whose high arm is here threatened with breaking?

Secondly, By whom the high arm shall be broken?

Thirdly, How or by what means, or in what manner it shall be broken?

I answer to the first, These terrible words are not levelled nor intended
against any high arm (eo nomine) upon that account, because it is high. God is
not angry with the highness of men. They who are highest, and have the highest
arm among men, may be highly pleasing unto God. The highest powers on earth,
are of Gods ordaining and appointing; now, God cannot be against his own
ordinances and appointments; therefore he never b^eaks the high arm, because
it is high in power, but because it is high in wickedness. So then we may be
confident, it is only the high arm of the wicked which is here threatened to be
broken.

To the second and third Queries, I answer in a word; It is God who breaks the
high arm, and he breaks it in what manner, and by what means soever pleases
him.

In which we may see a signal work of divine Providence, which does not suffer
the difference of good and evil, of right and wrong, to pass long unobserved.
And in this passage possibly, the Lord might intend a refutation of what Job
said ( Chap. 10.3.) That God shined upon the Counsels of the wicked: For seeing
the very light or life of the wicked is withheld from them, and their high
arm broken, does not God declare and testify that he loves righteousness, and
hates iniquity? And if the ministration of Divine Justice lie in the dark at
any time, does not the return of the light every day intimate, that a day of
the revelation of the righteous Judgment of God is at hand? The high arm shall
be broken.

Hence Note, First; Wicked men may grow high, and have a very high and strong
arm.

Therefore be not scandalized when it is so. The most high God often suffers it
to be so. The wicked man in the Text is he that has the high arm.

Note, Secondly; As all men by nature are altogether wicked in their state, so
some of them are extremely wicked in their lives;

They sin with an high hand, or with an high arm; they sin as if they would
dare God himself. Not only have wicked men been high in power, and high in
place; but there they have sinned highly, and stretched forth their hand
against Heaven it self.

Note, Thirdly; Observa in voce (...) hoc versiculo and v. 13. literam in
Bibliis magnis and ^^empl. emendatis suspensam esse, i. e. non eodem tenore cum
aliis scriptam sed supra caeteras sursum versas pender^ hoc modo (...) quod
forsun mysterio non caret, quasi lux impiis and totus eorum splendour sit in
suspenso non stabilis. Merc.
The wicked, how high or how strong soever they are, they shall be broken.

A learned Interpreter takes notice, that in the larger Bibles, and most
correct Copies, the Hebrew Word signifying the wicked, both in this 15th verse,
and in the 13th verse, has one letter raised up higher than the rest, and
exceeding the ordinary form of writing; as may be seen, if the Reader please to
cast his eye upon the quotation in the Margin. This (says my Author) is not
(possibly) without a mystery; even to intimate thus much, that all the
prosperity and outward splendour of the wicked hangs in suspense, or is very
tottering and unstable. But whatever occasioned that irregularity in the Hebrew
writing, or whatever it may import, this is a sure truth, that the highest
estate of the wicked is very unsure.

The Lord (who as Solomon says, Eccl. 5.8) is higher than the highest (on
earth) can quickly bring down the highest, and break or crush the strong arm,
as one would break a reed, or crush a moth. Thus the Lord bespake Edom by his
Prophet ( Jer. 49.16.) O thou that dwell in the clifts of the rock, that
hold the height of the hill; though thou should make thy nest as high as
the Eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, says the Lord. And thus the
Lord spoke by another Prophet concerning the Amorite, (Amos 2.9.) His height
was like the height of the Cedars, and he was strong as the Oaks; yet I
destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath; that is, I utterly
destroyed him. Yea, the very being of the wicked high and strong, is an
argument that they shall be brought low, destroyed, and broken to pieces. When
Babylons arm shall be in its highest height, When she shall say in her heart, I
sit as a Queen (that is, on high) and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow.
When Babylon is thus prophesying all good of her self, and promising all good
to her self, then shall her plague come in one day, death and famine, and
mourning, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord, who
judges her (Rev. 18.7, 8.) He will break her high arm, and break it when she
thinks it highest, and her self safest. David whose arm God raised on high,
affirmed all this of wicked high ones in general, or of all those, who should
be found high in wickedness ( Psalm. 92.7, 8.) When the wicked spring as grass,
and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be
destroyed for ever. As if he had said, that is the meaning of their prosperity,
you may spell that our of it, or make that interpretation of it, they shall be
destroyed for ever. As the Lord remembers his people in their low estate,
because his mercy endures for ever (Psalm. 136.23.) so he will take vengeance
on the wicked in their high estate, because his justice endures for ever.

The least sin deserves a breaking; but when the arm of sin is grown very high,
we may say the Lords arm cannot hold, he must break such high arms. The Prophet
Jeremy (chap. 6.6.) speaking of Jerusalem, says, This City is to be visited;
how visited? There is a twofold visiting:

First, In favor, care, and kindness.

Secondly, In wrath and judgment.

Usually when the Scripture speaks of visiting a City or a Land, it is meant in
wrath and in judgment. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord?
(Jer. 5.9.) Surely I shall, there is no avoiding my visitation. What kind of
visitation is meant, the next wo^ds evidence, Shall not my soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this? To be visited with vengeance and wrath, is a sad
Visitation, and so was Jerusalem to be visited. But why was the City Jerusalem
to be visited in wrath? there is no City whose inhabitants are so just and
righteous, but the Lord may visit them in wrath; but of this City the Lord
said, it is wholly oppression; they are given up to oppression, every one is
oppressing and wronging his brother; now when they sinned at this rate, when
their arm was thus high in wickedness, then it was to be broken. There is a
righteous God that judges the earth; and therefore the high arm of
unrighteouness shall be broken.

JOB, Chap. 38. Verse. 16, 17, 18. 16. Have thou entered the springs of the Sea?
or have thou walked in the search of the depth?

17. Have the gates of death been opened unto thee? or have thou seen the doors
of the shadow of death?

18. Have thou perceived the breadth of the earth? declare, if thou know
(...) all.


IN the former Context the Lord made a short d^gression from those questionings
with which he had begun with Job, concerning his Works; the occasion whereof
was the mentioning of the wicked, who improved not, but abused his works.

In this Context the Lord returns to his former way of interrogating Job, and
having questioned him about the birth or production of the Sea, the bands and
bounds of the Sea, at the 8th 9th 10th and 11th verses, he questions him here,

First, About the depth of, the unsearchable depth of the Sea ( verse. 16, 17.)

Secondly, About the vast breadth of the Earth ( verse. 18.)

Thereby to convince Job, that he, not being able to reach the depth of those
mighty waters, nor to comprehend the breadth of the earth, was much less able
to comprehend the depth of those counsels, or the breadth of those ways of
providence in which himself had been walking toward him. That Is the general
scope and sum of these three verses, as also of all that follow, as has been
showed formerly.

The last thing about which the Lord put the question, was the Light, whereby
hidden and secret things are discovered; here the question is about things that
lie out of the light, about hidden and secret things; all which yet are more
plain and obvious to, more open and naked before the eye of God, with whom we
have to do, than the Noonday light to us.

(...) Numqu^d ingressus es, vel penetr^st^?
Verse. 16. Have thou entered into the springs of the sea? Have thou? Doubtless
thou have not, nor have thou any mind to enter into those springs? Who has?
Have thou entered or penetrated the springs of the sea? There is a twofold
entering into the springs of the sea, or into any thing that lies remote from us.

First, A Local.

Secondly, An Intellectual entering.

To be sure, Job had not locally entered the springs of the sea; and it was as
sure, that he was not able to make any perfect intellectual entrance thither.
When therefore the Lord asked Job this question, Opartet judicem nosse ea de
qui^us judica^^^ us est: tu vo^^ judicas de operibus mo is, cum ea non noris.
^atabl.
Have thou entered into the springs of the sea? it is as if he had said, It
becomes him that makes a judgment upon any matter, to enter into it either
locally to view it with the eye, or intellectually to view it with his
understanding; but thou, O Job, have neither of these ways entered into the
springs of the sea, and there discovered how the waters flow or rise up out of
the earth: how then can thou make up a judgment about the waters? and if
not, what judgment can thou make up concerning my deep counsels, concerning
the secret springs of my judgments?

Have thou entered into the springs of the sea? (...) Ad plor^ta, i. e. lacrymas
m^ri^. Drus.
There is an elegancy in the word rendered springs, which some derive from a root
which signifies to weep or shed tears: Have tho^ entered among the tears o^
weeping places of the sea? The same word in the Hebrew signifies an eye, Aliqui
(...) fluenta, non a flendo, sed a (...) perplex^m esse deducunt. Et reddunt
perplexitates m^ris. Sensus eodem recidit, sed Grammatica magis quadrat ut a
(...) flevit destectatur. M^rc.
as also a spring or fountain; because as the eye drops, yea pours out tears (
David says, Rivers of tears run down mine eyes) so, springs pour out waters,
and are, as it were, weeping continually. Others derive the word from a root,
which signifies to be infolden or entangled; and so they render it, Have thou
entered into the perplexities or intricacies of the sea? Pharaoh used that word
in the Verb ( Exodus 14.3.) concerning the people of Israel, They are entangled
or perplexed in the land: he thought he had caught them in the briars, and
should have had his will, or satisfied his lust on them. The sense is much the
same, whether we read the springs or the perplexities and intricate places of
the sea; both tending to the same purpose, to show Job his utter incompetency
and inability for such an adventure. Have thou entered into the springs Of the
sea?

The sea is a consluence of many waters, the great vessel which God prepared to
hold the multitude of waters, as was showed before at the eighth verse; only
take notice, M^re dicitur J^mim voce deducta a Maiim transpositis quibusdam
literis.
that the word which signifies the sea, is composed of the same letters (a
little transposed) with that which signifies the water. The sea being the
gathering together of waters, and water being the substance of the Sea, one
word in substance serves them both in the Hebrew tongue. Yet others say it
alludes, at least, to a word signifying to make a noise, or to roar; seas and
floods make a terrible noise and roa^ing. David ascribes a voice to the floods
( Psalm. 93.3.) The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted up
their voices. These grammatical criticisms about words have their use, giving
some light about the nature and qualities of things. But to the Text, Have thou
entered into the springs of the sea?

And have thou walked in the search of the depth? (...) abyssus, vorago,
altittulo, expers fundi.
This latter part of the verse is of the same importance with the former. The
springs of the sea, and the search of the depth, have little, if any,
difference, and walking follows upon entering; therefore the Lord having said,
Have thou entered into the springs of the sea? says, Have thou walked, etc.

But more distinctly, what is the search and what the depth? The depth, is the
sea, where it is deepest, so deep that no bottom can be found by sounding. The
word rendered here search, notes the last o^ utmost of any thing, and so the
deepest of the depth, which possibly may be called the search of the depth,
because how much or how long soever it is searched for, it cannot be found out.
Mr. Broughton renders it, The border of the sea; the Vulgar Latin, The last or
utmost of the depth. Have thou walked there? We walk on dry land and in
pleasant fields: Et in novissimis abyssi deambulasti Vulg. i. e. in infimis
ejus partibus. Aquin.
Some artificial parts of the earth are by way of eminence called walks,
because they are purposely fitted by art to walk in. But who can walk in the
searches of the depth? Are there any under-water-walkes?

Vox (...) significat aliquid quaerere and investigare usque ad fundum and
n^vissimum.
To clear these words a little further, we may consider two other readings or
translations of them.

First, Thus, Have thou walked in the depth by search? that is, Have thou found
out a way to go to the bottom of the sea by curious search and diligent
enquiry? Have thou by thy skill discovered how deep the sea is? Have thou let
down thy line and plummet to fathom it, and then descended into it? I know thou
have not.

An ad dimetiendum abyssum ambulasti. Heb. in investigatione, i. e. ad
investigandum. Codurc.
Secondly, Have thou walked to search the deep? that is, Have thou gone down to
the bottom of the sea, and there discovered the secret and hidden paths of it?
I know (thy answer must be) Thou have not. Have thou entered into the springs of
the sea? or have thou walked in the search of the depth?

Hence Note, First; There are secrets or depths in the sea, beyond men's
searching or finding out.

The sea in many parts of it may be searched. Some have been at the bottom of
it, many have let down a line to the bottom of it; yet it is usual in Scripture
to speak of the sea as a thing unsearchable, or so deep, that none can find the
depth of it. The sea is so deep, that it is sometimes called the depth (chap.
28.1.) The depth says (that is, the Sea says) it (that is, wisdom) is not in
me. It Is also called the deep (Luke 5.4. chap. 8.31.) That is very deep, which
is called the deep; and that is of an unsearchable depth, which is called the
depth. Such a depth, so deep is the sea, that no man knows how deep, or what
the depth of it is?

Now, if we cannot reach the depth of the natural sea, then (which is the scope
of this place) surely there are depths and secrets in the ways and counsels of
God, which no man can earch or find out. David (Psalm. 139.9.) speaking of the
Omso presence of God, says, Whither shall I go from thy presence? If I take
the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; there
shall thy hand find me. There is no depth, no breadth, but God can find it out;
but how little of the depth or breadth of God can we find out! ( Psalm. 36.6.)
Thy judgments are a great deep; that is, thou O Lord do terrible things in
judgment as angry, yet such righteous things, as just and wise, that it is very
hard for any, and impossible for the many, or most of men to see the reason of
them. And doubtless, it was the deep of his own divine judgments that God
intended to lead Job to, when he spoke here of the depth of the Sea. We read
what the Apostle was forced to, when he was but, as it were, dipping his feet
into this sea of the Counsels and Judgments of God, even to cry out, O the
depth (Romans 11.33.) As if he had said, I dare not enter into the springs of
this sea, nor into the search of this depth. O the depth of the riches both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! This was David's express Confession concerning the
providential way of God, His way is in the sea, and his path in the great
waters, and his footsteps are not known (Psalm. 77.19.) Goings upon the water
leave no print behind them, we cannot observe a track in the sea. God walks
sometimes as upon the land, we may easily discern his footsteps, and see where
he has gone: But he often walks as upon the sea, where no man can see his
paths, nor are his footsteps known. The Lord is known by the judgment which he
executes (Psalm. 9.16. Profunditas maris rei obscurissimae and ignotissimae
humanae intelligentiae soli deo perspectae symbolum.
) yet his judgments are seldom known, they are a great deep, a sea. The sea
is a clear emblem of all obscure and unknown things, especially of those ways
of God which are too deep for our discovery, and lie beyond the reach of our
knowledge. And indeed, as soon may we hold the sea in the hollow of our hand,
or lade it dry with a Cockle-shell, as comprehend the deep counsels of God, and
the mysteries of providence, by which they are acted and effected in our
shallow understanding. Only what we cannot attain, either by sense or reason,
we may understand by faith, as the Apostle says, We do that the worlds were
made by the Word of God ( Heb. 11.3.) Who is able, any other way than by
believing, to enter into those springs, or walk in the search of those depths?

Secondly, Learn this from it; There is nothing a secret unto God.

That which here is denied to Job, is to be affirmed of God. Job knew not those
secrets, but God knew them. Job himself said ( chap. 9.8.) God treads upon
the waves (or as the Hebrew is, the heights) of the sea. Here the Lord
intimates that he walks in the depth of the sea: Both set forth his glory.
God commands from top to bottom, he treads upon the waves aloft; he walks in
the depths below, nothing can escape either his Power or his Eye. It is the
sole privilege of God to walk in the search of the sea, that is, to find out
and plainly to discern the most secret things. And by him the most unsearchable
depths are searched out, or rather, are known to him without search. He knows
even the depth of man's heart, which is the greatest depth in the world, next to
the depth of his own heart. God enters into the springs of that sea, the Sea of
man's heart, and walks in the search of that depth. There are innumerable
springs in the heart of man, which bubble up, and send forth their streams of
good or evil continually; all which the Lord sees more plainly than we see any
thing that is done above ground, or in the open light. Moses does not only
report ( Genesis 6.5.) That God saw the wickedness of man was great in the earth
(that is, that his outward practices o^ conversation was very wicked) bu^ that
he saw every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually. Consider, God saw not only the thoughts of man, but every
imagination (which is the least thing imaginable) of man's thoughts. He saw (as
the word which we render imigination properly signifies) every figment, every
little creature which the thoughts of man's heart was about to frame; and O how
many, how exceeding many, or innumerable, are they! yet God saw not only some,
or many, but every one of them. It was said by one of the Ancients upon this
place, Profundum m^ris deu^ ingredit^r, qu^ndo visitare mentes etiam press^^
sceleribus non dedignatur. Greg. l. 29. c. 7
God goes to the depth of the sea, as often as he goes into the depth of man's
heart, and beholds what is there. And there ^e beholds not only the great but
small beasts (as the Psalmist calls the fish of the sea) that is, not only
great but small lusts and foolish imaginations: the huge multitudes and shoals
of vain thoughts which swim and play in that wide sea of man's heart, are
distinctly seen, and as distinctly judged, as if but one were there.

Thirdly, From the scope of this place, note; That seeing we cannot search into
the depth of the sea, it should stay our curiosity in searching into, and stay
us from discontent, when we cannot find the depth of Gods Counsels concerning
us, and of his Providence toward us.

There is a dutiful search into the Works of God. David speaks of it ( Psalm.
111.2.) The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all those that have
pleasure in them. They are sought out; that is, they who have pleasure in them,
do and will endeavor soberly to search them out; as much as may be; but let
all take heed of searching them wantonly or presumptuously, that is, either to
satisfy their curiosity, or with an opinion that they can reach the depth of
them. The Lord would have us satisfy our selves in the ignorance, or rather
nescience of those natural things which he has not made known to us. Surely
then (which is, as has been said, the scope of this Chapter) we should be
satisfied, though we in some cases know not, nor can perceive the reason of
Gods providential dealings, either towa^ds particular persons and families, or
his Church in general. Will any wise or sober man vex and disquiet himself,
will he be angry and pettish, because he knows not all the secrets of the ear^h
and sea? (as some say Aristotle the Philosopher was to death and drowning,
because he could not find out the reason why the sea in one place ebbed and
slowed seven times in one day) Why then should we be impatient, because the
reason of Gods proceedings with the sons of men, or of the strange ebbings and
slowings of things in the sea of this world, is secreted and hidden from us.
And therefore when we are not able to enter into the springs of this sea, nor
to walk in the search of this depth, let it not trouble us, but humble us, as
it did Job, to whom the Lord put these questions, and proceeded to put more and
more hard questions, if harder can be, in the next words.

Verse. 17. Have the gates of death been opened (or revealed) unto thee? Or have
thou seen the doors of the shadow of death? Here is another strange question.
Who among the living has had the gates of death opened to him? O^ has viewed
the doors of the shadow of death?

We read often in Scripture of the gates of death. (Psalm. 9.13. Number illius
profunda, quae vere dixirim mortis regiam, etc. rimatus es. Bez.
Psalm. 107.18.) and which is all one, of the gates of the grave, (Isa. 38.10.)
but who knows what these gates are? yet we may say something toward the
clearing of this question. A gate in strict sense, is that by which we are
admitted into any place: and so, the gates of death are,

That, whatsoever it is, by which we enter into death, or go into the black
hall of the grave.

Again, The gates of death are any great and eminent danger. Then we may be
said to be at the gates of death, when our lives are in great hazard to be
lost, either by the violence of enemies, or by any violent sickness.

In the former sense David spoke (in way of supplication, Psalm. 9.13.) Have
mercy on me, O Lord, consider my trouble, which I suffer of them that hate me,
thou that liftest me up from the gates of death; that is, from deadly danger.
In the latter he spoke by way of narration, in his elegant description of the
sick, ( Psalm. 107.18.) Their soul abhors all manner of meat, and they draw
near unto the gates of death; that is, they are ready to die, or sick unto
death. And thus said King Hezekiah upon his sickbed, and as he thought (a
little before) upon his deathbed, (Isa. 38.10.) I shall go to the gates of the
grave, I am deprived of the residue of my years; that is, of those years which
I might have reckoned upon as mine, according to the common account of man's
life, or the usual course of nature.

These are the more general gates of death, and about these all agree.

But there are several opinions, what should be specially intended by the gates
of death in this place.

Portae mortis sunt causae corruptionis, quantum advirtutes corporum ^^lestium.
Aquin. in loc.
First, One rises very high, saying, that by the gates of death we are to
understand the visible heavens; because the heavenly bodies send down sometimes
malignant influences, which have a mighty power to corrupt the bodies of men
here below, so causing death to carry them away. Thus he imagins death issuing
out of the clouds, as out of opened gates, upon men on earth; But that is a far
fetched interpretation.

Secondly, Others go to the utmost contrary point, and say, by the gates of
death we are to understand Hell. The Papists give a description of several
receptacles for souls departed under the earth, they make at least three
distinctions;

First, Limbus Patrum, The place where they affi^m the souls of the Fathers
were before Christ came in the flesh, and had accomplished the work of our
redemption here on earth.

Secondly, Purgatory, the place where the souls of all that die not in mortal
sin (as they distinguish) are reserved to be purged by temporary punishments,
before they can get to heaven.

Thirdly, The lowest of all, is that which we call Hell, the place of the
damned, whither all go (say they, and we too) who die in sin without
repentance. This place of torment, some take for the gates of death. But seeing
the Lord is here speaking of natural things, not of moral actions, not of the
consequents of them, rewards and punishments; therefore (though we may truly
call Hell the gates or power of death, yet) that notion as well as the former
is altogether heterogeneal in this Text.

Thirdly, Several expound the gates of death, in connection with the former
verse, for the depth or bottom of the sea, where many dead carcases lie
rotting; all such as are cast away by shipwracks, or die at sea, being usually
thrown into the deep; and therefore at last the sea shall give up her dead, as
well as the earth.

Fourthly, The gates of death signify say others, nothing else but the grave,
or those lower parts of the earth, in which men's bodies deceased are buried and
laid up to rest till the resurrection. When we, that are earth in our
constitution, Per portas mortis int^lliguntur loca subterraneana, eo quod
ibimortui se peliuntur. Pisc. Dicuntur portae mortis, i. e. mortuorum.
go out of the world by dissolution, our return is into the earth, into the
lower parts of the earth, we sleep in the dust. According to this sense it is
as if the Lord had said, Have thou seen the state of the dead, or how it fares
with them that are gone to their graves? Have thou visited the courts and
palaces of the King of terrors? Thus the gates of death are the gates of the
dead.

Fifthly, We may understand by the gates of death in general, An nosti quae
fiunt in visceribus terrae. Vatabl.
whatsoever is most remote and farthest off from our sight and view. As if the
Lord, who said before, Have thou entered into the springs of the sea? had said
here, Have thou entered into the bowels or deepest abysses of the earth, which
are dark and uncomfortable, as the grave, or like the very gates of death?
Know thou, or can thou tell me what is done, or how things go there?
Portae mortis and umbrae mortis sunt ea loca, ad quae vivus non penetrat, quae
nulla lux ^^radiat, etc. Coc.


Or have thou seen the doors of the shadow of death? These words are of a like
intendment with the former: The gates of death, and the doors of the shadow of
death, are the same thing under a little difference of expression. What the
shadow of death is, has been showed ( chap. 3.5.) as al^o ( c^^p. 10.21.)
thither I refer the Reader. Have thou seen the doors of the shadow of death?
Surely thou have not? Thou neither desire, nor dare visit the doors leading
to those dismal shadows, which no light can pierce, or where (as Job spoke,
chap. 10.21.) The light is as darkness. The scope of both the queries in this
verse is the same also with those in the former, even to repulse Jobs curiosity
in searching into the secrets of God, or to convince him that God had secrets
which were no more opened to him than the gates of death, and which he could
see no more than the doors of the shadow of death. Have thou seen the doors of
the shadow of death? Taking death in a proper sense,

Note, First; Bodyly death has gates and doors, passages and entrances into it.

Deadly sicknesses and extreme dangers are (as was showed in opening the words)
those gates and doors. Many have been brought to those gates, and have been
stepping into those shadows, who yet have been recalled and brought back again,
as David and Hezekiah were, and as the Apostle Paul was, who had the sentence
of death in himself, yet was delivered, trusting in him who raises the dead (2
Cor. 1.9, 10.)

And therefore in all such cases, whenever we are brought to the gates of
death, and to the doors of the shadow of death, let us have recourse to the
living God; to that God, to whom belong the issues from death (Psalm. 68.20.) He
that is our God, is the God of salvation, of eternal salvation, and of temporal
salvation, of salvation from death by sickness, and of salvation from death by
danger and trouble: our God is the God of salvation, to him belong the issues
from death. As God opens the gates of death to let man in, so he can open the
gates of death to let man out. As there is a gate to go in unto, so there is a
gate to go out from, or an out-gate from death. As the ways to, so the issues
from death belong to God. David's heart was full of this, when having said (
Psalm. 141.7.) Our bones are scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth
and cleaves wood upon the earth; that is, we are ready to be cut in pieces and
perish by our enemies (having (I say) said this, he presently adds, verse. 8,
9.) But mine eyes are unto thee O God the Lord, in thee is my trust; leave not
my soul destitute, keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, etc. It
is the royal privilege of Jesus Christ, to be key-keeper of the grave ( Rev.
1.18.) I have the keys of hell and of death; that is, I have power to deliver
over to, and to deliver or keep from both hell and death. The keys are an
emblem of power and authority. Stewards have the keys. He that has the keys of
death, can deliver from death.

Secondly, Taking death properly, note; No living man knows how or in what
way he shall die.

The gates of death are not revealed to any man; he has no certainty by what
means he shall pass out of this world to the grave; he cannot tell through
what gate he shall go, whether through the gate of a natural death, or of a
violent death, as Christ spoke to Peter (John 21.18.) When thou wast young,
thou girdest thy self, and wentest whether thou would; but when thou shall
be old, another shall gird thee, and carry thee whether thou would not: this
spoke he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. Peter did not know
what death he should die, whether a natural or a violent death, till Christ
signified it to him. And if man knows not at what kind of gate he shall enter
the house of death, that is, whether by sickness or violence, then much less
does he know the particular sickness or violence, by which, as a gate, he must
pass into the house of death; these things the Lord keeps in his own hand. And
seeing we know not these gates of death, we should always pray that we may
know the path of life ( Psalm. 16.11.) Thou will show me the path of life, was
David's assurance as a type of Christ. And though Christ should not show any man
the gate of his own temporal death, yet he shows every godly man the path of
eternal life, and that is enough for us.

Thirdly, Note; God only knows when, how, and in what way we shall die, as
also what the state and condition of the dead is.

Death is the darkest and obscurest thing in the world. The grave is a gloomy
place, and filled not only with natural but metaphorical darkness: yet all is
light to God, he knows the gates of death, and the state of the dead ( Prove.
15.11.) The grave and destruction are before the Lord; how much more the hearts
of the children of men!

Fourthly, Taking the gates of death generally, for any secret or hidden thing,

Note; Man knows no more than God reveals to him.

When God puts the question, Have the gates of death been opened or revealed to
thee? it is as if he had said, thou can not know them unless they are opened
to thee. And who can open them, if I my self do not? As all the mysteries of
the Gospel are hidden from us, till God is pleased to reveal them; so in nature
there are many things which are mysteries and secrets to us, till God makes
them known to us. And there are some things which God will no more open to us,
than he has the gates of death, or the doors of the shadow of death. And if
so, then, as God will never blame us for not knowing those things which he has
hidden, so we should not busy our selves with any enquiries about hidden
things. Though the secret of the Lord be with those that fear him (Psalm.
25.14.) yet they that fear him, will not, dare not meddle with, nor search into
the Lords secret. Therefore,

Lastly, Observe; Whatsoever God is not pleased to reveal to us, or is pleased
to hide from us, that we should be content not to know, and be satisfied that
it is hidden from us.

( Deuteronomy. 29.29.) The secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but those
things which are revealed, belong unto us and our children for ever. It is both
our duty and our interest, to be content with our own share, or to be satisfied
with what belongs to us, and not to invade Gods peculiars or reserves. It was
Jobs fault, he would be entering into the secrets of God, but says God, Have
the gates of death been opened unto thee, or have thou seen the doors of the
shadow of death? if not, then be not troubled that those things are not opened
to thee, which I have reserved to my self. God has not straightened us in any
needful point of knowledge, there is enough opened to us, though the gates of
death be not. Is it not enough for us, that in the glass of the Gospel, God
has set before us, the mysteries of eternal salvation, unless he also acquaint
us in the day of our trial (which was Jobs case) with all the whole mystery of
his temporal dispensations?

The Lord having urged Job with these hard questions about the depth of the Sea
and the gates of death, seems now to offer him a more easy question in the
next verse.

Verse. 18. Have thou perceived the breadth of the earth? Declare if thou
know it all. (...). Sept. Sic terram eleganter circumloquuntur; n^m qui quid
sub coelo ^^re^, terra est, ^er terram ambit. Drus.
The Septuagint render, Have thou perceived the breadth of that which is under
the heavens? Under the Cope or Canopy of the heavens. Have thou perceived how
broad that is which is spanned or compassed about by the heavens; that is, as
we translate, the breadth of the earth. That which is circled or su^rounded by
the aereal heavens is the earth: Have thou perceived the breadth of that.
Though the earth be better known to man than the depth of the sea; yet no man
ever saw the whole earth. Many parts of the earth are deserts and unpassable by
man. The best Writers say the whole compass of the earth is 21600 miles; yet
that is rather a supposition, than a demonstration; no man having ever visited
or viewed the whole face of the earth. We find ( Job 11.9.) length ascribed to
the earth, and breadth to the sea; But in this place the Lord having ascribed
depth to the sea, gives breadth to the earth. We are not here to take the
breadth of the earth, according to the rules of Geography; for so the length of
the earth is from East to West, Terrae latitudo hoc in loc^, est universus
terrae ambitus. (...) Pluralis a (...) latitudo In qualibet re major dimens^o
voc^tur longitudo, minor latitudo. Aqui^.
and the breadth from North to South; but breadth is here put sinecdochically
for all the dimensions, or the whole circumference of the Earth. As it the Lord
had said, Do thou know how big, how spacious the Earth is? The breadth of the
Earth imports the largeness of it, opposed to straitness or narrowness; and to
show that here the breadth contains all dimensions, the word is in the Plural
Number, Have thou known the breadths of the Earth, that is, the whole compass
of it, how broad and how long, and so how big the Earth is? Have thou perceived
the breadth of the Earth?

Hence Note, First; The earth is a huge vast body.

That is very big, whose bigness is not easily perceived, if at all
perceivable; and such is the breadth or bigness of the earth. Whence take this
double Inference;

First, If the earth be such a great thing, that a man cannot perceive the
breadth or dimensions of it, then how great are the heavens! The earth in
comparison of the heavens is but as a point, it is as little as is imaginable. O
what a broad thing is heaven, if the earth be such, that we cannot reach the
breadth of it!

Secondly, If the earth be so great, how great is God, who made the heavens and
the earth too! That Is it which God would lead Job to the consideration of, even
of his own infinite greatness. How great is God, who made this great earth! To
him (as the prophet Isaiah speaks, chap. 40.15, 16.) The Nations, the people
(of the earth) are but as the drop of a bucket, and as the dust of the
balance: He weighs the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance: He
holds the dust as one single grain in his hand. What a nothing are all things
to God, seeing the earth is a nothing to the heavens! God puts the question to
Job, Have thou perceived the breadth of the earth? and we may put that question
into this negative Proposition, O Job, Thou have not perceived the breadth of
the earth. The wisest of men know not the breadth or bigness of the earth. Some
have undertaken to tell us how great the circle of the earth is; but theirs are
but guesses: though somewhat may be said that way, yet no man can give it
exactly; and therefore the Roman Orator attempting to write about the earth and
the dimensions of it, prefaceth or apologizeth thus for himself; De Geographia
dabo operam ut tibi satisfaciam, sed nihil certi polliceor; magnum opus est.
Cicero ad Atticum. l. 2. ep. 4.
I will do my endeavor to satisfy thee about Geography, or the dimensions of
the earth, but I promise nothing of certainty, it is a great work. Have thou
known the breadth of the earth?

Declare if thou know it all. As if the Lord had said, I have put the
question to thee; come now answer me, declare what thou know, let me know
what her thou know it all. God provokes or challenges Job to say his
utmost. We may refer these last words either strictly to the immediate question
only, or generally to all the questions before; yet I conceive they are rather
to be restrained to the last question concerning the breadth of the earth,
because they run in the singular number, Declare if thou know it all, that
is, if thou know all of the earth. There were many pa^ts of the earth, which
Job knew not at all; therefore he could not know it all. We at this day after
all the improvements which have been made by Navigation (little in use in Jobs
days) for the discove^y of the earth, are yet forced to write upon some places
(as we may see in our best Maps of the World) Terra incognita, this part of the
earth is unknown. If we now do not, surely Job then did not know it all.

Further, When the Lord says, Declare if thou know it all, his meaning is
not, If thou have any knowledge at all about it all; for there is no wise, no
understanding man, but has some measu^e or degree of knowledge as about the
depth of the Sea, so about the breadth and measures of the Earth: but the
meaning of these words, Declare, if thou know it all, is, if thou know
the all of it, if thou know it thoroughly: For, as these words have reference
to the object to be known, so to the manner of knowing. There are many that
know something, and some that know many things; yet none that know all things,
no not the all of any one thing. The Apostle speaking of spiritual things,
says, We know in part; and the truth is, we know but a part of natural things,
of the sea, of the earth, and we know them but in part. So then, when the Lord
says, If thou know it all, his meaning may be this, if thou have a distinct
and demonstrative knowledge of the thing, Declare it. I know thou may give
conjectures, and propose probabilities; but I know also, that thou neither
know it all, nor the all of it. God has given us a certain knowledge about
things that refer to eternity, and to salvation, to them we must stick and
abide by them; but as to these things, all that we know, is but little, and
about that little we labor under many uncertainties. Declare if thou know
it all.

Hence Observe, First; God is willing that man should make the best of himself.

God was ready to hear Job what he could answer to his Question. When God put
the question to Adam (Genesis 3.11.) Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I
commanded thee, that thou should not eat? And when he put questions to Cain
(Genesis 4.6.) Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen? As also (
verse. 9.) Where is Abel thy brother? He was ready to hear what either the one
or the other could say for themselves; nor would he have cut them short in
their plea, if they could have pleaded any thing for their justification. Now,
as God was willing to hear what they could answer to his questions about their
evil works; so he is willing to hear what any can answer (which was Jobs case)
to the questions which he proposes about his own works, and their behavior
under them.

Secon^ly, From the scope of the words, Note; The most knowing men know but
little of that which they know.

As we know nothing at all of some things, so there is nothing of which we know
the all, or of which we have a perfect knowledge, a knowledge, to which nothing
can be added. They who know most of any thing, know almost nothing of it; How
far then are they from knowing it all! David having spoken of the knowledge of
God ( Psalm. 139.2, 3, 4, 5.) concludes ( verse. 6.) Such knowledge is too
wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it. Man is so far from an
ability to attain such a knowledge as God has, the knowledge of the most
secret things of man, the knowledge of his thoughts afar off; that he is not
able to attain the perfect knowledge of the plainest things. We must stay for
perfect knowledge, till we come to another state, when all clouds of ignorance
shall be scattered, when we shall see no more through a glass darkly, but face
to face; when we shall know all that is to be known of God, and of the Works of
God; when we shall be enabled to declare all our knowledge about them, and to
give proof that we know them all.

Truly to know God the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent, is
eternal life, while we live here in this world, but to know the true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom he has sent, fully, yea to know any thing fully, is
reserved for us in that eternal life which we wait for in the world to come.

There are three things, which make up the happiness of our soul-state in
eternal life.

First, The due order of the Affections, when they shall ever be set upon right
objects, and upon them in a right measure.

Secondly, The due motion of the Will, when it shall ever choose that which is
good, and nothing but good.

Thirdly, The clear and unerring light of the Understanding. The proper object
of the Understanding is truth. The chief ornament and delight of the
Understanding is the knowledge of the truth. And the Understanding is not more
debased and dishonored by not endeavoring to know, than an understanding man
is vexed and troubled, when he cannot compass the knowledge of that which he
desires and endeavors to know. Indeed Solomon (the most knowing man among all
the sons of men) has concluded ( Eccles. 1.15.) That in much wisdom there is
much grief, and that he that increases knowledge, increases sorrow. Yet this
grief and sorrow arise not from knowledge attained, but from the great pains,
study, and travel, which we take in this world for the attainment of it; or
from the doubts and uncertainties which remain in our minds about many things,
when we have got the best and clearest knowledge of them attainable in this
life: Whereas in our heavenly state, we shall neither have any trouble in
getting knowledge, nor shall any doubt or uncertainty remain in our minds about
the things we know. For the beautiful face of truth, shall in a momen^ be
unvailed to us, and the curtain drawn away by the hand of God, which interposed
between us and the light; so that, there shall not any mist or darkness, not
any doubt or scruple hang in our minds about any truth.

And thus we may answer that of the Apostle (1 Cor. 13.8.) saying, That in
heaven, Knowledge shall vanish away. What, nothing but ignorance in heaven?
Surely, nothing more unsuitable to, nor unbecoming the glory of that state.
Ignorance may better be the Mother of Devotion here (as Papists with ignorance
enough have affirmed) than in heaven the companion of our joy. The Apostle then
means, that such knowledge as now we have, shall vanish, that is, knowledge so
gotten as now it is. In heaven there are no Schools, nor Universities, nor
Tutors, nor Teachers. Again, Knowledge of so imperfect a degree as now it is
of, shall vanish away; The knowledge which Solomon had on earth, will be but
ignorance, compared to the knowledge which the Saints have and shall have in
heaven; His largeness of heart (though like the sand of the sea) will be but
narrowness of heart, compared with the enlargements which Saints shall have
there. Glorified Saints shall be in natural things exact Philosophers, able to
answer all the questions here put to Job. In spiritual things they shall be
exact Divines; all dark Scriptures shall be clear to them; Christ will be their
Comment: all da^k questions will be clear to them; Christ will be their light.
Those perplexed Cases and fatal Controversies which have troubled the peace of
the Church, and have occasioned the calling together of some hundreds of the
ablest Scholars to debate and determine them, shall at one view be understood,
shall have all their knots untied, and their difficulties removed by the
meanest (if among them there shall be found any meaner than others) of
glorified understandings. What sweetness the soul shall feel at this revelation
of all knowledge, a little knowledge will serve to judge: For then not only to
this challenge which the Lord made to Job, about those special matters, the
gates of death, and the breadth of the earth; but also to any other, Declare if
thou know it all, Every soul will readily and confidently answer, Lord, in
thy light I know it all.

JOB, Chap. 38. Verse. 19, 20, 21. 19. Where is the way where light dwells?
and as for darkness, where is the place thereof?

20. That thou should take it to the bound thereof, and that thou should
know the paths to the house thereof.

21. Know thou it, because thou wast then born? Or because the number of thy
days is great?


THe Lord having posed Job in the former Context about the depth of the Sea,
the darkness of Death, and the vastness of the Earth; here calls him to an
account about the light of the Sun, and the darkness of the Air, in these three
verses. As if he had said, If thou know the breadth of the whole earth,
about which I enquired last of thee; then tell me in what part of the earth
does the light dwell, and where is the place of darkness?

Verse. 19. Where is the way where light dwells? The Septuagint translate, In
what land does light dwell? (...). In qua terra. Sept. (...) Vbi via in quae
habitat, scil. ^post viae and itineris spatium emensum.
Or where is the land of light? We say, Where is the way? The Hebrew word notes
a trodden beaten way, or (as we speak) a highway. Where is the way where light
dwells? That is, whither light retireth, and does, as it were, betake it self
in the night, when it has gone its journey, and is past thy Horizon. For every
one knows where light dwells, while the Sun is up with us, and shines upon us:
But what becomes of it, or whither it goes, when it is gone from us, that is a
question, and here (say some) the question.

The word which we translate dwells, implies a retirement, Verbum (...) est
ad quietem and noctem traducendam alicubicommorari.
a rest after long labor and travel.

Where is the way where light-dwelleth? and as for darkness where is the place
of it? Here are two great contra^ies (which cannot agree nor dwell together in
any one subject, yet) met together in this Text, Light and darkness; and there
is some, yea not a little darkness in this question about the light. We need a
great measure of Divine Light to answer this question about the Light.

Where is the way where light dwells? Tell me, O Job, if thou can, where
light lodges, where it reposeth it self, when the Sun is gone down, and
departed out of thy sight? Tell me what way leads to the lodging of light?
The words (as Interpreters give it) have in them a poet^cal tincture, as if the
Sun setting, retired to his chamber, as we do, when the light and business of
the day is ended. David speaks of the Sun as a Bridegroom coming out of his
chamber (Psalm. 19.5.) And when his race (as to us) is run every day, he has a
chamber ready for him: not that the Sun does at all end its motion, or sit down
to rest, but because it seems to rest, when it goes down to us. As if the Lord
had said, Have thou traveled to the place of the Suns rising and setting?
Where is the way where the light dwells?

There may be a threefold answer given to these questions, as light is taken
properly for the natural light, the light of the day, caused by the Suns
approach; and as darkness is taken properly for natural darkness, caused by the
withdrawing of the Sun.

First, Some (because the word dwells notes a stay or an abode, for such is a
dwelling place) answer the question geographically, and say, light dwells
under the Poles. There are two poles of the earth, the Northern and the
Southern, under both which interchangeably light and darkness abide six months
together; and because of the long stay and abode of light and darkness there,
Geographers reckon and conclude the dwelling of light and the place of darkness
to be there, and that therefore the Sun has two dwelling houses, one in the
North, the other in the South.

Secondly, When Astronomers answer these questions, Where is the way where
light dwells? and where is the place of darkness? They say, The East is the
place of light; and the West, the dwelling of darkness: And the reason given is
this, Because the Sun rises in the East, and goes down in the West, leaving
the World, Forvide Titan obitus pariter tecum Alcides vid it and Ortus;
novitque tuas utrasque domos. Sen. in Herc. Act. 4. Alludere videtur ad
signorum Zodiaci spatia, per quae Sol cursum suum perragit, quae ab astrologis
Mansiones vel Domus solent appellari. Itaque Zona illa sive fascia Zodiaci in
cujus medio protenditur eccliptica est via solis, qui in tot habitare domus
dicitur, quot in illa sunt signa. Bold.
that half of the World upon which it shined in the day, over-shadowed with
darkness. It is by the access and recess, by the rising and setting of the Sun,
that we enjoy light or are wrapped up in darkness. And so East and West are
called by the ancient Poets the houses or dwellings of the Sun.

Astronomers have found out, according to their doctrine, twelve houses or
dwelling places of the Sun; they imagine a girdle or bond passing quite through
the heavens, which they call the Zodiac, and there a line which they call the
Ecliptic, in which the Sun moves, or which is the way of the light; and in
this line, they place the twelve signs: the first of which the Sun enters the
first month of the year, and is called Aries, the second Taurus, the third
Gemini, etc. These are only fictions by which they represent the gradual
motions of the Sun in the several seasons of the year, and they call them
Mansion Houses or Dwellings of the Sun.

Thirdly, According to vulgar understanding we may answer these questions,
Where is the way where light dwells, etc. Plainly thus, Light dwells in the
Sun, there light abides, and from thence shines to us. The Sun is the Vessel or
Storehouse of light, the Luminary of the World by day, as the Moon and Stars
are by nigh^. And as for darkness, that takes its place every where, as soon as
the Sun leaves any place. As often as the Sun continuing his circular progress,
visits the other Hemisphere, da^kness takes possession of this. Light and
darkness take their turns; the one always going off, when and where the other
enters upon the stage of the world.

Now though Philosophers, with our own experience, tell us, that the reason of
this, is, the access and recess of the Sun; yet it is unknown to us, how God
has thus tempered the course of nature, that day and night should not be
always alike in any part of the World, but vary in both the Hemispheres, and
that in the same Hemisphere there should be such a settled inequality in the
length of the nights and days. This depends wholly upon the will of God, who
thus stated the motions of the heavenly bodies from the very beginning.

If it be asked, Why does the Lord put these questions to Job, Where is the way
where light dwells? Seeing every one may answer, light is in the Sun, light
shines in and fills the Air, while the Sun is up; and darkness fills the air
when the Sun is gone down, darkness being the privation or want of light; or
darkness (according to the usual definition of it) being the shadow of the
Earth coming between us and the Sun. When the opacous or thick body of the
Earth interposeth between us and the Sun, darkness follows. And if this be
all, there seems not to be much difficulty in knowing where the light
dwells, and where the place of darkness is; therefore surely that was not the
sole intendment of God in putting these questions to Job. But when he says,
Where is the way where light dwells? etc. It is as if he had said, D^st thou
understand the ordering and methodizing of l^ght and darkness? Or how it comes
to pass, that one part of the World has light while the other is covered with
darkness, and how light returns to that other part? Have thou made this
temperament and vicissitude of light and darkness, or procured that the day
should be long in the same country, at one season of the year, and short at
another? Have thou disposed the Sun to make short nights in Summer, and long in
Winter? This the understanding of man is not well able to comprehend, much less
his power to effect. Only the infinite wisdom of God has put light and
darkness into this method, and given them their certain seasons. And that this
is the meaning of the Text, we may gather more clearly from the next verse; for
the Lord having said, Where is the way where light dwells? and as for
darkness, where is the place thereof? presently adds, Verse. 20. That thou
should take it to the bound thereof, and that thou should know the paths
to the house thereof?

These words show that the former questions chiefly respect the order and
disposure of light and darkness.

That thou should take it, (...) Vi^ habet accipiendi quasi m anu.
The Word signifies the taking of a thing in ones hand. As if the Lord had
said, Do thou every morning take the light in thy hand, and bring it to the
bounds or utmost limits thereof? Art thou able to direct the light where it
should abide, till such time as it is to come forth ag^in to thee?

Nihil movetur quod non deducatur ipsa dei manu and potestate. Si ille manum
non admoveat, immota iners jacebit and squalebit naturae.

Potentissimus deus capit solemn, accipit tenebras, ducitatque reducit. (...).


There is a manuduction, a divine manuduction of all the creatures by the
wisdom and power of God; he as it were leads the light, and leads the darkness
^hither he pleases. The creature remains unmoved and slu^^^sh, it stirs
not till the Lord takes it by the hand, or puts forth his hand to dispose
of it as it pleases him, to the use or place he has appointed it; O^, To the
bound thereof?

The Original Word signifies a limit or utmost point; implying that the Lord
brings the light to its due and proper place; and that, as he has determined
the bounds of man's habitation (Acts 17.26.) so he has also bounded the
habitation of light and darkness, for the benefit and service of man: As if the
Lord had said,

Have thou done this, O Job? surely no; that is my work; I am he that takes the
Sun in my hand, and brings it to the bounds thereof; I direct at what point
it shall rise and set; It is I that know the paths to the house thereof, and so
can readily call for it, and cause it to appear in time and place appointed:
Thou know not where t^ have the light, how to bring light forth; but I do.
From these two verses laid and considered together,

Observe, First; Natural light and darkness have their special places, their
dwelling places; yet they have no where a^y long abiding place.

A Tabernacle (not a standing house) is set for the Sun (Psalm. 19.4.) A
Tabernacle is a moveable house. The Sun has a house every where, but it keeps
house or abides no where. It Is not only always moving in its place, but daily
removing to other places; and so, consequentially, is darkness. As it is thus
with natural light and darkness, about which the question is literally
proposed, so with civil light and darkness, about which the question also is
intended. These have their places, their dwellings, and it is seldom that they
dwell long in any one place. Light and darkness are not more interchangeable in
the Air, than joy and sorrow are in the states and conditions of men.

We may likewise conclude, that spiritual light and darkness have their houses
and their dwellings. Spiritual light, both the light of knowledge, and the
light of comfort, dwell,

First, In Christ himself. In him as Mediator, all fullness dwells, (Col. 1.19.)
and of his fullness we all receive grace for grace, (John 1.16.) I may say also
light for light, light of every sort, and light in every degree, ^^^^ful for
us, is received from him.

Secondly, These lights dwell in the hearts of every true believer. Faith and
light can never be separated: Though some who have faith may be in the dark,
yet light is not separated; it is only clouded, eclipsed or hidden from them.
All believers are so much in a state of light, that they are called light (
Ephesians. 5.8.) and many of them live in a plentiful enjoyment of light. A worthy
man of the former generation, lying upon his deathbed, a friend asked him
whether the light shining into the room did not offend him? he answ^red, Hic
sat lucis. Oecolampadius.
putting his hand upon his heart, Here I have light enough. The heart of a
godly man is the house of spiritual light, there he has and holds the light of
divine knowledge about the things of the Gospel, and the light of divine
comfort arising from that knowledge. It is also reported of Mr. Deering our
Countryman, that in his last sickness, and toward his end, being set upright
in his bed for his ease, a friend requested him, that he would speak something
for the edification and comfort of those about him: Whereupon, the Sun shining
in his face, he took occasion to speak thus, There is but one Sun in the world,
and there is but one Sun of righteousness which graciously shines upon me;
speaking further, he concluded thus, I bless God, I have so much light of joy
and comfort in my soul, that were it put to my wish or choice, I had rather a
thousand times die than live. As the hearts of these worthies were the dwelling
place of light, so is the heart of every godly person in his measure and
degree; the light of knowledge and of joy abide there. The Apostle says (2
Cor. 4.6.) God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined into
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ: And where that shine of God gives the light of knowledge, the
light of comfort cannot be withheld, unless it be for a season, that the soul
may rejoice the more in the end, and at last without end. For,

Lastly, There is an eternal light, the light of Glory, and that has a certain
dwelling place; that light dwells always in heaven; and the Saints at rest
in heaven, dwell always in that light. Eternal glory is called the inheritance
of the saints in light, (Col. 1.12.)

Again, Spiritual darkness has its place; and we should labor to know the
place of that darkness, to avoid it. Ignorance is spiritual darkness, and that
dwells in the heart of every man by nature. All that continue in that sad
condition, have their understanding darkened through the ignorance that is in
them, (Ephesians. 4.18.) and they who now are in the light, were once in the dark,
yea they were darkness ( Ephesians. 5.8.) Let it also be remembered, in whomsoever
this darkness of sin and ignorance abides, they must abide under the darkness
of wrath and judgment for ever. The place where that darkness dwells is hell,
and there outer darkness (as it is often called in the Gospel) dwells, even such
darkness as wherein the damned are not only out of the possession of the least
ray or glimmering of light, but without any hope or expectation of it. Hell is
quite beyond the bound or boundaries of light; there is darkness and thick
darkness, nothing but darkness. Thus we see light and darkness have their
places, natural light and darkness have theirs, and so have spiritual and
eternal light and darkness.

Secondly, From the scope of these two verses,

Observe; It is God who disposes and orders light and darkness.

The question was put to Job, whether he had disposed of them; but he could not
assume to himself, that he had taken or laid the light to the bound thereof, or
knew the paths to the house thereof. Light and darkness are at the dispose, and
under the command of God alone. And as the work or power of God is wonderful in
the dispose of natural light and darkness, so it is much more wonness; in the
dispose of civil, spiritual, and eternal light and darkderful these the Lord
takes to their bound, and knows the paths to their house. I form light and
create darkness (says the Lord, Isa. 45.7.) What light and darkness does the
Lord there speak of? Surely of civil light and darkness, as the next words
import, I make peace and create evil; I make and create them, I also direct and
appoint them whither to go, whether to a Nation or to a man only, whether to
this or that man or Nation. Darkness is of me as truly as light.

And that not only civil, but spiritual and eternal light and darkness are at
Gods dispose, is as evident from the Scriptures of truth. Some lands may be
called lands of light (like Goshen) others (like Egypt under that three days
plague) may be called lands of darkness. Of such lands that complaint is made (
Psalm. 74.20.) The dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of
cruelty. All places of the earth full of ignorance, not knowing God, of
atheism, not acknowledging God, of idolatry, worshipping false gods, or the
true God ^alsly, may be called lands of darkness, or the dark places of the
earth. Now as the Lord makes one land a place of spiritual light, so he
leaves another to be a place of darkness. And he often makes changes from
darkness to light, that is mercy, and from light to darkness, that is wrath, in
the same lands. Some lands which had sat in darkness for ages and generations,
the Lord has visited with Gospel light; and some lands, which for ages and
generations had that light, are now laid in darkness. How sad a witness of this
are the anciently famous seats of the Asian and African Churches, now under
Mohammedan power!

And further, as the Lord disposes that outward spiritual light and darkness,
giving the knowledge of the Gospel to, or taking it away from Nations, as he
pleases; so he dispo^eth inward light or darkness to every soul. Some gracious
souls walk in the light of Gods countenance, and under the sweet shinings of
his face every day; others, who also (as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 50.10.) Fear
the Lord, and obey the voice of his servants, walk in darkness, and see no
light. Now, whence comes this difference? Is it not of the Lord, who has the
command of our joys and of our sorrows, and who appoints this kind of light and
darkness their several and special places, according to the sovereignty of his
own Will?

From all that has been said, we may draw down this conclusion, which the Lord
did chiefly aim at in dealing with Job; That we are to own and acknowledge the
hand of God in every condition: be it light, or be it darkness; be it joy, or
be it sorrow; it is all of God. There is nothing which concerns either the
comfort or trouble of man, but comes forth from God, and is ordered by him;
like as in all ages and revolutions of time, light and darkness have held their
course, and kept their place, according to his institution and direction. Job
was in darkness, both as to his outward and inward estate; his body was pained,
his soul was grieved, anguish ^^ll^d (...) spirit; and God would have him see,
know, and acknowledge his hand in all. As if he had said, Thou can no more
dispose the peace or trouble, the light or darkness of thy condition, than thou
can dispose of light or darkness in the air. All our changes, from darkness
to light, from light to darkness, proceed from the unchangeable God. And as
light and darkness have their constant turns in the air, so they have very
frequent turns in the life of every man.

Therefore, they who when God causes darkness to cover and compass them about,
do not acquiesce and rest in his good pleasure, but murmur and are tumultuous;
these (I say) do as if they would take upon them to order the course of light
and darkness in the world; these do no otherwise, than as if at midnight they
should call for day, or at midday for night. Discomposed souls are like sick
bodies; they who are sick or ill at ease, cannot bear either night or day; in
the day they desire night, and in the night day: so it is with them of sickly
souls. Such are often heard saying in the morning, Would God it were evening,
and in the evening, Would God it were morning: Nothing pleases them. Did we
acknowledge the hand of God in making it night, we should sit down quietly in
our darkest night, as to impatience, even while we are most earnestly praying
for the return of morning light. Impatience was in a great measure Jobs
failing, though he had a great measure of patience. He made (as we say) an ado
in the night of his trouble, as if he would have made it day when God had made
it night and darkness with him. O remember, the way of light, and the place of
darkness, the bounds and paths of both are in the hand, or at the command of
God.

Thirdly, In that the Lord put this among his own great works, and takes it out
of the hand of Job, or of any other creature, to order light and darkness,

Note; The work of God in ordering light and darkness is wonderful.

And we cannot but be convinced that it is so, if we consider; First, The
constant succession of day and night in all places. As sure as the day comes,
the night will come; and as sure as the night is come, day is coming. There is
an unchangeable change between light and darkness, they mil^ ^or a moment in
their comings or returnings. Secondly, If we consider light and darkness as to
their increase or decrease in any place, thus, Day unto day utters speech,
and night unto night shows knowledge (P^al. 19.2.) which some think was a
well known Adage or Proverbial Speech among the Jews, importing the power of
God over, and his guidance of them both. God brings the light to the bound of
it, to day at this hour, or minute of the hour, to morrow at that. There is a
constant inconstancy, an uneven evenness between light and darkness upon the
face of the earth. We never have light or darkness twice of the same length in
the same place and season; yet they ever keep their place and season all the
world over: where you had them the last year, upon such a day, there you may
have them this, without a moments variation, though they have varied their
course many moments every day since. Thus exactly does the Lord take or lead
the light to its bound, and knows the paths to the house thereof.

And as there is a great glory coming to God, in ordering light and darkness,
as to the outward face of things; so there is a greater, as to the inward state
of his people, their soul-state. And though the Lord does not keep such a
constant course in that, yet he observes a rule in all the revolutions of it.
We have sometimes light and sometimes darkness in our souls: Now the light of
comfort increases toward us, and anon the night of sorrow darkeneth upon us.
Our souls meet often with these turns and changes. Let us adore the wisdom, and
submit to the holy will of God in all. For though soul-light be always
desirable, as well as comfortable, yet soul-darkness may sometimes be useful;
and this use it has, as often as it comes, even to try how we can trust God in
the dark; as also to let the world know that we are resolved through grace to
keep close to the light of commandments, how long soever we are kept from, or
are at a loss for the light of promises.

Lastly, We may consider from this Text, that as light has its special houses
or dwellings, so it has a special way to its dwelling chalked out (as it were)
and appointed by God. And is there not a way, a path, to spiritual, to eternal
light? The way to these lights is Christ, He is the Way, the Truth, and the
Life (John 14.6.) He is the true, the only way to life, to spiritual life and
light; yea, he is the way to eternal light and life. Holiness and faith in
Christ are the passing way to this light, but Christ himself is the way
procuring light. Without faith it is impossible to please God, and without
holiness no man can see God. Christ is the meriting way, faith and holiness are
the qualifying way, leading us to the house and dwelling of this light. As sin
and unbelief, or the sin of Unbelief, is the way leading to eternal darkness (O
how many go this way to the generation of their fathers, where they shall never
see light ( Psalm. 49.19.) so faith and holiness, or holy Faith, is the way, the
path to everlasting light and life.

Thus much of the enquiry made about the way and path of light and darkness,
which as they are literally to be understood of natural light and darkness: so
by them God led Job, and in him us, to consider his disposure of all sorts of
light and darkness.

Now, That Job might be convinced of his own ignorance in, and insufficiency
for an answer to these questions, God calls him to consider the late beginning
and shortness of his life, knowledge being gathered up by experience, and
length of days affording both time and opportunity for the gathering up of
experiences. Job was but of yesterday, in comparison of the day wherein the
interchanges of light and darkness were appointed; and therefore (should it be
supposed that days could teach him how these things came to pass, yet) he could
not but be much unprepared for a ready and satisfying answer to these questions.

Verse. 21. Know thou it, because thou wast then born? Or because the number
of thy days is great? The question still proceeds about the natural light and
darkness.

Know thou it? That is, what I last put to thee. If thou know it, how
came thou by thy knowledge? Know thou it, Because thou wast then born?

The Tygurine Translation renders the words thus; Habesne cognitum tempus quo
nasceboris. Tygur.
Do thou know the time when thou wast born? As if the Lord had argued thus
with Job; Thou do not know the hour of thy own Nativity, or when thou wast
brought forth; how much less the way or manner either of their production or
constitution, which were brought forth and established many ages and
generations before thine. Do thou know when thou wast born?

But I rather adhere to our own reading, Know thou it, because thou wast
then born? That is, because thou livedst then, and have lived ever since, and
so have gathered up the knowledge of these things by observation. Surely when I
put these things in order, when I disposed the way, and the dwelling, the path
and place of light and darkness, and took them to their bound, thou had not
so much as a being; how then came thou to this knowledge! I know, and thou
must needs confess, it is not because thou wast then born; wast thou? The
purpose of God in this question, as to show that he was before the Creation of
the world, even from everlasting, therefore knew all things; but that Job was
of little standing in the world, and therefore knew little, especially not
those things proposed. There is a double reading and understanding of this
verse.

Some both of the ancients and moderns expound it ironically, as if the Lord to
humble Job, put a scorn upon him in such a tenor as this: Doubtless thou
know the dwelling of light, and the place of darkness, thou know when and
how I settled the motions of the heavens, and the changes which they make here
in this lower world; Annocissimus es.
because thou art as old as the heavens, or contemporary with the worlds
creation; Thou wast born sure, when I did these things? As if the Lord had said
plainly and reprovingly, Will thou who (upon the matter) wast born but three
days ago, Triduo natus. Si harum rerum vias te nos se dixeris, item dic te tunc
extitisse. Chrysostom. Olymp.
or yesterday, will thou take upon he to understand my matters, as if thou
could number as many years as the whole Creation? Some holding the same
sense, render the Text cuttingly enough, thus; If thou say thou know the
way of these things, thou art best also to say, thou wast born, or in being,
when these things were done. Know thou it, because thou wast then born?

Or because the number of thy days is great? Even as great as ever any since
Adam. We render both the parts of the Text as a plain Interrogation, Know
thou it, because thou wast then born? yet carrying a close rebuke. As if the
Lord had said, Wast thou born, when I disposed of these things? Is the number
of thy days so great, that thou art able to reach such knowledge? Surely no;
therefore sit down silent, let thy mouth be stopped with this conviction, that
thou know not these things; and if not these, which are before thee, and
obvious to thy sight, light and darkness; much less art thou able to understand
my secret councels and hidden purposes in the ways of my providence concerning
thee: Therefore leave vexing thy self, and commit all thy concernments unto me,
rest in my Will, submit to my Power; for thou art no m^re able to reach my
mind, than thou art able to tell what was done before thou wast born. Know
thou it, beca^se thou wast then born? Or because the number of thy days is
great?

Hence Note, First; God only, who was before all things, knows the way and
dissposition of all things.

God, who made all things, was before any thing was made. How great is the
number of his years who is eternal! The prescience or sore-sight of God passed
through the whole series or through all the successions of the creature, before
it had a being. He who is without beginning, without end, knows and declares
(as he spoke of himself by the Prophet, Isa. 46.10.) the end from the
beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done. M^n by
report may have some understanding of things which were done before he was
born; but till he was born he knew nothing of himself, or, of his own knowledge.

Secondly, Note; Man by reason of his short life, knows little.

They who have been but a short time in the world, must needs be short in the
knowledge of many things; nor can they know much of any thing. Much knowledge
is got by much study and travel. And if the best improvers and redeemers of
time know but little, at most, because they were but lately born, and have had
but little time; surely they who have trifled away their time ever since they
were born, must needs know very little. We who came into the light so lately,
cannot get much light about naturals, and how little is it then that we have or
can about spirituals! But if we mis-spend that inch of time that we have in
this world, we may go out of it, knowing as little to purpose as we did at all
(which was nothing at all) before we came into it.

Thirdly, Note; They who have been longest in the world, have been but a little
while in it, and possibly have lived much less.

Know thou it, because thou wast then born? Wast thou then born? Surely no,
nor till many ages after. They who number most days, number but a few days; it
was but the other day since we had not so much as a day in this world. Wast
thou then b^rn?

Fourthly, Note; As it is but a little while since any man was born into the
world, so there is no man born, that has long to stay in this world.

As the number of our days past is not great, so neither can the number of our
days to come be great. Here we have a Text, yea a Map of our Mortality, and a
memorial of our short stay or quick passage through this world. No man has had
many days since he came into this world; they that have had most, have had but
few to eternity. As for the most of men, they go out of the world with a very
few days upon their backs; and as none have many days, so none know how many
days they shall have. Our life has these two things in it, which should
continually humble us, and keep us not only awake, but watchful:

First, Our days in this life are few, our life is short in this world.

Secondly, Our days are unfixed, as to us, our life is uncertain. They that
reckon upon many days in this life, usually fall short of their reckoning. It Is
or should be matter of humiliation to us, that we are short-lived, short
breathed creatures; we who were born into the world but the other day, shall in
a few days (no man knows how few) pass out of the world again.

Lastly, The Lord, by this question, would teach Job, that it is he who takes
care of us, and orders both our coming in, and our going out of this world. It
is God, by whom the days are numbered, and the years appointed which we have had
and are to have here below. And as the days of our life, so the condition which
we shall live in, rests and depends upon the wisdom and providence of God.
As we took no care of our selves, nor could, before we were; so all the care we
take for our selves, while we are, can avail us nothing without God. Which of
us by taking care, can add one cubit to his stature (Matthew. 6.25.) and which of
us by taking care, can add one moment to his life, all is in the hand of God.
And it is our duty to live as free from all troublesome cares while we are in
the world, as we were free from any care at all before we came into the world.
It is enough that God has undertaken for us, and would have us sit down in his
care of us. Christ said ( Matthew. 10.29, 30.) with respect to sufferings, Fear
not, for are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them falls not
to the ground, without your Father. It is God, who orders and disposes the
life of a silly bird, and by him the very hairs of our head (worthless
excressions) are numbered; surely then, the days of your lives, and all the
changes of them, are ordered, disposed, and numbered by him. And if so, we
should in this sense, be as quiet, and as much at ease in our spirits,
concerning the things of this life, as we were before we lived. Light had its
dwelling place appointed, and darkness was disposed of without any care of
ours; and all our care can neither create light for us, nor remove any
darkness, that is upon us. Let us only be careful of that duty we are called
to, and leave the burden of our cares to him who has called for them ( Psalm.
55.22.) and would have us rest in this assurance, that he cares for us (1 Pet.
5.7.) what cannot he command for us in our places, who commands light and
darkness to their places; therefore it will be our wisdom, at once to take as
much pains, and as little care as we can.

JOB, Chap. 38. Verse. 22, 23. 22. Have thou entered into the treasures of the
snow? Or have thou seen the treasures of the hail,

23. Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of
battle and war?


JOB was last questioned about the habitation and interchanges of light and
darkness: Here the Lord questions him about those two Meteors, the Snow, the
Hail. As if he had said; Possibly thou will confess thou know not how to
answer the former question, but perhaps, thou art better skilled in and
acquainted with the matter which I shall next propose; well then, I ask again,
Verse. 22. Have thou entered into the treasures of the snow, etc.

There is a twofold entering into any place.

First, In body.

Secondly, In mind.

The body of Job, nor of any man, never entered into the treasures here spoken
of; nor could Jobs mind, nor the mind of any man enter fully into them, that
is, comprehend how vast, how great they are. We had this phrase, Have thou
entered? at the 16th verse of this Chapter. There the question was put about his
entering into the springs of the sea, here about his entering into The treasures
or storehouses of the snow.

(...) Thesaurus Aspotheca, promptuarium.
The word imports any place or repository where stores of any kind are laid up
and kept for use. The Poet calls Bee-hives, the Treasuries of honey; and so
may Cellars be called, the Treasuries of Wine and Oil, etc. The Clouds are the
Treasuries, which contain the stores or treasures of Snow and Hail. Those
places out of which God is said either to bring good for the use and comfort of
man, or evil for his hurt and punishment, are usually in Scripture expressed by
this Word. Thus spoke Moses, encouraging the people of Israel to obedience (
Deuteronomy. 28.12.) The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to
give thee rain unto thy land in his season, etc. And God has his just and
righteous treasures of wrath, even as men heap up and have their evil and
unrighteous treasures of sin ( Deuteronomy. 32.34. Romans 2.5.) Thus the Apostle James
tells ungodly rich men ( chap. 5.3.) Ye have heaped treasure together for the
last days. Which may be understood of their getting their treasures of riches
so unrighteously in their days, as would prove a heaping together of wrath
against themselves in the last days or day of the last Judgment.

Treasures of good or evil imply three things:

First, The secrecy of what is laid up.

Secondly, The safety of it, or that it is surely laid up.

Thirdly, That there is store or great quantities of it laid up. A little is
not a treasure. The snow may well be called a treasure in all these respects;
for it is secretly laid up, no man can see it; and it is safely laid up, none can
reach or take it away; there are also vast quantities or great abundance of it.
Have thou entered into the treasures of the snow?

As if the Lord had said, Thou O Job, have often seen the snow fall, and thou
may easily perceive that it falls out of the clouds; but have thou ascended,
or can any ascend unto those airy regions, where snow is generated and laid up,
as in a treasure? If not, surely then no man can ascend to heaven, and there
search out or discover the mysteries and secrets of Wisdom and Justice in my
works here below, unless by the wings of faith and the light of a spiritual
understanding, which sits down satisfied in this conclusion, that all is wisely
and justly done, which God does, whether in heaven or earth. To bring Job to
this acknowledgment, was the design and purpose of God (as has been touched
before) in all the questions propounded to him in this and the next Chapter.

Have thou entered into the treasures of the snow? What the snow is, the nature
and the wonders of it, was spoken of and showed, at the sixth verse of the 37th
Chapter.

All that I shall further add for the opening of this question, is, that when
God speaks here of the treasures of snow, we are not to understand it, as if he
had great heaps of snow formally amassed up together in any place of the air,
as men lay up treasures of money or corn, or of any other useful matter; but
the words are an elegant Metaphor, the meaning only this, God has abundance
of snow ready at his will and dispose, at his call and command, whenever or
wheresoever he is pleased to make use of it; for it is as easy with God at any
time to draw out and power down abundance of snow, as if he had infinite store
of it kept always by him. He no sooner speaks the word, but the face of the
earth is covered, and its bosoms filled with silver showers. Have thou entered
into the treasures of the snow?

Or have thou seen the treasures of the hail? These treasures of hail are of
the same nature with those of snow, and so to be understood as the former; but
there is a difference in the form of snow and hail, though not in the matter
out of which snow and hail are formed. Hail (say Naturalists) is a hot vapor,
drawn up to the middle region of the air, whence falling, it is frozen in
passage into lesser or greater stones or grains of ice. These hailstones are
sometimes powered down so great in quantity, and often in such great quantities,
that it may well be said, there are treasures of them. And when the Lord puts
this question to Job, Have thou seen the treasures of the hail? he seems to
allude to those who inspect the public treasure of any Kingdom or
Commonwealth, receiving in and issuing out the revenues of it, as occasion
requires, and as they are required. As if the Lord had said, Have thou, O Job,
like some great Lord Treasurer, taken a view of these stores? I know thou will
confess thou have not seen them with thy bodily eyes; I know also thou have not
reached them clearly with the eye of thy mind or understanding; even those
treasures are greater than thou can imagine. All that which thou have any way
seen, is less than the least part of that which thou have not seen. Have thou
seen the treasures of the hail?

From both the parts of the verse, Note, First; God has store of snow and hail.

Treasures are not made up with a little. Christ says ( Mat. 12.35.) A good
man has a good treasure in his heart, and an evil man an evil treasure there;
because the one brings forth good things, and the other evil things out of
his heart; there both good and evil persons keep their store of good and evil
things, and there good men should have, and evil men always have a great deal
in store. For this reason also God is said to bring the wind out of his
treasures (Psalm. 135.7.) He has much wind and mighty winds at his dispose. God
who has made all things by his Word or Will, can have as much of every thing
as he will.

Secondly, Note; God has snow and hail ready for his service.

He has them as in a Storehouse or Treasury. Pharaoh built Treasure Cities
(Exodus 1.11.) or places of receipt, in which he kept either his public treasure
of Gold and Silver, or his Artillery and Ammunition for War, or great
quantities of Corn and Grain against a time of need. Christ says, Every scribe
which is instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a man that is an
Householder, which brings forth out of his treasure things both new and old
(Matthew. 13.52.) that is, he is not to seek, he has them in a readiness for
use, and so is himself ready to every good word and work, when any have use of
him for good. We may be sure God is never to seek, nor (as we say) out of
sorts, for any kind of means or instruments to carry on his service, and to
effect any purpose of his, whether in wrath against the wicked, or in favor of
such as fear him.

Again, In that the Lord says, Have thou entered, etc. Have thou seen, etc.

Note, Thirdly; No man knows, nor can any man conceive, what treasures and
stores, what abundance either of good or evil, of wrath or love God has.

( Psalm. 90.11.) Who knows the power of thine anger? I may say also, who
knows the power of thy love? that is, it is not known, no nor knowable, what
powers God can put forth either in anger or love. Eye has not seen (says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.9.) nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. And as the
preparations of God for them that love him, so his preparations against them
that hate him, are such as no man has so much as seen, much less entered into.
If the treasures of snow and hail exceed our conceptions, what do the treasures
of fire and brimstone in the bottomless pit? what is the pile of fire and much
wood in Tophet, which the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone
kindles? ( Isa. 30.33.)

But some may say, why has the Lord such vast treasures of snow and hail? what
are they good for, or to what use do they serve? What the use or usefulness of
the snow is, as well as the nature of it, was showed in some particulars at the
sixth verse of the 37th Chapter. Here God himself declares what use he has of
snow and hail, or what service he puts them to, in the next words.

Verse. 23. Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day
of battle and war. As God has made nothing in vain, so he does not reserve or
lay up any thing in vain. The Lord is a God of knowledge (1 Samuel 2.3.) by him,
as our actions, so his own are weighed. This verse shows one use or end of his
reserving stores of snow and hail, and that an extraordinary one. The ordinary
use of snow and hail is for some good or benefit to men indifferently, as the
Sun shines and the rain falls, whether good or bad. The use here spoken of is
only for the hurt and punishment of bad men. Some restrain the antecedent of
this relative which, in the beginning of the verse, to the hail only, because
no mention is made (say they) in Scripture of any hurt done by snow; but of
hurt done by hail we read more than once there. ^undi calamitas grando.
Yet as ancient histories so later experiences have reported, that both men and
beasts have been, not only covered, but smothered with snow, and overwhelmed
by floods and great inundations, caused by the sudden melting of it. Therefore
I conceive, we may take the word, which, referring unto both.

Which I have reserved, etc. There are other rendrings of the Hebrew Word by us
rendered reserved, all which may center in the same sense.

First, The Vulgar Latin says, Which I have prepared.

Secondly, The Septuagint, Which I have stored up, or which are stored up.

Thirdly, others thus, Which I have prohibited or stayed, (...) Per sin
sinistrum prohibere significat. Merc.
retained, detained, or withheld; so the word is used ( Genesis 20.6.) I also
withheld thee from sinning against me, said God to Abimelech. Such things as
we prepare and store up for some special use we detain, stop or withold from
all other uses, till our occasions call for that. Thus we may say here, the
Lord having as it were stored up snow and hail in his great Magazin or Arcinal,
he there detains and reserves them for the uses he has appointed them unto,
that is, as it follows in the Text, Against the time of trouble.

The Word in the Hebrew here translated time, (...) Tempus opportunum occasio.
notes a special season of time, that which we commonly call opportunity,
rather than time in general, or as it is a space of so many hours, days or
years. David (Psalm. 9.9.) calls God a refuge in time of trouble; that is, the
Lord marks and hits the fittest time to come in and help his out of trouble.
Thus, as they who reserve things, do it till a season of using them presents it
self; so God reserves the snow and h^il till he has a season, an opportunity
to use them, what that is, himself (as was said) expresses in the Text, it is
The time of trouble, or of straits.

When trouble comes, straits come, (...) Ad tempus arctum vel Angugustiae.
and great troubles reduce us to great straits, and compel us to say as that
good King Jehosaphat did (2 Chronicles. 20.) We know not what to do. The Septuagint
render, The time of the enemies, that is, when I am resolved to punish or
destroy my enemies. The word signifies both trouble and an enemy, (...), in
tempus hostis. Sept.
and both may well be comprehended under one word, seeing no trouble is more
troublesome, nor can put us to greater straits than the appearance of a
powerful enemy; which was Jehosaphats case, when in a time of trouble he cried
out, We know not what to do. And this notion of the word, as taken for an
enemy, falls in clearly with the latter clause of the verse.

Against the day of battle and war. As if the Lord had said, When my enemies
come forth against me, these are the Weapons, this the Ammunition, which I at
any time can, and often do make use of in the day of battle and war. (...)
Praeliuci.
The word rendered battle, signifies to a^proach because in a day of battle,
enemies or opposites approach one to another, (...) a radice (...) Vesci.
and charge each other. The word rendered war, springs from a root signifying to
eat, because the sword of war is a great eater, and devours the bodies of men.
Now when God breaks forth in anger against obstinate sinners, his enemies, and
brings any sore and destroying judgment upon them, he is said to have war with
them, or to make war against them: Who would set the briars and thorns in
battle against me, says the Lord (Isa. 27.4.)

So then, Both the time of trouble and the day of battle and war spoken of in
this Text, are the time and day of the Lords wrath and vengeance declared
against his implacable and incorrigible enemies: Snow and hail are treasured up
and reserved against this time of trouble, against this day of battle and war.

Hence Note, First; God has a check upon all creatures.

He reserves or stops them as, and as long as himself pleases. He can prohibit
snow and hail and command them not to come. As they will surely come at any
time, if he commands them to come, so if he commands them not to come till such
or such a time, they will not come till then. The sovereignty of God is
absolute over the creature. When Nebuchadnezzars understanding returned to him,
then he praised and honored him that lives for ever (Dan. 4.34.) whose
dominion is an everlasting dominion, and confessed ( verse. 35.) that he does
according to his will in the army of heaven; that is, the Angels, the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, as also the Meteors, Snow and Hail, etc. all, or any of these,
are the army of heaven, an army raised in the heavens; in this army God does
according to his Will, as well as among the inhabitants of the earth.

Secondly, Observe, God is very patient, he does not presently take vengeance,
nor bring trouble, though he be always provided for it, and able to do it.

As he retains not his anger for ever, so he restrains it long, because he
delights in mercy (Mic. 7.18.) As mercy moves the Lord speedily to receive
repenting sinners into fav^ur, so it prevails with him to be very slow in
sending judgments upon those that are impenitent. The Lord reserved or kept
back the waters of the flood a hundred and twenty years from drowning the Old
World; though, as they provoked and even dared him to do it every day by their
presumptuous sinnings against his warnings, so he was able to do it any hour or
moment of the day.

Thirdly Note, Trouble has its time or season.

There is a time for every purpose under the Sun ( Eccl. 3.1.) Men have times
for their purposes, and so has God (much more) for his; he has his times for
quietness and times for trouble. And as sin is the cause and sourse of all
trouble, so when sin is ripe, trouble is ready. When men have filled up the
measure of their sin, then God pouts down trouble upon them, or makes it a time
of trouble, that they may taste and see, and be convinced how evil and how
bitter a thing it is to sin against the Lord. The Amorites were full of
iniquity, when God spoke to Abraham (Genesis 15.16.) but their iniquity was not
full, and therefore their time of trouble, the time when their Land spewed them
out to make room for the Children of Israel, was not till a long time after.

Fourthly Note; Times of trouble are specially known to, and appointed by God.

As he reserves his stores of vengeance for those times, so he knows those
times. Wise Princes reserve stores against that evil time of war, etc. yet when
that evil time will be they know not: but to God all times are known. David
said ( Psalm. 31.15.) My times are in thy hand, that is, my times of peace and
trouble, of joy and sorrow, are at thy dispose; thou cuttest out my times, not
only as to the length or shortness of them, but as to the form and condition
of them. Now if the Lord disposes and orders our times, what they shall be,
whether troublous or prosperous, then he must needs know what times will be
times of trouble.

Fifthly Note; Present impunity is no assurance of future indemnity to sinners.

Judgment is but reserved, and the instruments of it, snow and hail, etc. kept
up for a while. Prodigals and spend-thrifts may boast, but the date of the bond
will come out, and then an arrest comes. Let sinners remember, the instruments
of divine vengeance are only reserved, they are not broken nor cast away; and
whosoever are found in sin, their sin (that is the punishment of their sin)
sooner or later will find them out (Numb. 32.23.) As God sometimes defers to
give out mercy to his faithful people, but never denies it them; so he often
defers the trouble of the wicked, but never (they continuing to do wickedly)
acquits them from it. The Apostle Peter prophesying of false teachers, who
shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and
shall bring upon themselves swift destruction (2 Pet. 2.1.) says of them also
( v. 3.) Whose judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and their damnation
slumbreth not. Though all seems to be well with them at present, and h^th been
so a long time, yet their misery is certain; it neither lingers nor slumbers,
as to the Lords time, though it may seem to have done both, in theirs. The
wicked, how long soever they escape judgment, are not preserved from it, but
only reserved to it, as follows in the fourth and ninth verse of that
Chapter. As the fallen angels are reserved in everlasting chains of darkness,
(that is, in chains that will hold them fast enough for ever) unto the
Judgment of the Great Day, or to the Great Day of Judgment: Which intimates
two things concerning the fallen Angels.

First, That their torments are not yet at the greatest, nor their sufferings
at the highest.

Secondly, That their punishment is unavoidable, for they can never break nor
file off those chains. (As I say the fallen Angels are said to be reserved to
judgment in chains of darkness, at the sixth verse of the Epistle of Jude; so
at the 13th verse of the same Epistle it is said that to seducers and false
teachers (who cause many to fall) The blackness of dareness is reserved for
ever; they have it not, but it is reserved for them. Their present impunity is
no assurance of their future indemnity.

From the latter part of the verse, where the time of trouble is called, The
day of battle and war,

Observe, First; Obstinate and impenitent sinners make war (in a manner) with
God himself.

Though they send not a Herald formally to defy him, yet a resolved progress
in sin (let God say what he will, and do what he will) is a real defiance of
him, or a bidding him do his worst. Gigantes (...) dicti.
It was said of the old Giants (men of great stature) They were fighters
against the Gods. We may say, men of all statures, even dwarfs and pigmies for
bodily stature, raise war against the great God by presumptuous sinning. Did
not men make a war upon God by doing evil, God would never make war upon them,
by sending evil. Men are vain when they fall into sin, but they are worse than
vanity, when they stand out in sinning. Who (says the Lord, Isa. 27.4.) would
set briars and thorns against me in battle (none but a madman will) I would go
through, or (as the Margin has it) march against them, I would burn them
together. Can briars and thorns abide contending with God, who is a consuming
fire? If God send forth an army of his meanest and most contemptible soldiers,
flies from the air, lice from the earth, even a mighty Pharaoh must call for a
treaty, and beg a parley. If he command snow and hail, much more lightning and
thunder out of the clouds to fight against his enemies, how soon are they
overwhelmed and confounded! It Is best therefore never to begin this war, and
the next best is, speedily to sue for peace.

Secondly, Observe; A day of battle and war is eminently a time of trouble.

There may be trouble where there is no war, but where war is, there cannot but
be trouble. War or the sword, is not only one of those four sore judgments,
but the first of the four, with which God threatened Jerusalem, to the cutting
off or utter destruction of man and beast ( Ezekiel. 14.8.) Every battle of the
warrier is with c^nfused noise, and garments rolled in blood (Isa. 9.5.)
Confused noises are the music of a battle, and bloody garments the bravery of
it; then prize peace, pray for peace, That (as the Apostle directs, 2 Thessalonians.
3.16.) The Lord of Peace himself would give us peace always by all means. For
though that may be doubted and queried, which some have fully asserted, That
the most unequal peace is to be preferred before the justest war; yet the
justest war may bring, though peace and honor at last, yet in the mean time
innumerable troubles and evils with it.

Thirdly, Note; God can make any creature hurtful and afflictive to us.

Snow is of great use, and serves much to advance the fruttfulness of the
earth, and is joined with rain in that effect, ( Isa. 55.10.) As the rain
comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters
the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, etc. (by the concurrent blessing
of God) So, etc. Snow as well as rain is a blessing to the earth, not an
affliction; yea snow is used by some as a delicacy to cool their drink in hot
Countries and seasons; which use of it was first found out by that monster of
men Nero, says Pliny, who thus declaims and p^otests against his intemperance;
Heu prodigia ventris! ^li nivem illi glaciem potant, paenasque montium in
voluptatem gulae vertunt. Plin. l. 19. c. 4. l. 31. c. 3.
O the prodigies of luxury! some drink snow, others ice, and so turn the
punishments of the mountains (so he calls snow and ice as to present sense)
into their own pleasure, or to serve their voluptuousness. Now though the snow,
according to Gods appointment be profitable to the earth, and is used by some
men to serve their pleasures and please their sensual appetite, yet God can
make a scourge of it, if he pleases, and destroy both our profits and
pleasures by it. He can afflict us, not only with strong and stormy winds, not
only with dreadful thunder and lightning, but with snow, which is soft as
wool, and hailstones, which usually children sport and play with. He has
destroyed sinners not only by lions and bears, and such like ravenous beasts,
but with frogs and mice, with lice and locusts, as was touched before. There are
two things which show the mighty power of God in the Creature.

First, That he can make the most devouring and destructive creatures harmless
and hurtless to us. Thus he stopped the fiery furnace from so much as cinging a
hair, or impressing the least smell of burning upon those three worthies ( Dan.
3.27.) He also shut the mouths of those hungry Lions, not only from tearing
and totally devouring, but from touching Daniel to hurt him ( chap. 6.22.)

Secondly, That he can make the most harmless and hurtless creatures to hurt
us. How powerful is God, who can crush the strongest man on earth by the
weakest of his creatures! There was much of God in it, that some of his people
of old, through faith, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant (being
it is like before, of a fearful spirit) in fight, turned to flight the armies of
the aliens (Heb. 11.33, 34.) And is there not much of God in it, when any sort
of creatures weak, and inconsiderable in themselves, are armed by him to
conflict with and get the victory over his strongest and proudest enemies!

Fourthly, Note; God can make a time of trouble terrible.

He has a reserve of snow and hail in his treasury against the time of
trouble, against the day of battle and war. As God can make a day of trouble
comfortable to his servants; he can be a hiding place from the wind, and a
covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, and as the shadow
of a great rock in a weary land (Isa. 32.2.) All which metaphors signify one
and the same thing, that Christ will be comfortable to his people either
immediately or by provision of means in the most troublesome times, there
intended by wind and tempest, by a dry place and a weary land. And that he had
been all this to his in such a day, the same prophet assures us ( chap. 25.4.)
Thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress,
a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible
ones is as a storm against the wall. The History of the taking of Jerusalem by
the Babylonians, set down by Jeremy, tells us, that he was fully heard and
answered, when he p^ayed ( chap. 17.17.) Be not thou a terror to me: thou art
my hope in the day of evil. Jeremy found the Lord very favorable to him, and
giving him favor in the eyes of the enemy, when that evil day, the day of
battle and war came upon Jerusalem. Thus sometimes God stays his rough wind
in the day of the East Wind (Isa. 27.8.) that is, he forbeareth to show himself
rough, harsh or grievous to his people, when great troubles are otherwise upon
them, noted by the East Wind, which naturally is a blasting, blustering, and
boisterous wind; and therefore a day of great trouble is elegantly expressed or
called, a day of the East Wind. When the Psalmist had described the fained
humiliations of the people of Israel in the Wilderness, which he calls their
flattering God with their lips, and lying unto him with their tongues; This was
enough to provoke God to make their day of trouble terrible to them, yet (says
that Scripture) He being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and
destroyed them not; yea many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir
up all his wrath (Psalm. 78.38.) Though they all stirred him to wrath, yet he
did not stir up all his wrath (when it was worst with them) that would have
made it a terrible day indeed. This is the Lords way with his people in an evil
day.

But when it is a day of battle and war with the wicked world, or with the
wicked of the world, he opens his treasures of wrath, and will let them see and
feel what stores of snow and hail he has reserved against that time. And hence
it is, that such are represented in the day of the Lord, going into the clifts
of the rocks and into the tops of the ragged rocks for fear of the Lord, and
for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth (Isa.
3.21.)

Lastly, Note; Snow and hail are Gods weapons and artillery, with which he
sometimes fights against sinful man.

The Lord of Hosts has such instruments of war in his Armory, as no Prince can
produce nor make use of, either to offend his enemies, or to defend himself. An
ancient Poet said of Theodosius the Emperor, Onimium dilecte dei, cui militat
ether. Et conjurati veniunt ad classi^a venti. Claudian. Eusebius. Eccl. Histor.
l. 5. c. 5.
O thou greatly beloved of God, for whom the heavens sight, and at the sound of
whose trumpets the winds, the confederate winds, present their service and
assistance. The Thundering Legion in the Army of Aurelius the Emperor, is
famous in the Church History, and has been mentioned before, upon other
passages of this Book, together with the occasion of that honorable Title
bestowed upon them in that age. The Scriptures give frequent instances of the
Lords avenging himself upon his and his peoples enemies, by storms of hail.
This was one of the ten grievous plagues which God sent upon Pharaoh and the
Land of Egypt (Exodus 9.17, 18.) As yet exaltest thou thy self against my
people, that thou will not let them go; behold, to morrow about this time I
will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as has not been in Egypt
since the foundation thereof, and until now. It was with hailstones that God
fought against and discomfited the Army of five confederate Kings in the days
of Joshua (Josh. 10.11.) The Lord cast great stones from heaven upon them, and
they died, they were more which died with the hail stones, than they whom the
children of Israel slew with the sword. There are two things singular and
extraordinary, if not miraculous in this passage of providence: First, The
magnitude and weight of these hailstones, together with the violence of their
motion was such, that like bullets discharged from Canon or great Ordnance,
they slew them outright or dead on the place, upon whom they fell. Secondly,
That the Israelites, being in pursuit of these Canaanites, and doubtless mixed
with them (as in a barrel, where they come to handy strokes, it must needs be)
that yet none of them were hurt by the hail stones, but the Canaanites only.
God, who, ^o show his goodness, causes his Sun to shine and his rain to fall
indifferently upon the good and upon the bad, knows how, that he may show his
Justice, to cause his hail to fall distinctly upon the bad, and not upon the
good. Deborah says in her song ( Judge. 5.20.) The stars in their courses
fought against Sisera. Joseph. lib. 3. Antiquit. Judaicarum. c. 6.
It is reported by Josephus, describing this battle, that as soon as the armies
joined battle, God sent a violent shower of hail, which (say some) being
naturally caused by the influences of the stars or heavenly bodies, the stars
may be said to have fought in their courses, like soldiers drawn up in
battalia against Sisera and his army. And thus by great thunder the Lord
discomfited the host of the Philistines in the days of Samuel, (1 Samuel 7.10.)
The prophet gives out several threatenings under the notion of hail ( Isa.
28.17. chap. 30.30.) and so does that last prophecy ( Rev. 16.21.) And there
fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a
talent. All which places, though not taken literally and properly, but
metaphorically and symbolically for great and sore judgments of one kind or
other, yet are a clear proof that proper hail stones have sometimes been the
instruments of Gods sorest revenge upon his hardened enemies.

So then, sometimes God does, as it were, pitch his Military Tent or R^yal
Pavilion in the Air, there he seems to muster his Army, to bring forth his
weapons, and from thence to confound his foes. God uses the clouds both as his
shield to protect his people ( Exodus 14.19.) and as his bow to shoot at and
wound the wicked. -- Armamentaria Coeli. Juven. Satyr. 16.
From thence ( Psalm. 11.6.) He rains upon the wicked, snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup;
That is, they shall have nothing else in their cup to drink but this, and of
this they shall drink deep, even the very dregs, and wring them out (Psalm.
75.8.) A heathen Poet called the Clouds the Armories or Arcenals of Heaven; and
the Scripture, both in this Text of Job, and in several other places, besides
those which have been mentioned, shows what Ammunition, what instruments of
the Lords fierce anger and fiery indignation are stored, laid up, or reserved
there against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war with the
rebellious world.

Now, Forasmuch as snow and hail, etc. are at once the Lords Host and his Arms,
by which he fights against the wicked, we may take notice of these five
following inferences for the help of our meditations about this matter, and to
make all that has been already held forth from these two verses, more
profitable to us.

First, God needs not borrow help from man on earth, when he would be avenged
on his enemies.

If he does but speak the word and declare his will, it is enough; The heavens,
the clouds of heaven will b^ing him Armies and Arms without number. He that
covers the earth a foot deep with snow, can cover all (as we say) over head and
ears with it. He that powers down showers of hail, no bigger than a pease, can
send it of a talent weight, as it is expressed, ( Rev. 16.21.) God cannot want
Armies at any time, for his day of battle and war, who can make any thing serve
him effectively as an Army; and therefore they who being in distress see no
more help in man, than David, when he said ( Psalm. 142.4.) I looked on my right
hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know me (how well soever I
was known to him) refuge failed me, there was no man that cared for my soul;
that is, that regarded what became of me: I was left at six and sevens, to sink
or swim, to shift for my self as well as I could: they, I say, who are thus
distressed, having an interest in God, need not despair nor despond, seeing the
Lord can charge or press any creature for our aid and help, yea can help us
without the aid of any creature.

Secondly, Take heed of provoking God, who has such Arms and Armies always
at command.

It Is dangerous meddling wi^h a prepared enemy. God can never be su^prised not
taken unprovided. As the wicked bend their bow, and make ready their arrow upon
the string, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart (Psalm. 11.2.)
So the Lord has his bow always bent, and his arrow made ready upon the
string, openly to shoot at the false in heart. Though it be usually long before
he takes revenge, yet it is not because he is unready and cannot, but because
patient, and will not take it sooner. He is always able to avenge himself, not
only speedily, but presently. As he will do what he has spoken, so he can do
what he will with a word speaking.

Thirdly, Would we not fear snow or hail, or any missive weapon of heaven, then
let us get God to be our friend, in whose hand, and at whose command they are.

No creature moves but by direction from God; and surely he will never direct
them to the hurt, though often to the affliction and correction of those whom
he loves. As such are in league with the stones of the field, and the beasts of
the field are at peace with them; so also are the stars of heaven, and all the
meteors (snow and hail, etc.) in the air.

Fourthly, God will charge them with hardness of heart and impenitency, who
humble not themselves when he fights against them with these weapons.

Every judiciary shower of hail, though it break not our heads, yet it should
break our hearts. That hail which does any hurt to the works of our hands,
should work good upon our hearts. And therefore the Lord complained when his
hailstones left no more sign or impression upon his peoples hearts than they
did upon a rock or stone ( Hag. 2.17.) I smote you with blasting and with
mildew, and with hail, in all your labors, yet ye turned not to me, says the
Lord. This Scripture teaches us two useful lessons,

First, When God smites any thing that is ours, or belongs to us, he smites us.
If our fields or gardens be smitten, we are smitten.

Secondly, God expects we should, and even wonders, if we do not turn upon such
smitings. He looks upon them as hardened sinners, who melt not by every
afflictive fall of hail from heaven. They are even resolved to be bad, who mind
not being good or better, when evils fall upon either them or theirs.

Fifthly, Hasten to make peace with God, when he gives signs and alarums of war.

God had no sooner said to Israel (Amos 4.12.) Therefore, (that is, because
thou have not taken the alarm by former judgment, therefore) thus will I do
unto thee, O Israel (that is, I will bring some sorer judgment upon thee than
any of those already brought) but he adds, and because I will do this unto thee
(unless prevented by speedy repentance) prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. As
if God had said, Consider (as Christ advises on another occasion, Luke 14.31.)
whether thou art able with thy ten thousand to meet me with my twenty thousand
(all the power of man is not only less by half, as ten thousand to twenty
thousand, but indeed nothing at all to the power of God) and if not, as I know
thou art not, then I counsel thee, while I only tell thee I will do thus unto
thee, but am yet a great way off (possibly) from coming to do it, prepare to
meet me, send an Embassage of prayers and tears, and desire conditions of
peace. It will be too late to call for a composition, or to think of a treaty,
when the trumpets have sounded, and the battle is joined. If we get not
(through Christ) our peace made before the day of battle and war in this world,
I mean before temporal judgments a^e actually come upon us, and have taken
hold of us, we may smart soundly before we have our peace, and pay dearly for
it, before we have it: But if we prepare not to meet God, and get our peace
made through Christ, before the day of battle and war in the next world, I mean
before Death and the Eternal Judgment come upon us, we shall not only smart
soundly and pay dearly for that wretched neglect of our season, but must perish
for ever, under an impossibility of having our peace made. The Day of Gods
battle and war with the wicked in the next world, is Eternity. Here in this
world God says to the worst of sinners, to him that is but briars and thorns (
Isa. 27.5.) Let him take hold of my strength (that is, of my Grace, or of my
Son, which are my strength to save sinners) that he may make peace with me, and
(I assure him his assay shall not be in vain) he shall make peace with me: I am
no inexorable God, yea, I am easy to be entreated, if treated with, when, and
in whom, and in such a way as I have offered my self to sinners, to be treated
with for peace. But if any think to make peace with God in any other way than
faith and repentance, by any other person than Christ Jesus, at any other time
than the time of this life, we must receive another Gospel, before we can give
them any (assurance shall I say, or) the least shadow of a hope that they shall
do so.

JOB, Chap. 38. Verse. 24, 25, 26, 27. 24. By what way is the light parted?
which scatters the east wind upon the earth?

25. Who has divided a watercourse for the overflowing of waters? or a way
for the lightening of thunder.

26. To cause it to rain on the earth, where no man is; on the wilderness,
wherein there is no man?

27. To satisfy the desolate and waste ground, and to cause the bud of the
tender herb to spring forth?


THe Lord still proceeds by way of interrogatory with Job. In this Context he
puts many questions,

First, About the Light.

Secondly, The Wind.

Thirdly, The Waters.

Fourthly, The Thunder.

Verse. 24. By what way is the light parted? Job was questioned at the 19th
verse concerning the light, here the question is renewed or repeated, yet
surely no needless repetition.

There are many things considerable in the light, chiefly these four:

First, The Nature of it.

Secondly, The Original or Spring of it.

Thirdly, The Communications or Effusions of it.

Fourthly, The Effects of it, or what it works.

The former two were chiefly intended in the former question at the 19th verse,
namely, the Nature of the Light and the Original of it; here the Lord enquires
of Job about the Communications or Effusions of light, as also about the
Effects of it, which are the two latter.

As these things, both singly considered and laid together, a^e an argument of
the divine power and providence, so of m^ns weakness and ignorance, who as he
is not able to withstand them, so not to understand fully what they are, or how
cau ed, as this question does imply.

By what way is the light parted? The word which we translate parted, signifies
to put things into distinct portions. As if the Lord did give ou^ several
portions of light to several parts of the earth, or upon several occasions. By
what way or means (says he) is this done? There is a twofold interpretation
concerning the light:

First, Some understand it of the lightning, Qua part lux fulguris erumpat.
Tygur. Qua part erum^at ignis. Bez. Rab. Levi.
so the Tygurine Translation, In what part does the light of the lightning
break forth? Mr Beza renders, By what way does the fire break out? Lightning
breaks out like fire. One of the ancient Rabbis calls the light here intended,
A dry and hot exhalation, which (says he) is therefore called light, or
receives the name of light, because it does easily conceive light, or take fire
as tinder and touchwood; such a kind of light is the lightning. And the
lightnings come often from the East, Christ assures us, while he says ( Matthew.
24.27.) As the lightning coming out of the East, and shines even unto the
West, so shall the coming of the Son of man be. Taking light to lightning, the
sense is, Know thou how it comes to pass that the lightning should so
forcibly break out of the cloud in a thunder-storm, and raising the East Wind,
Qua ratione fiunt corescationes fulgura procellae ventorum concertatione nisi
per me. Jun.
make such a hurry, such a tempestuous confusion in the air, by diverting t e
course of that strong Wind, and suddenly scattering it all abroad into the
several corners of the World? Know thou how these mighty commotions are
made, unless by me, by my power and orders? Some insist much upon this
Interpretation, taking the light for the lightning, of which the Lord speaks
expressly afterward, at the 35th verse of this Chapter, and of which Elihu had
spoken before in the 37th Chapter.

Our Translators and many others take light here strictly for the light of the
Sun, Know thou by what way the light is parted? either from the clouds, or
from the darkness; Know thou how the light is parted into several Climates
and Coasts of the World? This parting of the light may be considered,

First, As there is a new proportion of the light provided every day; for, as
it was showed before, we never have the light two days together in the same
state, but more or less, shorter or longer. The light is longer in one part of
the year every day, and sho^ter in another part of the year every day. This
change or parting of the light is a glorious work of God, who so divides the
light according to the time of the year, that every day has a portion, and yet
no day has the same portion.

Potest de luce proprie accipi quatenus ill^ sic in tempestate dividitur, ut in
aliqua coeli nubes luceant, and lux salis omicet in aliis densis tegatur
nubibus. Scult.
Secondly, The light may be said to be parted by the power of God at the same
time, or upon the same day, while in one Coast it is cloudy and in another
clear; yea within our own view we may behold the Sun shine in one place and not
in another. Some judge this the most profitable s^nse, because so there is a
clearing of this Text from what went before. Nor is it an easy thing, taking
this meaning of the words, to answer the question here put to Job. How the Lord
parts the light in the same day and at the same time in our view, making it
shine in one place and not in another. But whether we understand the Text of
parting light from darkness at the Sun rising, or of parting the light at any
time of the day after the Sun is risen, the matter is not of much importance.
By what way is the light parted?

Having observed several things about the light ( verse. 12.) I shall only give
these two brief notes from the words under hand.

First, God disposes and dispenses the light where he wills. The light is a
most sweet, pleasant creature to behold, and the Lord takes the guidance of it
into his own hand, he parts it, he proportions it out as himself pleases. And
as this is true of aerial light, so of a better light than that which shines in
the air, (though that be an excellent light) the light of the Gospel. The work
of God is as wonderful, I may say, much more wonderful in parting and dividing,
in distributing and proportioning the light of the Gospel, than it is in
distributing and giving forth the light of the Sun. Does he not at the same
time cause that light to shine upon one place, while it is darkness in another?
As he made aereal darkness to be a plague in the Land of Egypt, while it was
light in Goshen, so he leaves many places under spiritual darkness, while
others enjoy that blessed light, in a clear and constant shining. And as the
Egyptians with all their learning, could not tell the way how God parted the
light then, that it should be light in Goshen, and darkness to feeling, or
darkness that might be felt in all the other parts of Egypt; so who can give a
reason of that distribution of Gospel light which God makes to some parts of
the world, while other parts of it sit in darkness and in the very shadow of
death?

Secondly, In that the Lord puts the Q^estion to Job, Know thou, etc. (for
we are still to repeat those words in these questions, though not expressed,
Know thou?) that is, thou know not.

Hence Note; Man is much in the dark about the light, and how God distrubuteth,
disposes, and dispenses forth the light.

Those things that are clear to our sense, are often very obscure to our
unde^standing. Nothing more clear to sense, than that the light is parted; yet
what is more obscure than this, in what way, and how the light is parted. And
as this parting of the light is mavelous, so also in the effect of it, held
out in the latter part of the Verse, Which scatters the East Wind upon the
Earth.

Some because the relative [Which] is not expressed in the Original, take these
words as a distinct question, (...) Ventum Orientalem seu trentem subsolanum
signifi^at and per synechdochen hic omnem ventum. Sanct. Eurum ventum
vehementissimum loco omnium ponit. Scult. Sol dicitur ventorum pater and eurus
dicitur subsolanus and (...). quod sit sub regimine solis.
Know thou by what way the light is parted? and (taking up that again) by
what way he scatters the East Wind upon the Earth? But I shall speak of these
words, as intending this effect of light, the scattering the East Wind. The
Hebrew Word signifies strictly the Eastern part of the World, the Sunrising,
and so the East Wind, which rises often with the Sun, or upon which the Sun
has a great command, and may be here put synechdechically for all the Winds.
Naturalists tell us that lightning (which was the first interpretation) does
raise the East Wind, or causes it to blow; and that the light of the Sun, or
the Sunrising, hat^ also an influence upon the wind, or raises the East Wind,
is both the observation of Naturalists and an assertion which has ground in
Scripture. The Sun is by some called, the Father of the Winds, and especially
of the East Wind; and the East Wind has denominations both in the Greek and
Latin Tongue (as the Margin shows) implying that it is much (as it were) under
the dominion of the Sun. It is said ( Jonah 4.8.) that, The Lord at the
Sunrising commanded or prepared a vehement East Wind to blow upon the head of
Jonah. As if the rising of the Sun had some power in the b^inging the
East Wind; and without all doubt the East Wind (as one elegantly describes it)
at that time by Gods Call, fought under the banner of the Sun, and was
confederate with him for the affliction of that angry Prophet Jonah. The
East Wind is a vehement wind, a drying wind, a scorching wind. ( Exodus 14.21.)
When the Lord lead the people of Israel through the Red Sea, it is said, He
commanded a strong East wind to blow all night, and divided the Sea. The
East Wind it seems, was the most proper instrument to serve the Providence of
God, in dividing or scattering, and then in gathering the waters of the Sea; as
here the light is said to scatter the East Wind upon the Earth. Mr. Broughton
renders these words, as expressing the natural aptitude of the wind to spread
it self, thus, And which way the East Wind scatters it self over the Earth?
That is, which way it will scatter, or in what Country it will blow? The winds
are of a most diffusive nature, they scatter themselves, they disperse, and
pass through the air with much violence and vehemence. But I shall not stay
upon that. The main scope and purpose of the Lord in putting this question,
being only this, To show, that as the light (take it either for the lightning,
or for the light of the Sun) is in the hands of God; so also, that the wind,
even the East Wind, is at his dispose too.

Hence Note; Winds, the most vehement and violent winds, are under the power of
God.

He who commands the light, commands the winds ( Prove. 30.4.) He gathers the
winds in his fist, he comprehends them all in his hand. 'Ts a wonderful
expression of the power of God, that he has the loose winds as fast as a man
has that which he gripes in his fist, and it is at the opening of his hand that
they pass forth. Whatever natural causes there are of the winds, we must look
beyond them all, at the power of God, as the cause reigning over all other
causes. Christ ( John 3.) treating with Nicodemus about that most spiritual
Doctrine of Regeneration, or the New Birth, to show how free an agent the
Spirit of God is in it, compares his workings to that of the Wind, of which he
says, ( verse. 8.) The wind blows where it lists; which yet we are not to
understand, as if the winds did blow at random, or were carried out by their
own power and impression: Christ speaks of the wind there, as if it had a will,
or wilfulness, rather; but we are to understand it thus, The wind blows where
it lists, for any thing man can do or say to it; let man say what he will,
let man do what he can, the wind blows where it lists. The wind is not under
the control or command of any man, no not of the mightiest Prince on Earth;
yet it blows not absolutely where it self, but where God lists. The power
and skill of all the men in the World, cannot alter o^ control the wind. Some
indeed have traded with Witches for winds, as if they had the command of them;
yet know it is only the Lords choosing their delusions, or his giving them up
to those delusions and wickednesses, which their hearts choose, if at any time
any gain a breath of win^, by trading with them. We should only look by faith,
and trade with him by p^ayer, for the managing and disposing of the winds; it
is he that scatters the East Wind over the Earth. Know thou how the
East-winds are scattered over the Earth, or, by what way the Lord scatters
the East Wind over the Earth?

Hence Note, Secondly, The way of the Wind is a secret to man, as well as the
way of the Light.

The Lord Christ shows man's ignorance, with respect to the way of the wind (
John 3.8.) Thou hear the sound thereof, but thou know not whence it
comes, nor whither it goes. Which we are not to understand, as if, when a man
perceives the wind to blow, he did not know whence, or out of what part of the
compass it comes, or toward what point it goes: We know when it comes from
the East; and when it comes from thence, we know it goes to the West; and so
when it comes from the North, and goes to the South: but we know not whence it
comes, and whither it goes, as to the way of it; we know not how it comes to
pass, or is brought about, That Is done by the sole command of the Lord, who
has the whole Creation at his beck, and whose word every creature obeys,
moving and going where and when he himself gives order. It is the Lord, who by
the light (or by what means seems good unto him) scatters the East Wind (or
any other wind) upon the Earth. The next Question concerns the waters.

Verse. 25. Who has divided a Watercourse for the overflowing of waters? The
former Question was about the parting of the Light; here we have a Question
about the Division of the Waters.

Who has divided, etc. The Hebrew Word for a River, comes from this Root, and
so also does the Latin Word Pelagus, Quis dedit imbri vehementissimo cursum.
Vulg (...) Rivus, Pelagus nomen habet quod ex illo dividantur and deriventur
flumino,
which signifies the Sea, out of which Rivers are derived and divided into the
Land. From this word also the Elder or Firstborn Son of Eber was called Peleg
(Genesis 10.25.) and the Text gives us the reason why he was so called, For (says
Moses) in his days the Earth was divided; that is, it was distinguished into
several Coasts and Countries, and by several Names, which before, lay all as it
were in one Common. There have been too many hurtful divisions in the Earth,
that is, of men on Earth, ever since (in another sense) and are at this day: It
is sad to see the spirits, opinions, and practices of men so much divided; but
it was and is useful, to have both the soil of the Earth, and the body of the
Water divided. Here we have the division of the Waters.

Who has divided a Watercourse for the overflowing of waters? There is a
twofold division of water. We read of the former in the description of the
Creation ( Genesis 1.7.) where the Lord divided the waters which were under the
firmament, from the waters that were above the firmament, and it was so. The
division here intended is of the waters above; the^e the Lord makes a division
of the waters, and gives them their courses. The word rendered Watercourse
signifies to ascend, (...) Ductus aquae.
or to be on high, because the course of the water is from above, or from on
high; Water moves always from a higher place. Water naturally flows
downward; it is a heavy body, and cannot ascend naturally; therefore the course
of the water is from above. Quis nisi ego cursum dat aquis e coelo
defluentibus, veluti percanales ab hominibus manu-factos? Homines suos
Aquae-ductus per terram efficient, sed deus per aerem and nubem distribuit.
Merc. Inundationem aquarum non terrestrium, sed etc. Merc.
As men make Aqueducts, Watercourse, or Conveyances for water by artificial
pipes of Lead or Wood (as we see in this City) or by Channels cut in the Earth;
so the Lord has his Watercourse above, he has his Pipes, his Channels in
the Clouds. Who has divided a Watercourse For the overflowing of waters?

The Word signifies a great inundation, or a pouring forth of water, a
Chataract. Moses describing the Deluge, says ( Genesis 7.11.) The windows of
heaven were opened. And when at any time it rains, it may be said, the Lord in
some degree opens the windows of heaven. We are not to understand (as was
touched before) this overflowing of water, of the waters flowing upon the
Earth, but of the waters flowing from Heaven down upon the Earth; for the Lord
speaks not of Floods on Earth to destroy, but of plentiful and seasonable rain,
to nourish the fruits of the Earth, as is clear from the 27th verse. Now says
the Lord, Who has divided a Watercourse for these waters? that they might not
come down, as I may say, in a Full-sea, but as by or in pipes and channels, to
refresh the Earth. The Lord has his Waterworks in Heaven, as men have theirs
on Earth. This elegant Metaphor shadows out that certain Rule or Law of Nature
which the Lord has given those waters above, when they are commanded to slow
down for the use and service of Man and Beast here below. The Lord enquires of
Job for the Author of these upper Waterworks, Who has divided a Watercourse
for the overflowing of Waters?

Hence Note; God makes a division of his stores and treasures of water in the
clouds, as himself pleases; or the course of the water is directed by God,
where to fall, and when.

As God has divided the Earth to the Sons of men ( Acts 17.26.) as he has
determined their times, and the bounds of their habitation; so he has also
divided the waters for the Earth, the waters that are above; and he proportions
them according to his own will ( Amos 4.7.) I caused it to rain upon one City,
and I caused it not to rain upon another. God is so good, that usually he
causes his rain to fall upon the j^st and upon the unjust (Matthew. 5.44.) But
he can cause the rain to fall distinguishingly, and not promiscuously. It was
the saying of a Heathen in his fourth Book, concerning the bestowing of
benefits ( chap. 28.) The gods give many benefits to unthankful persons: Dii
multa ingratis tribuunt; sed illa bonis paraverant, contingunt autem etiam
malis, quia separari non possunt. Nec poterat lex casuris imbribus dici, ne in
malorum improborumque r^ra defluerent. Sen. de ^enef. l. 4. c. 28.
they provided them for the good, but they fall to the share ^f the bad,
because it is impossible to divide them. And instancing in rain, he says, No
law can be given to the falling showers, or to the showers when they fall, that
they distill not upon the lands of wicked men. Thus, what that Sc^ipture in
Matthew says, God does out of choice to show his goodness, that this Heathen
said their Gods did but of necessity, because they could do no otherwise. If
they sent rain upon the just, the unjust must have it too, he thought there was
no avoiding of that; but this Text in Job, and many more up and down the
Scripture, teach us, that God can put a law upon the showers of rain; he has
his Watercourse, and c^n direct the rain to what place and persons he will;
he can command it to fall by his law, when and where, and upon whom he
appoints. God retains his s^veraignty for a distinct distribution of the
wate^s; though to declare his bounty and mercy, he usually makes no difference,
but distributes it alike to all. The Lord is so good, that he feeds his
enemies, and nourishes a world of wicked ones, or the wicked world every day;
yet he retains his Empire over the clouds still, and he divides a Watercourse
for the overflowing of water; it falls by his appointment, wherever it falls.

There are four things wherein the Lords Empire and Sovereignty over these
waters does and may appear. The Lord orders the course of these waters,

First, When they shall fall. And,

Secondly, How long they shall fall.

Thirdly, Where, or upon what place, they shall fall. And,

Fourthly, He orders the course of these waters, in what quantity they shall
fall, whether there shall be a greater or a lesser rain; as the rain was
distinguished in the 37th Chapter, into the small rain and the great rain of
his strength.

It Is a very spiritual duty to give God the glory of ordering these natural
rains. The rain falls not by fortune or by chance, but has its courses
appointed by the Lord, as certainly as if he had it in a Conduit or Cistern,
and drew out by pipes a portion for every one. Who has div ded a Watercourse
f^r the overflowing of waters?

Or a way for the lightning of the thunder? Here is another question, Viam
Tempestati. Complut, Et Vtam N^mbo sonoro. Jun Pisc. Vox (...) hic tantum
occurrit and Zech. 10.1. Vbi est numero plurali.
Thunder and lightning have their way. Some re^d, A way for the Tempest?
because lightning and thunder c^mes with tempest. Oath s put it in the plural
number, Or a way for the Tempests? We render fully, who has made or divided A
way for the lightning of the thu^der?

Who di^ects the lightning, which breaks fo^th of the Thunder-cloud with such
^wift violence, to go the way it takes, and do the thing it eff cts. Lightning
is very fierce and subtle: Thunder is a very violent and furious Meteor; yet
the Lord has a way for them also, as well as for the gen^lest showers of rain.
The Lord can guide thunder-bol^s, and teach lightning its way. De pluvia and
fulmine conjunctim agit, ea quasi miscens, quia mirabile est ignem inter aquam
ardere. Scult. Rain or water puts out fire; but God can produce fire in the
midst of water.
I shall not stay upon this matter here, because we had the very same
expression, The way for the lightning of thunder, at the 26th Chapter, verse 2.
Thither I refer the Reader:

Only consider,

First, How the Lord speaks of rain and lightning together, and so (which is
won^e^ful) mingles fire with water; the flashes of lightning with the
over-flowings of water.

Secondly, Consider, Where the strength and stress of the question lies, and
what naturally flows from it, namely, that Thunder and Lightning go not their
own way, but in the way that God appoynts them. The Water moves Gods way, and
so does the Wind; the Light moves Gods way, and so does the Ligh^ning and the
Thunder, or the Ligh^ning of the Thunder. The Lord has all these at mo^e
command, than we have the tamest or most flow paced animals. Thunder and
Lightning go to the mark God sets them. As a piece of Ordnance, or great Gun,
being levelled and fired carries the Bullet; so those Cannons being discharged
from the Clouds, carry their Bolts to a hairs breadth, and miss not.

In the two next verses the Lord shows the reason, why he thus divides a
watercourse for the overflowing of waters, and a way for the Lightning of
Thunder; it is, (...)
Verse. 26. To cause it to rain on the earth where no man is, on the Wilderness
where there is no man.

Rain is the usual concomitant or speedy sub^equent of Lightning and Thunder;
these give warning that rain is at hand. Thunder and Lightning break the Cloud,
and so cause it, that is, the cloud, to rain Upon the earth where no man is,
etc.

The Lord speaks here of a special place, to which he designs the Rain: where
should that be? Surely the pastures, and tilled grounds, gardens, and
vineyards, places cultivated and inhabited by men; the Lord has Rain for them,
yet not all for them, or not for them all: Here the Cargo or lading of the
clouds is consigned to places uninhabited by man; He causes it to rain on the
earth where no man is. Some Parts of the earth are full of men, well inhabited;
there are other parts of the earth which are uninhabited, or where no man is.
This Text tells us, there is an earth where no man is. Travelers and
Navigators have found some Parts of the earth which were counted uninhabitable,
not only habitable, but actually inhabited by many people. Yet there may be
some Parts of the earth habitable in their own nature, wherein no man dwells,
or in which (as the Text speaks) no man is. Yea possibly there are some Parts
of the earth uninhabitable, or wherein no man can dwell. Now is it not strange
that the Lord should carry his rain to such parts of the earth, to places where
no man is? where there are neither Cities, nor Towns, nor Villages, no nor the
meanest Cottages, nor a man breathing on the face of that earth? or that, as
the latter part of the verse speaks, (which is but an explication of the same
thing) he should cause it to rain on the Wilderness, where there is no man? If
we would know what the Lord intends by earth where no man is, the Text answers,
The Wilderness where there is no man, or, where none of Adam dwells, as Mr.
Broughton translates. So then this latter clause of the verse is but a
repetition of the same thing, yet a repetition made not only for variety and
elegancy, but also to signify the certainty of the thing, that God gives rain
even to such places where no man is. There is a very elegant turn of the words
in this verse. The former part says, To cause it to rain on the earth where no
man is; the latter says, On the wilderness where there is no man. There are
some wildernesses which are inhabited, and therefore God tells us distinctly
what wilderness he means.

There are two sorts of wildernesses:

First, Such as are inhabited. John the Baptist went and preached in a
wilderness; there were Towns and many Dwellings in that wilderness.

Secondly, There are also wildernesses uninhabited. (...) a peste and morte. q.
d. etiam in locis pestiferis and incultis curandum praebet se deus
providentissimum.
God speaks here of a wilderness where there is no man. The Hebrew Word which
signifies a Wilderness, signifies also the Pestilence, and so some translate
here, In pestilent places, or in unhealthy places, in places untilled or
unmanured, because of the unhealthfulnesse of them, even in these wildernesses
the Lord sends rain.

Again, Others conceive the wilderness here stands in direct opposition to
Egypt, and that the Lord would intimate, that as Egypt was abundantly watered
by the river Nilus, they making sluices from that river (as has been somewhere
noted in this Book) to draw the water all the Country over; for Egypt is a flat
Country, not a Country of Mountains or Hills. Now says the Lord, even as Egypt
by the drawing of Watercourse, is made fruitful, and abundantly supplied with
moisture, though no rain falls there; so I will water the Wilderness with rain
from the clouds, as well as they water Egypt, Nemo aratorum in Egypto respicit
coelum. Sen. l. 4. Nature. quest. c. 2. Plinius in Panegyr. Te propter nullos
tellus tuo postulat imbres Arida, nec pluvio supplicat herb^ fovi. Tibul.
by sluices from the river Nilus. Egypt grew very proud or atheistical rather,
because they had such an advantage by the river; which caused one of the
Ancients to say, There is never a Plowman in Egypt will so much as look up to
Heaven. They took not themselves at all beholding to God, for the fertillity of
their land, they had it all from Nilus. Well, says the Lord, I will moisten
the very barren wilderness, it shall be satisfied with rain, even as Egypt
with the waters of the river. The Desert shall be as well watered by rivers
from heaven, as Egypt is by the river Nilus. But whether the Lord had any
respect to that or no, I dare not assert; yet it is plain, that the Lord waters
the wilderness where no man is, even as well as Egypt is watered.

Now forasmuch as the rain comes upon the wilderness, where it is very
improb^ble to have rain, Vapores pl^viosi elevantur maxim ex locis ^umidis;
unde si^ubes and pl^viae non impellerentur a ventis sequeretur, quod nunquam in
lo^is siccis plueretur. Aquin.
because vapors, which are the matter of rain, are raised u^ually from moist
places, from the seas and rivers; but from the wilderness, and from heaths and
deserts, which are dry places, how should vapors rise? yet, says God, though
there is no rain begotten there, yet I will send rain thither; I will cause the
wind to rise and carry the clouds, and the thunde^ shall break the clouds, and
they shall pour down wate^s upon the wilderness. Did not the Lord cause the
winds to d ive the clouds over wildernesses and desert places, and there to
unburthen themselves, they would be altogether without rain.

Hence Note; Where Nature denies, or natural causes produce no rain, God can
give it.

The clouds may deny rain to the wilderness, because the wild ness yi^lds no
moisture to make clouds, yet the Lord sends rain thither.

Again, Consider the wilderness and desert places, as they are here h^ld forth,
together with the providence of God concerning them;

And so Note, The care and providence of God extends it self to all places,
even to places uninhabited.

It is no wonder that God should provide rain so places that a^e inhabi ed; but
where no man is, there to water the earth, to what pu^pose is that, yet the
Lord will water such places (as it were) by his own hand, and (as it is said,
Psalm. 107.35.) Turn the wilderness into standing water, and dry ground into
Water-springs. Though there be no man to eat the fruit, which the rain
produces from the earth (of which the Text speaks afterward) yet God will send
rain to make that land fruitful, for the beasts sake, that they may have grass
and green things to feed upon. God will provide for the beasts of the earth,
where there are no men to provide for them, nor to be provided for. God is a
great Housekeeper: He nourishes all living creatures as well as men, as he
preserves, so he feeds the beasts of the Earth, and the fishes of the Sea, as
well as men ( Psalm. 104.27.) These all wait upon thee (O Lord) that thou may
give them their meat in due season; the very fishes in the Sea wait upon God
for their meat, and so do fowls of the air, together with all things moving
upon the face of the Earth ( Psalm. 145.15.) The eyes of all wait upon thee, and
thou give them meat in due season; and that he may do so, he gives them rain
in due season; He causes it to rain on the Earth where no man is, and upon the
wilderness, where there is no man. God has beasts to provide for, where men
are not, and he will not let a beast that he has made, want food; the very
worms shall have a support of life.

Hence Christ argues away all undue care and thoughtfulness in man for the
succors of this life ( Matthew. 6.25, 26.) Take no thought for your life, what
ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put
on. Behold, the fowls of the air; for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them: are ye not much
better than they? Surely ye are, therefore ye shall be better provided for than
they. Has God a breakfast ready for every little bird that comes chirping out
of her Nest? Has he a breakfast ready for every beast in the Wilderness that
comes out of his den? and will he not much more provide for you, O ye of little
faith? How encouraging an argument is this to our Faith, that the Lord will
provide for all men, and especially for his own; seeing he provides for the
fowls of the air, and the beasts of the earth, where there is no man to give
them any food, or take any care of them!

This consideration may strengthen our dependence on God, though we are brought
into a Wilderness condition, where there is no man to pity us, or give us a
morsel of bread. Surely the Lord that feeds the wild beasts where there is no
man, can and will provide for his own people, when the hearts of all men are
shut up against them; he can make the fowls of the air and the beasts of the
earth to bring them food, as the ravens did to Elijah.

Further, This is an instance of the inexhaustible treasure of the Lords
goodness: For if he gives rain in the wilderness for the beasts of the earth,
may we not thence infer, surely the Lord will take care even of those who are
unworthy. What have the beasts deserved at the hand of God, that he should
provide for them? Yea, the Lord does not only give food to those that are of
no desert, as the beasts, but to those that are of ill desert, he gives rain to
those who are but beasts in the shape of men, men of beastly spirits. The Lord
feeds the Lions and the Bears, the Tigers and the Swine of the World, that is,
men like them; he causes his rain to fall upon the just and unjust ( Matthew.
5.45. Satius est prodesse malis propter bonos quam bonis ^cesse propter malos.
Sen. de Benef. lib. 4. cap. 28.
) He will rather give good to the bad, for the goods sake, than be wanting to
the good, because of the wickedness of the bad; and therefore the rain comes
not only upon the just, but upon the unjust too.

This is true also in a spiritual way; The Lord sends his rain upon the
wilderness, he has done so, and he has promised to do so still; that is, he
has sent, and will send the rain of the Gospel upon the Heathen. Some Nations
are a wilderness; as they live in a wilderness, so they are themselves a
wilderness, a desert; and we have a promise that the Lord will cause the rain,
spiritual rain, to fall upon this wilderness ( Isa. 35.1, 2.) The wilderness
and the solitary places shall be glad for them (for whom? for the Church, and
for the sending forth of the Gospel by them) and the desert shall rejoice and
blossom as the rose; it shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and
singing; the glory of Lebanon shall be given to it, the excellency of Carmel
and of Sharon. That is, it shall be fertile and fruitful in spirituals, as
those places, Lebanon, C^rmel, and Sharon (which was the glory and excellency
of them) were in temporals. But how should the wilderness and solitary places
attain this glory? That Is showed at the sixth and seventh verses; for in the
wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert; and the parched
ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water. This
Prophecy contains a promise of sending the Gospel, and with that the Holy
Spirit (who is often compared in Scripture to water) to those who were or are
in their soul-state as a dry heath, or as a barren wilderness. This prophet
does not only hold out a like promise in the same Metaphors, but explains it
thus ( Isa. 44.3, 4, 5.) I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods
upon the dry ground; what is meant by water and floods we may learn from the
next words; I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
offspring, and they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the
watercourse; that is, they shall grow and flourish internally in grace and
knowledge, and not only so, but they shall openly profess it and avouch it,
as it follows in the fifth verse: One shall say I am the Lords, and another
shall call himself by the Name of Jacob, etc. That is, they shall give up their
Names to be enrolled and registered (as our Annotators express it) in Gods
Church-book, or among his faithful servants. In deserto pluere est verbum dei
gentilitate praedicare. Greg. l. 29. Moral. c. 16.
It was the saying of one of the Ancients with respect to this Allegory, To
send rain upon the desert, is, to preach the word of God unto the heathens. And
the Lord magnifies himself in the dispensation of this spiritual rain, when, as
he sends it upon his Garden the Church, so also upon the wilderness the
Heathen, that the wilderness may become a garden, and the desert a paradise,
that they knowing the Lord and believing on him, may be joined to the Church.
Thus also the Lord divides a watercourse, to cause it to rain on the earth,
where no (believing) man is; on the wilderness where there is no (good) man.
The reason of his so doing, is given expressly in the next words.

Verse. 27. To satisfy the desolate and waste ground, and to cause the bud of
the tender herb to spring forth. Here is the reason of sending rain upon the
wilderness, it is to satisfy the desolate and wast ground. Mr. Broughton
renders, The wast and vast ground. The Vulgar Latin renders, Inviam and
desolatam. Vulg.
The unpassable ground, or at least, that which none passes, and so being
disused, lies wast and desolate. But in what sense soever it is desolate, or by
what means soever it became desolate, the Lord sends rain to satisfy it, that
is, to water it abundantly; Vt riget ad satietatem usque.
satisfaction, is to have our fill. The very wast ground shall have enough,
enough to allay the heat and drought of it, enough to make it fruitful, and
enough to fructify the trees and plants that grow there, and so to feed and
fatten the beasts that live there. The Vulgar Latin renders, Vt impleret, etc.
Vulg. Satur dierum and plenus dierum synonyma sunt. Drus.
That he may fill the desolate and wast ground; that which is filled, is or
should be satisfied. To be full of days, in Scripture, is to be satisfied with
living. A man may have lived many days, yet not be full of days; but he who
is full of days (as it is said of some of the Patriarchs) is not hungry after
more time or days in this world; therefore to be filled and satisfied, import
the same thing. And to be sure they who are not satisfied when they are full,
will not be satisfied when they are empty. But however it is with man, we know
the earth spoken of in the Text is fully satisfied; it gapes for no more, when
it is filled with rain. And this the Lord will send, To satisfy the desolate
and wast ground.

But why is the Lord so careful to satisfy the desolate and wast ground? The
ground is a senseless thing, that feels not the want of rain. I answer, The
Lord does not satisfy the ground for the grounds sake, but for their sake who
live upon, and are maintained by the ground. Fruit-bearing trees and grass are
maintained by the moisture and fatness of the ground; beasts are maintained by
those fruits and grass: therefore the Lord satisfies the ground with rain,
that it may satisfy the trees and grass, and they the beasts that live upon
it. So then the Lord satisfies the ground, that it may satisfy all sorts of
vegetables growing out of the ground, and that they may satisfy all kinds of
animals living upon the ground. Such a gradation we find ( Hos. 2.21, 22.) I
will hear, says the Lord, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the
earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they
shall hear Jezrael, that is, my people. We may run up the meaning of this
promise backwards, thus, When my people (whom I now call Jezrael in a way of
promise, as in a way of threatening, chap. 1.4.) being pressed with hunger and
famine, cry to the corn, and the wine, and the oil, for food, they shall hear
them; and when the corn and wine call to the earth for moisture to feed them,
that shall hear; and when the earth calls to the heavens for rain, they shall
hear; and when the heavens call to God for orders to carry rain, he will hear
them. It is for man's use that God makes the earth fruitful; and where there are
no men, it is for the beasts sake, that he satisfies the desolate and wast
ground.

Hence Note, First, God is not wanting to any of his creatures, according to
their state.

He will not let the senseless ground suffer hunger and thirst overlong, that
shall have food after its kind, or proper for it.

Secondly, Note; Even the Earth knows when it has enough.

It is satisfied. And this may be a great reproof upon the insatiableness of
many men; they in this are much worse than the desolate and wast ground, that
may be satisfied, that will crave no more. But whereas Solomon says, there are
four things that say not it is enough (Prove. 30.15, 16.) Of all things, the
desires of man are most unsatiable, and say not it is enough. It was a great
word which Esau spoke, I have enough my brother (Genesis 33.9.) and I fear he has
but a few brethren in that saying. Among the four things which in Solomon's ob
ervation say not it is enough, the earth is one, in the place last mentioned.
But mark, It is the earth, that is not filled with water. For where God is
pleased to fill the earth with water, then as this Text in Job speaks, it is
satisfied. He causes it to rain on the wilderness, to satisfy the desolate
and wast ground.

Further, This may also comfort us in all our wants. For doubtless the Lord who
takes care to satisfy the senseless ground, will satisfy his believing people
early with his mercy ( Psalm. 90.14.) when they cry to him; yea he will satisfy
them not only with good in this life, but with long life will he satisfy
them, and show them his salvation (Psalm. 91.16.) He will abundantly bless
Sions provision (What is that? The Word and Ordinances chiefly) and satisfy
her poor with bread; with the bread of life especially.

Lastly, God sends rain to satisfy the desolate and wast ground.

Hence Note; God has rain enough for all places.

He can spare it for waste ground and wildernesses. And therefore, if he
supplieth not our pastures, cornfieldsd, and gardens with rain, it is not
because he cannot send it, or has not enough to send, but it is to punish us
for sin. God does not withhold rain from any place, because he is sparing of
his treasures, is more for laying them up than giving them out; but because he
is provoked by the unthankfulness of man, for, or by his abuse of his former
bounties. The Lord forbids the clouds to drop down the rain upon inhabited
places, and bids them convey it to waste wildernesses, when inhabited places
have not honored him for it, nor brought forth fruits of righteousness
answerable to the fruits of the earth by the blessing of rain.

Thus also Christ will take the kingdom, that is, the kingdom of the Gospel,
the rain of holy doctrine, from an unthankful and unfruitful people, and give
it to a Nation that will bring forth the fruits of it, as he threatened the
Jews ( Matthew. 21.43.) and afterward fulfilled that threatening upon them (
Acts 13.46.) Lo we turn to the Gentiles. Ye having refused and abused the
offers of Christ made to you by us; we will now go with our rain to the wast
and desolate ground, or to the wilderness; that is, to the Gentiles, and they
will receive it, and be thankful. The scarcity of Gospel mercy which God brings
upon any place, Sic sterilitas agrorum divitiae and fertilitas est deserti.
is a punishment of their barrenness under Gospel means. And have not we cause
to fear at this day, that forasmuch as we are so like that earth spoken of (
Heb. 6.8.) which drinks in the rain, yet (instead of fruit meet for his use
by whom it is dressed) bears briars and thorns; have not we cause I say to
fear) that we are nigh to some curse and burning, or that the Lord will carry
away the rain to Heathens, who as yet are a desolate and waste ground.

(...) E^itum germinis (...) Proprie herba renera. Exitum herbae vocat herbam
primum e terra prodeuntem. Drus.
To cause the bud of the tender herb to spring forth. The natural effect of rain
is growth, or to cause the bud of the ^ender herb to bring forth. If God denies
water to manured and well husbanded lands, they wither; and even desolate
deserts and waste grounds flourish, when God waters them; then the bud of the
tender herb springs forth.

Hence Note; Natural causes produce proper natural effects.

When God sends rain on desolate places, they bud and spring forth. When the
rain falls, the herb flourishes; where the Sun shines, the grass grows. And
surely thus it is in spirituals, spiritual causes bring forth spiritual
effects; if the Lord sends the rain of the word upon desolate souls, the soul
receiving it will bud, and the tender herb will bring forth. Moses (Deuteronomy. 32.1,
2.) compared his Doctrine to the small rain upon the tender herb, and to the
showers upon the grass. How green are the herbs after rain, and the grass
after showers! Herbs and grass bear witness to the bounty and goodness of God,
in giving sweet showers of rain: Natural rain is seen in their looks, and so
should spiritual in our lives. And if, where the rain of the word falls, they
that receive it, do not bud and blossom and bring forth fruit, the desolate
wilderness will rise up in judgment against them, the waste grounds will
condemn them. They will say, Lord, you sent rain upon us, and lo, here are our
buds and our blossoms, yea, here is the fruit which we have brought forth. Will
not this shame our barrenness? Has the Lord divided the Watercourse of the
Gospel, and caused it to rain on us from day to day, and shall not we show our
buds and blossoms of holiness, our fruits of faith and repentance, that he may
come into his garden, and eat of his pleasant fruits! How dreadful! Shall the
waste wildernesses and desolate grounds bring forth, when the rain f^lls upon
them, and shall not the Church! It is not bare professing, but fruit-bearing,
which honors God ( John 15.8.) It is uncomely if so much as a leaf of
profession withers ( Psalm. 1.3.) But how green soever the leaves of our
profession are, yea, though they should retain their greenness under the
hottest and most scorching Sun of Persecution, yet what would it advantage us,
if our leaves are not accompanied with good fruits.

Now, If any should ask, What mean you by good fruits? Or what fruits are good?
I shall close the point in hand with an Answer to these Questions.

These good fruits considered in reference to their efficient cause, are called
fruits of the spirit (Gal. 5.22.) and in reference to the matter of them, they
are called fruits of righteousness (Phil. 1.11.) but in reference to the
beginning or occasion of them, they are called fruits meet for repentance
(Matthew. 3.8.) In general, all that is good fruit, which is conformable to the
Word of God; whether it be the conformity of our natures to it, in conversion;
or the conformity of our ways to it, in our daily conversation.

More particularly, these good fruits are of two sorts:

First, Inward fruits, or those which we bring forth within, that is, in our
hearts; these are secrets, and only known to God.

Secondly, Outward fruits, which we bring forth in our lives; these are or may
be seen of men; yet they must not be brought forth, that we may be seen in
doing them, but, that men seeing our good works, may glorify our Father which
is in Heaven (Matthew. 5.16.)

Our inward good fruits (which are indeed our choicest and most spiritual good
fruits) are of three sorts.

First, Good Thoughts. To do good is best for others; but to think good, or to
have many good thoughts, is the best proof, that we our selves are good.
Solomon says ( Prove. 12.12.) The root of the righteous yields fruit. The
root of a righteous man is his heart, and the first fruits of a good heart are
good thoughts. He is a precious person, and has a precious heart, that can say
as holy David did ( Psalm. 139.17.) How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O
God, how great is the sum of them! That is, the thoughts which I have of thee O
God, are exceeding precious unto me; and I have many, very many of them, more
than I am able to sum or reckon up.

Secondly, Good affections are good inward fruits, such are godly sorrow, joy
in God, love to God, longing after God ( Psalm. 27.4. Psalm. 42.1, 2. Isa. 26.9.)
hatred of evil; all these movings of the heart, are good and precious fruits.

Thirdly (which are the issue and result of both the former) good purposes and
holy resolves to cleave fast to God, to stick (as David expresses it, Psalm.
119.31.) to his testimonies, ways, and truths, at all times, especially in
times of trial; or to continue with Christ in his temptation: these are very
good inward fruits ( Psalm. 17.3. Dan. 1.8. Acts 11.23.)

Outward good fruits are of two sorts:

First, Good words are good fruits. The lips of the righteous feed many (Prove.
10.21.) Edifying words (Ephesians. 4.29.) words of exhortation to good ( Heb. 3.13.)
words of reproof as to evil, ( Gal. 6.1.) words of comfort to the sad and
sorrowful (1 Thessalonians. 5.14.) all these words are good fruits.

Secondly, Good works, first, of holiness toward God, secondly, of
righteousness and love toward all men, thirdly, of charity to the poor; all
these are outward good fruits; and all these the Lord looks for, wherever, or
upon whomsoever he sends the rain of his word.

JOB, Chap. 38. Verse. 28, 29, 30. 28. Has the Rain a Father? or who has
begotten the drops of dew?

29. Out of whose Womb came the Ice? and the hoary frost of Heaven, who has
gendred it?

30. The Waters are hid as with a stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.


THe Lord having questioned Job in the former context about the course of the
Rain, and the free dispensation of it, even to those places where no man is,
and to the Wilderness where there is no man; here he questions him about the
cause and original of the Rain, and not only of the Rain, but of the Dew, the
Ice, and the Frost: So then, in these three verses we have four Questions.

First, about the Rain; and Secondly, about the Dew, in the 28th verse:
Thirdly, about the Ice; and Fourthly, about the Frost, in the 29th verse;
together with the marvelous force and effects of it, verse. 30.

Verse. 28. Has the Rain a Father? The Inquiry is, who is the Father of the
Rain? that is, who is the Author? what is the cause of it? Not as if the cause
of that or of the other Meteors here mentioned could not at all be known; but
to show,

First, That much of them all is unknown. There are many things in this lower
Sphere beyond man's Sphere; even these are not propagated altogether according
to our understanding or apprehensions of them.

Secondly, To show that he must be plentifully stored with all sorts of good,
who as a Father begets, and as a Mother brings forth such useful and necessary
things, for the preservation of living Creatures.

Thirdly, To show that these creatures are not produced by causes which are
constant and unvariable in nature, but proceed from and daily depend upon the
power and will of God, who sometimes checks and stops the course of Nature, and
at other times impregnates it for the production of these effects, or brings
them forth by the Midwifery and help of second causes.

Fourthly, When the Lord propounds the Question under this Relation of a
Father, he would show or teach us that he gives Rain, and Dew to the earth, as
a father gives food and other requisites to his children.

Further, This seems to be the design of God in putting these Questions to Job,
that forasmuch as he could not fully comprehend the causation and production of
these things, much less was able to cause or produce them himself, but must
receive them from the power and according to the dispose and providence of God;
therefore he should refer all his concernments to the same Providence, and so
rest satisfied whether God sent him a sweet and refreshing Rain and Dew, or a
grievous and afflictive season of Ice and F^ost.

Thus we may conceive the general scope of this Context. Now to the particulars.

Has the Rain a father? The question may be resolved both negatively and
affirmatively: First, Negatively; the Rain has no Father, that is, on earth,
or among men. There is no creature power that can produce a drop of Rain.
Secondly, affi^matively: Has the Rain a father? Yes, it has; God is the
Father of the Rain. The Rain is not fatherless; there is one who will own the
Rain as his child, or issue. The causation of Rain is a great secret in nature,
a secret about which though wise and learned men have discoursed much, and
given out much light about it, yet they have not reached the utmost, nor
attained the full knowledge of it; and the reason of that is, because the Rain
has a Father whose ways and workings as in the first constitution of Nature,
so in the daily motions of it, exceed our knowledge.

Has the Rain a father? Not on earth. Nor are the Heavens the Father of the
Rain; the God of Heaven is. As not a shower, no nor a drop of Rain falls on the
earth at the will or by the power of man; Si quis alium praeter Deum pluviae
patrem quaerat, is erit vapor qui ex humidis locis entractus e^ alevatus a Solo
concrescit in nebulam aut nubem, et inde a Sole repefactus liquescit et
solvitur. Sanct.
so not by the power of the Sun drawing up the vapors and dissolving the
Clouds, nor by the Winds scattering the Clouds. The Sun may shine, the Moon may
change, the Winds may blow and turn long enough, yet no Rain till the Lord
gives the Word. Some (and that not improperly) have called the Sun The father
of the Rain. The Sun draws up those vapors from the earth into the Air, which
are the matter of Rain, and there those vapors are condensed into Clouds, and
afterward rarefied and dissolved into Rain; yet these natural causes produce
these effects only as God sets them on work, and he can suspend their working
as often as he will. And therefore the simple and plain meaning of this
question is, the Rain owes its original to God, and must call him father: And
that is the observation which rises out of this question, Has the Rain a
Father?

God and God alone is the Father of the Rain. Without him it had never been;
and that it is continued is by his power and providence; that the frame of
nature is so disposed, that second causes are so ordered and furnished as to
produce Rain, proceeds from or comes to pass by the Lord alone. The Prophet
spoke this in a time of great drought ( Jer. 14.22.) both in the negative and
in the affirmative; and he proposed two questions, or the question twice,
intending the negative. First, Are there any among the Vanities of the Gentiles
that can cause Rain? (By the vanities of the Gentiles we are to understand
their Idol gods. Idols are vanities, or nothings; and can they who are nothing
do this great thing, give Rain? That Is the first question, Can Idols cause
Rain, surely they cannot: But will it not rain of course? will not the Heavens
one time or other yield Rain? That Is the second Question) Can the Heavens give
showers? No, As Idols, or false gods, cannot give Rain, so neither can the
Heavens, if forbidden, give Rain; they act not their power in their own power.
The Heavens cannot give Rain, if God gives them a command to the contrary; and
the God of Nature can check and counterm^nd the course of Nature, both on
earth, and in the Heavens, when he will. Though those bottles the Clouds be
never so pregnant and full of Rain, yet he can stop them. So then, neither the
Idols, nor the Heavens can do it, if God say No; yea, if he give not forth a
word of command, if he bids not the course of Nature proceed, the Heavens over
our heads will be Brass, and the earth under us as Iron; and therefore the
Prophet in the latter part of the verse tells us expressly, who is the Father of
the Rain, Art not thou he, O Lord our God? Therefore will we wait upon thee;
for thou have made all these things. As if he had said, O Lord, thou have made
them; and therefore thou have both the right and the power to dispose of them.
What can be said more clear and full for the confirmation of this point? Many
other Scriptures say the same thing. Read Deuteronomy. 28.12. Psalm. 147.8. Jer. 5.24.
Amos 4.7.

So then, though there are natural causes of Rain, yet God is the first cause,
and it is at his pleasure that these natural causes either p^oduce their
effects, or are stayed from p^oducing them. It Rains not by accident, nor by
any concatenation of second causes, but according to the appoyntments and
pleasure of the great God. It Is no small part of our duty to eye God in causing
these common things; and it is a great piece of Atheism, or a disowning of God,
to tie them up to natural causes.

Now, If God be the Father of the Rain, we may hence infer,

First, That God is the Father of all Creatures, and the supreme cause of all
effects in the creatures. As a Father is the second or instrumental cause of
his Sons Being, so God is the supreme efficient cause of all Beings and
Entities. Not only Animals and Rationals, but the very inanimates and senseless
creatures are of a Divine extraction: God is the Fountain of their Being. And
if God be, and must be acknowledged as the Father of all Creatures, even of the
Rain, then,

Secondly, God is much more the Father of Mankind. The Apostle voucheth that to
the superstitious Athenians as a Divine truth, out of their own Authors ( Acts
17.28.) As certain also of your own Poets have said, for we are also his off
spring; we are sprung from him as Branches from the Root, or as Streams from
the Fountain: Not that we are, as the Streams with the Fountain, or the
Branches with the Roo^, of the same Nature with him, (which to imagine were
highest Blasphemy) but we take or receive our Nature from him, that is, he has
made us to be what we are, and in him, that is, in dependence upon him, we live
and move, and have our Being.

Thirdly, If God own himself as a Father to all things, and to all men, in a
general way of Nature, then much more does he own himself a Father to all his
people in a way of grace. What the Apostle says of his Title Savior (1 Timothy
4.10.) He is the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe; so I may
say of this Relation Fat^er, God is the Father of all men, but especially of
those that believe. The fatherhood which stands in grace is the highest and
most excellent fatherhood which God bears to any of his Creatures: As to this
^he Apostle ( Jam. 1.18.) says, Of his own will begat he us by the Word of
Truth; that we should be a kind of first fruits of his Creatures; that is, as I
conceive, that believers (they only are begotten with the word of truth)
considered with all other creatures, to whom God is a Father in a common way,
should have the honor to be called the chief of his creatures. The first
f^uits were chief among the fruits of the earth. The first born both of man and
of beast were the Lords portion ( Exodus 13.1.) therefore chief. This honor
have all the Saints; the Birthright is theirs, and theirs is the Blessing:
They, as all holy things, are dedicated to God, and graciously accepted with
him, as a chosen Generation, as a peculiar people. He who is Lord over all, and
Father of all, both things and persons, as they stand in the whole compass of
Nature, is eminently and with endeared affections, a Father to all them who
believe and are actually in a state of grace.

Fourthly, If God be a Father to all creatures, and to man more than to
inferior creatures, and to true Believers more than to other men; then as his
fatherhood is extended, so is his fatherly care. God will not be wanting to any
as a Father, to whom he is upon any account a Father. He takes care of the
fruits of the earth, and of the beast of the field, and of all mankind, he
feeds them all, and clothes them all, and protects them all; but they who are a
kind of first fruits of his creatures, and bears the image of his holiness, or
his Image in holiness, have a special portion and proportion of his care over
them, and love to them, and provision for them. What can he deny to us as a
Father, who has vouchsafed to be our father? Has the Rain a father?

Or who has begotten the drops of Dew? This latter part of the verse is of the
same meaning with the former. The word which we translate has begotten, Verbum
(...) in Chal et de viro et de muliere dicitur; et (...) generavit in Hiphil de
viro tantum. Merc.
is applyable to either Parent, man or woman, in a different Conjugation, as
Grammarians speak: but in the Conjugation here used it is proper only to the
man; and therefore they who translate who has conceived, wrest this Text, and
depart from the Original sense of the word as here expressed, in which the
Metaphor of, or the Allusion to a Father is still continued. Who has begotten
The drops of dew?

The Lord does not ask who has begotten the Dew, but the drops of Dew? Drops
are very small things; yet the great God who made the mighty waters of the Sea,
makes also the small drops of Dew. (...) Guttas tantum hic extat. Sunt qui
(...) exponunt quasi fluctus; quod in magna abundantia fluctuum more ros
effundatur. etc. Merc. Ros est vaporis terrae propinqui noctuque resrigerati in
aquam concretio.
Some derive the Original word which we render drops, from a Root that
signifies a flood, as implying, that though the Dew falls in single drops,
yet being fallen there is much of it, even a flood of it. Others deriving the
word from, at least, judging it has near alliance with a word signifying a
drinking Cup, or a Vial, render, who has begotten the Cups or Vials of Dew?

We heard of the Dew at the 19th verse of the 29th Chapter, where Job (to set
forth the prosperity of his former condition) said, The Dew lay all night upon
my branches. Vapors drawn up from the earth in the day by the heat of the Sun,
are returned in Dew by the moderate coolness and stilness of the night. The
remote efficient cause of Dew is the heat of Heaven raising vapors from the
earth. The next efficient cause of Dew is the temperate coolness and quietness
of the night; for if the night be windy the Dew falls not; and if the night be
very cold, the vapors are congealed and hardened into a frost. It Is only in
temperate seasons, that we find those d^ops of Dew hanging like so many Orient
Pearls upon the grass, leaves and Flowers, at once adorning and refreshing
them. Vapores sereno tempore medium aeris regionem ascendentes resolvuntur
frigore in guttas tenues. Arist. l. de mund. c. 1. Plin. l. 2. c. 60.
We may take notice of two things in the falling of the Dew.

First, It falls very silently; Secondly, very abundantly. No man hears the Dew
fall, nor can any number the drops of Dew which fall. Hushai used both these
allusions, in that piece of loyal counsel which he gave for the defeating of
the counsel of Achitophel (2 Samuel 11.12.) where he advised Absalom, te gather
all Israel from Dan to Beersheba, as the sand which is by the sea for
multitude; and so, says he, we will light upon him as the Dew falls upon the
ground; that is, we will come so silently upon him, and in such numbers (even
as the drops of Dew upon the ground) that he shall not be able to avoid us, no
more than he can avoid the Dew, which in one and the same instant falls upon
the field or Country all over. An Army comes with an intent to fall upon the
enemy like a storm, yet it may be said to come and fall upon him like a Dew,
both because it comes always like a multitude, and because it comes sometimes
very silently to surprise him at unawares. Who has begotten the drops of Dew?

Hence Note, as before of the Rain, so here of the Dew, God is the father of
the Dew, as well as of the Rain. The Dew differs not much from the Rain; both
are of the same nature, and they have the same Father, and he will be owned in
the Dew as well as in the Rain. The Prophet Haggai reproving the returned Jews
(Chap. 1.10.) for their neglect in not building the Lords House, represents the
Lord thus speaking to them; Because of my house that is wast, and ye run every
man to his own house; that is, you eagerly and violently (running is a violent
exercise) pursue your private ends and interests, not minding nor promoting my
honor and worship; Therefore the Heaven over you is stayed from Dew, and the
earth is stayed from her fruit. The want of Dew makes many wants. If we want
but the Dew of Heaven we shall quickly want the fruits of the Earth. We usually
take notice of the want of Rain, but we seldom take notice of the want of Dew,
or pray for the falling of it; nor do we give thanks for it (as for Rain) when
we see it fallen, and sweetly filling the bosom of the earth. Yet the
withholding of Dew (though Dew be a less matt^r than Rain) is a greater
Judgment than the withholding of Rain; for it is a sign that the Judgment of
drought is at the height, or in the perfection of it, when the Lord does not
only with hold the Rain which is the greater mercy, but the Dew too, which is
the lesser. O how dry must the earth be when it has not only no plentiful
showers of Rain, but not so much as a drop of Dew! And therefore when the
Prophet Eliah would show the extremity of the Famine which was coming upon
Israel, he made that high protest (1 Kings 1.17.) As the Lord God of Israel
lives before whom I stand, there shall not be Dew nor Rain these years, but
according to my word. Not only shall ye have no Rain, but no Dew; and when the
Heaven is stayed from giving Rain or Dew, the Earth must needs be stayed from
yielding fruit or food. And so great is the Lords care in disposing the Dew of
Heaven, that Solomon tells us ( Prove. 3.20.) By his knowledge the depths are
broken up, and the Clouds drop down Dew. As if he had said, The Dew does not
steal down upon the earth without Gods knowledge; not a drop of it destils upon
the earth without his orders and privity. And when it is said, By his knowledge
the Clouds drop down Dew, it has this in it; God knows what moisture is meet
for the earth, whether little or much, Dew or Rain; though I conceive we may
take the word Dew in this Text of the Proverbs synechdochically, for any, or
all, the moisture that falls from Heaven, as by the breaking up of the depths
in the former part of the verse, we are to understand all the moisture which
rises from, and is conveyed up and down in the lesser or greater Channels of
the earth. The Lord does so much know how useful and beneficial the Dew is to
the Earth, that it is said to drop down by his knowledge; as if the Lord did
exercise a very special knowledge about it. The Clouds are Gods Vessels, which
being locked up by him, keep in their precious liquo^, and being opened by him,
pour it down in Rain, drop and destil it down in Dew, whereof ( Solomon in the
place last cited) assures us, there is not a drop that falls but he takes
notice of it, and therefore says, by his knowle^ge the Clouds drop down Dew:
And indeed such and so wonderful is the destillation of the Dew, that it may
well be said to drop even through his divine fingers.

The Dew is very useful and beneficial to the earth two ways or in two things
chiefly.

First, I^ moystens the earth: Secondly, It cools the earth. When Isaac was
giving the blessing to Jacob, he put this in particularly ( Genesis 27.28.) God
give thee of the Dew of Heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of
Corn and Wine; implying that the fatness of the earth causing plenty of Corn
and Wine, is caused by the Dew of Heaven. Answerable to this blessing given by
Isaac to his son Jacob, is that promise or prophecy given out by Moses (Deuteronomy.
33.28.) The Fountain of Jacob shall be upon a Land of Corn and W^ne; also his
Heavens shall drop down Dew. By the Fountain of Jacob some understand the
posterity of Jacob, or the whole house of Israel spread ab^oad like the
overflowing of a Fountain, to which David seems to allude ( Psalm. 68.26.) Bless
ye God in the Congregations, even the Lord from the Fountain of Israel, or (as
the words may be rendered) Ye that are of the Fountain of Israel. Now, says
Moses, in that Prophecy, The Fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn
and wine; that is, upon a plentiful land: also his heavens shall drop down Dew;
that is, he shall have the best blessings of heaven: Temporal blessings (as
Canaan was of heaven) being but a shadow of spiritual and eternal blessings.
And when the Lord would show how plentious in mercy (chiefly in spiritual
mercies) he would be to his people, he says ( Hosea 14.5, 6.) I will be as a
Dew unto Israel, and he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as
Lebanon; his branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree,
and his smell as Lebanon. Thus the Lord spoke by the Prophet, in allusion to
those great effects which the natural Dew produces on Earth. Solomon having
said ( Prove. 19.12.) that, the (just and deserved) wrath of a King is like the
roaring of a lion, presently adds, but his favor is as the Dew upon the grass;
that is, he exceedingly comforts and refreshes the hearts of all upon whom his
favor falls. And when the Prophet Micah, (chap. 5.7.) would show how great a
blessing the people of God would be to any place where they were cast, he
says, The remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people (how?) as Dew
from the Lord, and as showers upon the grass. By the remnant of Jacob, he means
the chosen and faithful remainder of Jacob after many scatterings and trials;
those few of the people of God in the midst of the world wheresoever they are,
shall be as Dew upon the g ass; that is, they shall be a great blessing to
them. The wo^ld will scarce let that remnant be any where, in some places of
the world there are scarce any of them, yet see of what benefit they are to any
place, They are as Dew from the Lord. The Apostle uses such an expression
concerning himself and other faithful Ministers of the Gospel (2 Cor. 2.15.) We
are unto God a sweet favor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that
perish; that is, we are a means of salvation and eternal life to them that are
saved, and we offer eternal life and salvation to them that perish. So says
the Prophet concerning all the remnant of Jacob, they shall be in the midst of
many people as a dew upon the grass, that waits not for man, nor tarrieth for
the son of man; they shall be as a Dew from the Lord; that is, there shall be a
great multitude of them, and they shall be as a Dew, that is, they shall
distill sweetly upon those many people as a Dew from the Lord, and as the
showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waits for the sons of
men. The grass in the field is not watered by man, as herbs and flowers in a
garden are, and therefore may be said not to tarry, nor to depend upon man, nor
upon the sons of men, but upon God for the Dew and Showers of heaven to water
it. Thus those many people shall have help and sweet supplies; though men
neglect them, yet God will take care of them, and send the remnant of Jacob,
some or other that are faithful, to be as a Dew from him upon them, to make
them grow and be fruitful.

Before I pass from this verse, we may consider a threefold allusion of the Dew.

First, To Christ himself. One of the Ancients expounding that place ( Judges
6.37, 40.) where Gideon desired as a sign from the Lord that he would save
Israel by his hand, that the Dew might fall on the fleece, the floor remaining
dry; and afterward, that the Dew might fall upon the floor, the fleece
remaining dry; concludes, Ros in vellere, Christus in virgin. Rupertus in Hos.
14.
The Dew in the fleece, is Christ in the Virgin. Jesus Christ indeed came down
from heaven as the Dew, for the refreshing and comforting of poor sinners; he
came down also as a Dew to make us fruitful and grow as the Lilly, and to cast
forth our roots as Lebanon.

Secondly, In the Dew there is an allusion to the word of God preached. The
dispensers of the Gospel are compared to Clouds; Moses was a Cloud, and his
speech distilled as the dew, (Deuteronomy. 32.2.) that is, it came down sweetly and
efficaciously. As the manna and the dew fell together (Exodus 16.12, 14.) so the
graces, comforts, and powers of the Spirit come with the word; there is dew with
the Manna, and Manna with the dew. When the dew of divine doctrine comes down,
Christ the Manna comes down too.

Thirdly, It carries in it an allusion to that sweetness of affection that is
among brethren ( Psalm. 133.1.) Behold how good and how pleasant it is, for
brethren to dwell together in unity! then follows ( verse. 3.) As the dew of
Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion; for there the
Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore. Love and unity among
brethren is like dew, it refreshes them and makes them fruitful; They who
provoke one another to love, will also to good works (Heb. 10.24.) Unity makes
a great increase. Small things grow great by concord, Concordia parvae res
crescunt, discordia magnae dilabuntur.
whereas discord dwindleth or reduces great things to little things, and at
last to nothing.

So much of Gods Father-hood or relation to the Rain and Dew: In the next words
he is pleased to enquire of Job concerning the original of Ice and Frost.

Verse 29. Out of whose womb came the Ice? These words are an elegant Metaphor
taken from Childbearing. What woman can the Ice call Mother? God is here
compared to a Mother, for the same reason for which he was before compared to a
Father. We are to note (says Aquinas upon this place) that Cold is the cause
of Ice, which is a feminine or womanish quality; but the cause of rain and dew
is heat, which is a masculine or manly quality. And therefore the Lord speaking
of the generation of rain and dew, uses the word Father; and about the
generation of Ice and Frost he uses a word most proper to the Mother; Out of
whose womb came the Ice? The word rendered womb signifies the whole belly, yea
the whole body. Thus ( Psalm. 132.11.) Of the fruit of thy body, etc. The Hebrew
is belly, so the word is used ( Genesis 15.4. 2 Chronicles. 22.21.) but according to
our Translation it strictly relates to the Mother, as if God would take upon
him both sexes, and be, as, the Father of the rain and dew, so, the Mother of
the Ice and Frost. The Ancients insist much upon this setting forth the glory
of God in the former verse as a Father, and here as a Mother, out of whose womb
the Ice comes; and they tell us of some who never had Scripture light, Clemens
Alexandrinus, l. 5. Strom. Docet Deum (...). ab Orpheo vocatum.
that yet did speak of God according to this Notion, calling him Mother-Father.
They looked to God, and honored him, as having not only the power of a
Father, but the care of a Mother conceiving, nourishing, nursing, and educating
the Creature as a Mother does her children; and therefore called God
Mother-Father, and so much this change of the word in the Text does imply, Out
of whose womb Came the Ice? (...) Gelu. Radix, evulsit pilos; quia gelu terram
gramine, arb^res plantasquefolits dejectis quasi glabrat.


Yet this manner of speaking signifies no more than this, that Ice and Frost
are caused and brought forth by the power of God. The word rendered Ice, comes
from a root which signifies to make bald, or to pull off the hair, because when
Frost and Ice come, they quickly pull off the leaves from the trees, and the
flowers from the herbs, they m^ke all bare-headed, and so Ice has its
denomination from that effect; Out of whose womb came the Ice?

And the hoary fr^st of heaven, who has gendred it? (...) Texit, operuit.
The word rendered hoary frost, signifies to cover over, because the ^oary frost
covers all over. The trees and herbs, all things above ground, a^e covered
with the hoary frost, therefore it has its name from covering; and here the
Lord calls it, The hoary Frost Of Heaven.

Because the cold which makes the hoary Frost, comes from the Air, which is
often in Scripture called Heaven.

Hence Note; The Lord will be acknowledged as the Author of Ice and Frost.

They are the effects of his power and declaration of his glory; and therefore
the Lord calls suchlike meteors to praise him, ( Psalm. 148.8.) as evidences or
p^^ofs of his power and wondrous works ( Psalm. 147.16, 17.) He scatters his
hoar Frost like ashes, he casts forth his Ice like morsels; who can stand
before his cold? The Lord takes the Ice and Frost and Cold to be his; it is not
only his Sun, but his Ice, and his Frost; he scatters his hoar Frost like
ashes. The Frost is compared to ashes in a threefold respect: first, Because
the hoar F^ost gives a little interruption to the fight. I^ you scatter ashes
into the Air, it darkens the light, so does the hoa^y Frost. Secondly, hoary
Frost is like ashes, because near in color to ashes. Thirdly, It Is like ashes,
because there is a kind of burning in it; F^ost burns the tender buds and
blossoms, Vnde pruinae nomen, e perurendo, quod fruges perurit, and vocant
Carbunculationem.
i^ nips them, and dries them up. The hoary Frost, has its denomination in the
Latin Tongue from burning, and it diffe^s but a very little from that word
which is commonly used in Latin, for a coal of fire. The cold Frost has a
kind of scotching in it, as well as the hot Sun: Unseasonable Frosts in the
Spring, scorch the tender fruits, which bad effect of Frost is usually expressed
by Carbunculation or blasting. Frost is sometimes a great benefit, and
sometimes a great scourge; when it comes opportunely and in season, it is a
great benefit; but if it comes in the spring of the year, if it comes when the
youth of the spring, buds and blossoms, are put forth, it proves very
detrimental, and kills that hopeful spring of the Earth, which the warmth of a
benign Sun and wind had invited out. The Frost of a few nights has spoiled
the hopes of Husbandmen and Vine-dressers, for the whole year. Frost is both a
benefit and a scourge; whether it proves the one or the other, it is God who
gendreth it, and must therefore be acknowledged in it.

As in this 29th verse Go^ declares himself the Author of the Frost and of the
Ice, and, in opening it, somewhat has been said of their effects, so in the
next verse one remarkable and very forcible effect of the Frost is held forth,
that we may learn (and it is no more than our ex^erience and eye-s^ght have
often taught us) what Cold or Frost can do. Why, what can it do? It can tu^n
water into stones. Such is the power of Cold, that it hardens the liquid water
like a stone. Ice in its very first appearance has the resembl^nce of a stone,
and being very thick (as in long Frosts) it is like a rock, like a mountain of
stone: Thus the Text speaks Verse. 30. The waters are hid as with a stone.

That is, when extreme cold freezes the waters into Ice, the waters are not
seen, they are lo^kt up, and (as it were) paved over with a stone; or the
waters seem to suffer a strange metamorphosis, and leaving their natural
liquidi^y and softness, are condensed or hardened into r^cks; such is the force
of cold. Some express it actively, not as we, The waters are hid, but the
waters hide themselves like a stone. Thus Mr. Broughton expresses it.
Naturalists tell us that in some cold Countries, Nives in Chrystallum durantur.
Plin. l. 37. c. 2. (...) i. e. Aqua frigore con^reta.
where there are great falls of snow and rain, the snow and rain grow into such
a hardness, that you cannot reduce them into wa^er. Crystal (say they) is
nothing but water hardened by c^ld: And thus water is more than hid as with a
stone, for it becomes a stone.

Hence Note; The Lord can make wonderful changes in Nature.

What is more fluid than water, more moveable than water; it was of old grown
into a divine Proverb ( Genesis 49.4.) Unstable as water; yet this unstable body
can the Lord change into a stone, and make it hard as a rock. Histories are
full of strange reports concerning the effects of cold. There have been such
Frosts and Freezings, that great waters, mighty rivers, yea some parts of the
Sea have been turned into a stone: Houses have been built upon these congealed
waters, and Battles have been fought upon them. Strabo l. 2.
The Army of King Mithridates overcame the enemy in a pitched Battle upon the
Ice. And it is fresh in memory, how the late King of Sweden a few years since,
passed his Army over an arm of the Sea, Danubius ripas golu jungit duratusque
glacie ingentia tergo bella transportat. Plin. in Panegyr.
in his wat with Denmark. So fierce and violent is the cold in some parts of
Muscovia, that a man's spittle is frozen (say some) in its passage from his lips
to the ground; much more may it be so, with cold water sprinkled in the Air.

Now as the power of God is great in hardening that which is soft, Concrescunt
subitae currenti in flumine crustae. Vndaque jam tergo ferratos sustinet orbs,
puppibus illa prius patulis, nunc hospita plaustris. Virg. l. 3. Georg.
so in softning that which is hard. He that turns water into a stone, can turn
stones into water. So the Psalmist expresses the miracle of bringing water out
of the rock for Israel in the wilderness ( Psalm. 114.7, 8.) Tremble thou Earth
at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob, which turned
the rock into a standing water; the flint into a fountain of waters. This is a
glorious work, the turning of a visible rock into water; but the work of God is
more glorious in softning a hard heart, or in turning the rocky heart of an
impenitent sinner, or the invisible rock of an impenitent sinners heart into
the waters of godly sorrow, working repentance not to be repented of. We should
much more magnify the power of God, when we see hearts of stone melted and
dissolved into those spiritual waters, than when (though that be a mighty work
of God) we see the natural waters turned into, or (as the Text gives it) hid as
with a stone, or when we see (as it follows in the Text) that The face of the
deep is frozen.

That is, the uppermost part of the deep is frozen; and, I conceive, the Lord
puts this in (the face of the deep) to show that the cold has not only power
in the shallow standing waters, but in that which is deep, and deep to
amazement; so deep, that it is called, The Deep; as if all other waters were
but shallows, compared with that. So then, not ponds only and rivers and
shallow waters, but the face of the deep, where one would think the Frost could
have no power, is frozen.

The Hebrew is, The face of the deep is taken. The word notes taking, as a
Captive or Prisoner is taken. Quasi ligata and captivata esset.
The Lord takes the face of the deep Cap^ive, and holds it as his Prisoner
during pleasure. They who inhabit or travel to the Northern Climes, have so
m^^h experience that the face of the deep is frozen, that I need not further
insist upon any proof of it; nor shall I further treat of these effects of
Cold, Frost and Ice, as considered in a natural way: Only for the close of
all, and a little improvement of them in a moral or spiritual way, we may
consider them in a twofold resemblance.

First, Ice and Frost resemble all humane things. The things of this world, are
they not like a Sea of Ice? that is, First, Very slippery. Secondly, Very
Uncertain, how long they will last or continue. Some conceive, that, the Sea of
glass like unto Crystal, which was represented unto St John in Vision ( Rev.
4.6. and 15.2.) signified the state of the world, which is like a Sea, because
of the tumultuousness of it; and like a Sea of glass, because of the
brittleness of it; and a Sea of glass like Crystal, because of the clearness
and transparency of it to God; he sees quite through it: to him all things are
naked and manifest. Such a thing is the world, it is a frozen Sea, especially
for the slipperiness and uncertainty of it. For though the Sea be turned into a
stone, yet no man knows how soon a Thaw may dissolve it back again into water?
The things of this world suffer sudden changes. Though men have worldly
estates, like to mountains of stone or rocks, yet the Lord can make these
mountains, these rocks, melt at, and flow down at his presence ( Isa. 64.2.)
The greatest mountains of worldly power and riches, which seem to be as hard as
rocks, as compact as mountains of Adamant, are yet but like mountains of Ice
before the Lord; if he let forth but a little heat of his anger and displeasure
against them, they melt like wax before the fire, or like a heap of snow before
the Sun, and slow down presently like water. Should we see men building upon
the Ice (as some have done in a proper sense) we would presently say, they
build upon a very unsure foundation. They who build their hopes upon any person
or thing in this world, are no wiser, and do no better than they who build upon
the Ice. All things here below are uncertain, they may, yea, they must soon
melt and pass away, from us, or we from them.

Secondly, Ice and Frost, the cold season, of which the Text speaks,
resembles a state of affliction and adversity; that is Ice, that is Frost. As
warm Sunshine resembles a state of prosperity, so Cold and Frost a state of
adversity; and so it does in a fourfold respect.

First, Because Frost or Cold is unpleasant and pinching to the body,
e^p^cially to weak and tender bodies. No chastening (says t^^ Apostle, Heb.
12.11.) for the present seems (to sense and sl^^^) to be joyous, (...)
but griev^us, or (as the Greek strictly) seems to be of joy but grief.

Secondly, Ice and Frost continue not, they are but for a season, a ^naw will
come. The affl^cted state of a godly man is unpleasing, yet not lasting, to be
sure not everlasting. Though some F^o^ts hold longer than others, yet none hold
always, Summer will come; and usually where winter is fiercest, Summer, Heyl.
Geog.
for a recompense, is pleasantest. O^ Modern Geographer having described the
sharpness of Winter in Muscovia, concludes thus; Such is their Winter, neither
is their Summer less miraculous. For the huge Seas of Ice which in a manner
covered the whole surface of the Country, are at first approach of the Sun
suddenly d ssolved, the waters quickly dried up, and the Earth dressed in her
Holy Day Apparel, such a mature growth of fruits, such fl^urish^ng of he bs,
such chirping ^f birds, a^ if it were a pe^petual spring. And that the Church
of God after a sad and cold winter of affl ction is relieved by a sweet and
comfortable manner of pro^perity, is set forth in the highest st^ains and most
beautiful slowres of divine Rhetoric by Christ in that invita^ion to his
Spouse ( Cant. 2.10, 11, 12, 13.) My beloved spoke and said unto me, Rise up my
love, my fair one, and come away: f r l^, the wi^ter is past, the rain is over
and gone (that is, thy affl cti ns are ended, thy clouds of so^row, and thy
tears a^^ over-bl^wn and wiped away, and now behold a succession of be^^e^
things, even of whatsoever may call out thy joys, and renew thy comf^^ts; f^)
the flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singi^g ^f birds is come; the
voice of the turtle is heard in our land: the fig tree puts forth her
tender figs, and the Vines with the tender grape, give a good smell. Here Is a
new face of things indeed; what can be added to the felicity of that estate
which is shadowed under these Metaphors? Such a Summer of spiritual felicity in
temporal liberties, after a winter of temporal sufferings in her spirituals,
did Christ invite his Church in general unto: And this may relieve particular
Christians in their afflictions. The cold Frost seldom lasts long, never
always.

Thirdly, Though Cold and Frost be pinching and troublesome while they last,
yet they have a very good effect upon the Earth while they last. First, they
mellow the Earth. After a lasting Frost the clods of Earth crumble easily,
whereas if it lie all the Winter without a Frost, they are more stiff, and not
so fit for husbandry: Thus afflictions mellow the heart of man, and make it
more fit for Gods husbandry. As Frost dries up the ill humors of the Earth, so
does affliction those of the soul; and thereby prepares it to receive the seed
of the Word. When God afflicts his people, it is for their profit, that they
may be partakers of his holiness; that is, that they may profitab^y improve all
those means which he has appointed to make them more holy. And hence,

Fourthly, As Frost and Cold kill the weeds and worms which eat the roots and
hinder the growth of Herbs, Corn, and Plants; so afflictions kill our lusts,
those worms and weeds that breed and grow in our hearts, always hindering the
fruitfulness, sometime to the utter unfruitfulness, of the seed of the word
sown among us and upon us ( Matthew. 13.22.) The frost of affliction is a means
to prevent the worm which breeds naturally out of the corruption of our hearts,
even that terrible worm spoken of ( Isa. 66.24.) the worm of conscience. As
there are worms of corruption, Pride, Covetousness, Wrath, Wantonness, etc. in
our hearts; so out of these that tormenting worm breeds, called the worm of
Conscience. Now, the frost of affliction which God sends upon us, is very
effectual, as to kill these worms of corruption which eat the roots of our
graces, and hinder our fruit-bearing; so to prevent the life of that worm of
Conscience, which (as the Prophet speaks in the place last named) never dies.

Therefore, as when the Lord sends frost, though it make us shake, and we have
a hard time of it, yet no man rises up in passion and says, I had rather dye,
and be out of the world, than live in such a season; No, men know that a frosty
season, is a wholesome season, and they know Summer will come and make amends.
So when we are in the Winter of affliction, let us not be impatient nor
unquiet; let us not think that the frost will ruin and undo us. Though Ice be
upon every water, though Icicles hang upon every twig, do not think this will
be at all for your undoing, it may be much for your bettering. Cold weather
does good as well as hot; and if we should have all hot, and no cold, it might
be very ill, very bad to us; therefore be not troubled at the cold, nor afraid
of ice and frost, they will not hurt you, unless you hurt your selves, by your
impatience under them. And when it is coldest, you may warm your selves at the
fire or Sunshine of this hope, that ere long the weather will be warmer. As
Athanasius said of the trouble given the Church by that Apostate Julian, It is
but a Cloud, it will soon be over; so may I say, according to the allusion in
this Text, its but a Winters frost, Summer will come: This should be the
comfort of all that fear God in a day of evil feared or felt. When Christ (
Mat. 24.32, 33.) had soretold the signs of his coming, he said, Learn a Parable
of the Fig Tree, when his branch is yet tender, and puts forth leaves, ye
know that Summer is nigh: So likewise, ye, when ye shall see all these things,
know that it is near, even at the door. As when we shall see those dreadful
appearances, which are the forerunners of Christ coming, so when we shall feel
any chilling frosts of affliction, then we may know that Summer is at hand;
when the night is darkest, the light is nearest; when Winter is hardest, a
thawing Sun leading in the Spring is approaching toward us.

There is but one kind of cold or frost which we have cause to fear, and that
is the frost of unkindness, or the coldness of affection to God and one
another; and I warn all to take heed of that, because it is but too too
probable, that this frost and cold will hang about the hearts of many in the
latter days; yea, is it not visible, are we not sensible of that frost begun,
at least, in these days? as Christ himself prophesied of those latter days, (
Mat. 24.12.) The love of many shall wax cold; is not love to God very chil? is
not charity to man, among men, of a complexion, as cold as ice at this day?
Take heed of this frost, of this cold; let not your hearts be frozen in love to
God or Man. It is sad when the streams of charitable bounty are frozen, and the
waters of compassion hidden as with a stone, when the very bowels of men are
Ice, and their hearts harder to one another, than the nether mil-stone?

There are two things much to be lamented, whenever they are seen or felt among
the Sons of men; especially among those who profess themselves the Servants of
God. The first is heat of anger and wrath. The second is coldness of love and
zeal. As that heat is apt to kindle unnatural fires, so this coldness may
provoke the Lord to kindle judiciary fires, or fiery judgments. The coldness of
the air will not hurt us, nor can the frost of any affliction much annoy us, if
our love wax not cold, if the frost of uncharitableness to one another, and of
unzealousness (if I may so speak) for God and his concerns, take not our
affections.

JOB, Chap. 38. Verse. 31, 32, 33. 31. Can thou bind the sweet influences of
Pleiades? or loose the bands of Orion?

32. Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or can thou guide
Arcturus with his sons?

33. Know thou the Ordinances of Heaven? can thou set the dominions
thereof in the earth?


THe Lord having questioned Job about his skill and knowledge in those Meteors,
the Rain, the Dew, the Ice and Frost, all which were wrought in the Air; rises
yet higher, questioning him about the Stars of heaven, and their ordinary
effects upon the earth, and all sublunary bodies.

In these three Verses, the Lord points at the four quarters or seasons of the
year; over which the four Stars or Constellations mentioned in this context
have a predominance, according to the appointment of God in the course of
nature: He points at Spring and Winter in the 31. verse; he points at Summer
and Autumn in the 32. verse; and he speaks of both more generally in the 33.
verse.

The sum of the 31. verse may be thus given; as if the Lord had said, O Job,
Can thou alter the seasons of the year? First, Can thou retard, or keep
back the Spring? can thou hinder the rising and appearance of the Pleiades or
seven Stars, so called? can thou stop the destillation of their influences,
proper to the introduction of that season? Or, Secondly, Can thou keep off
the Winter, that it come not, or hasten it away when it is come, by dissolving
the colds and frosts with which the constellations of that season bind up the
earth, and so shorten that unkind and comfortless quarter of the year? This is
the plain meaning of the Text, and of those hard or strange words, Pleiades,
Orion, Mazzaroth, Arcturus, used in it; all which Constellations are conceived
to have their special operations upon the four quarters of the year
respectively: For, ^fficit quidem Sol accessu and recessu suo istas anni
tempestatos, sed habet praeterea adjunct^s and adjuvantes causas. Merl.
though the access of the Sun has the chief hand in making Spring and Summer,
and the recess of the Sun in making Autumn and Winter; yet the Sun does it not
alone, but has the aid of other adjuvant causes in nature, by which those
great changes are in part effected and produced.

Further, the Reader may take notice, that three of these four Stars or
Constellations, as expressed in our Translation, Pleiades, Orion, Arcturus, are
not literally in the Hebrew Text; nor were they known by those names, when
either Job or the Penman of this book lived, but were long after brought into
use by the learned Grecians, and from them derived unto us; and we make use of
these names, according to the received opinion, expounding the Hebrew names by
them.

I shall not stay here in opening their derivations or significations in either
language, having done it already at the ninth verse of the ninth Chapter of
this book, where Job himself spoke of these constellations, attributing this
glory to God, that he it is, who makes Arcturus, Orion, Pleiades, and the
Chambers of the South, which last are supposed to be the same with Mazzaroth
here in this verse.

Verse. 31. Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades? That is, can
thou stop their rising, or the giving forth of their influences, which open the
earth by a kindly warmth, and cause grass and corn, herbs and flowers, plants
and trees of all sorts, to spring and put forth? can thou bind them up from
exerting their natural effects and proper operations? certainly thou can not.
He that is bound, cannot do what he would, nor what he could, nor what he daily
did when at liberty. The Philistims had a great mind to bind Sampson, supposing
that then he could not put forth his mighty strength to mischief them.
Prisoners, when bound and laid in chains can do nothing. As there is a binding
to do, so a binding not to do; and that not only with material cords, Pleiades
sunt septem stellae, q^ae ortu suo primae navigationis tempus ostendun ^^unde
Graecis dicuntur (...) quod est navigare, Vergiliae Latinis a vero quo tempore
oriuntur.
but metaphorical vows, oaths and promises. We commonly say, He that is bound
must obey: But can any bind the Stars to obedience? what, or who but God, can
bind or stay, either the constant motions or ministrations of the Stars?
Sampson could not be bound by the Philistims till he betrayed himself, and
discovered the secret where his strength lay. Who knows where the strength,
force and virtues of the Stars lie? or if any knew that secret, could they
climb up to the Stars, and cut off that lock wherein their strength lies? or
break the pipes by which their influences are conveyed down to the earth? Can
thou bind The sweet influences of Pleiades?

The word rendered Influences, signifies Delights, or delicacies, Fructus
delicatos. Pagn.
or delicate fruits; and therefore that Garden full of sinless pleasures, which
God himself planted for man in his state of primitive innocence and felicity,
is called from this word, the Garden of Eden, (Genesis 2.15.) that is, a place of
delight, commonly known by the name of Paradise; and hence we well translate
sweet Influences: the Hebrew is Delights. (...) quod est deliciari, aut
voluptate and deliciis abund^^e.
Mr. Broughton translates Delicacies; and the interlineal, Can thou bind the
delicate fruits that Pleiades brings forth? That is, the green herbs, the
flowers, with other delicacies and delights which accompany the Spring: can
thou hinder their budding or appearing at Springtime? When the deformity and
dirt of Winter depart or pass away, then there is a new face of things, then
every bush flourishes, then the trees and fields put on their ornaments, then
the singing of birds fills the Air, and makes it resound with their harmony and
melodious music. The word is rendered Dainties (Genesis 49.20.) and an adverb
coming from this, is used ( Lam. 4.5.) They that did fare delicately, are
desolate in the streets. As also (1 Samuel 15.32.) Agag came unto him delicately.
Can thou bind the sweet Influences Of Pleiades?

The Greeks express Winter by a word just of the same sound (...).
with the Hebrew word Chymah, by us rendered Pleiades; as if this respected the
Winter, or were a cold Constellation: but certainly here it relates to the
Spring; and considering that in this place the Pleiades are said to give out
sweet Influences, the delights and delicacies of the earth, the word must needs
be meant of, or intend a benign and favorable Star, a Spring-star, rather
than a Winter-star; and therefore the Latins give this Constellation its name
from the Spring, Vergiliae, quasi veris vigiles.
because then it appears; of which see more Chap. 9.9.

Further, When this Star, or company of Stars, (these Pleiades, or seven Stars)
are spoken of by name, we by a Synechdoche may understand all the Stars: for,
what influence soever any Star is empowered with, or puts forth, who can
hinder? Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades?

Hence observe: First, God has planted a virtue in the Stars of heaven, which
they shed down upon the earth.

The creatures of the earth, are (as I may say) fed and fattened from heaven.
All Vegetatives, grass, herbs, plants, flowers, trees; all Sensitives, beasts
of the earth, fowls of the air; yea, and rational creatures too, all men who
breath in the air, and walk upon the earth, are refreshed and fed by the
influences of heaven, by the clouds and stars. Further, the Stars send down
their influences, not only upon living creatures in their three ranks, but even
upon inanimate creatures; the minerals, the stones that lie deep under the
earth, the precious gems, with those of a courser grain, receive much from the
influences of the Stars. So then, all earthly bodies receive and derive their
vigor and beauty from the heavenly; the Sun and Moon have the greatest power,
and there is a very great power in the Stars and Constellations, in the
Pleiades, Orion, and Arcturus, for the production of great effects.

Secondly, In that it is said, Can thou bind, or stop the Influences of
Pleiades?

Observe, It is not in the power of man, of any man, to hinder or stay the
virtue of the stars from falling down upon the earth.

What God will do by the creature, no man can undo. If God set those heavenly
bodies at liberty, and bids them send down their influences, man cannot lock
them up, nor imprison their powers, nor bind them from working?

And hence we may infer. First, if none can bind the influences, nor stay the
comfortable virtue of the stars, when God is pleased to let them out? then much
less can any bind or hinder the influences of the Spirit. When God is pleased
to send his Spirit to work upon the heart of man, who can let him?

There is a threefold influence or work of the spirit of God upon the soul of
man.

First, To enlighten, or to give the light of the knowledge of his own glory in
the face of Jesus Christ. Who can hinder God, when he purposes thus to
instruct and teach the ignorant, and make them wise unto Salvation, wiser than
their teachers; who can hinder it?

Secondly, To convert, to work faith and repentance, together with love,
humility, etc. These graces are destilled, and drop down from the Spirit of God
upon the soul; and who can hinder the Spirit from working them in the most
hardened and unbelieving souls in the most vain, proud, and presumptuous soul?
the barren'st wilderness, dryest heath (such are persons unconverted) are made
fruitful by the influences of the Spirit.

Thirdly, To refresh and comfort. There are unspeakable influences of joy
destilled from the spirit upon believers; and when God will let them down from
heaven, who can let them? what can let them? All the troubles and sorrows, all
the pains and tortures, that men can invent or inflict upon a believer, cannot
bind these influences of the Spirit, nor hinder joy in believing. The greatest
evils of this life, can neither shut up nor shut out, that comfort which the
Spirit speaks. The most churlish winds that can blow from the coldest
quarters of the world cannot chill, much less kill or blast those fruits of the
Spirit, Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, says,
meekness, temperance, mentioned by the Apostle ( Gal. 5.22, 23.) The soul grows
green, like a Garden or Pasture, in the Spring; the soul bud's, blossom's, and
brings forth these blessed fruits abundantly, when fed with these dainties and
delicacies of the Spirit. Those great floods of trouble and persecution, which
the Serpent, any where, or at any time casts out of his mouth, cannot prevail
against the least drop of Consolation, wrought in the heart by the Spirits
influence. Paul and Silas were bound in Prison, but there their persecutors
could not bind the sweet influences of the Spirit from comforting them, nor
daunt them by any terror from triumphing in Christ; they could sing in Prison,
yea, they sung at Midnight.

Secondly, We may Infer; If God has placed the Stars in heaven, to drop down
sweet influences upon us, then at every sight of the Stars our hearts should be
raised up, in the admiring thoughts of the wisdom, goodness, and power of God.
We usually look upon the Stars, as if they were only so many lights bespangling
the Canopy of heaven, and sparkling, as so many fires in the firmament; but we
seldom consider their virtues, their influences, or the wonderful effects which
they produce How few are there, who behold the heavens with David's eyes. (
Psalm. 8.3, 4.) When I (said he) consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers;
the Moon and the Stars which thou have made: What is man, that thou are mindful
of him? God is mindful of man, not only to give him light by the Moon and
Stars, by the benefit whereof he sees other things; but God gives many unseen
benefits by the Moon and Stars. The influences of the Stars are as beneficial
to us, Qui negat esse Deum spectet modo fidero c^li. Sidor^ qui spectat non
negat esse Deum.
and as great a treasure as their light. We indeed have great cause (as we are
commanded, Psalm. 136.7, 8, 9.) to pay the tribute of thanks to God for setting
up the Sun, Moon, and Stars in the heavens to give us light; O give thanks to
him that made great lights, the Sun to rule by day, the Moon and Stars to rule
by night. Yet we must not confine our thankfulness to God for them only as they
give us light, for they give us heat as well as light, and wonder working
influences as well as either. Moses (their civil Father) blessing the twelve
Tribes, as Jacob their natural Father did before his departure out of the
world, thus bespake the blessing upon Joseph (Deuteronomy. 33.13, 14, 15.) Blessed of
the Lord be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and also
for the deep that coucheth beneath, and for the precious fruits brought forth
by the Sun, and for the precious things put forth by the Moon, and for the
chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the
lasting hills, and for the precious things of the earth, and the fullness
thereof, etc. Here we have two sorts of precious things. First, The precious
things of heaven. Secondly, The precious things of the earth, of the hills and
mountains. The former precious things are the cause, the latter the effect: The
precious things of heaven, are the influences of the Sun and Moon, under which
we are to comprehend the influences of the Stars, these cause or produce the
precious things of the earth; that is, Grass, Herbs, with all sorts of
Vegetables growing upon the surface of the earth, they produce also the
precious things of the ancient mountains, and of the lasting hills; that is,
gems or precious stones, gold and silver, together with all sorts of inferior
minerals. Now if the Stars, by their influences, yield us all these precious
things, have we not much cause to admire both the power of God, who has
implanted those virtues and opperations in them, as also his goodness, who has
ordained both those causes, and their products or effects, for the benefit and
comfort, yea, for the contentment and delight of man? What is man, that God
should be thus mindful of him; that for his sake and use, or for the sweetning
of his passage through the Wilderness of this troublesome world, he should
impregnate the earth by the sweet influences of heaven? It has been said; Let
him look to the Stars of heaven, who denies the God of heaven; and doubtless he
will not only not deny, but not so much as doubt that there is a God in heaven,
who duly considers the pure nature, and the irresistible operations of the
Stars of heaven? Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades?

Or loose the bands of O^ion? We can neither bind what God lets loose, Tune
coeli and naturae ordinem immutabis, ut quod Astrum Pleiadum sol vit
constringas aut quod Orion constringit, solvas Merc.
nor loosen what God binds. What Christ affirmed of himself in regard of
spirituals ( Rev. 3.7.) These things says he that has the key of David, that
opens and no man shuts, that shuts and no man opens; the same is true
also in regard of naturals, and therefore the Lord had no sooner said to Job,
Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, but he adds, or loose the
bands of Orion?

There are several opinions concerning these two Constellations of heaven, yet
all agree in this; that one of them is a benign Constellation, and very
comfortable to the fruits of the earth, and that the other is as sharp and
churlish; that the one is very friendly and favorable to all living creatures,
but that the other is a bitter, and as it were a killing Constellation; and
therefore the Lord says, Can thou loose the bands of O^ion? When once Orion
has and holds the earth, as it were in bands and chains; when Orion has got
the earth in his clutches, and huggs it, in appearance, to death, in his cold
arms, who can rescue it? (...) a (...) quod est inconstantem and varium esse,
quasi signum quod inconstantiam and perturbationem aeris efficiat. (...) Aut
attrahentia Orionis aperies? Drus. Aut Lora Orionis dissolves? Jun. Vox Hebraea
(...) a verbo (...) traxit. Funes ejus sunt operationes, quibus tempestates
velut furibus attrabit, and frigore constringit terram, Scult. Sidus hoc oritur
in principio hiemis, and terram tanquam loris constringit, Pisc. Nimbosus
Orion, Virg.
The Pleiades open the earth, and set all free; they call up the quickening
moisture, and draw out the verdure of every growing thing: But Orion holds all
in bands, Orion is a hard natured Constellation, the O^iginal word signifies to
be unconstant, vexatious, and unquiet; because, under the Dominion of this
Star, the air is usually troublesome and unquiet.

Can thou loose, etc. The word imports opening what is fast shut, or loosing
what is fast bound. When a man is in bands, we say, loose him from his bands.
Now says the Lord, Can thou loose the bands of Orion? that is, can free
the air from those colds and frosts, which bind the body of the earth, and all
things growing out of the earth in winter season? The word rendered bands, comes
from a root that signifies to draw; hence some translate, The Traces of Orion.
Traces are those bands by which Horses being fastened to Carts or Wagons, draw
them after them: Which expression alludes to that natural power planted in this
Star, by which, according to Gods appointment it draws rain storms and cold
freezing winds after it, and so binds up the pores of the earth. Now says the
Lord to Job, can thou with all thy skill and strength loose those bands, and
set the earth at liberty? Thou can not. O^ this Orion, see more at the 9th
Chapter (ver. 9.) I shall only say thus much further here, That these words
stand in direct opposition to the former, showing that as Job could not stop
those Benign Stars, the Pleiades, from giving forth their virtues to the
earth; so he could not loose the bands of that severe and harsh Star, nor
divert the effects which it brings upon the earth. Can thou loose the bands
of Orion? Hence learn, first, in general.

Cold is a binder, a great and mighty binder. Winter binds the earth from
bearing, and it binds the hands of men from working; when a man is extreme cold
he can make little use of his hands.

And as Natural, so Spiritual cold is a great binder. A cold heart is a bound
heart. When the heart has in it no heat of love to God, or has not been
heated with a sense of the love of God: when the heart has in it no heat of
zeal for the glory of God, nor for the good of men; when these sad colds are
upon the heart, it is bound indeed. He that has this cold upon him, can say but
little to God; and will say, and do less for God: He is bound not only hand and
foot, but tongue also. Take heed of cold upon your hearts, it will hinder you
from holy activity, bind you up from duty both toward God and man. He that is
only lukewarm will do God little service, can do none that is pleasing and
acceptable unto God; but he that is key-cold, as we say, neither will, nor can
do any thing at all, that may be called Service. The Apostle Paul ( Acts
20.22.) was bound in the Spirit to go to Jerusalem, which was a great service
for Christ; that is, The heat of true affection, which the instinct of the holy
Spirit caused in him, engaged him beyond all power of revocation to undertake
that hazardous journey. But when any are bound in spirit by the coldness of
their affections to Christ, they always prove hand-bound and foot-bound, I may
say (without affectation according to the use of that word in our language)
hide-bound also, as to any thing that is good; especially, if it be (as it was
in the Apostles case now mentioned) either dangerous or costly. And when a soul
is in those bands of the Mystical Orion, the evil spirit, surely none but God
can loose them, seeing none but he can loose these in the Text. Can thou
loose the bands of Orion, the Winter-bands?

Hence note, Secondly, It is not in the power of man to loose what God binds.

The Lord put the question to Job about his works, that he might see his own
weakness and utter inability to undo his providential workings: When God had
Job in bonds, it was not in his power to loose his bonds by his strength and
striving. The providence of God were to him as Orion to the earth, cold and
sharp, causing the frost of adversity to bind him so strongly, that he could by
no means loose himself. Christ says to his Disciples about Church Censures
rightly laid, and Church-approbation duly given ( Mat. 18.18.) Whatsoever ye
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Where man binds in Gods way, God binds too;
and where man looses in Gods way, God looses too; but take it either in natural
or spiritual things, it is not in the power of man to bind where God loses,
nor to loose where God binds: Can thou loose the bands of Orion? If God
appoint cold to bind the earth, man cannot loose it; and if God will bind man
with the cords and cold iron of any affliction, man cannot free himself. In the
hottest natural season of the year, man may be in cold providential bands, and
under them he must abide till the Lord breaks the frost and set him free. It is
said of Joseph (Psalm. 105.17, 18, 19.) He was sold for a servant, his feet were
hurt with fetters, he was laid in iron; or, (as the Margin reads it) His soul
came into iron. But how came he out? did he himself loose the bands of that
Orion who cast him into prison? surely no, the Text tells us otherwise; he lay
fast enough in bands, until (ver. 19.) the word of the Lord came; the word of
the Lord tried him. But what was this Word of the Lord? some say, it was the
word of God to Pharaoh in a dream, concerning the seven years of plenty and
famine, which may be said to try Joseph, none but he could interpret it, and
that may be said to unloose his bands, because it was the occasion of his
deliverance and advancement. But I rather conceive the word that came, was the
word of Gods decree and promise made to Joseph in a dream, for his advancement
above all his brethren ( Genesis 37.6, 7, 8.) When once the time came that this
Word of God must come to be fulfilled, then the bands of Orion were loosed; for
then (says the Psalmist, ver. 20.) The King sent and loosed him, even the
Ruler of the people, and let him go free. And as it was with Joseph so with
Job, and so will ever be. If the cold winter blasts of any adversity bind up
our comforts, either in our callings or relations, there is no unloosing them
un^il the word of the Lord come. Solomon gives this counsel ( Eccles. 7.13,
14.) Consider the work of God; that is, his working in the world. The reason of
this counsel follows; For, who can make that strait which he has made crooked?
Solomon intends this specially of the dealings of God in the world; not that
there is any crookedness or unrighteousness, any iniquity or injustice in the
ways of God; but he means by crooked, that which is troublesome and grievous.
Now if God himself make a thing crooked, till he himself make it strait, it is
not in the power of all the men in the world to do it. The moral sense of that
Text, is the very same with the point in hand; If God bind, who can loose?
There is no striving, no contending with the providence of God: we must deal
with, and apply to God himself for the altering of them, we cannot alter them
our selves; we must desire him to mend his work, we cannot: This Solomon
plainly intimates in the next, or 14. verse; In the day of prosperity be
joyful, but in the day of adversity consider (in a time of adversity things
grow crooked and awry from what we would have and desire, or from what is
comfortable to us) for God has set the one over against the other, to the end
that man should find nothing after him. Sometimes he makes things crooked,
sometimes strait; sometimes he gives a day of prosperity, sometimes of
adversity, that no man may be able to say directly, what shall be next. And
seeing there is no loosing the bands of Orion till God himself loose them;
therefore let all who are companions in tribulation, say one to another, as
they in a like case are represented, ( Hosea 6.1.) Come, and let us return unto
the Lord, for he has wounded, and he will heal; he has torn, and he will bind
us up: O^, as this Text speaks, He has bound us, and he will lo^sen us.

Thirdly, From both the pa^ts of the verse considered together, these negatives
upon man must be resolved into affirmatives, as to God: He can bind the sweet
influences of Pleiades; he can loose the bands of O^ion.

Whence note; God can both stop the ordinary course of our comforts, and
deliver us from our troubles when he pleases.

God can stop those things from comforting us, and those persons from showing
us any favor, whose dispositions are as benign to us, as Pleiades are to the
earth; and he can give us favor in their eyes, who naturally are as churlish
as Nabal, and as sharp as Orion to the earth. He can make a Wolf a Shepherd,
and those a safety to his servants, whose hearts were to swallow them up. The
earth shall help the woman, that is, the worst of the world, the Church. God
made Ravens feed Eliah (1 Kings 17.4.) And he said of Cyrus, whom he calls a
ravenous Bird, (Isa. 46.11.) He is my Shepherd (Isa. 44.28.) Thus the Lord
loses the bands of Orion. And when he hardens their hearts against us, who
formerly were tender toward us, or when he turns their hearts to hate us, who
formerly loved us and showed us favor, then the Lord may be said to bind the
sweet influences of Pleiades. What sweet influences of favor did the people of
Israel receive from Pharaoh and the Egyptians, at their first coming thither,
and long after? yet afterward, what grievous Taskmasters were they to them?
their favors were all restrained and changed into yokes and bands: whence was
this? The Psalmist answers fully ( Psalm. 105.25.) He (that is God) turned their
heart (that is, the heart of the Egyptians) to hate his people, to deal
subtly with his servants, and cruelly too. Thus the Power and Name of God is
both ways magnified. Whenas we have the most benign Pleiades dropping down
sweet influences upon us, God can stop them; and when we have the hardest bands
of Orion upon us, the Lord is able to loose them. This glory is due to God in
all the changes which we meet with in this world, whether from good to bad,
from the favors to the frowns of men; or from bad to good, from their frowns
to their favors, from their bands to their embraces: all is of God. And I
conceive the scope of God in these questions, was chiefly to bring Job to that
conclusion. The next verse bears the same sense.

Verse. 32. Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or can thou guide
Arcturus and his Sons? This also is a denying Question; Can thou? thou can
not bring forth Mazzaroth in his season. The word rendered to bring forth, is
applied, First, to the birth or bringing forth of children ( Genesis 15.4.)
Secondly, to the earths bringing forth flowers and fruits ( Judge. 13.14.)
Thirdly, to the rising of the Sun or Stars ( Genesis 19.23.) ( Neh. 4.21.) Thus
here, can thou cause Mazzaroth to rise, and go forth? Or can thou bring
forth Mazzaroth?

What Is that? Some Interpreters conceive, Sunt collectionis syderum, quae usus
obtinuit, ut vocentur (...) quasi parva animalia alii vero dicunt signifi^are
(...) sydereum canem Chrysostom. apud Orus.

Colligunt quidam hic Mazzaroth esse quod ibi dicebatur penetralia Austri. Merc.

Remotiora si^ na Heb. separationes, i. e. sidera a nobis qui sub polo arctico
degimus (ut Jobus) separata; sic autem vooantur sidera meridionalia quae
oriuntur in principio aestatis, Pisc.


that by Mazzaroth we are to understand those Constellations which Astronomers
call the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, which are expressed for learning sake,
by the fancied names of living creatures; so that according to this
interpretation, the Suns appearance in, or passage through those monthly signs,
is the bringing forth of Mazzaroth in his season. But most generally they are
taken for the Southern Stars, and thought to be the same with those ( Chap.
9.9.) Called the Chambers of the South; and seeing the other three are named
there, it is not improbable that under this word the fourth is intended. Master
Broughton calls them, far Stars in the South: The letter of the Hebrew imports
that; and the Seventy derive it from a root, that signifies to separate or
disperse, because those Stars are far separated, or are at a great distance
from us, who lie under the Northern Pole. Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in
his season? that is, can thou make that Constellation appear in its proper
time? thou can not. Hence take these brief Notes.

The Stars of heaven are brought forth by special order and appointment. As men
are brought forth at such a time, in such a place, so are they by an order from
God; The Stars of heaven are not under any law of man on earth, no, nor of the
Angels in heaven, ( Psalm. 19.4, 5.) In them (speaking of the heavens) has he
(that is, the Lord) set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which is as a Bride groom
coming out of his Chamber (every morning, to visit his Spouse the earth) and
rejoices as a strong man to run a race; what is there spoken of the Sun, is
true of Mazzaroth and of all the Stars, whether planted in the Northern or
Southern, in the Eastern or Western parts of heaven? It Is the Lord who brings
them all forth, and that in their season.

Note secondly; The Stars of heaven have their seasons, and keep their seasons.

They keep them punctually to a minute, to a moment, they know their times, and
they keep time; they have their seasons of rising, and their seasons of
setting. ( Psalm. 65.8.) Thou make the outgoings of Morning and Evening to
rejoice; Some Stars go out in the Morning, others go out in the Evening, their
times are various, but they all keep their time, ( Psalm. 104.19.) The Sun
knows its going down, that is, the time of its going down, the place of its
going down; In this we may see what we should do, or our own duty.

Let us come forth in our season. The Stars are brought forth in theirs, and
shall not we! happy are they that come forth, and bring forth in their season.
To hit time is a mercy as well as a duty! Paul indeed said of himself, (1 Cor.
15.8.) that he was an abortive, or born out of due time. An abortive in nature,
is one that comes into the world before the due time. Paul, as to his spiritual
birth or new birth through grace, was not, nor can any one be newborn before
the due time. We may rather say, that we are newborn too late than too soon,
or before our time. Paul might say he had been too long a proud Pharisie, a
formal professor, and at last, a persecutor of those who professed the truth of
the Gospel in truth; and therefore in that sense Paul was not an abortive, or
born out of due time, namely, before his time: But Paul might say so of
himself, that he was so, First, Because he was the last of the Apostles that
was called. The other Apostles were called by Christ, while he lived here on
earth: Paul was called by Christ from heaven, after his death and departure
from the earth. Secondly, He was born like an abortive, or those that come out
of due time, because of the violence, and grievous pangs which accompanied his
new birth: He was smitten from his horse to the ground, and lay as one dead in
his passage to his new-life. Such was the suddenness and violence of his
conversion, that it was most like an abortion. Thirdly, The Apostle himself
seems to give the reason in the next Verse; we know abortives are usually very
weak and imperfect children, and less in body than those born in due time. Now
such was Saint Paul's humility, so low was he in his own thoughts, that he calls
himself ( verse. 9.) the least of the Apostles, not meet to be called an
Apostle. In all these, or in any of these notions, the Apostle Paul might say
he was born out of due time; yet both as to the truth and seasonableness of his
conversion, he was born in due time and in his full time. Now as there is a due
time, a season for our spiritual birth, so for our fruit-bearing in spirituals.
It is said of every godly man ( Psalm. 1.3.) He shall be like a tree planted by
the rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in his season, that is,
seasonable fruit. The Stars appear in their season, and so should the fruits of
every Gospel-professor. If we should see Winter-stars in Summer, and
Summer-stars in Winter; if the Sun should rise at Midnight, or go down at
Midday, how prodigious would that appearance and disappearance be! if the Sun
should not rise and set just at the time we look for him, it would breed
horror, and put all men into an amazement. But now the Lord brings forth
Mazzaroth and all the Stars in their season. O therefore, let us look to our
seasons; we shall be reproved else by the Stars of heaven, Mazzaroth will be a
witness against us. Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season?

Or can thou guide Arcturus with his Sons. A radice (...) duxit placide and
sensim sicut pastoroves. Arcturus est stella insignis, quae oritur in principio
Autumni: Hebraei putant esse septem stellas quae semper apparent in nostro
hemisphaerio, a congregatione sic dictas; nam (...) est congregatio, Merc.
(...) Sive Cynosura supra alias stellas in apice caeli, tanquam matter in alto
supra filios suos sedens cum iis certissima ratione circumducitur, Coc.
Here Is a fourth question: Can thou guide? The word signifies to guide, or
conduct gently, softly, can thou guide them as a Shepherd guids his flock?
can thou guide them as a Father guids his Family, his Wife, Children, and
Servants? can thou direct them their course, how or which way to go? Some
think he uses the word guide, because this constellation represents the form of
a Wain or Wagon, and is by us commonly called Charles-wain, or the greater
Bear. Can thou guide Arcturus.

That Is another Constellation, seated in the Northern Pole, notably conspicuous
to us in a clear night. It Is the Sea-mans mark or guide. The Lord who guids that
Star, has made it a guide to the Seaman in the night; by looking to that, he
knows how to make his course. Can thou guide Arcturus With his Sons.

Some read Arcturus, and her Daughters; Master Broughton, and her Children: We
render in the Masculine Gender, and his Sons. There is one principal Star, and
several other Stars that stand as Children about their Father or Mother; and
therefore the Lord expresses them by that familiar Allusion, Arcturus and his
Sons, can thou guide them?

Hence Note, First, The Stars have a Guide a Governor.

The Stars move as directed. God himself is the guide of the Stars, not Man. As
a Shepherd guids his flock in the fields, so the Lord guids the Stars in that
spacious field of the heavens; yea, he names and numbers them, as a Shepherd
does his flock. ( Psalm. 147.) He tells the number of the Stars, and call's
them all by their names. The Prophet exhorting the people to lift up their eyes
on high, that is, to the heavens, presently adds, and behold who has created
these things? (Isa. 40.26.) that is, the heavens, and the fu^niture of them, he
brings out their host by number (that is, the host of the Stars) As an Army
is enrolled and numbered, how many thousands they are; so does the Lord bring
forth that host by number, and calls them all by names, by the greatness of
his might, for that he is strong in power; not one fails. There Is not one of
the host of heaven, not one of the Stars that fails, but comes forth at Gods
call, and appears as it were in rank and file, when and where the Lord gives
command. Thus the Prophet speaks of the Stars, as Gods host; and of the Lord,
as a Commander or General of an army, knowing their number, nature, place, and
office; mustering and marshalling them, o^dering them out upon service as he
pleases. And whereas in the best disciplined armies of men, many fail when
drawn out to service, some for fear, others through unfaithfulness, not a few
through weakness and sickness; here is neither weak nor sick, neither an
unfaithful nor a fearful one in this host, not one fails: Nor does the Lords
memory fail, for he calls them all by their names; which shows the perfect
remembrance, and exact knowledge which the Lord has of them all. It is
reported, as a wonder, Plin. lib. 7. c. 24. Valerius Maximus lib. 3. c. 7.
of Cyrus King of Persia, that he having a vast Army, yet knew them by face,
and was able to call every man by his name. What then shall we say of this
wonder? The Lord who guides Arcturus and his Sons, who leads out this
innumerable Army of the Stars, knows every one of them by name, and sends them
forth by name, upon what enterprise or service he pleases.

The Lord having questioned Job about those four eminent and well known
Constellations, Pleiades in the Spring, Orion in the Winter, Mazzaroth in the
Summer, and Arcturus with his Sons in the Autumn, to convince him, that as he
was not able, nor any man else, to alter the natural motions or courses of the
Stars, so that neither he, nor any man else, was able to alter the course of
his providence.

The Lord (I say) having done questioning Job, about these four notable
Constellations of heaven in special, proceeds to interrogate him more generally
about the whole heavens, in the next Verse.

Verse. 33. Know thou the Ordinances of heaven? can thou set the Dominions
thereof in the earth? Surely as thou know not the special laws by which I
govern the Pleiades, Orion, Mazzaroth and Arcturus, so not the general laws by
which the heavens are governed. Know thou the Ordinances of heaven? The word
here rendered Ordinances, is often rendered in the Psalms statutes, laws,
decrees: know thou the laws or statutes of heaven?

The word rendered heaven is of the dual number, as Grammarians speak, because,
in what part soever of the earth any man stands, the heaven is cut in two parts
(as to him) by the Horizon, whereof one part is over him, and the other under
him; As there is a heaven above us, so a heaven below us, though wheresoever
any man is on earth, heaven is above him. Know thou The Ordinances of heaven?

Now the Ordinances of heaven may be of two sorts.

First, Those which God has given to the heavens. The heavenly bodies move
according to his constitutions who made heaven and earth. (...)


Secondly, Those which the heavens give to the earth, or to man on earth. The
heavens may be said to impose their laws upon the earth, men being guided and
directed by the changes and motions of the heavens, how to order many of their
motions and actions on the earth, those especially which concern the earth. The
heavens give these common laws (as I may say) to men concerning the earth:
First, When to Till the earth. Secondly, When to cast their Seed into the
earth. Thirdly, When to reap and gather the fruit of the earth. When to perform
any part of Husbandry to the earth, is known only by the heavens; that is, the
heavens by their motions and vicissitudes, show men the seasons of doing these
and these works on earth. And if men obey not these laws of heaven, nor observe
their seasons, they loose all their labor and cost bestowed on the earth.

Again, when he says, know thou the Ordinances of heaven? the meaning may
be this; Are the heavenly bodies disposed or empowered by thy wisdom? have
thou given them virtue to work upon inferior bodies? I have thou made the
statutes by which they are governed, or by which they govern? That Is the Lords
Prerogative.

Hence note; First, The heavens are under a law, they have their statutes.

They are under a law in a threefold Respect. 1. In respect of their motion,
how and whither they shall move. 2ly. They are under a law as to their
influences, where and on whom they shall drop them down. 3ly. (Which
necessarily follows the former) They are under a law as to their effects and
operations upon the Creatures, whether for good, or for evil. The heavens can
neither hurt nor help us, but according to higher order. This threefold law may
be understood in that one Scripture ( Jer. 31.35.) Thus says the Lord, which
gives the Sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the Moon and of the
Stars for a light by night.

Note Secondly; What all the Laws and Ordinances of heaven are, is a secret to
man.

Know thou them? says God to Job. There are some Ordinances of heaven, or
some things for which heaven is ordained, which are easily and commonly known;
such are the changes of seasons, with the division of night and day, of winter
and summer. There are also sec et Ordinances and Orders given to the heavens,
according to which they produce many unexpected and extraordinary ^ffects here
on ear^h, as Drought, and the consequent of it, Famine; Infection in the air,
and the consequent of it, Pestilential diseases and Mortality. Who knows these
ordinances of heaven? and if these are so unknown? then we may conclude,

First, If man know not such like secret Ordinances of heaven, surely he is
much less able to understand the secret counsels of heaven. We know but little
of those things that are commonly seen and felt among us, but there are
reserves which we cannot know at all.

Secondly, We may hence also conclude, If the heavens have their statutes and
Ordinances, as to their motion, etc. then much more has man statutes and
ordinances according to which he should move. The heavens never move but
according to ordinances. Let us be sure, that whatever we do, a (...) unde
(...) praefectus, ideo non nemo praefecturam vertit. Drus. (...) quod
Augustinus interpretatur commutationes coe^i.
we have an ordinance or word of God for it, either express or consequential.
If the heavens be under such a rule, shall we think God has left man at random
or without a rule, how to speak, and think, and do in this world? It is
dangerous to move without an ordinance, much more to move against an ordinance;
we should take heed of acting besides a Law, much more of acting against a Law.
Know thou the Ordinances of heaven? (and as it follows) Can thou set the
dominion thereof in the earth?

Cast thou set his force upon the earth? Ponere dominium est facere ut
dominetur, and quasi dominum constituere. Ho^ homo non facit, sed solus Deus.
Drus.
So Mr. Broughton translates. To set the dominion, is to make one have
dominion, and as it were, to appoint a Lord or Governor in the earth: This is
not man's work, but Gods. As if God had said to Job, Can thou give power to,
or empower the Stars to rule day and night, to cause diversity of weathers and
of seasons, to which all things here below must submit, or with which they must
needs comply? The word which we read Dominion, signifies an under dominion, an
inferior dominion; it signifies a Magistracy or power under a Power. The Hebrew
language has two words, the one signifying the power of a Judge, who gives the
rule of the Law; and the other, Qui simpliciter judicat and sententiam
pronunciat dicitur (...) Sed executor, qui judicatum exequitur and cogit
refractarios obedire sententi^^ judicis dicitur (...)
here used, signifying the power of a Sheriff, who sees execution done. A
person may be in power, and have great command, yet not the first or chief
command. The Heavens have not a supreme or an absolute command over the earth,
but a dominion by way of administration they have, and that a large and great
one. Heaven has a dominion so far as to execute and fulfill that which God the
supreme Judge orders, determines, and gives forth, both concerning persons and
things here on earth. The heavens have a ministerial dominion, respecting most
changes wrought in this world. Their ministry respects, not only the constant
and usual changes of times and seasons barely considered, but they have also a
ministry with respect to those usual and rare changes, which (according to the
appointment of God) befall the persons and conditions of men in this world.
Can thou set the dominion thereof in the earth? Thou can not; but I can and
have, I have set and determined what dominion the Heavens shall have upon the
earth, or how they shall exercise their dominion.

Hence observe; The Heavens have a power on the earth.

Some Astrologers give them a power of doing all on the earth, as if both our
lives and livelihoods depended wholly upon the Aspects of Planets: It is not
this man's endeavor (say they) nor that man's skill, but all flows from the
Stars. These make or put the Heavens, which are Gods work, into the place of
God himself; they put the heavens into the place of the God of Heaven. All
things are in the hand of Heaven, say they. We say, All things, even the
Planets themselves, are in the hand, and at the dispose of God. We grant, and
this Text proves, that the Heavens have a great power upon the earth; we cannot
but see and feel what the Sun does upon the earth, we see, it distributes the
year into four seasons, Summer and Winter, Spring and Autumn; we see, it makes
Equinoxes twice in the year, when days and nights are of an even length, and as
many Solstices, in one of which days are of greatest length, and nights in the
other. We see how the Sun brings forth several effects in those several
seasons, even the generation or corruption of natural things. We know also,
that as the North draws the Magnete or Lodestone, so the Sun, the Heliotrope,
a flower so called, because it follows the motion of the Sun. It is said also,
that the Sun has a great power upon the Cock, who therefore croweth about
midnight, as if he did then congratulate or welcome the return of the Sun from
the Antipodes to our Hemisphear. Though these instances are not demonstrative
or concluding, yet they are probable evidences of the Heavens dominion in the
earth.

Further, it is generally agreed, that the Moon has a great Power upon the
waters, causing the ebbing and flowing of the Sea; as also, upon those
inhabitants of the Sea, Shelfish, because they are observed to increase with
the increase of the Moon, and to decrease at the wane of it.

Nor may we deny the heavens have a dominion upon the bodies of men; for,
though we subscribe not to those fancies of Astronomers, who have fixed a
special star as ruling the special parts of man's body, as you see in Almanacks;
who tell us also, That in the body of man, the Sun answers the heart, Mars the
gall, Jupiter the liver, Mercury the mouth and tongue, Saturn the head; though
(I say) we subscribe not to these, no nor to those other sentiments of theirs,
who ascribe a special dominion to the seven Planets over the seven ages or
stages into which the course of man's life is commonly divided; that is, First,
Infancy to the dominion of the Moon; Secondly, Childhood to Mercury; Thirdly,
You h to Venus; Fourthly, Adolescency or the young man's state to the Sun;
Fifthly, Complete manhood to Mars; Sixthly, Old age to Jupiter; Seventhly,
extreme or decrepid old age to Saturn; yet doubtless the Stars have a great
power upon the bodies of men, as well as upon Plants and all sorts of
Vegetables, subordinately to the power and appointment of God, who rules all
things and persons according to the pleasure and uncontrollable sovereignty of
his own will.

Again, Naturalists tell us (and many are not far from believing them) that the
Planets have great power over minerals and metals; They say, Gold is under the
dominion of the Sun, Silver of the Moon, Iron of Mars, Lead of Saturn; and that
Tin and Coppar are under the dominion of that Planet by them called Jupiter.
Now whether or no God has set these metals under the peculiar dominion of
these stars, I will not dispute; not will I deny that there may be a natural
sympathy and congeniality between them, nor that their influences may be very
operative and effectual toward their gene^ation, production, and full
concoction in the bowels of the earth.

Only let us take heed that we be not found giving that to the Heavens which
God has not given them. Remember, the dominion here intended of the heavens
over the earth, is a ministerial, not a supreme dominion; it is not, I dare say,
any such dominion as those Astrologers cry up, who would persuade or make us
believe,

First, That the dispositions and manners of all men are under the dominion of
the Planets and Stars.

Secondly, That the very way and course of every man's life, is ordered by the
dominion of Stars and Planets.

Thirdly, That all the successes and events, good or bad, of men's actions and
undertakings, depend upon the Stars and Planets.

Fourthly, (which some have adventured to affirm) That the rise and fall of
great persons and families, together with the growths and declinings of whole
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, are under the dominion of the Stars.

Fifthly, That the flourishings and decayings of Arts and Sciences depend upon
them. Yea,

Sixthly, That the stars operate much toward the planting and progress,
toward the rooting up or going back of Religion.

But this Scripture intends not any such dominion of heaven over the earth:
Moses has told us long since what this dominion is ( Genesis 1.14.) And God said,
let there be lights in the firmament of heaven, to divide the day from the
night; and let them be for signs and for seasons, and for days, and for years.
The ordinary lights or stars of heaven, are always for ordinary signs and
seasons; and sometimes there are extraordinary lights seen in heaven, or the
ordinary are seen appearing in an extraordinary manner, to signify that God is
about to do extraordinary things, or to bring forth extraordinary times and
seasons.

So then, they who say the heavenly bodies have no power, or produce no effects
upon the earth or earthly bodies, oppose not only the testimony of sense and
daily experience, but this, and other express testimonies of Scripture. And as
for those who ascribe all those things before mentioned, or any one of them
absolutely to the dominion of the heavenly bodies or luminaries, they put them
in the place of God himself, and overthrow the common foundations of Religion,
which teaches us to depend wholly upon God for all things, which teaches us
also to trust in him alone, and to look upon his favor (not the favorable
looks or aspects of the Stars) as the fountain of all our good, as also to fear
him and his displeasure alone (not the displeased looks of the Stars) as the
fountain of all penal evils.

Therefore let us in these things speak and think according to sobriety. All
that I shall add for the conclusion of this Point, is,

First, Let us be warned and awakened by the signs of Heaven; but let us not
be dismayed at them; let us leave that to the Heathen, who know not God ( Jer.
10.2.) or rather, let us pray, that the Heathen may no longer be left under
that blindness and bondage.

Secondly, If any would know what shall come to pass, or would acquaint
themselves with future events, whether with respect to persons or Nations, let
them not go to, nor consult Stargazers, but the holy Scriptures, the Word of
God; for he has given us a written word, wherein as in a glass, we may see,

First, What God would have us to do, and how to order the whole course of our
lives.

Secondly, What good, what blessings, what successes, we are like to have or
may expect through his free favor to us in Christ, we walking humbly, holily,
believingly before him.

Thirdly, What evils, what crosses, what curses, what miseries, what mischances
(as we speak) we are subject to, and may fear, if we walk proudly,
impenitently, frowardly, in the way of our own hearts. We need not go to the
Stars if we would know what is like to befall us in this life; let us consult
the Promises, and they will tell us what good we shall receive, if we believe
and obey; let us go to the threatenings, and they will tell us what evils will
be our portion, if we are unbelieving and disobedient. Let us fear God, not the
Stars; let our hope be in God, not in the Stars. If we are evil, and do evil,
the most auspicious conjunctions, benign and promising appearances of the
Stars in our nativity, will never produce us any true good; and if we are good,
and do good, their most inauspitious, harsh and threatening appearances shall do
us no hurt: It needs not trouble us under what Star we were born, if we are new
born. One being told, that the Stars in power, or which had the dominion in his
birth, bare him no good will, answered, I care not for that, I have had a
second birth. Do not my words (says the Lord, Mic. 2.7.) do good to him that
walks uprightly? doubtless they do, and so they will, let the Stars do their
worst. Let us sit down quietly in this assurance, That whatsoever rule or
dominion Heaven has in the earth, the dominion of God is over, and over-ruleth
the Heavens.

JOB, Chap. 38. Verse. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. 34. Can thou list up thy voice to
the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thee?

35. Can thou send lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee, Here we
are?

36. Who has put wisdom in the inward parts? or who has given understanding
to the heart?

37. Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the bottles of heaven,

38. When the dust grows into hardness, and the clods cleave fast together?


IN the context of these five Verses, return is made to the Meteors of Heaven.
The Lord having questioned Job about the Stars, those pure heavenly bodies, the
Pleiades, Orion, Mazzaroth, and Arcturus with his Sons; here puts the question
afresh about the aireal bodies, or the natural works of God in the Air. The
first question concerns the Clouds, and the effects or births of them, the
waters.

Verse. 34. Can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds? That is, can thou do
it effectually? Can thou speak so loudly that the clouds above may hear thee;
and so powerfully, that they will obey thee? Any man, the meanest man may lift
up his voice toward the clouds; but no man, no not the mightiest man, can lift
up his voice to the clouds and be heard; that is, be obeyed by them: Thou can
not command the clouds. Though a man speak, and speak aloud, though he lift up
his voice (as God bid the Prophet to his people) like a Trumpet, to the clouds,
yet the clouds will be deaf at his voice, as deaf as sinners commonly are at
the voice of a Prophet, though lifted up like a Trumpet. The voice here
intended, is an effectual voice; such a voice to the clouds is proper and
peculiar to God alone, Numquid descendet ad te pluvia imperio ^u^? Vatabl.
whose power and Empire is so great and large, that he can stretch forth his
voice to the clouds far and near all the air over, and cause them both to
appear at his call, and presently to empty themselves and pour out their waters
according to his direction, upon any coast or quarter of the earth. The text is
singular, Can thou lift up thy voice to the cloud? can thou lift up thy
voice to any one of them, as it were by name? We render it plurally, Can thou
lift up thy voice to the clouds, to any one, or to all of them?

That (as it follows) abundance of waters may cover thee. As if the Lord had
said; If I lift up my voice to the clouds, they presently dissolve and melt,
and abundance of waters flow down to cover man and beast; to cover the fields,
the corn, the grass; nor is it any marvel, if the clouds, those thin, and, upon
the matter, liquid bodies, melt and slow down at the voice of God, when^s at
his voice the mountains flow down, and the rocks themselves, even the hardest
rocks are melted into waters, or give forth abundance of water ( Number. 20.8.)
Eliphaz said to Job, at the 22. Chap. of this book, and the 11. Verse. Abundance
of waters cover thee. The words are the same there and here, but the sense is
very different; Eliph^z meant it there, of metaphorical waters, the waters of
affliction, with which God covered, yea, almost overwhelmed and drowned Job;
But the Lord speaks here of natural waters. Job could not call to the clouds,
and get abundance of those waters to cover him, nor was he able in a way of
command to get one drop of water from the clouds. The words are plain, and the
scope of them obvious, even to convince Job yet further of his inability and
frailty; or that he ought to leave God to the government of the world, to the
government of Persons, Families, and Nations, for as much as himself was not
able to govern a cloud, nor to order out the least shower of rain.

Hence Note; Man has no absolute or sovereign power over any creature.

Clouds will not be commanded, cannot be commanded, by the greatest and
mightiest of the sons of men. Job was a great Prince himself, yet he could not,
neither can the greatest Princes of the world command a shower nor a drop of
rain to fall from the heavens. Man cannot command the clouds to rain, either
when he will, or where he will, or how much he will; these powers belong to God
alone. Yet in one sen e man may lift up his voice to the clouds, and abundance
of waters will cover him. There is a twofold voice of man? First, A commanding
voice; And secondly, A praying voice. Let man lift up his commanding voice to
the clouds, as long as he will he shall get down no rain, but if man by faith
lift up his praying voice to the clouds, that is, to God, in whose hand the
clouds are, he may get rain, yea, abundance of waters to cover him. ( Zach.
10.1.) A k ye of the Lord rain, in the time of the latter rain, so the Lord
shall make bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one grass in
the field. At the voice of man humbly praying, the Lord makes bright clouds; or
(as our Margin has it) l^ghtenings, which fore-run black clouds; to those God
gives showers of rain, and those showers of rain give every one grass, that is,
they cause all sorts of Vegetables to spring and flourish in the field^, both
for man and beast. This was one of the cases which Solomon put in his prayer,
at the dedication of the Temple for the Lords answering of prayer. (1 Kings
8.35.) When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned
against thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn
from their sins when thou afflictest them; then hear thou in heaven, and
forgive the sin of thy servants, etc. and give rain upon thy land. When the
clouds are locked up, when they are as brass over our heads, prayer moves the
Lord to open them, or to melt them down into showers, for the refreshing and
fructifying of the earth. The Apostle James (Chap. 5.17, 18.) tells us, that
^lias covered the earth with abundance of rain, by lifting up his voice in
prayer. Elias (says he) was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he
prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth by the
space of three years and six months: And he prayed again, and the heavens gave
rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. The holy history makes the same
report (1 Kings 18 45.) And it came to pass in the mean while that the heaven
was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain, etc. If we would
have rain, we must ask for it, and lift up a praying voice to God, who commands
the clouds; it is a vain thing for us to lift up a voice to the clouds in our
own name, to command them to give us rain in the season of it.

And as this is true of the clouds and rain, so of all creatures, Their powers
and virtues, their efficacies and influences are not at our command, but if we
look up to God and wait upon him in prayer, he can command them all to give out
their virtues both to serve our necessities and accommodate our delights. Now,
as in this question God shows Job his insufficiency to command water, so in the
next to command fire from the clouds.

Verse. 35. Can thou send lightnings that they may go, and say unto thee, here
we are? What lightning is, has been showed once or twice already, in this and
the former Chapter, and therefore I shall not stay here in any discourse,
either about the nature or the wonderful effects of lightning.

But the Lords manner of speaking, and his purpose in speaking here about the
lightning is very considerable, and calls for further discourse. Can thou
send lightnings that they may go, etc. As if the Lord had said, If thou can
not prevail with the clouds to send rain? can thou prevail with them to send
lightning? have thou the command of thunder and lightning? will the lightnings
come forth at thy bidding?

The words may have a double allusion. 1. To the General of an Army commanding
his Soldiers, and they going at his word. 2. To the Master of a Family, who
gives orders to his Se vants, and they go at his word; Can thou send
lightnings that they may go And say unto thee here we are? or, as the Hebrew
is, Behold us.

That manner of speech here we are or behold us, is a description of the most
ready obedience, either of Soldiers to their General, or of Servants to their
Master. Will the lightnings obey thee thus, and say, here we are? Some expound
these words, as supposed to be spoken by the lightnings, upon their return from
some former service given them in charge by God, as having dispatched what they
were sent for, and were ready to go again. Hence the Latin translator gives it
thus; Vt reverentia tibi dicent adsumus, Vulg.
That they being returned (or after their return) should say unto thee with
reverence, here we are. 1. Ready to go whithersoever thou will send us. 2.
Ready to do whatsoever thou will enjoin us. As if the Lord had said; Can thou
send forth the lightnings, and will they return to thee, and say, we have done
thy commands, and here we are again to receive fresh commands, or new orders
from thee? Surely, as the rain will not thus obey thee, so neither will the
lightnings, neither the one nor the other will be thy servants, to go of thy
errand, or execute thy will.

The same note which I gave before concerning the rain, might be taken up here
again concerning the lightnings, They are not under the command of man, etc.

Secondly, for as much as the Lord here denies this privilege, both respecting
the rain and lightning unto man, he would have us understand and know that both
are in himself; though you cannot, yet I can command them, both are under my
dominion. While the Lord shows Job his impotency to command these meteors, he
asserts his own omnipotency; as he has made them, so he can rule them.

Hence observe; All treatures, even those which seem to be most out of command,
are fully under the command of God.

What, to appearance, is more out of command than the lightning, that quick,
that piercing, that fierce and fiery creature, yet that stirs no more than a
stone, till the Lord commands; and at his command it stirs, and is gone in a
moment. The Lord God has spoken (says the Prophet Amos 3.8.) who can but
prophecy? And as a faithful Prophet cannot but prophecy, so the not only
faithless, but senseless creatures cannot but do what God has spoken. That of
the Psalmist (Psalm. 104.4.) which we read, who makes his Angels spirits, his
Ministers a flaming fire; some render thus, who makes the winds his
messengers, and the flames of fire his ministers. That is, he uses tempestuous
winds and flames of fire as his messengers and ministers. The same Hebrew word
that signifies an Angel, signifies a Messenger, at large, and the same word
that signifies a Spirit, signifies also the Wind. And as the words, so the
truth will bear both translations or constructions; for as those higher or
highest of rational creatures, the Angels; so those high inanimate creatures,
the winds and lightnings, which may properly be called flames of fire, are the
Ministers and messengers of God; that is, they go forth and Minister according
to his Word, they say, Here we are. The Lord by a call or word speaking can
have whom and what he will to serve his purpose, and fulfill his decrees. It is
said (2 King. 8.1. as also, Psalm. 105.16.) The Lord called for a famine, a
famine of bread; and he no sooner called, but the famine came, and said, Here
am I; the famine presently brake the staff of bread, and did eat up all the
good of the Land. The Prophet Haggai (Chap. 1.11.) represents the Lord, saying,
I called for a drought (which is the usual forerunner of famine) and the
drought said, Here am I; it came presently as soon as the Lord commanded. On
the other hand, when the Lord made many promises under the new Covenant, among
other things, he said, I will call for plenty (Ezekiel. 36.29.) I will call for
the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you. As in those other
places he called for famine and drought, so here he says, I will call for
plenty, and it shall say, Here am I; abundance of corn and grass, and fruits of
the earth came at that call. Lamenting Jeremiah speaking of the woeful captivity
of the people of Israel, says ( Lam. 1.15.) The Lord called an assembly
against me, that is, I conceive, an assembly of the Assyrians and Babylonians,
an assembly of men, an army of men; he caused them to assemble and come
together; he did but call, and they said, Here we are, and we will go vex Judah
and Jerusalem. Thus, if the Lord call for famine and drought, if he call for an
assembly of men, for men assembled with the sword of war in their hand, to
punish and chastise any people for their sin; they will surely come and do his
pleasure: whatever the Lord calls for, cannot but come. Take this inference
from it; If the Lord have such a command upon all creatures, even the inanimate
creatures; if the lightnings answer him when he calls, Here we are, Then how
readily should men, the best of visible creatures answer his call and say, Here
we are?

When the Lord said to Abraham (Genesis 12.1.) Get thee out of thy Country, and
from thy Kindred, and from thy Fathers house, unto a Land that I shall show
thee, he never disputed the case, but (says the Apostle, Heb. 11.8.) Obeyed
and went out, not knowing whither he went. He never enquired what the place was
to which he was to go, nor what accommodations he should find when he came
thither: Abraham knew he was to go whither God called him to go, though whither
he was to go he knew not. And when long after this the Lord called to Abraham
(Genesis 22.1.) he said, Behold, here I am; or, Behold me; as if he had said,
Lord, I am here ready to obey thy command, to go of thy errand, to carry
whatever message thou shall put into my mouth, to do whatever work thou shall
put into my hand; and that Abraham did not complement with God, it appears in
the same Chapter; for though when God commanded him to offer up his Son, his
only Son Isaac, whom he loved, every word was enough to wound his heart, and
the last deepest (to part with a Son is hard, with an only Son harder, with a
son dearly beloved, is hardest of all, especially when he must be not only
passive but active in this loss, and his own hand must give the parting blow)
yet Abraham being called to this hard and hot service, said, Here am I, and
readily obeyed. This readiness at the call of God, David professed from his own
experience ( Psalm. 27.8.) When thou said, seek ye my face, my heart said unto
thee, thy face Lord will I seek. That is, as thou have commanded that I should
worship thee, so I do; or, what thou, O Lord, say, is my desire; thy command
is not only the resolution, but the request and supplication of my soul. We
have the like readiness of that holy Prophet Isaiah, who (after the Angel with
a coal from the Altar had touched his lips, and cleansed him from his
filthiness) hearing the Lord enquire for a messenger, Whom shall I send?
presently answered (as the lightning in the Text) Here am I, send me (Is. 6.8.)
Lord, I am ready to go whithersoever thou will send me. This should be, and, in
some measure is the temper of all believers; though they may have, and to their
sorrow, find many reluctancies and stops, yet this is in the heart of every
true believer, to be ready at the call of God, and to say, Here I am. When the
Apostle Paul had a call to preach the gospel of Christ, which once he
persecuted, Immediately (says he, Gal. 1.16.) I conferred not with flesh and
blood; he made no delays, much less any excuses, least of all any d^nials, but
was obedient to the heavenly Vision. As soon as he had that vision and call
from God to go and preach the Gospel, he never stood reasoning and conferring
with flesh and blood, he put no questions, he asked not this or that man's
opinion, whether it were best for him to go or not; neither did he confer with
the flesh and blood in his own heart, he conferred not with himself, he
consulted not his own safety, nor any carnal interests, but did as he was
commanded. And unless we do thus, not only will the ordinary practice of
servants to Masters rise up in judgment against us ( Mat. 8.9. I am a man
under authority (said the Centurion) having soldiers under me; I have a
superior officer, and I have inferior soldiers, and I say to one go, and he
goes; and to another come, and he comes: Such is or ought to be the carriage
of soldiers and servants toward their Superiors. Now I say, unless we readily
obey the voice of God, not only will the daily practice of servants, but the
practice (if I may so speak) of the lightnings from the clouds, will rise up in
judgment against us and condemn us. Shall a servant say, Here I am, at the
call of man? Shall the lightning say, here I am, at the call of God? and shall
not man say so at Gods call? Shall men put questions to Gods commands? Shall
they query, Will the world bear it if I do this? or, will this stand with my
ease and profit, with my credit or commodity, when God requires it? If any do
so, the lightning may flash in the face of their consciences, and not only
blast them as stubborn and disobedient, but brand them for foolish and unwise,
or, at least, for want of wisdom; about which the question is put to Job in the
next verse.

Verse. 36. Who has put wisdom into the inward parts? and who has given
understanding to the heart. Some Interpreters conceive, that at this verse the
Lord enters discourse with, or begins to question Job concerning living
creatures; and beginning here with man, the chiefest of visible living
creatures, he proceeds to inferior living creatures, the beasts of the earth,
and the fowls of the air, as follows in the 39th Chapter: Yet the very next
verse offers a great objection against this opinion; for there return is made
to the former matter, the works of nature. Verse. 37. Who can number the clouds
in w^s^om? or who can stay the bottles of heaven?

And therefore I rather conceive, that this 36th verse is to be joined with the
two former already opened; as if here the Lord would convince man, that as he
has not power sufficient to command, so not wisdom enough to dispose, either
of the Rain or of the Lightnings; under which, by a Synechdoche, all other
creatures may be comprehended. As if God had said, Whatever wisdom man has, is
of my putting into him; now I have not given him wisdom enough, nor taught him
how to order and dispose the clouds and lightnings; and if I have not given him
wisdom for these things, whence should he have it? So then, according to this
way of interp^etation, the 37th verse which follows, gives a reason why man
cannot attain to this privilege, the government of the clouds, the disposal of
rain and lightnings, even because God has not given him any such wisdom. All
the wisdom which man has, is the gift of God; but God has not given man
wisdom to order the clouds and lightnings, therefore he has no such wisdom.

Who has p^t wisdom into the inward parts? Wi^^^^ may be taken either
generally for knowledge, which is the (...) of the mind, and may be called
speculative knowledg^^ (...) p^^ticularly, for prudence, which is practical
knowledge, in the du^ ordering and manage of things before us. Who has pu^
w^s^^^, (...) either sort, Into the inward parts?

The word which we translate inward parts, signifies sometimes the Reins, and
sometimes the Heart. The Chaldee paraphrase renders, Who has put wisdom into
the heart: The matter is not much, to which of them we determine it; for,
though the heart in Scripture, is usually put for the seat of wisdom, and the
Reins for the seat of the affections; yet David says, My reins instruct me in
the night season (Psalm. 16.7.) To instruct or teach, is properly the work of
wisdom. The word is well rendered by us, the inward parts, for that takes in
all; wisdom lies within ( Psalm. 51.6.) Behold thou desire truth in the
inward parts, and in the hidden (part) thou shall make me to know wisdom. The
inward parts, in the fo^mer part of that verse, and the hidden (part) in the
latter, are the same; by both, or either, he means his soul in all the
faculties or operations of it. And indeed, neither the Reins not the Heart, nor
any, nor all the members of the body, are properly o^ strictly wisdoms seat.
Wisdom is lodged in the soul, in the man of man, as some call it; and therefore
that must needs be intended here: Sapientia non tantum in corde^sed and in
renibus aliquo modo posita est. ie. Quod omnis hominis affectus a divina quadam
sapientia irradietur. Coc. Renes (...) vocantur, ut quidam volent quia sunt
oblitae adipe. Drus.
but because Naturalists speak of wisdom, as lodged and exercised in bodily
parts, some placing it in the heart, some in the head, others in the reins;
therefore we may well place it (as our Translation expresses it) in the inward
parts. The original word strictly imports, that which is covered over, the root
is rendered to cover; and Grammarians give this reason of it, because the reins
and kidneys are covered with fat. But seeing all the inward parts of man are in
a sense covered parts, that notation of the word may very well sort with our
Translation; as also with that which is the exposition of the inner parts, the
mind or soul of man. So then, Who has put wisdom into the inward parts, is
plainly this; Who has planted it in the mind or soul of man? who has rooted
it there? who has made man wise? some give the sense thus, Who has made man a
reasonable creature? or bestowed that rational faculty upon man, whereby he is
able to apprehend the truth of the works of God, and to inquire into, and find
out many secrets in nature? Thus some (I say) expound it, specially of that
rational power with which man, as man, is naturally endowed, and not of wisdom
attained in Schools and Academies by study, or in the wo^ld by experience,
which is but the lightning of reason, Quis posuit, etc. insinuans se de illa
sapientia lequi, quae nec co-operante ratione, nec industria humana, nec per
ullam disciplinam ^quisita est. Janson.
or of that natural wisdom planted by God in man as a reasonable creature.
Taking this sense, Who has put wisdom into the inward parts, is no more but
this; Who has made man a rational creature? who among men, can take this
honor to himself, and say, I have put this wisdom, called reason, into my self
or any man? surely none: It Is the sole prerogative of God to put wisdom, in the
lowest and commonest notion of it, reason, into the mind of man. Who has put
wisdom into the inward parts?

Hence observe; Man's natural reason is the gift of God.

All wisdom flows from God, the eternal and inexhaustible fountain of wisdom;
it is of God that all men have reason, as well as that any men have grace.
Reason is a very great gift, take it barely, as unpollished and unheightned, by
study, by Arts, Sciences and experiences: Wisdom, as planted in nature, is a
high favor. As grace sets one man above another, so this natural wisdom sets
every man above the best of bruits. And as this wisdom in man (which is
properly called wisdom) so that Analogical wisdom, or that appearance of
wisdom, that is in many subtle b^uits, is of Gods putting and planting too.
And if so, then much more those higher indowments, the pollishings and the
inrichings of man's reason, are of God. Reason is that ground o^ soil, which
being tilled and dressed, manured and well wrought upon, brings forth those
excellent fruit^ of wi^dom which ennoble the mind of man. ( James 1.17.) Every
good gift, and every perfect gift is from above. The good gift, may be taken
for natural wisdom; that is of God: and the perfect gift, for infused wisdom,
especially in spiritual things; that is more of God, that is chiefly from above,
and c^mes down from the father of lights, with whom there is no variableness
nor shadow of turning. From this point we may infer,

First, Seeing wisdom, both that which is planted in man, as a rational
creature, and that also which man acquires by industry, is of God, Then God
knows how wise any man is, and what any man's wisdom amounts to. God can
easily compass the wisest man in the world. The wisdom of some men is beyond
the compass of many men; but the wisdom of all men, is infinitely within the
compass of God. He that has put wisdom into man, is himself wiser than all
men. Thus David argued ( Psalm. 94.9.) He that planted the ear, shall not he
hear? and he that formed the eye, shall he not see? doubtless he does. God has
made sight and hearing, and therefore the seeing and the hearing powers are
transcendently in God. And as it follows ( verse. 10.) He that teaches man
knowledge, shall not he understand? certainly he does. He understands and
knows, not only what men understand and know, but he understands how much
understanding, and what knowledge any man has; God looks through all.

Secondly, If God has put wisdom into man, then he can take wisdom from man,
he can destroy the wisdom of the wise, he can turn the wisdom of an Achithophel
into foolishness. As he can make a fool wise, so he can make a wise man a fool,
or befool the wisest men.

Thirdly, If all wisdom be of the Lords putting in, then let none be proud of
their wisdom. There is nothing that we are so apt to be proud of as of our
wisdom. If we have but better natural parts than others, we are presently
lifted up above others; if we have better acquirements than others, we are apt
to be proud of our selves. A little knowledge puffs up, and indeed that which
puffs up is but a little. True wisdom, though great, does not puff up, for
that leads us to him that gives us wisdom, and that will keep us humble.

Fourthly, We may infer, if the Lord has put wisdom into man, then man ought
to be thankful to the Lord for the wisdom he has. As man should not be p^oud
of his wisdom, because how much soever he has, he has received it; so man
ought to be very thankful for wisdom, because how much or how little soever it
is he has received it. If all receipts from God call for thanks, how much more
this receipt of wisdom? which, next to grace, is the most precious thing we
receive from him, and is it self sometimes put for grace.

Fifthly, If wisdom be of Gods putting into man? then let men be careful to use
their wisdom for God. That stock which another man has put into our hands, he
expects we should use it for him; especially, that we should not use it against
him, or to his disadvantage. How wicked are they, who are so far from using
their wisdom for God, that they use it against God, that is, against his
interest, truth, and servants. Pharaoh said ( Exodus 1.10.) Come on, let us deal
wisely with them. And what was it for, but to vex and enslave Gods first born,
the people of Israel. He that imploys his wisdom to any evil purpose, imployeth
it against God, and so arms himself with what he has received from God to
resist God: Woe to those who do so. Wisdom is of Gods giving; use it then for
him, and dedicate it to him; above all, take heed of using it against him. It
had been better for that man that he had been a bruit, than that he should be
so brutish, as to employ his understanding and reason against God.

Sixthly, If the Lord has put wisdom into man; Then man must be accountable to
God for his wisdom, as also for all the other talents which he has received.
Wisdom is a great talent; they who are so wise as to know what that means, will
use it tremblingly, that they may give their account rejoycingly. They are wise
indeed who daily consider, whence or from whom they had their wisdom, and
before whom they must come to a reckoning, what they have done with it, even
before him who has put all their wisdom into them. Who has put wisdom into
the inward parts?

Or who has given understanding to the heart? (...) ^pp^llatio est cordis vel
mentis, a (...) quod est prospicere unde (...) picturae quae prospiciuntur
dictae, and metaphortce picturae seu prospectus cordis i. e, imaginationes seu
species reri^, quae ve^uti in cord pinguntur, vel a delineatione conceptuum
animi. Merc. (...) Thargum interpretatur (...) cordi, a (...) quod est
prospicere^ sic vocatur cor, quia speculatur and considerat omnia, Drus.
Quisdedit gallo intelligentiam? Vulg.
This latter part of the Verse is of the same sense with the former, only it is
doubled to show the certainty of the thing; understanding in the heart is the
same with wisdom in the inward parts.

Yet here is a word in the Original used for the heart, different from what is
commonly used, and so occasions a difference among Interpreters and
Translaters. Grammarians derive it from a word that signifies to look or
behold, to see and and foresee, and the Noune signifies a picture, because
pictures are pieces of art, which draw all men's eyes to behold and look upon
them; and the heart is therefore expressed by this word, because it forms, and as
it were (by its imaginative faculty) draws the picture of all things in it
self, or because in the heart or mind of man the forms of all things are
represented: Man's imagination delineates and shapes a thousand varieties within
it self, or man has the picture and prospect of all matters in his heart, and
therefore the same word signifies the heart and a picture, drawn and delineated
to the life. That Is the force of the word which here we render heart.

The Latin translation renders at a great distance from us, yet the letter of
the Text may bear that reading also. Who has given understanding to the Cock?
Interpreters following this translation, conceive that here the Lord begins to
question Job about irrational living creatures; Having said, who has put
wisdom into the inward parts? to wit, of man; he now adds who has given
understanding to the Cock? The same word that signifies the heart, signifies
also a Cock; as the heart foreseeth and looks upon things afar off, so the
Cock foreseeth the rising of the Sun and the break of day, and therefore has
his name from his foresight. They who follow this Translation, speak many
things of the wonderful foresight of the Cock: and surely God has placed a
natural wisdom in that creature constantly to understand the hours of the
night. A Cock is a natural clock to any family, he has his first, and second,
and third crowings; Talmundici in Judaicis precationibus dicunt at docent cum
gallus canit dicendum esse, Laudetur qui gallo dat intelligentiam.

Gallus enim haud dubio non aliunde quam a Deo didicit noctis momenta
dis^ernere proclivius tamen estut pro cord exponamus, Merc.

Plin l. 10 c. 21. Cantavit Gallu^ non ut tempora distingueret, sed ut petrus
paenitere^, Ambros.


and having a kind of natural instinct concerning the course and return of the
Sun, he claps his wings and crows, as rejoicing at his coming, and willing to
awaken all to entertain him and prepare themselves for labor, study and
business, at his approach. But I shall not stay upon this; And the general
stream of interpreters keeps in the former channel, expounding this latter part
of the Verse as the former, with respect to man. Who has given understanding
to the heart? It is a truth (I grant) which the Jewish Talmudists teach, that
God is to be praised who has given such understanding to the Cock, that he is
able to distinguish the hours of the night, and tell us of the approaching day,
that it surprise us not like sluggards unawares. The natural Histo^ian reports
the useful qualities of the Cock: And one of the Ancients wittily takes notice
of the Cocks crowing in the Gospel, which awakened Peter, according to Christ's
prediction, Before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny we thrice: The Cock
(says he) was a Preacher to call Peter to repentance. Christ made use of a
Cock to press that eminen^ Disciple into a conviction of, and sorrow for his
sin; for at the crowing of the Cock, he remembered the words of Christ, went out
and wept bitterly.

But that the question propounded to Job in this Verse concerns the wisdom
given to man, not to beasts or birds, is plainly proved by the questions put
him in the two Verses following. Which show that though God has given man
wisdom sufficient for many great purposes, yet not for the purpose there
expressed, as not for several other purposes.

Verse. 37, 38. Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the bottles
of heaven, when the dust grows into hardness, and the clouds cleave fast
together? In these two Verses we have two questions more propounded by God to
Job. The first whereof is about the numbering, (...)
the second (though under another title) about the stopping of the clouds.

Who can number the clouds in wisdom? The word rendered clouds is sometimes
translated heavens, and so a learned Interpreter gives it here; to which he
adds this gloss, Quis tam prudenter fecit? caelus eo numero quo sunt, Vatabl.
Who has made the heavens with such wisdom in that number wherein they are?
who can number them? The word rendered number signifies both to number things
Arithmetically, and to demonstrate them Logically; and it may be taken in
either or both senses here, who can number the clouds in wisdom? that is, who
has wisdom sufficient to tell how many clouds there are? Man has not
arithmetic enough to number them. The clouds are many in their sorts or kinds,
and they are many more in their singula^^, or (if I may so speak) individuals;
there are many sorts of clouds, and there are many of every fort; as there are
many sorts of living creatures, and very many of every sort, so of the clouds;
we may as well number the waves of the sea or the stars, as the clouds of
heaven. If we look up to one part of heaven, we may see more clouds than we can
number; how great then is the number of the clouds in the whole circumference
of the heavens?

Again, taking the word as it signifies to demonstrate logically, or to
declare, the question imports thus much; Who can clearly and perfectly set
forth the nature of the clouds or the various effects which they produce, and
services which they are employed in? Who can, either in the former sense or in
this, number the stars of heaven?

Hence note; The wisest among men can neither exactly tell how many the clouds
are, nor fully demonstrate what they are.

As the number and nature of the stars, so of the clouds (which are beneath the
stars) exceed man's wisdom. The least and lowest works of God are above man's
reach, how much more his greatest works, and those which are far above?

Yet further, from this word which we translate to number, to declare, or
demonstrate, that precious stone the Saphir, mentioned often in Scriptures has
its name; Quis sapphirinas effecit nubes sapientia? Jun.
and so the Text is rendered thus, who can make the clouds saph^rine, or like a
Saphir? the meaning is, who can make the clouds bright and clear l ke the
Saphir-stone? The Saphir is a most pleasant resplendent and beautiful gem: That
glorious throne which was showed the Prophet in vision ( Ezekiel. 1.26.) had the
ap^earance ^f a Saph^^-stone, that is, it had a most excellent and illustrious
appearance. Now says the Lord who can make the clouds (dark of themselves)
like a Saphir-stone? that is, serene, pleasant, beautiful, and delightful to
the eye. God can make bright clouds (Zech. 10.1.) clouds wonderful fair and
pleasant to behold, even as pleasing to the eye as a precious Saphir. As this
translation holds out a truth in it self, so it is very suitable to that which
follows, Or who can stay the bottles of heaven?

Clouds darken the heavens, Hunc interpretationem postul^^e videtur antithesis
quum additur, and lagenas coeli quis collocet, q d. quis ^oelum number ^^renum ac
sulum, nunc vero nubilum reddat, Pisc.
but when the Lord stays the clouds from rain, then the heavens are clear
like a Saphir; God can make the heavens cloudy or clear.

Who can stay the bottles of heaven? that is, the clouds, who can stay them, or
(as the Hebrew strictly) who can cause them to lie down? Master Braughton
renders, who can destill the barrels of heaven? The word here used signifies a
bottle, or any vessel wherein liquor is preserved; and it may be taken either
for a bottle made of skin, a leathern bottle, or for a bottle made of clay, an
earthen bottle, a Potters bottle, as it is called ( Isa. 30.14.) The clouds are
like a leathern or an earthern bottle, which as it holds the liquor, so being
unstopped and held up, the liquor runs out; who can stay the bottles of heaven?
that is, if God once unstop the clouds, they presently pour down in and who can
stay them from raining? no man can. That Is a plain sense; as if the Lord had
said, who can hinder the clouds from giving down rain, if once opened? who but
I can restrain the rain (which is heavy of it self and tends naturally
downwards) from falling out of the clouds?

There is another reading of this part of the verse, Con^entum coeli qun
dormire faciet, Vulg. (...) per quinque puncta significat N^hlium, in
strumentum musicum utri simile and habens chordas quae pulsantur.
who can slay the harmony of heaven? The Vulgar Latin renders, who can make
the music of heaven sleep, that is, cease, or be quiet. The reason of this
translation is this, because the same word which signifies a bottle, signifies
also a musical instrument somewhat resembling the form of a bottle ( Psalm.
33.2.) Thus some take it here, as intending that musical or melodious harmony,
which ancient Philosophers have affi^med is made by the motion of the heavenly
spears; yet by this they do not mean a proper musical sound or harmony, such
as the Pythagoreans dreamed of, which some other learned men have said is so
sweet and ravishing, that if we did but hear i^, we could neither eat, nor
drink, nor sleep: Yea, they tell us, that Moses while he did not eat, nor
drink, nor sleep those forty days in the Mount, was all that while taken up,
and ravished with that Music; but you may put that among Jewish fables.

Sober men following this translation, who can stay the music of heaven?
understand by it only the harmonious concord and agreement, which all the
heavenly Orbs unfailably observe in their several courses, without the least
jarr or discord. That Is a truth, showing the great wisdom and power of God, who
has put the heavens into such a sweet order, that they move, not only
constantly, but harmoniously. Though the motion of the heavens makes no audible
or proper music, yet it makes an intelligible or metaphorical music, that is,
the heavens move orderly, there is an agreement in their motion, which is the
the sweetest music in heaven among Saints and Angels, and among good men on
earth. We say of men moving peaceably in their places, as becomes them, there
is a harmony among them. And how blessed a thing would it be, to see all sorts
of men moving orderly in their spheres? what a harmony would it make, to see
every one doing his duty, and doing it in his place? whereas to omit duty,
makes our lives useless; and to do it out of our place, makes us troublesome
and unharmonious. And therefore, though I insist not upon this reading, yet it
were well if all would insist upon the moral of it, laboring to make harmony
(as much as may be) in all their motions. But I pass from it, and rest in our
own,

Who can stay the bottles of heaven, that is, who can make them leave raining?
The Lord by a late question convinced Job that no man can make it rain ( verse.
34.) Can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may
cover thee? and by this question he would convince him, that no man can
obstruct or hinder the rain. Who can stay the bottles of heaven?

Hence observe, It is God who stays or restrains the clouds from raining.

Should not the Lord put stopples into those bottles? should not he close up
those barrels, they would drop down continually? and in stead of watering,
drown the earth. When in the days of Noah the Lord opened the bottles of heaven
forty days together, who could stop or stay them? Did not the clouds pour down
till the whole world was overwhelmed? and unless the Lord did now stay the
clouds, and forbid them to give out their whole stock, they would again
over-whelm the world. There are Seas of waters above our heads, God keeps them
in from hurting the earth, and lets them out to help i^. The next verse
intimates at least this power of God over the clouds and the season when he
exercises it: Who can stay the bottles of heaven?

Verse. 38. When the dust grows (or is poured) into hardness, and the clods
cleave fast together? The Margin of our Bibles gives us the former part of the
verse in a very different translation, thus, When the dust is turned into mire.
The earth has had its fill, if not too much rain, when the dust is turned into
mire? And when it is so, who but God stays the bottles of heaven from pouring
down overmuch?

But I shall only open the reading in the Text, of which there are two
interpretations.

First, Some expound it of staying the rain when there is most need of rain, or
when the earth wants it most, or in a time of drought: For then the earth
grows hard like a molten-pillar, and the clods thereof cleaving one to
another make clefts in the body of the earth. In a time of great drought, the
earth at once cleaves asunder, and runs closet together, as it were to succor
it self. Who stays the bottles of heaven, when the earth is chapt and gapes
for rain to soften and cool it? Surely man does it not, nor can he be said to
do it (unless meritoriously) It is God alone who efficiently stays the clouds
from rain in a time of drought, or when the necessities of the earth call aloud
for it. Taking the words in this sense.

Observe; God can stop any of our mercies (as here the rain) when we have most
need of them.

I (says the Lord Amos 4.7.) have withholden the rain from you when there were
yet three months to the harvest, and I caused it to rain upon one City, and
caused it not to rain upon another City; one piece was rained upon, and the
piece whereupon it rained not, withered. One months drought before harvest
threatens a scarsity or dearth of Corn; but two, yea, three months drought,
must needs usher in a dreadful famine.

Voce^ (...) ^^^o serment^ti^^m ^erbo (...) qu^d ^^gnificat, ^^rmentari atque
int^mescere, E. Pisc.
The second interpretation of these words seems yet more clear, Who can stay the
bottles of heaven, when the dust grows into hardness, and the clods cleave
fast together? that is, who but God can stop rain when there is no farther need
of rain? As it the Lo^d had said, When the bottles of heaven have given out so
much rain as may sit the earth for fruit-bearing, or when the ground has had
its fill, so that the light dust is turned into lumps of earth, and that dust
which was raised and tossed with every breath of wi^d, is clodded and
agglutinated by water into a massy substance; when, I say, it is thus with the
earth, who can stay or stop the bottles of heaven, from raining more, to the
sp^il of all, but my self? So then the true use of rain is held forth in this
38. verse. namely, that the dust of the earth being moistened with rain, may
coalesce or be joined close together. This, I conceive, is the most natural and
proper sense of the Text. For the earth, which by drought was cru^bled into
dust, rain falling plentifully upon it, is knit again into one body, like meal
or flower into which leven is put, and so is made ready to receive, Humore
aquae terrae puries continentur, and uniuntur quae ante disjunctae fuerant,
Merc. Vt perfusio sit formentandae terrae, ut conglutinentur glebae, Jun.
Trans, I. e. ut terram quum pulverulenta est, ab ariditate immissis pluviis
sermentet ad glebarum com^agem and rerum ex ea nascentium alimentum, Jun.
nourish, and b ing forth whatever grain is cast into the bosom of it.

Rain falling upon the dust embodies it. The ground moulders in a time of
drought; but when rain comes, that hardens it. The dust (as we commonly say)
slyes before, but as drought cleaves the earth, so rain causes the parts to
unite; an^ then the earth, which like a heap of sand would not hang together,
becomes solid and fit for tillage. Now when so much rain has fallen as
prepares the earth, and (as the word imports) fermentates or levens it to
receive the seed cast into it, then, who stays the bottles of heaven?

Hence note, First, Rain compacts the earth.

As moisture loosens compacted things, so it compacts or knit, together loose
things. The earth is soon made dust by droughts, and it would be a very
dust-heap, if it had no moisture to reunite it. The Lord threatens his people,
in case of disobedience ( Deuteronomy. 28.24.) to make the rain of their Land powder
and dust; that is, they should have dust and powder, instead of water. Long
drought turns the earth to dust. In this learn, how great a mercy there is in
rain.

Secondly note, The Lord knows when the earth has had sufficient rain.

And therefore (unless in judgment) he will not let the clouds run wast; he
will stay his bottles from letting down one drop more, when once the dust (by
rain falling upon it) grows into hardness, and the clods cleave fast together.

Note Thirdly, It Is a mercy, when the earth has enough, that God stops the
bottles.

As it is a duty, when we have drank enough, to stop the bottle, that is, to
give over drinking; so it is a mercy, that the Lord stops the bottles when the
earth has drank enough. When the earth has enough, the Lord sometimes will
not stop the bottles of heaven, but lets them pour down rain, till the fruits
of the earth are utterly spoiled; and this he does for the punishment of man's
sin always, and sometimes for the punishment of those special sins, man's
unthankfulness for, and abuse of the fruits of the earth; that is, because he
did not stay the bottle, when he had taken enough.

Now, if the Lord knows when to give rain, and when to stop it, with respect to
husbandry, and the natural fruits of the earth, then doubtless he knows and
will take care to give rain for the souls of his people, when they have need. (
Psalm. 68.2.) Thou, O God, did send a plentiful rain, whereby thou did
confirm thine inheritance, when it was weary; which is specially meant of
spiritual rain. There are bottles of heaven which water souls. The Preachers of
the word are those bottles or clouds, which hold and destil the mystical rain;
and the Lord will not stop them, till he sees the hearts of men made fit to
bring forth the fruits of righteousness and holiness; he will not stop (I say)
that spiritual rain, till this be effected, unless in judgment to a people,
that have despised the rain, and slighted those showers of divine doctrine;
against such the Lord will stop the bottles of heaven, and then their souls
turn to dust, and their hearts become hard as rocks, or like the mountains,
upon which neither rain nor dew falls, fruitless and barren of every good word
and work.

JOB, Chap. 38. Verse. 39, 40, 41. 39. Will thou hunt the prey for the Lion? or
fill the appetite of the young Lions,

40, When they couch in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in wait?

41. Who provideth for the Raven his food? when his young ones cry unto God,
they wander for lack of meat.


THe Lord having by a multitude of questions proposed to Job concerning
inanimates, or creatures without life, such as are the Earth, the Sea, the
Heavens, the Clouds and Meteors, (having, I say, by these questions) convinced
him of his weakness and insufficiency, as also, of the transcendent power and
wisdom, which abides and resideth everlastingly in himself; he now undertakes
Job for the same ends, by putting him questions about the living creatures, and
those of three forms or sorts:

First, About the beasts of the earth.

Secondly, About the fowls of the Air.

Thirdly, About the fish of the Sea.

The Lord gives particular instance, or makes inquiry about thirteen kinds of
living creatures; whereof seven abide upon the earth, five in the air, one in
the waters.

The seven creatures inquired about, which abide on the earth, are, First, The
Lion; Secondly, The wild Goat; Thirdly, The Hind; Fourthly, The wild Ass;
Fifthly, The Unicorn; Sixthly, the Horse; and, Seventhly, The Elephant, under
the name of Behemoth, as is most generally conceived.

The five creatures inquired about, that live in the air, are, First, The
Raven; Secondly, The Peacock; Thirdly, The Ostrich; Fourthly, The Hawk; and,
Fifthly, The Eagle.

Of the third sort, namely, such as live in the water, or in the Sea, Job is
questioned only about one, the Leviathan, or the Whale, a creature of a vast
magnitude; of so vast a magnitude, that take all the other twelve creatures and
join them together, the Leviathan exceeds them all in magnitude; as will appear
in the description given of him at large, in the one and fortieth Chapter.

The Lord in this latter discourse with, or questioning of Job, seems to
descend, or to put matter of easier resolution to him than he had done before,
and doubtless he does; yet he does it for the greater and fuller conviction and
humiliation of Job. As if the Lord had said, If (O Job) thou find thy self
puzzled and unable to give any tolerable answer and resolution to the questions
which I have proposed, about the whole bulk or body of the earth and Sea, or
about those great things that are wrought in the heavens, and in the air, then
consider, how thou art able to answer my questions about these lesser things,
which are also near unto thee, the beasts of the earth, fowls of the air, and
the fish of the Sea. The Lord even in these works, makes manifest his glorious
perfections, far exceeding the reach and apprehension of man, as well as in,
yea more than in, those other works of his mentioned before.

There are two things especially, of which the Lord would convince Job, with
respect to these living creatures:

First, Of his care and providence in the provision that he daily makes for
them.

Secondly, Of his power and wisdom, in the extraordinary strength and strange
qualities which he has bestowed upon them, and endued them with; in some of
which they much surpass man, the masterpiece, and master of the whole
invisible Creation.

The general scope and aim of God, in putting questions to Job about these
living creatures, seems to answer a secret doubt which some might have
concerning his providence. True, the Lord governs the Heavens, the Stars, the
Thunder, the Lightnings, the Rain; but does he look after things below? Yea,
the Lords care and providence about inferior creatures, is very great,
condescending to the very wild beasts of the earth, Ego qui omnio justa
dispensatione procuro, circa te tantum O Job videbor injustus. Philip.
to the fowls of the air, as also, to the fish of the Sea; and hence the Lord
would have Job understand, that surely he had a much greater care of him, and
of the affairs of the children of men. Who can but conclude, That if the Lord
has such a respect to these irrational creatures, which live only the life of
sense, then much more has he a care of man, and among men, of good men, who
are his children, and of them most of all in their afflictions and troubles. So
that, the Lord by these questions, seems to bespeak Job thus: How comes it to
pass, that thou should so much as doubt, whether I take care of thee or no,
when I take care of, and look to the wild beasts of the earth, to the fowls
that fly in the air, yea, to the fish that swim unseen in the Sea? Or thus, Am
I thus solicitous to look after Lions and Goats, Hinds and Unicorns, the
Ostrich and the Peacock? etc. am I so careful to look after these creatures, Vt
dis^at Job Deum non saevum esse in suos, qui tam beneficus sit in feras.
Chrysostom
many of which are of very little use to man, and some of them a trouble to
man? and do thou think I will not have a care of thee? learn therefore from
what I now question thee about, that I can never be cruel to thee, or forgetful
of my faithful servants, who am mindful of the bruit beasts and ravenous birds.
This seems to be the general tendency of the Lords discourse with Job,
continued from the close of this 38. Chapter, quite through the 39. a great
part of the 40. and the whole 41 Chapter.

Having thus given a prospect of the whole, I shall now proceed to the
particular animals here named, and to that first which is not only named in the
order of the Text, but is looked upon also as first in dignity, a King among
beasts, the Lion.

Verse. 39. Will thou hunt the prey for the Lion? The Lord speaks thus, because
the Lion is a beast of prey, he lives by hunting, by hunting, catching, and
seeding upon other beasts; the Lion is a Nimrod in the world, a mighty Hunter:
Naturalists say, he is so curious in his diet, that he scorns to feed upon any
carcass that he has not hunted and killed himself, or that has not been
hunted by a Lion. He will not touch a carcass that lies dead in the field; but
what he feeds upon, is what he conquers and kills, and that therefore it is
here said, Will thou hunt the prey for the Lion? thou needst not, he is able
enough to hunt for himself.

Yet some Travelers report, that there is a little beast called Jackal,
somewhat bigger than a Fox, who usually does that service for the Lion, to hunt
the prey for him, and may be called the Lions Hunter. Purchase Pilgr.
Mr. Purchase, in that Book called his Pilgrimage, ^^^s us this relation; The
Lion (says he) has the Jackal for his Usher, which is a little black
shag-haired beast, about the bigness of a Spaniel, which when the evening
comes, hunts for his prey, and coming on the foot, follows the scent with open
cry, to which the Lion as chief hunter gives diligent ear, following for his
advantage. If the Jackal set up his chase before the Lion comes in, he howls
out mainly, and then the Lion seizes on it, making a grumbling noise, whilst
his servant stands by barking; and when the Lion has done, the Jackal feeds on
the relics. Thus far that industrious collector of observations from most of
the remote parts of the world. And though neither Pliny, nor any natu^al
Historian, no nor any Interpreter upon this Text (that ever I met with) have
given any intimation that the Lion has such a servant to hunt the prey for
him; yet the testimony of those ingenious Travelers or Navigators, upon whose
report of what they have seen or heard in those Countries, the worthy Author
abovenamed makes this relation (this testimony I say) may be a probable ground
for such an Exposition of the Text, that the Lord had in his wise providence
provided one to hunt the prey for the Lion. Though I conceive the sense of the
place to be mo^e general, namely, that the Lord himself has one way or other
taken care, that even the Lion shall have his prey, and that neither Job then
nor any one else needed take care in that matter. How great an argument that
might be, both for Jobs conviction and consolation, will appear afterward.
Will thou hunt the prey For the Lion?

The word rendered Lion, signifies a stout Lion; Mr. Broughton renders, the
hardy Lion; others, the old Lion, (...) Leoni vetulo, qui viribus deficientibus
non amplius potest venari; sed a juvenibus capta praeda, rugitu eum ad
participationem praedae vocantibus, alitur. Aelian. l. 9. Histor. Animal. c. 1.
Will thou hunt the prey for the old Lion? and there is a double interpretation
with respect to that translation, That either here is meant a Lion come up to
his full strength, and so every way able to provide for himself; or, that by
the old Lion, is meant a Lion g^own so old and weak with old age, that he can
no longer provide for, nor hunt the prey for himself; and therefore the Lord
says, Will thou hunt the prey for the old Lion, that cannot hunt for himself?
do thou provide for the Lion, that cannot p^ovide for himself? It Is I, who
provide a prey for the old Lion, that cannot hunt the prey for himself. This is
a good sense, and I shall touch it in the Observation.

However, it is plain, that by the Lion in the first part of the verse, is
meant, an old Lion; for he stands opposed to the young Lion, in the latter part
of the ve^se: Will thou hunt the prey for the Lion?

Naturalists speak many things of the nature of the Lion, to whom I refer the
Reader, I shall have occasion to touch some of them, while I mention what the
Sc^ipture says of him. The Lion bears a fourfold resemblance in Scripture.

First, The Lion is the emblem of a King. Judah, whose tribe was the stock of
Kings, or the tribe Royal, is called a Lions whelp (Genesis 49.9.) Thus spoke
Jacob, Judah is a Lions whelp; from the prey my Son th^s art gone up; he
stooped down, he couched as a Lion, and as an old Lion; who shall rouse him up?
The Kings of the earth are compared to Lions; First, Because of their greatness
and supe iotity: What the Lion is among beasts, Kings are among men, their
chiefs. Secondly, Because of their stoutness and courage. Solomon says of the
Lion ( Prove. 30.30.) He is strongest among beasts, and turns not away for
any; That is, he is not afraid of any beast. To be bold as a Lion, is a sacred
as well as a common proverbi^l, noting greatest boldness. Aristotle says,
Nunquam in locis patentibus fugit aut metuit, pedetentimque discedit. Arist.
the Lion never flies o^ makes any hasty retreat, let the danger be what it
will in open view, but goes off, keeping his own pace. A modern Writer speaks
thus: The Lion in Africa is more fierce than in colder climate; He shrink^ not
in danger, except some covert of Woods h^d^s him from witnesses, and then he
will take the benefit of a flight, which otherwise he seems to disdain. Such is
the true spirit of Kings; Leoni tantum ex feris clementia in supplices. Plin.
l. 8. c. 16. Satis est prostrasse Leoni. Vigilans oculus sceptro impositus
perpetuae vigiliae symbolum est.
they are much above ignoble fears. Thirdly, Lions resemble Kings, because of
their mildness and nobleness to them that submit. Fourthly, Because of the
stateliness of their gate, and majesty of their a^pect. Fifthly, Because of
their vigilance and watchfulness. The Lion sleeps (say Na^uralists) with his
eyes open, he sleeps as if he were not asleep; and as some observe, he often
moves his tail while he sleeps, as giving notice, that he is not (as we
speak) fast asleep.

And as the Lion is an emblem of earthly Kings, so, Secondly, of the Lord Jesus
Christ, the King of heaven and earth, the King of Kings: To show his
supe^eminent excellency, he is called a Lion ( Rev. 5.5.) There was found none
w^rthy to open the Book, but the Lion of the tribe of Judah. Now Jesus Christ
is compared to a Lion upon all those accounts before named, for which worthy
and heroic Kings are so compared: for, First, Jesus Christ is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords ( Rev. 19.16.) He is highly exalted; he has a name given him
above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth (Phil. 2.9, 10.) And as
Jesus Christ is like the Lion for his superiority, so, Secondly, for his
clemency and true nobleness of spirit toward those who yield unto him! It Is
enough indeed, to humble our selves before this Lion. How ready must Christ be
to receive and embrace humbled sinners, who humbled himself to death, that he
might save sinners, even while they were proud and rebelled against him.
Thirdly, Jesus Christ is a Lion also, in respect of his watchfulness over his
Church. This Lion that keeps Israel, neither slumbers nor sleeps (Psalm. 121.4.)
and, Fourthly, for his invincible courage and strength, always ready to be put
forth for his Church. The Prophet ( Isa. 31.4.) compares Christ to a Lion, that
will not be frighted; Like as the Lion (says he) and the young Lion roaring on
his prey; when a multitude of Shepherds is called out against him, he will not
be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them; so shall the
Lord of Hosts himself come down to fight for mount Sion, and for the hill
thereof. As if the Prophet had said, God will protect Jerusalem against all her
enemies (the Assyrian forces are there specially intended) no more regarding or
fearing them, than a fierce Lion in the prime of his strength, will regard or
fear a company of simple Shepherds, that shall attempt to rescue his prey from
between his teeth. And because of this Lion-like power and courage of Christ so
his Church, another Prophet says, that the Church herself shall be as a Lion (
M^c. 5.8.) And the remnant of Jacob (that is, the true Church) shall be among
the Gentiles, in the midst of many people (who are enemies and unbeliev^ng) as
a Lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young Lion among the flocks of
sheep; or rather (as the Margin ha^h it) Goats, who if he go through, both
treads down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver. That is (as our
late Annotators express it) The faithful shall be endowed with an invincible
force of the Spirit of God, to overcome and overthrow the devil, the world, and
all their enemies.

Thirdly, The Lion is the emblem of oppressors and tyrants. They in evil
qualities resemble Lions. Thus the Apostle Paul called Nero (as it is generally
conceived) a Lion. I was (says he) delivered out of the mouth of the Lion (2 Timothy 4.15.) which though it may be taken in a general sense, for deliverance
out of any great danger, yet it is specially and particularly applied to the
person of Nero, who was cruel as a Lion, and had the Apostle Paul in his paws
at that time. David speaking of the multitude of his cruel opp^essors, tells
us, his soul was among Lions ( Psalm. 57.4.) that is, among those that were
cruel, as the next words explain it; I lie among them that are set on fire
(with rage and malice) even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows,
and their tongue a sharp sword. The Lion is (though in some cases a clement,
yet) mostly a cruel, a devouring creature. Naturalists say, Leo est animal
carnivorum and saevum; est and voracissimum and repletus duos tresve dies
jejunat. Arist. Histor. Animal. l. 4. c. 5. and l. 8. c. 16.
he will swallow down whole gobbets of flesh without chewing; yea, that he will
swallow down such a quantity at once, as will serve him two or three days
without eating more. And as oppressors are shadowed out by the Lion with
respect to their cruelty, so likewise with respect to their subtilty and
treachery ( Psalm. 10.8, 9, 10.) He (that is, the wicked enemy) sits in the
lurking places of the Villages; in the secret places does he murder the
innocent; his eyes are privily set against the poor; He lies in wait secretly
as a Lion in his den; he lies in wait to catch the poor, etc. Evil men have as
much of the Lions craft, as of his cruelty, and both from him.

Christus Leo propter fortitudinem, diabolus propter seritatem. August. Ser.
46. de diversis.
In the fourth place, The Lion in some things resembles the devil himself, the
worst of all creatures. The Apostle Peter gives it expressly (1 Epist. 5.8.) Be
sober, be vigilant; for your adversary the devil goes about like a roaring
lion, seeking whom he may devour, or swallow down at a draught, as the word
signifies. The devil is like a Lion in his wrath, rage, malice and subtilty, to
ca^ch and ensnare poor souls, and to make a prey of them.

Lastly, The Lion is an emblem of a godly man, First, For his boldness and
gracious confidence in a good cause ( Prove. 28.1.) The righteous is bold as a
Lion. De Leone hominis hospite, and homine medice Leonis. Vide Gellium, l. 5.
c. 14. and Aelian. l. 7. cap ult.
Secondly, For his gratefulness to them who have done him good. Some of the
ancients have rela^ed strange things of the hospitality of a Lion entertaining
a man, and of the gratitude of a man healing a Lion, with the consequents of
both. Thus by these Scripture-resemblances, we may learn much what the Lion is,
and what his qualities are. Will thou hunt the prey for the Lion?

Or fill the appetite of the young Lions? Possibly the Lord speaks of filling
the appetite of young Lions because young Lions have appetites so strong, that
a small matter will not fill them. Young ones of any kind, have stronger
appetites than those that are old; young Lions especially, whose constitution
(say Naturalists) is very hot and dry: that being the temperament of Lions;
young Lions must needs require a great proportion of food to satisfy their
stomach, and find work for their quick concoction. It Is but a while, that the
milk of the Lioness will serve their turn, they must have stronger meat; young
Lions are soon ready for prey; It Is said ( Judge. 14.5.) that when Samson passed
by, a young Lion roared against him, or (as the Margin reads it) a young Lion
meeting him roared; and why did he roar? not so much for anger, as for hunger,
desiring to make a prey of Sampson.

Will thou fill the appetite of the young Lion? Some translate it, Will thou
fill the company, or troop of young Lions? that is, all the Lions that are in
the den. The word signifies a company or troop, so its rendered ( Psalm. 68.30.)
Rebukes the company of speare-men, or of those that carry the cane. Verum est
nomen (...) interdum significare catervam, sed quum de hominibus sermo est
P^rde catervam arundinis, i. e. hastatorum, Pisc.
But though the word may signify a company, yet it is not so used, but where
it referrs (as in that Psalm) to a company of men; and therefore, though that
be a good sense, and may well be included in our Translation, which being
(according to the Text) in the plural number, young Lions, takes in the whole
company, how many soever they are. Will thou fill the company of the young
Lions? can thou give all the whelps in the kennel their dinner or supper? yet
I rather adhere to those, who render the word Appetite, as we do, than to those
who render it Company.

Can thou fill the appetite (or soul) of the young Lions. Anima pro appetendi
facultate.
The word is translated life or soul, in the 20. Chap. of this Book ( ver. 22.)
as also in the 33. Chap. of this Book ( ver. 18.) It Is likewise translated
appetite (Prove. 23.2.) and when we read greedy dogs (Isa. 56.11.) we put in the
Margin, strong of appetite, implying that the persons intended under that
disgraceful denomination greedy dogs, were such, who though they had little
appetite or stomach to their work, yet had even an insatiable appetite or
stomach after their wages or reward. The appetite being so quick and lively a
faculty, is expressed by the same word that signifies life or liveliness, which
is the spring and original of appetite. When life cease, appetite cease;
and the more lively any are, the quicker is their appetite.

Will thou fill the life or appetite of the young Lions? These young Lions are
opposed to the old Lion spoken of before; and we may take them either for Lions
so young, that they are not able to hunt or fetch their own prey, and therefore
must have prey brought in to them; or we may take them for young Lions that
have strength enough to go forth to seek their prey. So then, as the Lion
before may be taken for an old Lion, for a Lion so old, that he cannot go forth
to catch his prey; and the young Lions, for Lions so young, that they never had
strength to go forth and catch their prey: So we may take the Text in general
for old and young, whether able or unable to catch prey for themselves. Will thou hunt the prey for the Lion? or fill the appetite of the young Lions?

Hence note, First, The way how Lions live, or get their liveli-hood.

Lions are all for prey. There is no work spoken of that the Lion does to get
his living by, there is nothing spoken of any service the Lion does, all his
care is for his belly, he hunts his prey: Wicked men in this are like Lions,
they are like Nimrod, all for hunting, all for catching the prey. The Prophet
Nahum (Chap. 2.12.) describes the oppressing power of Nineveh, by a Lion
tearing in pieces enough for his Whelps, and strangling for his Lionesses, and
filling his holes with prey, and his dens with ravin. Tearing and strangling,
filling all with prey and ravin, is all that Lions do; not is the work of
oppressors and cruel men any other in their kind, Basil. Hom. 9. in Hexam.
Ambros Hex. l. 6. c. 3.
nor any whit better. Some of the Ancients speaking of the Lion, say, that when
he roareth, the poor Beasts that are within hearing are so amazed and
affrighted, that though they might escape by flight, yet they stand still and
yield themselves up to him for a prey. Such frights are poor men often put to,
by the roaring throats of merciless oppressors.

Secondly note; God provides prey for Lions.

God feeds not only Sheep and Lambs, but Wolves and Lions. This note gives us
the chief scope of the whole con^ext, which is to show the care of God over
all. It is said ( Psalm. 104.21.) The young Lions roar after their prey, and
seek their meat from God. It is a strange expression, that young Lions when
they roar after their prey, should be said to seek their meat of God; implying,
that neither their own strength nor craft could feed them without help from
God. The strongest creatures left to themselves cannot help themselves. As they
who fear God are fed by a special providence of God, so all creatures are fed
and nou i^hed by a general providence. The Lion, though he be strong and
subtle, yet cannot get his own prey; we think, a Lion might shift for himself,
no, it is the Lord that provides for him; the young Lions seek their meat of
God: Surely then, the mig^tiest of men cannot live upon themselves, as it is of
God that we receive life and breath, so all things needful for the maintenance
of this life. The Prophet Jeremiah gives check to all flesh ( Chap. 9.23.) Let
not the wise man glory in his wisdom; let not the mighty man glory in his
might. As if he had said, neither a wise man by his wisdom, nor a mighty man by
his might, can bring any work to an effectual issue. That is also the
conclusion which the Spirit of God made, by the wisest and one of the might
men that ever was in the world, King Solomon (Eccles. 9.11.) The race is not to
the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet
riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill, but time and
chance happens to them all: though men have suitable qualities and abilities
for the attaining of their ends (what suits better the winning of a race than
swiftness?) yet they cannot attain them, without the power and presence of God
in some kind and degree or other; the strong Lions would starve, did not the
Lord help them to hunt their prey.

Thirdly, If we take the Lion in the first part of the Verse. for the old
decreped Lion, and the young Lions for such as a e not able to go abroad for
their prey, the Lord providing for Lions under both these considerations,
yields us this observation.

God takes care for those creatures, who through infirmities (being either too
old or too young) are not able to provide for themselves. There Is a special
providence of God over them that have special need. The old Lion, that once
could, but now cannot the young Lions that never could hunt the prey, are yet
provided for. Old Lions that are strong are taught by natural instinct to get
prey for their young ones while weak; Leo vetulus qui viribus deficien^ibus non
amplius, Potest vonari a juvenibus praeda capta, rugitu eum ad participationem
praedae vocantibus, alitur, Aelian. l. 9. de natura animal. c. 1.
and the natural Historian tells us, that the younger Lions, which are strong,
are taught by a like instinct to hunt the prey for the old ones that are weak.

Fourthly, From the latter words, will thou fill the appetite of the young
Lions?

Note, God can and does provide for the creature to fullness or satisfaction; he
fills their appetite.

God, as I may say, keeps a good, a bountiful house for all his creatures; the
young Lions that have such strong stomachs shall have their fill: Hence we may
infer.

First, If the Lord does thus provide for Lions young or old, one or other,
then much more will he provide, and hunt the prey for his faithful people.
David (Psalm. 34.10.) gives us the Lords word for it, The young Lions do lack
and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.
That is, the young Lions may lack, or though the young Lions should lack and
suffer hunger, yet they that seek and serve the Lord shall not. Lions have a
good assurance that they shall not lack, but the servants of God have a far
better assurance that they shall not. Does God take care for Oxen? was the
Apostles question (1 Cor. 9.9.) or says he it altogether for our sakes; for
our sakes (speaking of Gospel Ministers) no doubt this is written, (ver. 10.)
As if he had said, if the Lord did not give that law to the Jews, Thou shall
not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn altogether for our
sakes, yet questionless he gave it chiefly for our sakes, and had a far greater
respect to us in making that law than to Oxen. Thus from the text and point in
hand, I may say, Does God take care for Lions? Surely, he has caused this to
be written, that we may know, he will much more take care of his sheep, of all
that fear him and call upon his name. A Lion may come into a starving
condition, but those that fear God shall not. Lions, though they are very
strong and subtle cannot always get their prey, but the Lord has promised to
minister to his people, at least a supply of their necessities; as David
speaks, I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread (Psalm. 37.25.)

Secondly, Does the Lord provide to satisfaction for the young Lions? does he
fill their natural appetite? then surely, he will p^ovide for the satisfying of
his people in spiritual things ( Luke 1.53.) He fills the hungry with good
things. Who are the hungry? doubtless, he the holy Virginmeant the spiritually
hung^y. And what are the good things he fills them with? doubtless, spiritual
good things; they shall have not only some tastes of these good things, but
their fill of them; he fills the hungry with good things. (Psalm. 81.10.) Open
thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. God has much respect to fill us with
outward good things; but much more to fill us with spi^i^ual good things, open
thy mouth wide, and raise up thy desires after the things of heaven, growth in
grace, increase in faith and love, in patience and holiness, and I will fill
it. He that fills the appetite of the young Lions with natural food, will fill
the appetite of his Servants with spiritual food, which is best of all; they
shall be abundantly satisfied with the goodness of his house, and he will make
them drink of the river of his pleasures: (Psalm. 36.8.) He that fills the
appetite of the young Lions, will not send hungry souls away emp^y. We may rest
in much assurance that God will deal well with us, both for soul and body,
while he questions Job whether he would do that which himself only does; Will thou hunt the prey for the Lion? or f^ll the appetite of the young Lions?

Verse. 40. When they couch in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in
wait. This Verse gives a further description of the Lion, whether young or old.
Before we had them hunting abroad in the fields, here we have them couching in
their dens, and abiding in their covert.

When they couch in their dens. This couching or bowing down in their dens, may
be upon a threefold account, and so there is a threefold interpretation of
the words.

First, Some taking the Lion for the old Lion and the young Lions for such as
are very young, interpret this couching as proceeding from weakness; they couch
in their dens, as not being able to go abroad.

Secondly, Others say, they c^uch in their dens only for rest and ease, having
tired themselves in hunting for their prey.

(...) deprimit gestus hominis insidiantis alicui, Drus.
Thirdly, That they couch in their dens upon design to catch their prey, thus
the latter part of the Verse seems to carry it; where it is said, they lie in
wait. So then, this couching in their dens, is either from necessity, as not
being able to go forth; or it is a couching in policy, which I rather pitch
upon.

They couch in their dens. As if they were asleep, as if they minded nothing
but their ease; yet even then they are busily minding how to catch their prey.
As if the Lord had said, Have thou (O Job) taught the Lion that art and
cunning, to lie couchant in his den, that he may steal upon beasts passant, and
surprise them unawares. They couch in their dens, And abide in the covert to
lie in wait.

The word rendered Covert signifies a Tabernacle or Tent in which men abode for
a time, and is therefore here opposed (as some conceive) to the Lions dens or
houses spoken of in the beginning of the verse. Beasts (say they) are aware of
Lions dens, and so avoid them; but they may pass unawares by the coverts and
thickets, where they lie in ambush. But I suppose we need not be thus critical
in distinguishing between dens and coverts, both words may signify the same
place and thing; or at least in both places Lions do the same thing, Lie in
wait. It is said of the Lord himself ( Jerem. 25.38.) he has forsaken his
covert as a Lion. The meaning of the Prophet was to show the Lords purpose to
come forth, and tear and rend his enemies by some sore judgment, as a young
Lion that rangeth about for his prey. We read a little before (at the 34th
verse) of the howling of the shepherds, that is, of the rulers and governors,
and of the cry of the principal of the flock, that is, of the wealthiest among
the people. When the Lion came forth of his covert, there was a howling and a
cry made; why so? the Lion came forth to destroy both sheep and shepherds. Thus
the Lord comes forth, even as a young Lion, full of wrath and fury to destroy
the wicked: He is sometimes like a Lion couching in his den, and abiding in his
covert, but he does it as the Lion, To lie in wait.

This expression may have a twofold allusion. First, To Fowlers and Hunters,
who (in some cases) keep out of sight, that they may with the more advantage
take birds or beasts in their sna^es and toils; For in vain (says Solomon,
Prove. 1.17.) the net is spread in the sight of any bird. Secondly, To
Soldiers, who lie in ambush to surprise their enemy. Thus do Lions; They
(says the Text) couch in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in wait.
Here,

First, Taking that interpretation of the words, which supposes, the Lion
lying down in his den through age and weakness,

Observe, The strongest creatures are tamed an^ weakened by age.

The Lion is the strongest among beasts, yet he cannot always range in the
fields and hunt for prey, he must come to his den, and keep house there. It Is
so with men, how strong soever they have been, yet old age necessitates them at
last to keep house and home. All must submit to time, and yield to those
infirmities, which old age inevitably bring upon us. Time is called, Tempus
e^a^ rerum.
The eater of things; It Is so also of persons, that great eater will eat out
the strength of the eater himself, that is, the Lion, as Sampson called him in
his riddle proposed to the Philistines (Judge. 14.14.) Time reduces our
strength to weakness, our life to death. Time confines us first to our
chambers, then to our beds, and then to our graves. The Lion must give over his
hunting and couch in his den.

Secondly, Taking the Lion as politickly abiding in covert, and waiting for his
prey;

Observe, As the Lord gives much strength, so much craft to some creatures.

There are creatures of little strength which have much craft, others have
little craft but much strength, in some both meet together; and among them we
may number the Lion, he is a crafty one as well as a strong one; he has his
covert, there he waits for his prey. We may parallel men with beasts in this
regard; among them some are strong but not crafty, others are crafty but not
strong, and not a few are both. Such David compared to a Lion ( Psalm. 10.4, 8,
9.) The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God:
What will he seek after then? the 8th. and 9th. verses tell us, He sits in
the lurking places of the villages, in the secret places does he murder the
innocent, his eyes are privily set against the poor, he lies in wait secretly,
as a Lion in his den, he lies in wait to catch the poor, he does catch the
poor when he draws him into his net: He croucheth and humbles himself, that
the poor may fall by his strong ones. Thus the subtle practices of a wicked man
are set forth, by the subtlety of the Lion. He coucheth and croucheth, he waits
for the innocent, he draws him into his net; he first entangles him, and then
devours him. David gives a like description of evil men in another place (
Psalm. 17.11, 12.) They have now compassed us in our steps, they have set their
eyes bowing down to the earth; like as a Lion that is greedy of his prey, and
as it were a young Lion lurking in secret places. These Scriptures plainly show
the natural subtlety of the Lion, waiting in his covert that he may do mischief
unawares; and that in this piece of mischievous policy wicked men are not
behind him, they show as plainly.

Thirdly, Whereas in the former verse the Lion is said to hunt his prey in the
field, and this in to abide in his covert to lie in wait for it;

Observe; What some cannot do by strength they do by craft.

We say, of craft or power, it is hard to say which is most dangerous or
undesirable in an enemy. Where these two meet, where craft and power, ability
and subtilty are joined, what will they not do? We may say of men, in whom
these are united, as the Lord said concerning the men of the new world, soon
after the Flood, who were united in heart and tongue (the people are one, and
they have all one language) nothing will be restrained from them, which they
have imagined to do (Genesis 11.6.) The devil is always like a Lion, both strong
and subtle: He is so strong, that he sometimes hunts his prey (as I may say) in
open field, and overcomes by fine force. He is so crafty, that at other times
he knows it is best for him to abide in his covert, and lie in wait to catch
souls. He goes about like a roaring Lion (says the Apostle Peter, 1 Epist.
5.8.) but he is craftier than to roar always like a Lion, when he goes about
seeking whom he may devour; he often fawns and flatters; he uses his wits, and
puts tricks upon poor souls whom he would devour. We (says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
2.) are not ignorant of his devices. Christ advises all his Disciples to join
the wisdom of the Serpent, with the innocence of the Dove; subtilty and
honesty, craft and innocence, working together, work well, or make good work:
But where there is the strength and craft of a Lion, without a dove-like
integrity, what sad work do men make? Godly men, or men truly fearing God,
sometimes have the wisdom of the serpent, together with their dove-like
innocence; and when to both the former, the Lions strength is joined, what good
may they not do? they may do (as we say) a world of good in an evil world.

Fourthly, In that the Lion coucheth in his den, and retireth sometimes to his
covert; we may take notice of the good providence of God toward man. God has
ordered it, that the Lion coucheth all day in his den, and is quiet, that men
may go out quietly to their labor. The Psalmist commends the providence of God
in this ( Psalm. 104.20, 21, 22.) Thou make darkness, and it is night, wherein
all the beasts of the Forest do creep forth: the young Lions roar after their
prey, and seek their meat from God. Thus they are roaring and raging for their
prey all night; but how is it with them, or what do they in the day? The next
words tell us, The Sun rises, they gather themselves together, and lay them
down in their dens. (Then it follows) Man goes forth to his work, and to his
labor until the evening. Such is the care of God, that he clears fields and
Countries of these ravenous beasts, that man may go safely to his work, and not
be troubled. When the Lion comes forth in the day, it is usually to execute some
judgment of God; witness that of the Prophet, who going out of Gods way, God
told him by another Prophet, a Lion shall meet thee and tear thee; and so it
came to pass, a Lion met him, and executed the judgment of God upon him,
because he went beyond the command he had received from God (1 King. 13.24.) We
read also, that God sent Lions to vex the people continually, when they fell to
idolatry and false worship (2 King. 17.26.) It was of the Lord that Lions which
used to keep their covert in the day time, were so bold as to come by day to
their houses and destroy them. And such is the mighty power of God, that though
hungry Lions are altogether for prey, yet God can stop their mouths, and check
their appetite ( Dan. 6.8.) When Daniel was cast into the Lions den, amongst a
company of hungry Lions, yet not one touched him, but were as meek to him as so
many lambs; whereas no sooner were his enemies and accusers let down into that
den, but they brake their bones before they came to the ground. Thus much of
the Lion, a King among the beasts of the earth. The Lords next question
concerns the Raven, none of the best, if not one of the worst among the birds
of the Air.

Verse. 41. Who provideth for the Raven his food? When his young ones cry unto
God, they wander for lack of meat. As the Lion is a devourer among beasts, so
is the Raven among birds. The Lion (as was said) is so curious, that he will
not feed upon a carcass in the way, but the Raven feeds upon any dead or
corrupted body; and that is the reason why in many great Cities there is a Law
or custom that Raven sneer them, shall not be shot at nor terrified, because
they eat up the filth and carrion, which might infect the air, and breed
pestilential diseases.

Now the Lord puts the question, Who provideth for the Raven? As if he had
said, I provide not only for the Kingly Lion, but for the carrion-eating Raven.
The Lord made provision of food for Lions and Ravens, for all sorts of beasts,
and birds, and creeping things, in the work of Creation; and in his works of
providence, he makes all things ready, and brings them to hand for their use
and sustentation: He, as it were, dresseth and disheth out meat for all his
creatures, and then sets it before them, that they may eat and be satisfied.

Who provideth for the Raven? The Hebrew word rendered provideth, has two
significations, Verbum (...) notat indulgentissimam creatoris providentiam, non
solum necessaria sed etiam usque ad delicias.
which wonderfully set forth the care of God toward this creature: First, the
certainty of their provision, for the word signifies to establish; as if the
Lord did give them a necessary, settled, or constant diet. Secondly, It notes
the sutableness and pleasingness of their food to their nature and
constitution, yea, to their gust and appetite; as if the Lord fitted their
food, as we say, to their tooth or palate, and gave them not only meat, but
savoury meat to them (like that which Isaac bespake of his son Esau) such as
they love; for though the food of Ravens be unpleasant to us, yet it is
pleasing and toothsom and savoury to them. What the Lord p^ovides for Ravens,
is to them dainties and delicacies; carrion is so to them, because it is suitable
to their nature, and such as their stomach likes very well. The sutableness of
any food to our taste and palate, makes it delightful to us: What makes sin,
which is as odious as a carrion or corrupt thing to God and good men, pleasant
to carnal and wicked men, but the sutableness of it to their nature? they can
feed upon sin as heartily and hungrily, as a Raven does upon a putrified
carcass. And what is the reason that the ways of God are so pleasant to a godly
man? is it not because his heart is made (through grace) suitable to them? To do
the will of God is meat and drink to a godly man; but his soul being in a right
frame) can no more delightfully do, any thing that is sinfully evil, than he
can delight to feed bodily upon putrefaction or poison.

Who provideth his food For the Raven?

The Hebrew word for a Raven signifies bl^ckness, darkness, Corvus in Hebraeo
(...) dictus a color nigro. Graece (...) crocitare.
or the evening. The Raven is the true Blackbird, a dark-colored creature;
black as a Raven, is the Scripture language for perfect blackness. The Greek
word for a Raven, intimates her hoarse, harsh and unpleasant cry, or croking.
As the coat of the Raven is eminent for a beautiful blackness, so his note is
well known by his unpleasant and jarring hoarsness. The note of the Crow or
Raven, sounds like the Latin, Cras, cras; in English, To morrow, to morrow, or
the day to come. And hence men, who when called to present repentance and
forsaking of their sins, desire time, and say, to morrow, to morrow, are said
to resemble Crows and Ravens, Zorom. l. 4.
whose only song is cras, cras. It Is reported concerning Athanasius, that
walking in the streets of a Heathenish or Gentile City, a Raven slew over his
head and crooked; the Heathens that stood by, laughed and smiled to see the Raven
fly and croke so near him; and they asked, What said the Raven to thee? He
answered, The Raven cried, to morrow, to morrow; for to morrow the Emperor will
send out such an Edict or Decree, as will put a stop to your superstitious
observation of Heathenish Feasts: And though he knew nothing of the Emperors
purpose at that time, to put forth such a decree, yet the next day there came a
command from the Emperor, that they should no more observe them: And then the
Heathens cried out against Athanasius, and said that he was a Witch.

Further, The Raven is so called in our language, from her ravening; her name
speaks her nature, as Nabals did his (1 Samuel 25.25.) yet even Ravens are under
the Lords inspection. Who provideth for the Raven his food?

Hence note; The worst and vilest creatures are under the care of God.

The Lord does not give Job an instance of his care in the people of Israel,
for whom he provided a long time in Egypt, and whom he fed forty years in the
wilderness; nor in Elias, fed by Ravens, but in his feeding Ravens; nor among
fowls, does he instance in the Hawk or Falcon, which are highly prized and fed
by Princes; nor in the sweet singing Nightingale, or such like musical pretty
birds, which men keep choicely and much delight in; but in that hateful and
malicious bird, the croking Raven, whom no man values, but as she eats up the
carrion which might annoy him. Behold then, and wonder at the providence and
kindness of God, that he should provide food for the Raven, a creature of so
dismal a hue, and of so untuneable a tone, a creature that is so odious to most
men, Avis inauspicata.
and ominous to some. There is a great providence of God seen, in providing for
the Ant or Pismire, who gathers her meat in Summer ( Prove. 6.8.) but a greater
in the Raven, who though he forgets, or is careless to provide for himself, yet
God provides and lays up for him. One would think the Lord should say of
Ravens, let them shift for themselves or perish; no, the Lord God does not
despise any work of his hands; the Raven has his being from God, and therefore
the Raven shall be provided for by him; not only the fair innocent Dove, but
the ugly Raven has his meat from God. As the Lord feeds not only Doves, but
Ravens, in kind, so he feeds not only Doves, but Ravens, in a figure; that is,
he feeds not only dove-like or innocent men, but raven-like or wicked men. (
Mat. 5.45.) He causes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends
rain on the just and on the unjust: Thus he feeds Ravens in the likeness of
men. Such men whose minds feed upon carrion, the Lord feeds their bodies with
excellent dainties, they fare deliciously every day, as the rich Glutton is
said to do, who was but a Raven. The Lord, I say, does not only provide for his
better and more excellent ones, but he provides for the bad, for the evil, for
the wicked; such an indulgent father and provider is God toward all his
creatures. We find this reported to the praise of God ( Psalm. 104.10, 11.) He
sends the Springs into the valleys, which run among the Hills; they give
drink to every beast of the field; the wild Asses quench their thirst. And
again ( Psalm. 145.15, 16.) The eyes of all wait upon (or look unto) thee, and
thou give them their meat in due season: thou openest thy hand, and
satisfiest the desire (that is, the hunger and thirst) of every living thing.
He that gives life to all, upholds the lives of all. As it shows the great
power of God, that he has made some living creatures (the Angels and souls of
men) which need no mear, so it is a very great glory that he provides meat for
all that ^eed it. God has a great household, and he keeps a plentiful house;
the meanest of his household have food convenient for them.

Now, Does the Lord provide a table for the Ravens? Remember Christ^ Inference
from it; Then much more will he provide a Table for his children who fear him,
and trust upon him. Behold, (says Christ, Mat. 6.26.) the fowls of the air;
for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your
heavenly father feeds them: Are ye not much better than they? And that which
Christ spoke in general there concerning the fowls of the air, he in the 12th
of Luke (ver. 24.) spoke particularly of the Raven; Consider the Ravens, for
they neither sow nor reap, etc. and God feeds them; how much more are ye
better (as if the Lord had said, than the fowls?) Ye are much better than the
best of fowls; then how much better than the worst, the Ravens? and be ye
assured, that as much as ye are better than the Ravens, by so much is my care
for you, greater than for the Ravens. As God is the Savior of all, especially
of those that believe (1 Timothy 4.10.) so he is a provider for all, but
especially for those that believe. The Lord, who alike cares for all, does not
care for all ali^e; there would be much inequality in that equality. As
creatures vary in their kinds and degrees, so the Lord (who is a God of
judgment) varies both the kind and degree of his care toward the creature.
Therefore we may conclude; Does God put forth any kind or degree of care for
Ravens? doubtless then he will take care of his beloved children and faithful
servants.

There Is no temptation with which the children of God are mo^e oppressed, than
with this; What they shall eat? and what they shall drink? and wherewithal
shall they and theirs be clothed? n^r does any thing cast them upon more
dangerous rocks than these distrustful queries; How shall we live? and who
shall provide for us, especially in a hard and dear year? But may we not s^an^
amazed to hear such queries proceed out of their mouths, who have hea^d of this
word which once proceeded out of Ch ists mouth, That God feeds the Ravens?
who believing that, can but beli^ve that God will feed him! Nor does the Lord
provide for and feed the old Raven only, but his young ones also. As it
follows, When his young ones cry unto God.

The Raven in the former part of the ve^se, is the old one that has young
ones. How can that feed the you^^, that cannot feed him self, but by Gods
p^oviding? As if the Lord had said, As it is not by thy providence, O Job, but
by mine, that the old Ravens are fed; so that the young ones being early
forsaken of the old, and wanting skill to shift for them selves, wandering here
and there, have their cries (which nature has taught them to put up to Go^ in
their necessity) heard and answered with supply of food.

The Hebrew is, When his children cry unto God; children are properly the young
ones of men, yet the young ones of any c^eature may be called children.

The word rendered to cry, (...) Est opem and salutem ingenti vociseratione
postulare. Clamor ob necessitatem emissus, petitionem imitatur. Theodoret. Non
novit omnino invocare Deum nisi anima rationalis. August. in Psalm. 136. Ego
haud secus exauditos pasco, quam si ad me vociferentur. Bez.
notes a very strong cry for help for food. The young ones of the Raven being
pincht with hunger, make a loud confused cry for food; but to whom do they cry?
the Text says, They cry Unto God.

No creature can properly be said to cry unto God, but the rational creature;
and there is none among the rational creatures that indeed cry unto God, but
those that have faith: How then is it said, The Ravens young ones cry unto God?

I answer, First, They are said to cry to God, because man hears them not, or
if he do, he regards them not; what man regards the cry of a young Raven?
therefore they cry to God if to any, who alone takes notice of their cry.

S^condly, They cry to God, not properly, but equivalently; they cannot be
imagined to make any formal or direct prayers to God in their necessities, but
their necessities which force them to cry, have the force of a cry, or of a
prayer unto God.

Thirdly, They may be said to cry unto God, because God takes or interprets
their cry when hungry, as a prayer to himself: And God may be said to hear
their cry, because he provides for them, and helps them, as he does those who
put up powerful prayers to him. There is in all creatures a desire of that
which is needful for them, or proper to them, and when that is wanting they
cry, that is, make some signification of their want. And as all young ones are
apt to cry (that being all they can do) for food; so the Scripture, as here, so
elsewhere represents young Ravens crying more than other creatures ( Psalm.
147.9.) He gives to the beast his food, and to the young Ravens which cry. The
beasts are not said to cry for food when God gives it them, but the young
Ravens are. Crying seems to be the property of young Ravens, as if the least
lack of food made them cry.

But how come young Ravens to be in such want of food, that they should cry for
it? and when they cry, why are they not said to cry to their parents (if I may
so speak) or to the old ones, but to God for meat? In answer to these queries;

First, Some Naturalists say, the Raven is a forgetful creature, and leaves her
young ones altogether unprovided of food, and therefore (as the last resort of
all helpless ones) they are supposed to cry unto God.

Chrysostomi sententia est n^n obullam a^boris speciem, sed ex ipsa parentum
crudelitate pullos adhuc implumes negligi and deseri. Illis naturae author
dignam vicent rependi imperat; nam filit genitores s^os in senectute minime
alunt. Vt Aelianus dixit (...).
Secondly, Say others, the Raven is not only a forgetful, but an unnatu^al
creatu^e. Ravens have not those bowels of natural compassion to their young
ones, which other creatures have, who will presently bestir themselves to get
food for their young ones; therefore some say, that their young ones, as it
were, cry to God of the impiety and unnaturalness of the old ones, in not
providing for them, and in a manner accuse them for it. The Apostle says, He
that provides not for those of his own house, has denied the faith, and is
worse than an infidel. A beast will provide for his own, and most birds provide
for their young, but the Raven provides not for his own young ones; and
therefore his young ones are brought in, as crying or complaining to the Lord
of their pa^ents unnatural astorgy, or want of pity: And indeed paren^s, who do
not provide for their own house, may justly be put among the Ravens. Remember
(by the way) the power of God, who could make Ravens feed Elias, and be kind to
him (1 King. 17.16.) though naturally they are cruel to their own kind, and
refuse to feed their young ones.

Dicitur, quod corvus pullos non pascit, donec suos depreh^ndens plumis
^^grescere viderit, unde septem diebus iis cibos non ministrat, sed a Deo
suste^tantur per naturalem vim iis indi^^m. Aquin. Sed apud authors historiae
n^turalis hujus re testimonium vix invenitur. Lege Arist. l. 9. Hist. Animal.
c. 31. Plin. l. 10. c. 12. Aelian. l. 15. c. 39 Hieronimus ad illud (Psalm.
147.9.) ex Philosophorum sententia ait, e coeli rore vivere corvorum pullos
derelictos.
Thirdly, There Is another reason given by Naturalists, why Ravens feed not their
young ones: For when the Raven has hatched her young, they look whitish, which
the old ones cannot abide, being themselves black, and therefore the Raven
forbears to feed his young ones for seven days (says my Author) that is, till
their feathers begin to grow black, whereby he knows them to be his own, being
loath to bring up a spurious brood; so that all this time of their estrangement
and forbearance, the Lord feeds their young ones, some say, with a dew from
heaven, or with little flies (say others) bred out of their dung. But I shall
not stay upon these things, especially considering that they who professedly
write of the nature and manners, both of beasts and birds, are very silent, as
to any such observations concerning the Raven; yet because so grave an Author
as is noted in the Margin insists upon this latter reason, take this Note from
it.

Every one loves its like. A Raven does not love her young, till she perceives
them in her own likeness. It is said also of the Eagle, that when her young are
first hatched, she will not own them for hers, till having held them up to the
Sun, she finds they outface it; and here it is said, the Raven will not own her
young till they are black. Now, if it be thus in nature, if it be a truth, that
the Raven is not delighted in her young till they grow black, it is doubtless
true in spirituals, like to like. God loves none with delight, but holy and
pure ones, and the more holy and pure any are, the more he loves them; the
reason is, because himself is altogether infinitely pure and holy. Where God
sees most of his own image, which is pu^ity and holiness, there he loves most,
and for such he will certainly provide, such he will surely feed.

But, which way soever the young ones of the Raven come to want food, whether
it be through the forgetfulness, or the unnaturalness of the old Raven, or
because they are hatchr white, upon what account soever (I say) it is, that
they come to want food, the Text says they are in such want, that they cry to
God, yea, that They wander for lack of meat.

This is a further evidence of their distress, they cry when they are in their
nest, and there God provides for them; and when they wander (from their nest)
for lack of meat, God feeds them too. Some restrain this wandering to a narrow
compass, and say, it is only in their nest, where they struggle and are unquiet
for want of meat; but this their wandering for want of meat, may be conceived
to be out of the nest, rather than in it; for a nest being a strait place, it
cannot be congruously said, that the young ones wander while they are in it.
And therefore, which clears the matter sufficiently, Naturalists tell us, That
when the Raven has fed his young in the nest, till they are well fledged and
able to fly abroad, then he thrusts them out of the nest, and will not let
them abide there, but puts them to get their own living. Now when these young
ones are upon their first flight from their nest, and are little acquainted
with means how to help themselves with food, then the Lord provides food for
them. It Is said by credible Authorities, that the Raven is mavelous strict
and severe in this; Locis arctio^ibus, ubi non satis cibi pluribus sit, duo
tantum incolunt; and suos pullos cum jam potestas volandi est primum nido
ejiciunt deinde regione tota exp^llunt. Arist. l. 9. de Histor. animal. c. 31.
for as soon as his young ones are able to provide for themselves, he will not
fetch any more food for them; yea, some affirm, the old ones will not suffer
them to stay in the same Country where they were bred; and if so, then they
must needs wander. We say proverbially, Need makes the old wife trot; we may
say, and The young ones too. It has been, and possibly is, the practice of
some parents toward their children, who as soon as they can shift for
themselves, and are fit in any competency to get their bread, they turn them
out of doors, as the Raven does his young ones out of the nest. Now says the
Lord in the Text, When the young ones of the Raven are at this pinch, that they
are turned off, and wander for lack of meat, who then provides for them? do not
I the Lord? do not I who provide for the old Raven, provide for his young ones,
both while they abide in the nest, and when they wander for lack of meat?

Hence note first, (which was in part touched before.)

The providence of God extends it self to all, even the meanest of his
creatures. As some deny providence, so others restrain it to greater matters,
or more eminent creatures, as if it were true of Jehovah, which Heathens said
of their Idol Jupiter; He is not at leisure to mind little things. But the Lord
Jehovah disdains not to look after the least things, he looks into birds nests,
to see they want nothing, or to supply their wants. Young Ravens are
inconsiderable creatures, yet the Lord remembers and considers them. And if God
take care of young Ravens, then I may again infer, he will much more take care
of their young ones or children, who are themselves heirs of the promise, the
spiritual seed of Abraham.

Secondly, in that young Ravens are here said to cry unto God,

Observe; Extreme want or necessity will put mere nature upon praying or crying
to God.

The worst of men, yea, the very beasts will pray in their kind, or after their
manner, when they are pinched with extremities, either of want or fear. The
Heathen Mariners in Jonah, being greatly distressed, cried every one to his
god. There may be a cry of prayer to God in the mouth; where there is no grace
in the heart. The Apostle says, Romans 10. Whosoever calls upon the name of
the Lord shall be saved; but then it must be in faith, for so it follows there,
How shall they call on him on whom they have not believed? Many call upon God,
that shall not be saved ( Psalm. 18.41.) They cried, but their was none to save
them, even to the Lord, but he answered them not. The cry of graceless men is
seldomer heard than the cry of reasonless beasts or birds. Hence,

Thirdly, Note; The Lord hears the cry of nature when it is in want.

He hears the cry of beasts, and he hears the cry of Ravens. Though wicked men
stop their ears, and will not hear his commands, yet he sometimes hears their
cries in outward troubles, and does them good many ways.

Hence also we may infer; If the Lord hears the cry of nature in beasts, and
birds, and bad men, how much more will he hear the cry of grace, and of the
spirit of Adoption, crying Abba father, in his children?

If he hears the croking cry of young Ravens, who have no intention to pray to
him, how much more will he hear the believing cry, the deep groans and sighs of
Saints, who set their faces purposely to pray unto him, and seek his face. This
poor man cried (a man rich in grace doubtless he was) and the Lord heard him,
and saved him out of all his troubles.

Fourthly, Note; If you would have supply in your wants, you must ask it of God.

When you are in want, whither soever you go, if you go not to God, you go to a
wrong door: The Ravens tell you whither to go when you are in want; it is not
to this or that creature, to this or that means, to this friend or that, but
you must go to God for help; and if we have help any where else, and not in
God, our help is worse than our distress. Wants are an evil of affliction, but
the help we get out of wants in any way, with neglect of God, is an evil of
sin, therefore cry to God. The Lions are said to seek their meat from God, and
here the Ravens are said to cry unto God; the young Lions and the Ravens, will
condemn those, who in their distresses do not cry to God the fountain, but run
to broken cisterns. It was the sin of that good King Asa, that in his disease
he sought not to God, but to the Physicians (2 Chronicles. 16.12.) not that Asa had
cast off prayer to God, or did not at all seek unto him (it cannot be that so
good a man as the Scripture reports him, should so much at once forget God and
himself) but the meaning is, he was very cold and negligent in calling upon God
for help, and over confident of help by his Physicians.

Lastly, consider, God provides for the young Ravens, when the old ones leave
them, or put them out of their nest.

Hence note; When nearest Relations in nature leave us, God will not.

When they whose duty it is to take care of us, prove unnatural, like the Raven
to his young ones, then God will take care of us. When my father and mother
forsook me (says David, Psalm. 27.9, 10.) then the Lord took me up. The Lord
who seeds outcast Ravens, will give entertainment to his outcast servants. (
Psalm. 68.5.) A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in
his holy habitation. They that are fatherless by their parents deserting of
them, or fatherless by the decease of their parents, God (they committing
themselves to him) will be a father unto them, he will do the office of a
father to them, that is, provide for them. Thus much of the Lion, chief among
the beasts of the earth, and of the Raven, one of the worst among the fowls of
the Air. The wisdom of God has chosen out these creatures, that in testifying
his care of them, he might convince Job, that he had not cast off the care of
him, but would provide for him, possibly in unknown ways of providence, as he
did for the Lions and the Ravens.

JOB, Chap. 39. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1. Know thou the time when the wild Goats
of the rock bring forth, or can thou mark when the hinds do Calve?

2. Can thou number the mouths that they fulfill? or know thou the time
when they bring forth?

3. They bow themselves, they bring forth their young ones, they cast out their
sorrows.

4. Their young ones are in good liking, they grow up with corn: they go forth,
and return not unto them.


IN the former context, which was the close of the 38th Chap. The Lord gave Job
an account of his care in providing food for the Lion, and the young Lions; for
the Raven and his young ones. In this context and Chapter the Lord proceeds to
show his care and providence concerning both the production and sustentation of
several other creatures, of whom men take no care nor make any provision for at
all. The wild Goats and the Hind, the wild Ass and the Unicorn.

There are some creatures which live under man's inspection, and are provided
for by him, being tame and serviceable; there are others which have no commerce
(as I may say) with man, but are savage, living at la^ge in the fields and
for^ests, upon hills and mountains, yet these are preserved in their
generations and increase, as well as those which are the under the eye and
daily care of man. The wild Goats are preserved as well as the sheep, and the
Hinds of the Forest as well as the Calves of the Stall. In and by all these
examples the Lord would have Job take special notice, that his providence
extends both to the feeding or nourishing of all kinds of creatures, as also
to their births and bringing forth, for the preservation of their several kinds.

So then, the providence of God is here magnified in continuing and multiplying
several sorts of four footed beasts of the earth and winged fowls of the air;
some of which being tame are kept by the care of man; others being wild and
avoiding the presence of man (he scarce knowing the nature of them, nor having
any service by them) are perpetuated in their kinds by the only care of God.

In these four verses there are two things in general, about which the Lord
holds forth his care of these savage creatures. First, About the bringing forth
of their young ones. Secondly, About the bringing up of their young ones. The
bringing forth of their young ones, we have in the three first verses of this
Chapter; the bringing up of their young ones, we have in the 4th verse.

About the bringing forth of their young ones the Text speaks two things.
First, The season of it; and secondly, The painful manner of it.

The season of it in the two first Verses. Know thou the time when the wild
Goats of the rock bring forth? (verse 1.) and then of the hinds ( ver. 2.)
Can thou number the months that they fulfill?

The painful manner of bringing forth their young is expressed at the 3d verse,
They bow down themselves, they bring forth their young ones, they cast out
their sorrows.

The bringing up and growth of their young ones is given ( ver. 4.) Their young
ones are in good liking, they grow up with corn, etc. Thus we have the general
scope and parts of this context. I shall now deal with the particulars.

Verse. 1. Know thou the time when the wild Goats of the rock bring forth?
The first question concerns the wild Goats, and the season of their bringing
forth. Haec and sequentia verba per Synecdochen intelligenda sunt, pro eo quod
est totam administrationem earum obtinere. Jun.


Know thou the time, etc. These words intend more than a bare naked
knowledge of the time, they take in the knowledge of the whole disposal or
administration of God, concerning the wild Goats in their bringing forth.

Know thou the time? The word rendered time, signifies the opportune time,
the fit time, the appointed time; (...) tempus opportunum seu idoneum.
know thou the time or that time, When the wild Goats of the rock bring
forth?

What these Goats here called wild Goats, (...) rupicapra a (...) scandit,
ascendit, quod montes and rupes ascendit.
and wild Goats of the rock, are, is commonly known. The word which we render
wild Goats, signifies in the Hebrew ascending or clambering, because Goats are
clambering creatures, getting up the steepest rocks, and ascending the height
of hills and mountains, which they do many times exceeding dangerously, seeming
rather to hang by their feet than to go upon them. Pendentem summa capream de
rupe videbis.

Casuram speres decipit illa canes. Martial. Ibices quasi avices, eo quod
instar avium ardua and excelsa teneant.


Thus the old Poet fancied them, when he said, You may see the wild Goat
hanging upon the rock, you may hope she will tumble down presently; But she
deceives the hunter and his hounds; though she seems to hang uncertainly, yet
she keeps her footing steddily. The Latins have a word signifying wild Goats,
which critics say, comes from another latin word signifying a bird or flying
fowl, because Goats may be said rather to fly than go upon those craggy places,
or rather to use wings than feet. Such are the creatures here called wild
Goats, and that with an addition, wild Goats Of the rocks,

Because they specially delight in rocky places, or because they breed and
bring forth in rocks. It is said (1 Samuel 24.2.) that Saul in his pursuit of
David, came with a select army of three thousand men, to seek him and his men
upon the rocks of the wild goats; which Scripture fitly answers this which
calls them wild Goats of the rock. Saul did not seek David only in the plains
and valleys, where flocks of sheep feed; but upon the craggy rocks and
precipices, where wild Goats take up their quarters or use to feed. This showed
his implacable rage, and revengeful spirit against an innocent person, that
rather than not take him and have his will on him, he would undertake an
expedition, not only tedious but very hazardous to himself and his army.
Wrathful men will not only not spare others, but not themselves. But to the
Text, Know thou the time when the wild Goats of the rock Bring forth, that
is, their young ones.

(...) a (...) verbum ipsum quod d^lere significat sum^tur pro parturire. Merc.
The word translated bring forth signifies pain and sorrow. There is so much
pain in bringing forth, that bringing forth and pain may well be signified by
one word. The pains of the wild Goats in bringing forth here employed, are
expressly spoken of at the third Verse.

But why did the Lord enquire of Job here, whether he knew the time, the exact
time of their bringing forth? is that a secret? I answer, doubtless it is a
secret, and such a secret as few are acquainted with. Wild Goats come little
under the eye or sight of men in that work; they bringing forth upon
inaccessable place^, c^aggy rocks and mountains, men cannot without much
difficulty reach that piece of knowledge. And therefore the Lord might well ask
of Job, Know thou the time when the wild Goats of the rock bring forth? I
may say also, the Lord puts this familiar question to Job, that he might the
more awaken him into the consideration of his own weakness, and utter inability
to find out the secret of his other works. As if the Lord had said, thou can
not discover so much as the birth of the wild Goats, how then can thou find
out the births of my wonderful providence? My providence bring forth
wonderful births, and much more unknowable by thee than the birth and bringing
forth of the wild Goats. Thus the Lord would check his curiosity; he who was
unable to give him an account concerning the state of those poor creatures,
must not think himself able to pry into the great and unsearchable works of
God, in the amazing products of his providence toward the children of men.

Before I pass from these words it will not be unprofitable to mind the Reader,
how (as one of the Ancients has hinted) we may moralize or spiritualize this
Text, Gregor l. 30. mor. c. 16.
there being much of the disposition or condition of a godly man, especially of
a faithful Teacher, typed or fairly represented in the nature and qualities of
these wild Goats.

First, As these wild Goats seek both their food and rest, their repast and
refuge in rocks; So the godly abide and dwell in the rock, that is, in the Lord
Jesus Christ, they look to him alone both for refuge and refreshing, both for
comfort and safety while they are in this world. Christ is the rock upon which
the Church is built ( Mat. 16.18.) And as the state of the true Church in
general, so of every true believer, is built upon this immovable rock the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, As the rocks, so the mountains are much desired by the wild Goats (
Psalm. 104.18.) The high hills are a refuge for the wild Goats. Thus David was
eying the hills for help ( Psalm. 121.1.) I will lift up mine eyes to the hills,
from whence comes my help. What were these hills? Surely, neither the material
nor metaphorical hills of this world, of which latter the people of God spoke (
Jerem. 3.23.) disclamingly, Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the
hills, and from the multitude of mountains, that is, from the greatest power of
man or men. What the hills were to which David lifted up his eyes for help,
himself tells us at the second verse of that Psalm, My help comes from the
Lord, which made heaven and earth. As the affections of a godly man are set
upon the things above, not upon things below ( Col. 3.2.) so his confidences
are set upon God who is above, not upon men here below.

Thirdly, These wild Goats are very agil and active creatures, much in motion,
full of life, full of spirits; and so they resemble a godly man, he is a man of
motion, of spiritual motion; and he desires his motions and speed may be more
and more speedy in the ways of God. As David resolved to run the ways of Gods
commandments, when God should please to enlarge his heart; so doubtless he
prayed, that God would enlarge his heart to run those ways. And how often did
he pray for quickening grace and liveliness, that being delivered from a slow,
dull, flegmatique spirit, he might be active and full of holy fire about the
things, and for the things of God.

Fourthly, Wild Goats of the rocks, in those countries where they abound, are
much pursued and di^quieted by hunts-men, as that passage which I before quoted
from a Heathen Poet intimates; so good men, the best of men are often hunted
and disturbed in this world, there are hunters of men, as well as hunters of
beasts. Nimrod was a mighty hunter ( Genesis 10.9.) he was a hunter of men. Saul
hunted David even as a wild Goat on the rocks, or as a Partridg on the
mountains.

Fifthly, They who hunt the wild Goats are at a very dangerous pleasure, they
often fall upon the rocks, and sometimes fall from the rocks. Is it not so with
those who without cause pursue good men? have they not a dangerous service of
it? get they not many a fall? The wicked (says David, Psalm. 37.12, 13.)
plotteth, or (as the Margin has it) practices against the righteous, he
gnasheth upon him with his teeth. But shall it go well with him who does this
evil? The next words answer, The Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his
day is coming. What day? surely a black day, even the day of his destruction;
which is yet further confirmed in the 14. and 15. verses of the same P^alm. The
wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow to cast down the poor
and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation, or the upright of
way. But shall this end well with them? or shall it be well with them in the
end? The next words tell us what their end shall be, even this, which is a
dreadful end, Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows
shall be broken.

Sixthly, It Is observed of these wild Goats, that when they seem to be very
near falling from the rock and high places, yet they fall not, and that though
they fall they take little or no hurt at all. Some say they have a natural art
to save themselves, they know how to fall upon their feet, and so escape
without harm. This also is applicable to the case of godly men, they are often
near falling, yet they do not fall, and when they fall, they take no hurt; they
have a divine art to preserve themselves; and it is a truth, that though they do
receive hurt in the flesh, yet their spirit or better part takes no hurt.
Though a good man fall (into affliction or temptation) he shall not (says
David, Psalm. 37.24.) be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his
hand. Yea, though he falls (says Solomon, Prove. 24.16.) seven times (that
is, often, into affliction, it is true also of his falling into sin) yet he
rises again, out of affliction by deliverance, out of sin by repentance. With
respect to the former, the Church warned her insulting enemy ( Mich. 7.8.)
Rejoice not against me O mine enemy; when I fall, I shall arise. Babylon shall
fall and rise no more; but though Sion may fall, yet she shall assuredly rise
again.

Lastly, It is said of the wild Goats, that when they receive hurt, they, by a
natural instinct, seek out the herb Betany, growing among the rocks and upon
mountains, which gives a present and perfect cure to their bruises or hurts.
Thus when good men receive hurt in and from the evil world, they have some herb
or other, some comfort or other for their cure; they go to the Word of God, to
the Scriptures, there they find Medicine for all their sicknesses, Betany for
all their bruises, and a Salve for every sore. Thus we may spiritualize our
meditations upon these wild creatures the Goats of the rocks, in allusion to
the state of godly men in this life. Know thou the time when the wild Goats
of the rock bring forth?

Or can thou mark when the Hinds do calve? Here Is another sort of wild ones,
the Hind. Can thou mark? the word imports the most strict and heedful
marking; (...) solicitudinem and diligent iam Connotat.
It Is used by Jacob (Genesis 37.11.) when Joseph had told his dream, his Brethren
envied him, but his Father observed the saying, that is, he marked what his Son
had said. The word is often used to note our dutiful keeping or heeding the
commands of God, which should be done with the greatest strictness, care and
observation. Now says the Lord to Job, can thou mark (or observe) when the
Hinds do calve? as if the Lord had said, do thou keep their reckoning
exactly? art thou able to tell the day and hour when they will calve? The word
rendered Hind comes from a root signifying strength. Hinds are strong, (...)
cerva
though timorous and fearful creatures; and for their fearfulness they have a
help besides their strength, that is, their speed or swiftness; and though
their strength does not serve them sufficiently to stand and make head against
their pursuers, yet it serves them (as we may say) to show their pursuers a
fair pair of heels, or to run from them and escape their danger. Can thou
mark when the Hinds Do calve?

It is the same word in the Original, which in the former part of the verse is
translated to bring forth; Mas cum pinguerit, long secedit, ut qui pondere
suae corpulentiae capi se posse facile sentiat. Aristot. l. 9. c. 5. de natura
animalium.
but because that special word calving is more proper to Hinds, therefore we
wave the general sense bringing forth, which is applicable to any kind of
beasts; and take this, not rendering as before, when the Hinds bring forth, but
when they calve. The Hind is a wild beast often spoken of in Scripture, and
well known in nature; the male we commonly call a Stagg or Heart, of which
naturalists observe two things.

First, That perceiving himself to grow fat in the latter end of summer, and
being conscious of his own inability to help himself by flight, he retires
naturally to covert in secret places, that so he may be free from the pursuit
of hunters.

Cum su^ amis^^it arma, cavit ne inermis reperiatur. Arist. ubi supra.
Secondly, (Say they) when he has cast his horn, then also he retires and gets
into the thicket, as far from sight as he can, being sensible he has lost his
arms, his defense, and is therefore unwilling to come abroad where danger is,
till his head be grown again, and he furnished with weapons for his own defense.

The Hind in the Text is the female, and the Scripture speaks of the Hind in a
twofold allusion. First, In allusion to Christ. Secondly, In allusion to those
that are Christ's.

Jesus Christ himself is often alluded to under this name, and that in a
threefold respect.

1. For his swiftness and speediness in coming to the relief and help of his
Church ( Cant. 28.9.) Behold, he comes leaping upon the mountains, and
skipping upon the hills; my beloved is like a Roe, or young Heart, or Hind, it is
the same word. His leaping and skipping notes 1. His cheerfulness. 2. His
speediness in coming. The mountains and hills upon which he leaps and skips,
note the great obstacles and difficulties, which stand in his way when he comes
to help his Church, his beloved Spouse. Again ( Cant. 8.13.) Be thou like the
young Roe, or young Heart upon the mountains of spices: The Church describes the
gracious have which she desires Jesus Christ would make to help, comfort, and
relieve her, by the speedy running of the young Heart.

2. Jesus Christ is so compared with respect to his lovingness; that is the
Epithete which Solomon gives the Hind ( Prove. 5.19.) Let her (thy Wife) be as
the loving Hind and pleasant R^e. Now as the Wise should be tendered by her
Husband as a loving Hind, so Jesus Christ is like the Hind for his exceeding
lovingness to his Spouse or Wife. Christ is so full of love, that he is called
love it self. One of the Ancients speaking of Christ dying, said My Love was
crucified.

3. Jesus Christ is shadowed by the Hind, with respect to his sufferings, for
he was hunted as a Hind with Hounds, with bloodhounds, with the hell hounds of
this world, the worst of wicked men. Therefore it is remarkable, that in the
22. Psalm, which is throughout a prophecy of Christ (the first words being the
last he spoke in this world, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?) The
title of that Psalm is, To the chief musician, upon Aijeleh Sahar; and if you
would know what that signifies, look into the Ma^gin of your larger Bibles,
there you shall find, The Hind of the morning. Hunters use to single out that
special Deer, Heart or Hind, early in the morning, which they purpose for game
that day; signifying that Jesus Christ, who is so much spoke of in that Psalm,
was a Hind, not only sorely and fiercely, but early hunted by wicked men to
death.

Again, The Scripture speaks of the Hind, with respect unto godly men.

First, As to the freeness and cheerfulness of their spirits, in the ways and
things of God. The Prophet ( Isa. 35.6.) shows how it shall be with those that
receive the Gospel, though they have been lame, impotent cripples before, not
able to take one step Godward, yet, says he, The lame shall leap as a Heart,
or as a Hind; that is, they shall exceedingly rejoice at the receiving of the
Gospel, and be very active in the obedience of it.

Secondly, As to that exceeding thirst, strong appetite or desire, which true
believers have to and after Jesus Christ, who is the living water, the water of
life. Thus David spoke of himself ( Psalm. 42.1.) As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. Some render, as the she
Heart, that is, the Hind, pants after the water brooks, etc. When David would
express the exceeding ardency of his souls thirst after Christ, he compares it
to the thirst of a hunted Heart or Hind.

Thirdly, The Hind is very swift of foot; so are believers: as they have strong
desires, so speedy pursuits after Jesus Christ. David had a holy confidence,
that God would make him swift in spirit, when he said ( Psalm. 18.33.) The Lord
shall make my feet like Hinds feet; that is, he will make me very active,
agile, and nimble, not only for the avoiding of corporal evils, but also in
following of spiritual good things.

F^u thly, The Hind loves high places, or to be and breath in the free air.
Thus the Prophet Habakkuk speaks of himself ( Hab. 3.19.) The Lord will make my
feet like Hinds feet, he will make me walk upon my high places. He means not
the high places of worldly preferment or power, but of peace and safety; nor
either of them, so much as those truly high places of a holy life and joy, in
spiritual meditation and conversation, to which we resort by the wings of says
in, and love unto God. Upon these high places thou will make me to walk. As if
the Prophet had said, I shall go lightly and sweetly on in my journey to
heaven, having my soul supplied and suppled (as it were) with the oil of
spiritual joy and gladness. As it is said of Jacob (Genesis 29.1.) after that he
had that blessed vision at Bethel, in the close of the 28th Chapter) He went on
his journey; or (as we put in the margin) He lift up his feet; his feet were
like Hinds feet, lithe and nimble for his journey, going on in faith toward
God, and in the light of his countenance.

Fifthly, It is observed by Naturalists, that Hinds are very charitable and
helpful one to another; and they give that special instance, when swimming over
any River or deep water, the second is supported by the first, and the third by
the second, and so to the last they help one another over; which does
excellently shadow the usefulness that should be among Christians, and their
helpfulness mutual; they should be as Hearts and Hinds always in this respect,
and then most when they come into the Rivers and deep waters of sorrow and
trouble, then they should support and bear up each one his brother. The
Apostles word is ( Gal. 6.2.) Bear one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law
of Christ. The burdens which he there intends, are not only the infirmities
which are in us, but the afflictions and troubles which possibly we may at any
time be in. And again ( Phil. 2.4.) Let not every man mind his own things, but
let him mind the things which are another; that is, let him be helpful to
others in outward things, much more let him be helpful to others in spiritual
things. Thus the Scripture speaks, both of Jesus Christ, and of those that are
his, under the similitude of the Hind.

From both parts of the verse, in that the Lord puts the question here to Job,
Know thou the time when the wild Goats of the rocks bring forth? or can
thou mark the time when the Hinds do calve?

Note, First; The Lord himself takes special care of the wildest creatures,
even of those which are most remote from the help and care of man.

The care and tenderness of God toward beasts, turns to his praise, as well as
the care which he has of, and the tenderness which he shows to believers. And
as it does exceedingly advance the glory of God, that he takes care of wild
beasts, so it may exceedingly strengthen the faith of man, that he will take
care of him. Does the Lord take care of wild Goats and of Hinds, then
certainly he takes care of those that particularly belong to him; as has been
already showed or inferred from such like instances as we have here in the Text.

Secondly, From the particular Point, upon which the care of God is here
intimated, with respect to the wild Goats and Hinds; namely, their bringing
forth and calving, we learn, that There is a special providence of God toward
these and such like creatures, for the production of their young.

He (if I may so speak with reverence) shows his Midwifry, in helping these
savage beasts when their pains come upon them. As the Lord takes man (in an
eminent manner) out of the womb (Psalm. 22.9.) so in a manner, he takes beasts
out of the womb too ( Psalm. 29.8, 9.) The voice of the Lord shakes the
wilderness, it shakes the wilderness of Kadesh. So we translate it; but the
word which we render shakes, is the same with this in the Text, which
signifies to bring forth: And hence some very learned in the Hebrew tongue, do
not render as we, The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness, but, The voice
of the Lord makes the wilderness to bring forth; The Lord makes the
wilderness of Kadesh to bring forth; which is not to be understood of the
vegetative creatures (that is a truth, the Lord makes the Trees of the Forest
to bring forth both leaves and fruit) but it is meant of animals or living
creatures there: And then, when he says, The voice of the Lord makes the
wilderness to bring forth, the meaning is, The Lord makes the wild beast of
the wilderness to bring forth; which seems to be the clear sense of the place,
by that which follows; for the Psalmist having said this in general at the 8
h verse, The voice of the Lord makes the wilderness to bring forth, he in the
9th verse, gives the special instance of the Hind, The voice of the Lord makes
the Hinds to calve.

So much concerning the wild Goats bringing forth their young, and the Hinds
calving. In the next verse the Lord enquires of Job, the time how long they go
with young before they bring forth and calve.

Verse. 2. Can thou number the mouths that they fulfill? As if the Lord had
said, Can thou tell how long they, that is, the wild Goats or the Hinds,
bear their natural burdens? Can thou number their months? Menses qui hic
(...) u^^ant^r a Laina; menses enim Hebraeorum Lunares crant.
the Hebrew is, their Moons. The Jews reckoned their months by Moons; and we
distinguish between Luna^y and Solary months. Moon-months consist of twenty
eight days, Sun-months of thirty. Can thou reckon the Moons or months that
they fulfill? To this the Prophet alludes ( Jer. 2.24.) speaking of the wild
Ass that snuffs up the wind at her pleasure; that is, who takes pleasure, or
(as the Margin reads it) The desire of whose heart is to snuff up the wind; in
her occasion (sai h he) who can turn her away? He compares wanton vain persons,
idolatrous and superstitious persons especially, who of all others are the
w^ntonnest and vainest persons, to an Ass, when she is in the heat of her lust
and pleasure; all they that seek her, will not weary themselves, that is, they
will not weary themselves to seek her, while she is in that condition, but in
her month they shall find her, that is, when she is burdened with young, when
her sorrows and pains are near coming upon her, then she may be dealt wi^h.
Thus the Lord would show his people, that however being so lusty, so wanton,
there was no dealing with them, yet a month of sorrow was coming upon them,
even as upon one with young, wherein they should feel, and be under such sad
pains, as would burden them to purpose (as we say) and then they would be
found, and might be spoken with. Wild Asses have their months, their months of
bearing, and their month of bringing forth; about those and this the Lord
enquires of Job, Can thou number the months that they fulfill? The question is
not so to be understood, as if the number of the months which they fulfill were
so many that they could not be numbered; but the Lord speaks thus, because of
the uncertainty of the time (as to man) when those months are fulfilled. David
prayed ( Psalm. 39.4.) Lord, show me the number of my days; not as if the
number of his days were so many, that he could hardly find out the number of
them Arithmetically, but being so uncertain, he needed the Lords instruction to
teach him how to count the number of them spiritually. So here, Can thou
number the months that they fulfill; that is as great a secret as the number of
any man's days in this world are.

Yet it may be objected; surely it is no such hard matter to number the months
which Hinds and wild Goats fulfill: For if the question be, what time of their
age Goats first conceive, Aliquando anniculae semper binae and pariunt octonis
annis. Plin. l. 8. c. 50.
and how long they continue bearing, Pliny answers? Sometimes they conceive at
a year old, always at two years old; and (says he) they continue bearing
eight years. Secondly, If the question be, about what time of the year they
conceive and bring forth? the same Author answers, They conceive in November,
and b ing fo^th in March, so that they go burdened five months. Again, if the
question be about the Hinds, he thus resolves it; They conceive about the
latter end of September, and bring forth about the middle of April, the whole
time they go, Octonis monsibus serunt p^rtus. Plin. l. 8. c. 32.
being about eight months; so that there seems no such difficulty in numbering
the months, which either wild Goats or Hinds fulfill, that is, how long they go
with young.

I answer; Though the general time which they fulfill may be known, or is known
and set down by Writers, yet the precile particular time, the day of the month,
or hour of the day, or (which is the thing enquired) when their months come out
and are fulfilled, that is a secret. Though it be commonly known, that a woman
goes nine months with child, yet who knows, or can a woman her self know
exactly to a day, or an hour, when her pains and travel will come upon her?
Many women have been under great mistakes in that ca^e, and rarely do any hit
the time right, but reckon a day two or three over or under the just account.
So then, though the general time is known, yet the exact particular time is not
known. I may say in this case, as our Lord Jesus Christ said about the end of
the world, Of that day and hour knows no man; we may know the general time, we
may know it will not be long before the world shall end. The time which the
world shall go with its great birth, is commonly said to be six thousand years;
but the day and hour of its travel, and of the consummation of all things
according to the decree of God, no man, no nor Angel, knows. Here the Lord
questions Job about the exact particular time, which himself keeps, as he does
all special seasons, in his own h nd or power, under his own lock and key, as
Christ told his Disciples, ( Act. 1.7.) Can thou number the months that they
fulfill? do thou keep their reckoning?

Or know thou the time when they bring forth? It Is the same in effect that
was spoken before, therefore I shall not stay upon it.

From the whole verse observe: The Lord only can give timely succor to all
creatures.

The reason is employed in the Text, Because he only knows the certain time of
their extremity. None can give exact and timely help to the necessity of
another, but he that knows the exact time of his extremity. The Lord can and
will give deliverance to his people, in the very nick of time, when the months
of their sorrow and burdens are fulfilled, for he knows the number of them. The
children of Israel had long and sore bondage in Egypt, but no longer than the
months which were appointed; for as soon as they were fulfilled, their bondage
was ended, and they delivered; mark how the Spirit of God records it to a day (
Exodus 12.41.) And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty
years, even the self-same day it came to pass, that all the h sts of the Lord
went out from the Land of Egypt. Nor does the sacred Record leave it thus, but
adds ( verse. 42.) It is a night to be much observed; or (according to the
letter of the Hebrew) A night of observations unto the Lord, for bringing them
out from the Land of Egypt: This is that night of the Lord, to be observed of
all the children of Israel in their generations. But Moses said in the former
verse, It was the self-same day. Why does he say here, It is a night, etc? And
this is that night of the Lord, etc. The reason I conceive was this; The word
day may be taken largely, for a natural day consisting of twenty four hours;
now because the four hundred and thirty years were fulfilled and ended at the
beginning of that day, (the Jewish account of days beginning at evening)
therefore their deliverance began then, and did not stay till the morning. Thus
exact is the Lord, keeping his word not only to a day, but to a piece, yea, to
the very hour of a day. And as the Lord gave that people deliverance just when
those years were fulfilled, according to that ancient prophecy; so doubtless
when the forty two months, or (which is the same) the thousand two hundred and
threescore days for his witnesses prophesying in sackcloth ( Rev. 11.2, 3.)
shall be fulfilled, then they also shall come out of their bondage from under
mystical Egypt and Babylon. Men have been long guessing at the fulfilling of
those forty two months, but may we not say to them concerning the birth of that
prophecy, in the same sense that the Lord does here to Job, concerning the
particular time when the wild Goats of the rock, and the Hinds bring forth,
Can thou number the months that they fulfill? As the particular time of the
Hinds fulfilling her months, so of Sions fulfilling her months of sorrow in
this world, is a secret which the Lord has reserved to himself, and keeps fast
locked up in the Cabinet of his eternal counsels. Know thou the time when
they bring forth?

The Lord having thus questioned Job about the time of the bringing forth of
these two creatures, in these two verses, proceeds to question him about the
manner of their bringing forth, or the painfulness of it.

Verse. 3. They bow themselves, etc. These words are a description of the hard
travel of the Hinds, not of the Goats, as Interpreters generally agree. Bowing
of the body is the posture of any creature in travel to bring forth. As if the
Lord had said, Is it thou, O Job, that have, or I, that have given them an
instinct in nature to put their bodies (as wild as they are) considerately,
into such a posture (when their pains come upon them) as may be most easeful
for themselves, and least hurtful to their offspring, by bowing their bodies
to dilate the passages of nature, and so by a natural Midwifry to deliver
themselves of their burdens? as follows, They bring forth their young ones.

The word rendered bring forth, signifies to cleave asunder, (...) proprie
findo, diffindo, trajicio.
implying their extreme pain in bringing forth; or that it is to them as
grievous as the rending and cleaving of their bodies could be. So the word is
translated (Chap. 16.13.) where Job making a lamentable complaint about his
sufferings under the hand of God, expresses it thus; His archers compass me
round about, he cleaves my reins asunder. Such torture have these poor
creatures in bringing forth their young; which is more plainly set down in the
close of the verse, They cast out their sorrows.

Which may be understood two ways; First, bowing to free themselves of their
young ones, their sorrows end, or there is an end of their sorrows, they are
cast out. Secondly, Thus they cast out their sorrows; that is, their young ones
are cast out which have put them to much sorrow and grievous throws, and so may
well be called their sorrows; as Rachel called that child with which she had
such hard travel, Ben-oni, The son of her sorrows (Genesis 35.18.)

The word which we render sorrows, signifies cords and bonds, implying, that
these creatures are girded and bound about with extreme pain, until (by the
power of God in nature) they receive deliverance. Some are bound and girded
with troubles, in and from the world, who yet are not sorrowful; we through
faith may even glory in tribulation (Romans 5.3.) but they who are sorrowful, are
always bound; and therefore the same word signifies bonds and sorrows. They
cast out their sorrows.

Hence note; First, Even wild and savage creatures bring forth with pain.

This is part of that vanity brought by man's sin upon the creature, of which
the Apostle speaks ( Romans 8.22.) We know that the whole creation (or every
creature) groaneth and travelleth in pain together until now. (...).
The creatures groan, as b^ing laden with a heavy burden, and they travel in
pain, as a woman with child, to be eased and delivered of her burden, even
those creatures which in proper sense, neither travel nor bring forth, yet are
said to groan and t^avel in pain, by reason of the sin of man; and therefore
the Apostle ^aith, They groan and travel in pain together; that is, all the
creatures join in this. They do not some groan, and others sing, some travel in
pain, and others travel in or take their pleasure, but they are all (as it
were) sensible of their sad change, and bewail it sadly; and (says the
Apostle) they groan and travel until now, or unto this now; not as if their
groaning did then cease when this was said, but to show that it had continued
without ceasing, until that instant now; and so it will continue until the
manifestation of the sons of God, spoken of ( verse. 19.) As soon as man sinned,
the Lord laid that affliction on the woman, In sorrow shall thou bring forth
(Genesis 3.16.) Now that which was first declared an affliction, with respect to
the woman, is fallen upon all creatures in their degree; they all are more or
less pained in travel, or travel in pain. The sin of man has brought sorrow
upon the whole world, even upon sinless creatures; and therefore man should
pity poor creatures in their sorrows, his sin having brought those sorrows upon
them. How vile then are they, who merely to satisfy their lusts, increase the
sorrows of the creature, and cause them to travel more than needs, in pain
every day?

Secondly, The Lord instanceth here in the Hinds for hard travel; and
Naturalists observe, the Hind has the sorest travel in bringing forth of any
creature, woman excepted. And, that the Hinds have very sore travel in bringing
forth, beside what Naturalists speak, may be collected from those expressions
in the Text, They bow themselves, they bring forth their young ones, they cast
out their sorrows. That Scripture also intimates as much ( Psalm. 29.9.) when
among other wonderful effects of thunder, The breaking of Cedars, etc. This is
added, The voice of the Lord makes the Hinds to calve; as if it did require
the special help of God, to give the Hinds ease and deliverance in the time of
their travel, The voice of God does it; that is, Tunc officis ut cervae quae
alioquin aegerrime essent pariturae commodius pareant? dum ante partum
purgantur herba quadam quae Seselis dicitur faciliore ita utentes utero Jun.

Plin. l. 8. c. 32. Arist. l. 9 de Histor. animal. c. 5. Cicero l. 2 de not.
Deorum.


either the thunder, or some extraordinary power, sent out for that purpose,
does it.

And here we may consider the goodness of God, even to this wild beast, in
ordering her natural helps, to ease her the more speedily of her grievous pains
in bringing forth her young ones.

The natural Historian tells us concerning the Hind, that she by common
instinct, a little before she calves, feeling her pains coming upon her, seeks
out a certain herb called Seselis, feeding upon which does exceedingly
facilitate her pains in bringing forth. Women, who have understanding and
reason, as also the assistance of friends about them, have many means for their
ease in that hour of extremity; but the Lord has made this poor creature, both
Physician and Midwife to her self. Further, it is reported of them, that when
they have brought forth, they use the same and other herb to help themselves
against their after-pains. Once more, Naturalists observe, A partu duas habent
herbas quae Aros and Seselis appellamur. Plin. l. 8. c. 32.
that they usually bring forth at that time of the year when there is much
thunder, according to that before mentioned ( Psalm. 29.) The voice of the Lord,
(or thunder) makes the Hinds to calve. For the Hind being of a fearful nature,
that dreadful noise does so astonish her, that it either makes her put out all
her strength to bring forth, or makes her less sensible of her pains in
bringing forth. That Is the second thing here considerable in Hinds, their
painful bringing forth, They bow themselves, they bring forth their young ones,
they cast out their sorrows.

Hence take this inference, with respect to women who come under the like
pains. This should be a staff of consolation to them, in the time of their
travel. If the Lord directs these creatures to the best posture, and most
proper means for their help and ease in that condition, how much more will he
take care of them, especially of them who call upon him, and trust in him? We
may well make that interpretation of the Apostles words (1 Timothy 2.15.) She
shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue in faith, and charity, and
holiness, with sobriety. This early care of God for mankind, is described (
Psalm. 22.9, 10.) Thou art he that took me out of the womb; I was cast upon thee
from the womb; thou art my God from my mothers belly. And again ( Psalm. 71.6.)
By thee have I been holden up from the womb; thou art he that took me out of my
mothers bowels; my praise shall be continually of thee.

St. Augustine applies this matter of the Hinds bringing forth, to the
spiritual birth; First, Because the time is unknown, or known only to God, when
any soul comes to the new birth. Secondly, Because every soul which travelleth
with this new birth, boweth and humbles himself greatly under the sense of sin
before the Lord. Thirdly, Because this new birth is usually accompanied with
great and grievous pangs, always with the truth of godly sorrow.

The Lord having spoken thus of the Hindes bringing forth their young ones,
speaks next, as I may say, of the education and bringing up of their young ones.

Verse. 4. Their young ones are in good liking, they grow up with Corn, they go
forth and return not unto them. This Verse holds out three things:

First, The good plight of their young ones, They are in good liking. As if it
had been said, Though the Hinds have much pain in bringing them forth, yet they
are slick and fat, as soon as, or soon after they are brought forth. The word
which we render in good liking, notes a growing into health and strength, (...)
Significat aliquando valere and incolumem esse. Licet matres difficilem habent
partum, filii tamen salvi and incolumes sunt, beneque valent, alii pinguescunt.
Drus. Facti sumu^ sicut consolati, melius quam ab aliis somniantes, etc. Bold.
(...) ager unde (...) sera agrestis. Sed hic est (...) quod in lingua
Chaldaeorum extra denotat; unde Barbarus geninalis syllabis. Drus. Mira est
providentia Dei in subulonum and himulorum nutricatione, qui nullo custode,
nullo opilione reguntur sicut vituli haedi vel agni, tamen pinguescum. Codrec.
which we call recovering (Isa. 38.9, 16.) The writing of Hezekiah King of
Judah, when he had been sick and was recovered, etc. And it is said of Naaman (2
Kings 5.14.) his flesh came to him, or he recovered his flesh, as the flesh of
a little Child. The same word is used ( Psalm. 126.1.) When the Lord turned the
Captivity of Sion, we were like to them that dream; which others translate
thus, and conceive it nearer the O^iginal Text, When the Lord turned the
Captivity of Sion, then we were like them that are fed and grow fat at the
dugg, and so are chearely or in a comfortable condition. Thus the Hinds young
ones grow fat, lusty, and strong; As the Lord takes care for their bringing
forth, so of their bringing up; he that makes the Hinds to calve, makes their
calves of good liking too; as he makes the Babe thrive at the Mothers breast,
so the Calf at the Hinds dugg. And when they have a while grown fat at the
dam's dugg, then Secondly, They grow up with Corn.

They come to harder meat, they soon leave sucking and feed upon corn. Some
read, they grow up in the fields, or by the field, that is, by that which
grows in the field. Thus it is with our Children, they are fed first at the
breast and spoon, afterward with flesh or any wholesome food. According to
every degree of life, God provides suitable food; the Infant shall have milk,
and when a little grown, stronger meat. As it is in spirituals, when we are new
born babes in Jesus Christ, we are fed with milk, that is, with plain and easy
truths, called by the Apostle, The first principles of the doctrine of Christ;
afterward we go on (as the Apostle there speaks) to perfection, and then we
can digest and profit by the deeper Mysteries of the Gospel. Thus it is said of
the young Hinds, or of the Hinds young ones in the Text, They grow up with corn.

The word signifies to grow apace, to thrive much in strength and stature, and
being thus thriven and grown, their Dam's hear no more of them. For as it
follows Thirdly, They go forth and return not unto them.

I^ hunc sinem haec allata sunt ut ostendoretar, haec e^^ sola Dei providentia
fi^ri, ^^n ^il^ humano in lustri^. Merc.
First, they had the duggs of the Dam to nourish them, soon after they fed upon
corn, at length they go forth and return not unto them; they trouble the old
ones no further, they shift for themselves. One of the Naturalists commending
the qualities of the Hind, notes this chiefly; They are very diligent to
instruct their young ones, how to ge^, or where to seek food for themselves,
before they put them out of their own care.

Hence note, First; The Lord has taught the bruit creatures to provide for
their young ones, till they are able to help themselves.

This intimates the duty of Parents, to take care of their Children till they
are able to get their living.

Secondly, Forasmuch as those young ones go forth, and return not again when
once they can live of themselves,

Note, It is the duty of Children, when Parents have bestowed cost in bringing
them up, to go forth, and not return to be chargeable to their Parents.

Arist. l. 9. de ^^^^t. Animal, c. 5.

Quod pulcher erat and nemine indigeret vocatur cervus e^^issus.

Editos partus exercent cursu, and sugam meditari docent, ad praecipitia ducunt
s^ltumque docent. Plin. l 8 c. 32.


Children must not think to burden their Parents always, but stick to their own
labor; the very bruit beasts will condemn those children who do not: When the
Hind has sufficiently instructed her young ones by her example, where and how
to get food, having also breathed them well, and taught them how to hasten away
when in danger; having, lastly, led them to precipices, and taught them to leap
or jump, then they go forth and return no more. The Patriark Nephthali was
called ( Genesis 49.21.) a Hind let loose, because strong and able to live alone.
Thus we have here both the care of the Hind, to provide for her young ones as
long as they need, which lays a great obligation upon Parents to take care of
their Children. He that provides not for his own, especially, for those of his
household, for his own Children and Servants, is worse than an Infidel, yea, he
is worse than a hind. But then, let Children, when they have been well provided
for, and taught how to get a living in the world, take heed of lasiness and
idleness, as if they were to live upon their Parents pains or provision always.
Let them go forth and not return, but to show kindness and thankfulness to
their Parents, for their care and cost bestowed on them in their tender years,
and while under their inspection; yea, let them learn (as the Apostle gives
them in charge 1 Timothy 5.4.) To show piety or kindness at home, and requite
their Parents; helping their Parents (if need be) in their old age, as their
Parents helped and brought them up when they were young. Which dutifulness of
Children the Greeks express by a word alluding to Stork^, (...)
who are so much noted for their tender care toward their aged Parents, that
their name signifies the thing, not only in that famous language, but in the
Sacred Language, namely, piety and pity.

JOB, Chap. 39. Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8. 5. Who has sent out the wild Ass free? or
who has loosed the bands of the wild Ass?

6. Whose house I have made the wilderness, and the barren land his dwellings.

7. He scorneth the multitude of the City, neither regards he the cry of the
driver.

8. The rang of the mountains is his pasture, and he searches after every
green thing.


THe Lord continues his speech with Job, to show his provident care of, yea,
and bounty toward the wildest creatures.

The question put in these four Verses concerns the wild Ass, and there are
three things considerable in the description given him in these four Verses.

First, His liberty and freedom ( v. 5.) Who has sent out the wild Ass free,
etc.

Secondly, His dwelling and habitation ( v. 6.) whose house I have made the
wilderness, and the barren land his dwelling. He scorneth, etc.

Thirdly, His food or manner of feeding ( ver. 8.) the range of the mountains
is his pasture, and he searches out every green thing. Thus the Lord proposes
to Job the example of these wild and untamed creatures, for whom no man
provides nor bestows a thought upon toward their livelihood, yet God provides
for them, and feeds them, and houseth them, and preserves them in as good a
condition, as those which are tame, and under the daily care and inspection of
man.

Verse. 5. Who has set the wild Ass free? The wild Ass is at liberty, he is
free; love of liberty is the property of the wild Ass; and here it is
questioned, whence he has his liberty, or who made him free? that is, so
stout, that he will not be taught subjection to the command of man, nor do him
any work, as not only other creatures, but other Asses do; who has made him
thus free? Surely, not any man, not any company, society, or brotherhood of
men; the wild Ass has not his manumission by them, Liberum s^^ ab hominibus,
i^a ut in eorum potestate non sit. Drus.
but by God, he has bestowed that privilege (such as it is) upon the wild
Ass, God has set him free. Some beasts are, as it were, Apprentiz'd or bound
to the service of men, and men have special services, uses, and employments to
which they appoint them; there are other creatures, as it were, manumitted from
man's service, man has no command of them, nor work done by them, they are
free, and amongst these the wild Ass is eminent for freedom.

(...) unde serus and ferae. (...) multiplicare, augere, fructificare, quod
foecundiores solent esse ferae, quam domasticae animantes.
The Hebrew text which we render the wild Ass, is but one word; and from thence
some derive the Latin word which signifies wild beasts in general; conceiving
also that the Hebrew word comes from a root signifying to multiply and
increase, because wild beasts (usually) multiply and increase more than tame.
Thus they understand this former part of the verse, not as we of that special
sort of wild beasts the wild Ass, but in common of all sorts of wild beasts;
and then (say they) in the latter part of the verse, the wild Ass is especially
spoken of under another term; for though we have he wild Ass, according to our
translation, (...)
in both parts of the Text, yet under different appellations, by which some
understand two so^ts of wild Asses, but others take the first only in general
for wild beasts of any sort, and the latter for this particular sort of wild
beasts the wild Ass. But I conceive, we need not be so curious, for though we
take both the former and the latter word for the same, the sense is clear, and
the same: Who has sent out the wild Ass free?

Or who has loosed the bands of the wild Ass? But was the wild Ass, here
spoken of, at any time in bonds, (...) Quod promde videtur aliud animal ab
Onagro, non tamen multum differens Grot.

Aliqui vertunt Onagrum and Alcen, quae sunt equorum and asinorum agrestium
genera.

Distinguit inter Onagrum and Alcen. Plinius lib. 8. c. 15.


and now set free? I answer, The Lord speaks thus figuratively, not that the
wild Ass was ever in bonds, but that because he is so untractable, and will by
no means be managed, he seems to be as one loosed from bonds, even as Oxen and
Horses which serve man, and are under his power, seem bound to his service. So
then, as the former, so this latter part of the verse is not to be expounded,
as if the wild Ass had ever been under restraint, and afterward was sent
forth free and loosed from his bonds, but both expressions intend only, that as
his disposition is for freedom, so in his condition he is, and always has
been, free from bondage; for not only is he free from bondage, who having been
in bondage is delivered, as slaves and captives oftentimes are; but he may be
said to be free from bondage, or to have his bonds loosed, who was never in
bonds, who was either born free, or who by his wit, skill and policy, or the
help of others, has been preserved from bondage. A man may be said to be free
from sickness, that never was sick, as well as he that is restored from
sickness to health; and so a man that never was in bonds, may be said to be
free from bonds, as well as he that is delivered from bondage. Thus the wild
Ass in the Text is said to have his bonds loosed, though he never was in bonds.
As the Lord has made all creatures, so he has made some free, others servile;
he has set some at liberty, but holds others at hard labor all their days,
in drawing, traveling, or bearing heavy burdens. The words are plain; the sum
and scope of them may be thus conceived: As if the Lord had asked Job, by whom
this natural inclination was given to the wild Ass, that he should so
earnestly desire liberty; as also, who gave him that fo^ce and stoutness, that
he should be able to live without Law, to follow his own lust, not at all
submitting to, nor guided by the will of others. Who has sent out the wild
Ass free?

Hence observe, First, That some creatures are free from, and others bound to
service, is of Gods own appointment.

It would be both a vanity and a high presumption, to ask the reason why the
Lord has appointed some creatures to spend the whole time of their lives in
liberty, and that others should be continually groaning under bondage,
laboring and sweating, tyring and wearying themselves out in the service of
men, seeing we cannot change the orders of God. And as we must not busy our
selves with enquiring, why he has not subjected the wild Ass to the same
bonds and burdens as he has tame Asses? So we must not say unto God, why have
thou made some men to serve, others to rule? no, nor why he handles some men
more gently, others more grievously? We must resolve all these questions into
the will, dominion and sovereignty of God; and we may well conceive, that the
Lord would in this question about the wild Asses, intimate unto us, as well as
unto Job, that he has a power in himself, which no man ought to question, to
free some men from the bonds of service, and to bind others, to free some men
from the bonds of affliction, sorrow and trouble in this world, while others
are hampered and held fast in them all their days. What Job sp^ke in reference
to the various dispensation of bodily health ( Chap. 21.23, 24, 25.) One dies
in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet, his breasts are full of
milk, and his bones moistened with marrow; and another dies in the bitterness
of his soul, and never eats with pleasure; the same may be said about the
dealings of God with men, as to bodily liberty; one dies free, he girded
himself all the days of his life (as Christ said to Peter of his younger
days, Joh. 21.) and went whither he pleased, no man asking, whither go
thou? or why stayest thou here? another is laid by the heels, or girded by
others, and never enjoys the freedom of his own person or motions, he (poor
man) is bound in fetters, and holden in the cords of affliction, as Elihu spoke
in the 36th Chapter of this book. This was Jobs case; he was in the bonds and
cords of affliction, while others enjoyed peace and liberty. Now man ought no
more to question the Lord, why one man is afflicted and another free, then why
the wild Ass is free, and the tame a servant. As the whole creation (which was
occasionally showed at the third verse) is subject unto bondage, by reason of
the sin of man, and groaneth till it be delivered; so the sovereignty of God
has laid this bondage heavier upon some parts of the creation, or upon some
creatures, than upon others. And as we should daily and deeply bewail it, that
our sin has brought bondage upon the creature, so we should humbly submit to
whatsoever bondage or hard travel the sovereignty of God has designed us in
one kind or other, while we are in this world.

Secondly, Consider to whom it is granted to be free, and to have their bonds
loosed; it is to wild Asses.

Then observe; To be free from labor and service, is but a very low privilege.

It is but the privilege of an Ass; and as it is but a low privilege to be
free from service, so it is a great sin to cast off service. Some under
pretense of liberty, cast off obedience, and will not bear the yoke of duty or
good government; this is indeed to be free as the wild Ass is free. Such are
spoken of ( Psalm. 2.2, 3.) Come let us break their bonds, and cast their cords
from us. They that would break the bonds and cords there spoken of, desire
only, and look after a sinful liberty, a meaner liberty than that of the wild
Ass. The Prophet going to the great men ( Jer. 5.5.) said, These have
altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds; that is, the yoke of duty
which God has laid upon them. They have no cause of boasting, that are free
from the bonds of service; but they who cast off the bonds of duty, have great
cause to be ashamed. Thus the Prophet reproves that people, as one man ( Hos.
8.9.) They are gone up to Assy i^, a wild Ass alone by himself. As if the
Prophet had said, They lo^k not up to the high God for help, but to Assyria;
the high God was not so high in their eyes as Assyria: doing thus, they we^e
like a wild Ass (says the Prophet) and so they were in two things; First,
They we^e extreme stubborn, resolved to have their will, and satisfy their
lusts. Eph^aim was as violent in his way as a wild Ass. Secondly, ^hey were
like a wild Ass, they would be alone; A wild Ass alone by himself; that is,
they would be at liberty, free from all command, to do what they list; they had
rather be in a barren wilderness where none could control them, than in good
pastures under any thing that looked like a restraint, or a rule. This is a
very unworthy spirit; this is liberty in a way of licenciousness, this liberty
is libertinism. They who submit to no rule but that of their unruly headstrong
passions and affections, nor will be reclaimed nor tamed by any, whether fair
or foul means, these in Scripture are compared to the wild Ass for their folly
and vanity. Z^phar offered this rebuke to Job, in the 11th Chapter of this
book, verse. 12. and possibly he could not altogether free himself from it, Vain
man would be wise, though he be born like a wild Asses colt; that is, though
this be all his wisdom to be free from that subjection which he owes to God
and man. The Prophet ( Jer. 2.24.) compares the whole people of Israel, when
they cast off the service of God, to a wild Ass (which Scripture was touched at
the second verse upon another occasion) that snuffeth up the wind at her
pleasure; in her occasion who can turn her away? all they that seek her, will
not weary themselves, in her month they shall find her: There is no bringing
such into compass, till they are compassed with pains. We may call all such
nominal Israelites real Ishmaelites, it being said of Ishmael (Genesis 16.12.)
that he was ( pere Adam) a wild man, having more of the wild Ass than of the
man in them. Thus it is with vain and unbridled spirits, they cannot bear the
yoke of service; and therefore remember, though this be spoken of as a
privilege, yet it is a low privilege to be free from any honest service; and
to be be free from all service, is worse than the worst of outward servitudes.
It Is a mercy to be free from slavery to man, but to be free from service to
man, is to be unmanly; every man should be a servant in one kind or another,
and therefore the Law says, To call a man a servant, distinguishes no man,
seeing every man is supposed in the way of his life a servant. The Apostle
speaking to those whose very calling is to serve, and are therefore in strict
sense called servants (1 Cor. 7.21, 22.) says, Art thou called, being a
servant, care not for it (that is, be not troubled that thou art a servant
(service to man is not inconsistent with the service of God) but if thou may
be made free, use it rather; for he that is called in the Lord, being a
servant, is the Lords free man. Let every man (v. 24.) wherein he is called,
therein abide with God; that is, let him continue to serve man in all things,
according to the will of God. To be wholly free from the service of man, is no
better than the freedom of the worser sort of beasts, the wild Ass. Christ (
Mat. 11.29, 30.) calls his to the yoke; and Christ's yoke implies all manner of
dutiful service, even service to man as well as to God: Come unto me all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest; take my yoke upon
you, and learn of me, etc. for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. If we
refuse Christ's easy yoke, we may quickly get a heavy one, yea, an iron one, as
the Prophet told him who broke the wooden one ( Jer. 28.13.) There are some
yoaks, which to bear is our honor; it is surely so, to bear the yoke of Christ;
to be under Christ's bonds, is a favor; woe to those that seek to be loosed
from them. The Prophet Jeremiah tells us ( Lam. 3.37.) It is good for a man to
bear the yoke in his youth.

There is a threefold bond or yoke, from which it is a favor to be wholly
freed, and that freedom we should seek after; but neither of the three is a
freedom from duty and service, or from due service.

First, To be free from the yoke of sin, and to have the bonds of our
iniquities loosed, that is a blessed privilege ( John 8.36.) If the Son make
you free, you shall be free indeed. The chief part of a Sons freedom, which we
have by Christ, the Son, is freedom from sin. Freedom from the condemning power
of sin, and freedom from the ruling power of sin, is our spiritual or Gospel
freedom. Peter said to Simon Magus (Acts 8.23.) I perceive thou art in the gall
of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity; thou art still a prisoner, a slave
to sin, the guilt of sin holds thee fast; nor art thou delivered from the filth
of it. To have our sin-bonds loosed, is to be free like Saints; to loose our
selves from duty-bonds, whether to God or man, is to be free like wild Asses.

Secondly, There is a great mercy in being loosed and made free from the curse
of the Law. Thus also the Son makes us free ( Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed
us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; that is, enduring the
curse for us, or dying acursed death for us, that we might have, and for ever
enjoy a blessed life: This is a glorious liberty.

Thirdly, To be freed from the old legal ceremonies, is the privilege of all
believers under the Gospel; and it is such a privilege as the Apostle exhorted
the Galatians, and us with them, to maintain with all our might ( Gal. 5.1.)
Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be
not entangled again with the yoke of bondage; that is, with the bondage of the
ceremonial Law, from which Christ has made us free ( Gal. 4.26.) Jerusalem
which is above is free, which is the mother of us all; free, First, from the
slavery of sin; free, Secondly, from the curse of the Law; free, Thirdly, from
the yoke of legal ceremonies. All believers are made thus free by Christ, but
Christ has not made so much as one believer free from service. Christ makes us
free to serve, not free from serving. To be be free to serve, is infinitely
better than to be free from service; nothing is more ingenuous, nothing shows a
more noble spirit in man, than to be free to serve, as all are, being once
freed from spiritual or sin-slavery ( Romans 6.19.) As ye have yielded your
members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity, even so now
yield your selves servants to righteousness unto holiness; for (as it follows)
when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness, or (as it is
in the margin) free to righteousness; not free to do righteousness, but free
not to do it. Righteousness had then no command (yielded to) no power
(submitted to) over you; whereas over a gracious heart, righteousness has the
greatest command. A godly man is at the beck of God, in all the ways of
righteousness: and, as he is free to serve Masters, so he is free to be subject
to Magistrates, or higher powers, according to that rule of the Apostle ( Romans
13.1.) And that all in their places may be mindful of this duty, they are upon
all occasions to be put in mind of it, as the same Apostle directed Titus in
his Epistle to him ( Chap. 3.1.) The Lord having spoken of the freedom of the
Ass, proceeds to described his dwelling.

Verse. 6. Whose house I have made the wilderness, and the barren laid his
dwellings. These words contain the second part of the care and providence of
God toward the wild Ass; he has not only made them free, and loosed their
bonds, but he has provided a dwelling for them; and where? in the wilderness;
a wild place, and therefore fit for wild beasts. The wilderness; strictly
taken, is the dwelling of beasts, not of men; we read (I grant) in Scripture
not only of Houses, but of Cities in the wilderness, yet take the wilderness
strictly, and it is a place un-inhabited by man; and that is the place where the
Lord has appointed the wild Ass to dwell; it is his house, there he abides as
men do in their houses. The wilderness is a place undressed, untilled, uncared
for by man, yet by the care and goodness of God it affords sufficient provision
for the support of these creatures, whom no man provides for.

Whose house I have made the wilderness. The wild Ass has a large and open
house, some conceive the wilderness here intended was the wilderness of Arabia,
which as (Historians tell us) was much stockt or abounded with wild Asses. The
word Arabia signifies a wilderness; the whole country being so like a
wilderness, is so called after its own likeness. The Chaldee Paraphrast reads
it, whose house I have made a plain, as if these wild Asses were in this
opposed to the wild Goats, (ver. 1.) who live on high hills and craggy rocks.
The word is translated a plain (Deuteronomy. 1.1.) yet rather, as we, the wilderness.

And the barren land his dwellings; the Hebrew is, and the salt place his
dwellings. A barren place, and a salt place, are the same ( Judge. 9.45.) When
Abimeleck took that City, he sowed it with salt, in token that an everlasting
curse of barrenness should come upon it, according to that ( Psalm. 107.34.) A
fruitful land turned he into barrenness, the margin says into saltness. Once
more ( Jer. 17.5, 6.) Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh
his arm, he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good
comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land
and not inhabited, that is, in a barren land, unfit for any to inhabit. There
is a reason in nature why salt land is barren; salt being hot and dry, draws
up the strength and moisture of the land that should make is fruitful: This
salt or barren land, which yields little grass or herbage, the Lord has
appointed for the wild Ass to dwell in.

Hence note, First; God provides a place of dwelling for the meanest creatures.

Where the wild Ass shall dwell or inhabit, comes under a Divine appointment.
How much more has God appointed dwelling places for the children of men. The
Apostle tells us ( Acts 12.26.) That he has not only made men to dwell on all
the face of the earth, but he has also determined the bounds of their
habitation, that is, God has not only made the whole earth habitable for
mankind, but he has by his providence disposed every man to his special
habitation in this or that part of the earth.

Secondly; The dwelling which God appoints to any creature is suitable to its
nature.

This wild creature dwells in a wild place, in a wilderness. This barren
creature (as to any benefit he brings to man) God appoints to dwell in a barren
land. It is said of Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. 5.21.) when for his pride he was put
from his dominion, that he had his dwelling with wild Asses; he himself carried
it like a beast, and he had a dwelling suitable to his beastial disposition
among the beasts; he was proud, and would not bare the Lords yoke, he cast off
the bonds which God laid upon him, and thought it enough for him to lay bonds
upon men, therefore the Lord (to humble him) thrust him among the beasts. As
like will to like mostly in way of election, so sometimes like shall to like,
though they like it not, in way of compulsion; and usually like are put to like
persons or places, in way of gracious ordination. God himself appoints wild
beasts to the barren wildernesses, tame beasts to the fruitful enclosed
pastures; he places men in well built Houses, Towns or Cities; and he has
appointed faithful men and women his Church to dwell in, which is therefore
called (though in a wilderness) the house of God, (1 Timothy 3.15.) David found
that house more pleasing to him than any of his Royal Palaces, and therefore
made it his great request, The one thing of his desires (Psalm. 27.7.) That he
might dwell in the house of the Lord for ever: Even as he bitterly complained (
Psalm 120.5,) Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar. And as the Lord has provided suitable habitations for beasts, wild and
tame; for men, good and bad here on earth; so he has provided suitable
habitations for all men, when they leave this earth. He has provided hell for
their house and dwelling place for ever, who are disobedient (...) ^nbelieving*
and he has provided heaven for their house and dwelling place for ever, who
believe and obey. As now all godly men dwell in God by faith ( Psalm. 90.1.) so
they shall hereafter dwell always with him by fruition. He that gives the
wilderness for a house, and the barren land for a dwelling to the wild Ass,
will provide a Paradise for the house, and a Spring-garden of everlasting joys
and sweetnesses for his faithful servants.

Thirdly, From these words (the barren land his dwelling)

Note; As some lands are barren by a Divine Malediction, so some by Common
Constitution.

Some lands become barren by a curse from God; Thus he turns a fruitful land
into barrenness, for the wickedness of those that dwell therein (Psalm. 107.34.)
Now as some lands are made barren (besides the general curse which befell all
lands upon the fall of man into sin) by some special curse, for special causes,
so, it is merely an act of Divine Sovereignty, that some lands, as to their very
soil and constitution are barren, while others are fruitful.

Fourthly, Consider where do these Asses dwell? it is in a barren land. Hence
note; They that do little work deserve but little reward, a barren land may
serve them who refuse service.

As every land, the best land is barren and unprofitable to them who will not
take pains to improve it; so it is pity they should dwell in a fruitful land,
who will not take pains in it.

Fifthly, Note; There it no place so bad or barren, but it has its use.

God has use for barren wildernesses, as well as for the richest pastures.

Sixthly, The wild Ass living according to nature, is satisfied with a barren
Land.

Hence note; Nature is content with a little.

They have always enough, who desire no more. A cottage is as good as a
Palace, and a barren Land as good as a fruitful one, to a contented mind. Yet I
cannot approve either their principle or practice, who have a kind of ambition
(possibly they call it self-denial, and reckon it a high piece of their
Religion) to dwell, as the wild Ass, in the wilderness; such are those popish
votaries, called Hermites, from the wilderness where they dwell: These in
devotion (such as it is) make the wilderness their house, and the barren Land
their dwelling, that they may be free from the cares and temptations of this
world; these retire themselves utterly from converse with man, that they may
more freely converse with God (an excellent end, but that way to it is no where
commanded by God) Let such remember, that God has not appointed the wilderness
and desert places for man's dwelling, but for the dwelling of wild beasts: Q^id
pr^dest solitudo corporis, si defuerit solitudo cordis. Greg. lib. 30. cap. 23.
Let them also remember, that they who have the wilderness for their house, may
yet have the City in their hearts. It was said by one of the Ancients,
concerning such retirements, What does it advantage us to have a solitary place
for our bodies, whilst our souls are in the thickest thro^gs of the world.

There are only two cases wherein men should desire such solitary places.

First, In case of persecution, to get out of the hands and reach of cruel men.
Thus David desired the wilderness ( Psalm. 55.3, 4, 5, 6.) Because of the voice
of the enemy, because of the oppression of the wicked; for they cast iniquity
upon me, and in wrath they hate me; my heart is sore pained within me, and the
terrors of death are fallen upon me, etc. And what follows? O that I had
wings like a dove, for then would I fly away and be at rest; Lo, then would I
wander afar off, and remain in the wilderness. It is better to be in the
wilderness among savage beasts, than to live among beastly savage men. The
Apostle ( Heb. 11.38.) tells us the reason why many worthy ones of the Jewish
Church (of whom the world was not worthy) inhabited the wilderness; They were
stoned and sawn asunder, and were slain with the sword, etc. And what then?
then they who remained alive, to avoid those extremities, avoided the society
of men, and wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and caves of the
earth. In such a hot day we may choose the shadow of a desolate wilderne^s,
rather than a City to dwell in. And thus it is said ( Rev. 12.13, 14.) When the
Dragon (that is, Heathenish Rome) persecuted the woman (that is, the Church)
which brought forth the man-child; then to the woman were given two wings of a
great Eagle (that is, sufficient means, strength and opportunity to make her
escape) that she might flee into the wilderness; which as it has been often
verified in a metaphorical sense, Professors then lying close and retired in
their several places, so it has been true in the letter, the Church has sled
into the wilderness for safety, and has there been preserved from the face of
the Serpent.

Secondly, We may desire such retirements to, and a dwelling in solitary
places, in case of the extreme wickedness of those among whom we dwell; though
they break not out into open persecution, yet their evil conversation makes
their society int llerable. This caused the Prophet Jeremiah to cry out ( Chap.
9.2.) O that I had a place in the wilderness, that I might leave my people and
go from them (why?) for they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.
For, as it is better to dwell in the corner of the house top, than with a
brawling woman in a wild house (Prove. 21.9.) so it is better to get into a
corner, or into a wilderness, than to live in a City, or in the fairest Palaces
among men of wicked and ungodly spirits, such as vexed Lot in Sodom (2 Pet.
2.8.)

In these two cases we may imitate the wild Ass, and dwell in the wilderness;
but for any to make it their choice, let them consider where they have a rule
for it. Man is a sociable creature, and ought to be helpful and useful to
others, and not wholly to confine himself to himself, as they do, who are and
are called Anchorets and Hermites. To serve our Country, and to observe the Law
of Nations for the common good of mankind, is better than upon any pretense of
devotion, or converse with God, to seclude our selves totally from the company
and converse of men. And seeing God has made us for the good of humane
society, it is inhumane, voluntarily and electively to disjoyn and exempt our
selves from the Laws of society. Aristotle said, concerning decliners of
society, He that affects solitude, Deus sit aut bellua oportet, qui posset in
solitudine vivere. Aristot.
is either a God, or a beast; h^ either lives above man as God does, or below
man as beasts do. The Reader will easily pardon me this short diversion against
unnecessitated solitude, thus occasioned by the solitary dwelling of the wild
Ass in the wilderness and barren Land. And I have the rather touch it, because
I find the wits of some running somewhat wild in the Allegory of the wild Ass
in the Text, as if he were a very fitting resemblance of a contemplative man.

I grant a godly man should be, and the more godly any man is, the more he will
be, I am sure, the more he would or desires to be free from the thoughts, and
loosed from the bands both of love to, and cares about the things of this life,
that he may be the more in the meditation of, and preparation for, a better
life. In those meditations he retires from the throng of worldly desires, as
much as a man living alone in a wilderne^s withdraws from worldly businesses;
he is weaned from, and mortified to the plenty and pleasures which a City life
courts him with; nor is he afraid of the threatenings of any who would drive him
from his duty. His soul searches after, and he feeds upon the green things
which every where grow upon the mountains of the holy Scriptures, both for his
instruction and consolation. All this I grant, as was said before, is true of a
godly man raised to any high degree of spiritualness, and walking much in the
Spirit. He is in the world, yet sits loose and free from the bands and baits of
it. Howbeit, this warrants no man to loose himself from all bands of service in
the world, much less to be so gross, as literally to make that his house, which
God has made the house of the wild Ass, The wilderness, or to take the barren
Land for his dwelling.

As this verse has showed us the house and dwelling of the wild Ass, so the
next shows us how he carries it in the wilderness.

Verse. 7. He scorneth the multitude of the City, neither regards he the
crying of the driver. Ansignis metaphora ad notandum indo^itam naturam.
He scorneth; the Hebrew is, He laugheth at, or slighteth, etc. The Lord speaks
of this wild Ass after the manner of men, who laugh at those things which they
contemn, despise or scorn, as much below them or contrary to them: The word is
rendered by laughing (Psalm. 2.4. Job 5.22.) It is said also of the good woman (
Prove. 31.25.) She shall rejoice in time to come; which others render thus, She
laughed at time to come; that is, she having so well and wisely provided for
time to come, is not at all burdened with cares about it. There may be a double
reason, why this wild Ass scorns, or laughs at the multitude of the City.

First, Because it is no way pleasing to his nature, he has no desire to a
City, to a sociable life.

Secondly, He may be said to scorn the multitude of the City, because though a
multitude should come out of a City to take him, yea, as great a multitude as a
City can make, yet he is not afraid, for he knows he can show them a fair pair
of heels, and by his swiftness of foot keep out of their hands, and maintain
his liberty.

Farther, The words translated, The multitude of the City, (...) Copia. ie.
opes and divitiae, q. d. nihil appetit ex abundantia exuperantiavo civium.

Malit in sterilibus locis raram and malam herbam quaerere, quam in urbe
servire pro victu copioso.

Gerit ergo paupertatis imaginem, cap. 24. 5. (...)


may be rendered, The abundance or plenty of the City. If there be abundance any
where, it is in Cities; and therefore heaven is called a City, because of the
great abundance of all good there, and all in God. Thus the word is rendered (
Psalm. 37.16.) A little that a righteous man has, is better than the riches of
many wicked; that is, than all their large sums of money, of gold and silver,
as also, than their large inheritances of houses and Lands. The word may bear
that sense in the Text, and it is a good sense; the wild Ass scorns the
abundance of the City, he can content himself with the barren Land; he cares
not though he fare hard, so he may live free from hard labor; he scorneth,
both the multitude and plenty of the City; Neither regards he the crying of
the driver.

The word is, He hears not, that is, he obeys not the crying of the driver.
This is spoken in opposition to tame beasts, for such must regard the crying of
the driver, else they must smart for it; if the driver speaks, they understand
his language, they must mend their pace, and follow their work more closely, or
seel the drivers lash. Here then is a farther description of the liberty of the
wild Ass; he is not brought to work by any thing that the driver can say or do,
he is not afraid either of his words or blows.

The word which we translate Driver, signifies an Oppressor; so it is rendered (
Job 3.18.) It signifies also an Exactor. (...). Querelam ejus qui tributum
colligit. Sept.
The seventy translate, He regards not the hasty call or citation of the
gatherer of Taxes or of Tribute. There are two sorts of Exactors; First,
Vocatur autem Exactor, non modo qui tributa exigit, sed q^i p ras ^rget. Drus.
those that exact Tribute; Secondly, those who exact Labor. Now he that drives
cattle, urges them to work both by hand and tongue, and so exacts labor of
them. Hence the word is used to express the Taskmasters of the Israelites in
Egypt (Exodus 5.6.) who indeed exacted labor of them, and made them serve with
rigor. From these Oppressors, with the Exactors of labor, the wild Ass is
free; he is at such liberty, that he regards not the cry of the driver, Exactor
or Oppressor; nor will he be brought to work by fair means nor by foul. As that
was a proverbial speech to show the tranquillity of those times ( Isa. 14.8.)
Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us; So this seems to be
a proverbial speech, showing the liberty of the wild Ass at all times, He
regards not the crying of the Driver.

From the former part of the verse,

When it is said, He laughs at, or scorns the multitude of the City. Taking the
word City, as opposed to the wilderness or barren Land,

Note; Cities as they are full of company, so they are accompanied with all
manner of outward plenty and fullness.

If good things are to be had any where for love or money, it is in Cities; and
therefore they who dwell in great Cities, where there is such a multitude of
people, and abundance of all things, should remember their privilege; it is a
mercy they are not in a wilderness, or in a barren Land.

Secondly, In that it is said, He scorns the multitude of the City,

Note; No society, no company pleases, but that which is suitable.

What cares the wild Ass for the company of men? he had rather be among the
wild Asses, than among the best and wisest men. Bad men, who are like wild
beasts, scorn the company of good men; and it is as true of good men, that they
have no joy in the company of bad men, yea, they are often burdened with their
company. The content of our lives does very much consist in our harmony with,
and congeniality to those whom the are engaged to converse with.

Thirdly, Take the word in the other sense, as noting the abundance or plenty
that is in the City, the wild Ass had rather be in his barren Land than there.

Hence we learn; Liberty is more pleasing than plenty, and a wilderness with
poor fare, than a City where there is oppression.

Better be sometimes in a starving condition, than always in a fearing
condition, always hearing the cry of the Driver. The wild Ass is content to
fare hard, so he may be free: how much more then is he below a man, who parts
with his true liberty, as Esau did with his Birthright, for a morsel of meat,
or a mess of broth?

Fourthly, Note; To be driven and forced, is grievous to beasts, much more to
men.

The wild Ass regards not the crying of the Driver, because he knows the Driver
cannot reach him with his cry, much less with his whip. The tame Ass must
regard and attend the cry of the Driver (though he has no will to it) whether
he will or no. It was said by the Moralists, Man would be led, not driven;
persuaded, not compelled. The disputes have been great what man may do, and how
far he may go to that matter; but I shall not meddle with it any further, than
to say, that when Christ in the Parable said ( Luke 14.23.) Compel them to come
in, The compulsion there intended, is only that of argumentation, exhortation
and persuasion by his Ministers, whose divine Rhetoric in beseeching sinners
to come in, and to be reconciled unto God, has such a power in it, as amounts
unto, and may be called a compulsion. I grant, many use their liberty, or
rather abuse it, as an occasion to the flesh, and turn it into wantonness,
these are indeed no better than wild Asses; and though they are such as regard
not the cry of the Driver, yet they need it.

Thus the Lord has showed Job the house and dwelling, as also the liberties
and privileges of the wild Ass; in the next verse the Lord shows him the food
or diet of the wild Ass.

Verse. 8. The range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searches after
every green thing. This verse tells us where the Lord has made provision for
the wild Ass. The Range (or as some render, the search) of the mountains is his
pasture; Investigatio montium (est) pascuum ejus, i. e. quicquid in montibus
investigari potest, id ei pabuli loco est. Bez.
that is, whatsoever he searches and finds out upon the mountains, is his
pasture. Job speaks of wicked men (Chap. 24.5.) after the manner of these
wild Asses, finding food in the wilderness for themselves, and for their
children.

The range of the mountains is his pasture. Some interpret it choice things,
that is, the best things, or those things that are most savoury to the pallat
of that beast, those he picks up for his food. Mr. Broughton translates, Chosen
places in the mountains are for his pasture: As if it had been said, Though he
be wild, yet he is prudent, he takes not what comes next, but he chooses what
is best for him; for as it follows, He searches after every green thing.

The word notes a very diligent search, after every green thing. Green things
are his delicacies, he lives upon them, and delights in them; he searches
after all, and feeds upon that which is best for him; he looks not that man
should fodder him in winter, as they do tame and working cattle, he looks out
his own living, and picks up some green thing or other all the year long.

Hence note; Where God gives dwelling, he gives feeding.

God has made the wilderness and barren places for the wild Ass to dwell in,
yet there is something for him to feed on.

Secondly, His food is every green thing.

(Whence learn; God gives food to all creatures convenient to their nature.)

He gives green things, grass to the beasts of the field; but he does, not feed
man with grass, he feeds man with the finest of the wheat, and with honey out
of the rock ( Psalm. 81.16.) And as the Lord provides suitable food for the
bodies of men, so for their souls he has spiritual green pastures for them (
Psalm. 23.1, 2.) The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want; he makes me to lie
down in green pastures; that is, in his Word and Ordinances. They are green
pastures for his people; he makes them lie down in the Promises and in the
Commandments, in the holy Prophecies and Histories of the written word; all
which are written for our instruction or learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope (Romans 15.4.) that is, that our faith
having the truth of the Word (especially in the promises) to feed upon, our
hope may be said to wait for the good of the Word patiently. The holy
Scriptures (I say) are the green pastures which the Lord has provided for the
souls of men to feed in, and grow fat upon. The Scriptures are a bare common, a
dry heath to unbelievers, they find nothing there which is food for them; but
to believers they are fat pastures, and full of such green things as are most
suitable to their taste, and nourishing to their souls. Thus spoke the Prophet (
Isa. 49.9, 10.) Their pastures shall be in all high places; they shall not
hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor the Sun smite them; that is, they
shall have safe passage, and sufficient food, both for soul and body, for their
souls especially, when delivered out of their soul-prisons, or spiritual
captivity, there spoken or prophesied of, under the Gospel.

Thirdly, Wild Asses sea^ch after every green thing, they take pains for their
living; i^ it be not near, they will travel for it, and seek after it.

Hence note; Hunger makes irrational creatures, every living creature,
industrious.

They who love not labor, will yet take some pains, at least so much as serves
them to get food, and keep them alive. Those beasts which are most at liberty,
are in a kind of bondage to their bellies. The wild Asses (says the Prophet, (
Jer. 14.6.) did stand in the high places, they snuffed up the wind like
Dragons, because there was no grass. How will they search after grass, who are
thus afflicted for want of grass! And will not spiritual hunger make us as
industrious as natural hunger does? Hungry souls will be seeking after every
green thing, after every divine precept, after very precious promise; these are
the green things which the soul searches for, and is satisfied with.
Naturalists say of the wild Ass, that he utterly refuses to feed upon those
things that are dry and dead, he must have g^een. That Is true of every
believer, he cannot feed upon dead and dry things, upon what is chaffy and
husky, he must have green, sappy, juicy, lively food; such has God provided
for him, and he will be satisfied with none but such.

JOB, Chap. 39. Verse. 9, 10, 11, 12. 9. Will the Unicorn be willing to serve
thee? or abide by thy crib?

10. Can thou bind the Unicorn with his hands in the furrow? or will he
harrow the valleys after thee?

11. Will thou trust him, because his strength is great? or will thou leave thy
labor with him?

12. Will thou believe him that he will bring home thy seed, and gather it into
thy barn?


THe Lord still enquires after Jobs skill and knowledge in the book of the
creatures. In the former context, Job was interrogated about the wild Ass,
whose freedom was there set out, in opposition to the servitude of the
homebred, or tame Ass. Here the Lord puts the question about the Unicorn, and
sets forth his liberty, in opposition to the servile labor of the Ox.

Verse. 9. Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee? or abide by thy crib? The
Unicorns liberty is here described, first, more generally, in two things.

First, He will do no work for man.

Secondly, He will receive no reward from man.

That he has no mind to work for man, is showed in the first words of the
verse: Will he be willing to serve thee? Will he be employed in thy service?

And that he cares not to be fed or provided for by man, that he looks for no
reward from man, is set down in the latter part of the verse; Will he abide by
thy crib?

Secondly, The stubborn liberty of the Unicorn is described in this context,
more particularly, by his refusal of that special labor which is necessary in
husbandry, or for the tillage of the ground, in the whole compass of it; and
here are three parts of that labor set down, all refused by the Unicorn.

First, The ploughing of the ground in the 10th verse; Can thou bind the
Unicorn with his band in the furrow? He will not go to plough.

The second labor with which beasts are wrought in husbandry, is harrowing the
ground; the Unicorn will not touch that, as it is said in the close of the 10th
verse, Will he harrow the valleys after thee? No, he will neither plough nor
harrow, he will do none of these works though he have strength enough to do
them, as appears ( verse. 11.) Will thou trust him, because his strength is
great? or will thou leave thy labor to him?

The third part of husbandry, about which beasts are used, is the bringing of
the Corn in, or the home-bringing of it; the Unicorn will lend no help to that
work neither, as is showed in the 12th verse, Will thou believe him that he
will bring home thy seed, and gather it into thy barn?

Thus the Unicorn will neither serve in general, nor do any of these particular
services; he will neither plough nor harrow, nor bring home the seed. The
Unicorn is a beast unsubject to, and unsubduable by man, yet subject to God,
and by him easily subduable; for (as the Apostle spoke in another case, Phil.
3.21.) He is able to subdue all things to himself.

We may conceive, the scope and intendment of the Lord in putting these
questions to Job about the Unicorn, was to show, that if he could not time or
reduce such a creature as the Unicorn to his Plow and Harrow, then he must not
think of bringing God to his bow, who made both the Unicorn and man too. Surely
God will be at his liberty, to do with man what he pleases, do man what he
can, seeing the Unicorn will take liberty to do what he pleases,
notwithstanding all that man can do. God will not be bound up to, nor tied by
any man's dictates, but remains soveraignly free for ever, in all his
dispensations. Thus of the whole matter in general: I shall now open the
particulars mentioned about this unserviceable creature the Unicorn.

Verse. 9. Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee? (...) and (...) dicitur a
(...) quod alium esso significat. Monoceros unicum habet cornu, sed alium, unde
appellatio ejus.
The Original word translated Unicorn, denotes an animal, high and stately. It
comes from a root which signifies to be exalted or lifted up; and hence David
(Psalm. 92.10.) testifying his assurance that God would lift him up out of his
troubles, and deliver him from his pressures, compares his hoped for exaltation
to that of the Unicorn: My horn shall thou exalt like the horn of an Unicorn, I
shall be anointed with fresh oil; that is, I shall have new and sufficient
supplies of grace, and gifts, of joy and consolation.

This word (Reem) which in the Hebrew bears only that general signification
Highness, (...). 70. Vnicornu. Lat.
is rendered by the Seventy in Greek Monoceros, and by the Latins Vnicornis,
both which answer our English term Unicorn; the notation of all these words in
the Greek, Latin, and English imports a beast with one horn, whereas (I say)
the Hebrew word imports only the highness or nobleness of that animal or beast
intended under it.

Arist. l. 2. de Hist. Animal. c. 1. Plin. l. 8. c. 21. l. 11. c. 37.
Natural Historians, in their descriptions of, and discourses about the beasts
of the earth, make report of an Indian Ass with one horn, as also of Indian
Oxen with one horn, which may therefore, according to the sense of the word, be
called Unicorns. Our late Annotators seem to incline, that by the word Reem
here rendered Unicorn, is meant the wild Bull rather than the Unicorn, because
as the wild Ass is here opposed to the tame, so the wild Bull seems to be
opposed to the Ox, which is a tame creature And fitted for the service of man.

Numquid volet Rhinoceros servire tibi? Vulg (...). Aquil.
The Vulgar Latin translation reads it, the Rhinoceros, and so does one of the
Greek interpreters; and in our English translation ( Isa. 34.7.) we put the
word Unicorns in the Text, and Rhinocerots in the Margin. The notation of which
word (Rhinocerot) imports a beast with a horn of his nose or snout. The
Rhinoceros is a large beast, near in bigness (say some) to the Elephant, Basil.
in Psalm. 29.6.
only shorter in his legs. And the description or character which one of the
Ancients gives of the Rhinoceros, is very suitable to, and does fully correspond
with that which the Lord gives here in this Text of that savage beast (Reem) by
us rendered the Unicorn: For (says my Author) The Rhinoceros is a proud
imperious animal such as will not not be subject to man, nor be brought to
obedience, living perpetually in desert places, and securing himself from
danger by his horn.

Further, It is said of this Rhinoceros.

First, That he is a mortal enemy to the Elephant, Cornu ad saxa limato,
praeparat e pugnae. Plin. l. 8. c. 20.
whom he assaults fiercely; and having sharpened, or as it were whetted his
horn at a ragged rock, that his weapon may be fit for the bloody battle, he
wounds him under the belly, where he knows the Elephant is most in danger, that
being his softest part.

Secondly, Some to carry the sense of the word Unicorn to this other creature,
say, the Rhinoceros has but one horn; Namque gravem gemino cornu sic extulit
ursum, Jactat ut impositas taurus in astra pilas. Mart in suo Amphitheatro
Epigram. 22.
whereas others affirm confidently, that the Rhinoceros has two horns, one
upon his Nose, and another upon his Brow, though not so big as that other. One
of the old Poets speaking of the Roman sports, describes a Rhinoceros thus, He
tossed the bear that was brought before him with his double horn. Sanctius (in
his Comment upon this verse) says he saw a Rhinoceros which was brought into
Spain, in whom he observed all things answering the description given of him by
the Ancients.

What the shape or form of the Unicorn is, as ordinarily painted and set up
with the Lion, as a supporter of the Royal Arms, and as a sign at many common
men's doors, every one knows. Some Historians speaking of the Unico n, paint him
out thus in their books and writing^. Pliny in his eig^^^ Book, at the one and
twentieth Chapter says, Asperrimam feram. Plin l. 8. c. 21. Aelian. l. 7. c 3.
S^^l. Ex^^^^t. 205. Ge^^^er.
the Monoc^^ote or Unicorn (whom he there calls a most fierce savage beast) is
in the general make or bulk of his body like a Horse, and in the shape of his
head like a Heart or Stag, that in the fashion of his feet he is much like an
Elephant, his tail resembling the tail of a Boar, that he has a black horn in
the midst of his forehead two cub is in length, which say others, is not
smooth, but wreathed, and somewhat ragged, and at the very top or point
exceeding sharp. Hanc se^^ viv^m ^eg^^t c^^^ Id ^^bi supra.
He is of so fierce a nature, that he will not be taken alive, as the same
Autho^ affi ms from hearsay.

Yet there want not those who make doubt whether there be, ye who deny that
there is any such beast in the compass of nature, as is commonly called an
Unicorn, having such a medicinal horn as is asserted; and therefore all those
Scriptures, wherein this word (Reem) in the Text translated Unicorn, is used,
They who are of that opinion, translate Rhinocerote, as not being satisfied
that there is such a creature as that other in the world. One of the Rabbines
collects an objection against him from that of Moses (Deuteronomy. 33.17. Singularis
numerus, ibi positus est pro numero multitudinis, ut sit unicornis pro
unicornium; sic arbor ponitur pro arboribus, rana pro ranis, etc. Drus.
Conf^sio numerorum in h^c lingua frequens est. Merc Coesar Scaliger, dicit se
vidisse monocerotis cornu, and quidem diversi coloris, unum suffulvum unum
subluteum, etc.
) where speaking of this beast (Reem) he seems to say that he has more horns
than one, therefore no Unicorn; for there describing the flourishing and
powerful estate of the Tribe of Joseph, he says, his horns are like the horns
of an Unicorn; as if that beast (whatsoever it is which is signified by that
Hebrew word) had more horns than one. We indeed translate both words plurally,
not the horns of an Unicorn, but the horns of Unicorns, yet the Hebrew is
singular. However I conceive this objection is of no weight, to the denial of
any such creature as the Unicorn, it being frequent in Scripture to put the
singular number for the plural, as there Unicorn for Unicorns; and therefore
that Text has little or no force in it to invalidate their opinion, who assert
that there is such an one horned animal.

Now as to the Text in hand, it may suffice my purpose (leaving farther search
of these things to Naturalists) to say, that the Hebrew word Reem signifies a
wild beast, very fierce and furious, usually called an Unicorn, or expressed by
a word signifying a beast having but one horn in Greek, Latin, and English.

But though I shall not deliver any opinion of my own to the contrary, yet I
suppose it will not be unpleasing to the ingenuous and learned Reader, if
before I proceed with my own meditations, upon what is said in this Chapter,
about this creature, I here insert the discourse and opinion of that learned
Physician, and Divine Critic, Doctor Arnoldus Bootius, in the third Book of
his Sacred Animadversions upon the Hebrew Text of the Old Testament, and the
first Chapter of that Book: The substance of which I have gathered, and in most
places translated word for word, as follows

That the word Reem (says he) is the name of some certain Animal all Writers
agree; but what this Animal is, is not agreed. Hierome renders it sometimes a
Rhinocerote, sometimes an Unicorn; and so do some others in translating the
Bible. Pagnine translates it only once a Rhinocerote, in all other places where
it occurs, an Unicorn; yet in his Dictionary he seems to incline, that the word
signifies a Rhinocerote, rather than an Unicorn. But the Greeks generally are
more constant in rendering it an Unicorn, than a Rhinocerote; and in this almost
all interpreters, both they who translate the Scriptures into the Latin
tongue, and they who translate them into their Mother tongue, follow them, and
do so too; the Rabbis also go the same way. And therefore one of them writing
upon those words of Moses concerning Joseph (Deuteronomy. 33.17.) His horns are like
the horns of (Reem) an Unicorn (which seems to oppose this opinion which makes
Reem to be the Unicorn, a beast of one horn; he I say, to avoid this
difficulty) says that place is to be understood by an Enallage or change of
the number, the word Reem Unicorn, being put for Reemim, Unicorns; with which
answer several others wipe of that objection.

Nor does it a little help this interpretation that most of those marks, which
the Scripture takes notice of in that beast called Reem, namely, his extreme
fierceness, great strength, and the extraordinary magnitude of his horn, are
all ascribed by Authors to the Unicorn.

Yet to me this interpretation seems the less probable, because Unicorns are
found only in India, say they, who have written of them. Now it is not likely,
that M^ses, David, and the Prophets should speak so often of, and take
similitudes from, and that God himself should spend so much time in a discourse
with Job about a creature unknown in their Countries. And it must needs be,
that he was there (and to them) unknown, if no Country nearer than India
produced the Unicorn; for the world was not so discovered in those times, by
mutual commerce, that living creatures, and things proper to Nations, should be
familiarly or much known, in Nations far remote. Of this we have a clear
instance in the Elephant, of which famous animal, so useful to man for various
services, and so abounding in many parts of Africa and Asia, the Israelites
seem to have had little or no knowledge at all; which we may well conjecture by
that deep silence in Scripture concerning him, there being no mention made of
the Elephant any where but in the book of Job: And Job was not an Israelite,
nor an inhabitant of Canaan, but of Arabia; whose neighbors on the other side
of the Red Sea, the Aethiopians and Troglodites abounded with Elephants. And
this is the more to be marvelled at, because Ivory, which is nothing else but
an Elephants tooth, was so well known and common in India. Now, if the
Elephant, of whose teeth they had plenty, and which were bred in great numbers
in Countries much nearer than Judea, was so little known to the Jews, who can
believe that the Unicorn, which was proper to India, should be known to them?

But we have another, and that a stronger argument, against this
interpretation; namely, that we account the report of this Unicorn to be a mere
fable, and that no such animal, as this is described and commonly believed to
be, is at present in the the world, or ever was. For Clesias, a most vain man,
and who, moved only with a love to lying, has b^ought in very many, and those
most monstrous figments in his books of the Indians, is the father of this
story, from whom Pliny, Aelian, and all who have written of the Unicorn,
received and took it up.

And that Clesias lied, as in many other things, so in this also, we may hence
conjecture, because this animal was never seen at Rome; in whose shows, all the
rarest animals which this half part of the world, containing Asia, with Europe
and Africa, ever produced, were wont to be presented to public vi^^^, and
those not only fetched from within the bounds of the Roman power, but from the
Empire of the Parthians, and from the furthest parts of India and Aethiopia.
For to omit many other wild beasts, Tigers, etc. (none of which were bred in
the Roman Territories) Rome often saw Rhinocerotes, which are bred only in
India. So that Aristides spoke but the truth in his Encomium of Rome, when he
said, All things meet here, whatsoever is bred or made; and whatsoever is not
seen here, is to be reckoned among those things which are not, nor ever were.
Seeing then, in those many ages, wherein that custom continued, of showing the
strangest beasts that could be found all the world over at Rome, the Unicorn,
among all the strange beasts, was never seen there, it gives a ground of strong
suspicion, that there is no such animal in the whole compass of nature.

M^reover, in these times, wherein no corner of the world has been unsearcht,
and all things in them as well known to us, as those which are bred a^ our own
homes; ^he (...) is no man will say, that he ever saw this animal, except
Ludovicus Vartomannus, who writes that he had seen two. But it weakens his
credit in this report, both that he is found in other matters to tell fables
for truths, as also, because what he says of the Unicorn, differs so much from
what has been said by others. Certain it is, that Garcias ab Horto, in those
many years which he spent in India, as Phycisian to the Kings Vicegerent (in
all which time, he had great acquaintance with very many learned men of that
Country, and had the favor of their Kings, and was himself a most diligent
searcher after such like matters, He, I say) did not only not see any Unicorn
there, but could not get any certain information concerning him; only he met
with some persons, who told him, that in the furthest parts of Africa they had
seen a beast having but one horn. Yet, suppose these men told him the truth, it
makes nothing as to the Unicorn so much spoken of, with which that, according
to their observation, has little agreement; that being an Amphibion, and
having a horn not passing two handfuls in length. My own Countryman also,
Johannes Hugonis Linschotius, who was an industrious inquirer after Natural
things, having resided twelve whole years in the City Goa, one of the most
famous among all the Cities of India, and to which is brought whatsoever is
rare and of esteem in those Countries, did never see an Unicorn, nor yet hear
by any worthy of credit, that there was any such animal in all those parts, and
therefore accounts the report of an Unicorn to be merely fabulous; as may
appear by what he writes in the 47th Chapter of his Itinerary; where speaking
of the Rhinocerote he says, that is taken by many for the Monocerote or
Unicorn: Forasmuch as no other Unicorn is found or known, but only in reports
and pictures.

We have showed what moves us not to assent to them, who say, that by the word
Reem, we are to understand the Unicorn. And they who render it the Rhinocerote,
may with no l^ss ease be refuted. And the first argument brought against the
former exposition, may serve here; seeing the Rhinocerote is only bred in those
remotest parts of the East, Bengata, Patane and Cambaya, all which lie beyond
the River Ganges, in the utmost India.

But besides this, there are two other unanswerable arguments against that
interpretation.

First, From their horns. Those animals called Reem have very large horns, but
the Rhinocerotes have very small ones: And though Martial the Poet seems to say
the contrary, while speaking of the Rhinocerote, he says, How powerful was he
with his horn, who could toss a Bull with it like a Ball! And though Nicolaus
Contius in his Itinerary, reports it as long as a man's arm, yet experience and
eyesight have confuted them; to which it appears, that the horn of the
Rhinocerote is very thick and strong at the root, yet very short: For Gesner
tells us, that his horn planted upon his Nose, rises no higher than his Ears,
and therefore it cannot be long. Bucer makes use of this argument, in his
Commentary upon the 2d Psalm, affirming that the hight of the horn, ascribed to
that animal the Reem, will not agree with the Rhinoceros.

The Second argument is grounded upon the unconquerable fierceness of that
animal called Reem; whereas the Rhinocerote, though with some difficulty, may
be in some measure tamed, as has been seen in those at several times brought
into Portugal.

Thus laying aside (for the reasons forementioned) that interpretation, which
makes this Reem to be either the Unicorn or the Rhinocerote, we are now to
consider what animal this Reem should be: And surely it cannot but be some
beast (Bubulo generi affinis) of the race of Bulls or Bullocks; seeing in many
places of Scripture, mention is made of the Reemim and Bullocks together, as
intimating that they are animals of a near cognation or likeness, Deuteronomy. 33.19.
Psalm. 27.6. Isa. 34.6, 7. In this last place the Prophet having named three
living Creatures of one kind ( ver. 6.) to wit, Lambs, and Goats, and Rams;
Reason may persuade our belief, that in the 7th or following verse (which seems
to run parallel with the former) the Prophet observes the same rule of
speaking; and to those two Bullocks and Bulls, joins this third called Reemim,
being beasts belonging, at least, to the same kind with them.

I find the same confirmed Psalm. 22. by comparing those words of the 12. verse,
Many Bulls have compassed me; strong Bulls of Bashan have beset me round; with
those of the 21. (which answer them) Save me from the Lions mouth, hear me (we
read, thou have heard me) from the horns of the Reemims (we rendered Unicorns)
as if the Psalmist intended under the word Reemim, a sort of beasts much like
in kind, if not of the same kind, with the Bullocks and strong Bulls of Bashan,
spoken of before (as the learned Author endeavors there to make out more
largely and distinctly) to whom I refer the Reader.

By what has been said, I suppose we have made it appear plainly, that the
beast meant by this word Reem, is an animal near in kind to the Bull or
Bullock, which can be no other than a wild Bull or Bullock, which is to other
Bulls or Bullocks, as wild Swine, B^ars or Sows, are to those which are tame,
or live and feed about our houses. But seeing there are several sorts of these
wild Bulls or Bullocks, we do not conceive the word Reem, to be a common
appellation which may be given to them all, but that it signifies some one
certain sort among them. To find out which, will not be hard to those who
consider what the Scripture holds out concerning the beast there called Reem;
namely, the eminent greatness of his horns, and the eminent greatness of his
strength; both which are ascribed to him, not only Deuteronomy 33.17. and Psalm.
22. but Psalm. 92.10. My horn shall thou exalt, like to the horn of a Reem; i.
e. Thou shall exalt it greatly and strongly, even like the horn of a Reem. This
makes it evident, that this Reem cannot be that beast which Aristotle calls
Bonasus, nor that which later Writers call Bubalus or Bufalus (we in English, a
Buffe) which is so far from being better fitted by his horns, for fight and
force, than our Bulls, that his horns are indeed altogether unfit for either;
as Aristotle shows ( lib. 3. de part. Anim. cap. 2.) his horns being turned
inward, and one against the other, and therefore (as he says, lib. 9. Hist.
Animal. cap. 45.) are unuseful for his own defense. The horns indeed of some of
those beasts, are of another fashion, as Gesner describes them, and also
Scaliger, Exerc. 206. Sect. 3. but all concludes them unfit to fight with,
because they all are either turned one against another, or point downward.

Now though this beast which Aristotle calls Bonasus, others Bubalus or
Bufalus, be of such great strength, as also of such fierceness and
untractableness, as may well suit the description which the Scripture gives of
the Reem; yet the form and fashion of his horns will by no means comply with
it, notwithstanding it must be granted, that they who have expounded Reem by
that beast, have spoken more probably, and have come much nearer the truth,
than they who understand by it, either the Unicorn or the Rhinocerote.

There remains two sorts of wild Oxen, Bulls or Bullocks, the Vrus and Bisons;
which latter is so like the Bonasus, that by some he is taken for the same; yet
between the Bisons, properly so called, and the Bonasus of Bufalus, their horns
make a very remarkable difference. What the form of the horns of the Bufalus
is, has been showed; but the Bisons have them a little bowing in the top or
point, in which respect they are compared by Oppianus to brazen fish-hooks, but
in the rest or body of them they spread upward, or stand right up, and not so
unfit to fight with, insomuch that some have called them (Leth^feros tauros)
deadly Bulls. And though we grant to Gesner (who denies the Bonasi and
Bisontes to differ in specie) that the difference which is between the horns of
these two beasts, is not sufficient to constitute a specifical difference
between them; yet when besides the difference in their horns, there are other
constant differences, as namely, that the beast called Bonasus does not fight
with his head, but with his heels, and runs away as soon as wounded (as
Aristotl^ reports of him, lib. 9. Hist. cap. 45.) whereas the beast called
Bisons, uses his horns only in sight, and is not at all discouraged by being
wounded, but like a Boar or a Lion, assaults his pursuers the more fiercely (as
is set forth at large by Sigismundus Liber, in Muscovieticis) therefore we may
well conclude, that there is a specifical difference between these animals.

Now though the beast called Bisons, considering the greatness and strength of
his horns, as also his fierceness, might be taken for the beast in Job, called
Reem, yet he is not that beast, because he may be tamed by the art of man, and
made to put off his fierceness; as appears abundantly out of a good Author. But
as for the beast called Reem, Pansoni as in Phocicis.
he never gives over the fierceness of his nature, nor can he be tamed or
brought to hand; as appears fully, by what God says of him in this 39th
Chapter of the book of Job. In which, when God had proposed the more remarkable
properties of several creatures to the consideration of Job, he brings in this
beast, called Reem, only to set forth this property, the unsubduable or
untameable fierceness of his nature. So that all that God says of him, may be
reduced to this; That the Reem can neither by the skill nor power of man be
brought to the yoke, nor made serviceable to man in any way, when as many other
wild beasts, no less eminent than he for strength and fierceness, even Lions,
Tigers, Elephants, Leopards, Bears, Rhinocerotes, have laid down their
immanity, and become mild, and have suffered themselves to be managed and
governed by men, yea, and learn to acknowledge their Masters, and serve them;
whereas such tractableness might rather be expected from the Reem (he being of
the Bullocks kind, and living upon grass) than from any of them; all which,
except the Elephant and Rhinocerote are ravenous, and delighting in blood and
slaughter, live upon spoil and prey.

And that we may the more wonder at the unsubduable nature of the Reem, the
Lord shows the same to be in the wild Ass, a weak and ha^mless animal, and
which has neither strength nor inclination to do hurt; than which nothing can
be said or imagined more wonderful, that wild Asses, whole flocks of which,
even a single boy will put to flight and chase, yet will by no means be tamed,
whereas Tigers and Lions, one of which will stand a band of armed men, and
sometimes put them to flight, should notwithstanding be tamed, even to yield
servile obedience. No other reason can be given of this, but only, because it
has seemed good to God, the Author of nature, to order it so.

Now in that God is pleased to discover the untameable nature of the Reem by
these marks or signs, namely, that he scorns to plow the ground, or do any work
that belongs to Husbandry. Hence it does more clearly appear, which we have
above confirmed by many Scriptures, that the Reem is an animal of the same kind
with Bullocks; forasmuch as the sense of the discourse of God about him, is as
if he had said, Seeing among those beasts which are prepared by men to help
them in their work, and whose labor they ease in tilling and subduing the
earth, the Ox is chief, as being man's most laborious helper in husbandry, and
which in most Countries is more used in it than any other beast, according to
that ( Prove. 14.4.) Much increase is by the strength of the Ox. How comes it to
pass, that men do not make use of the Reem for those services, seeing he is of
the same kind with Oxen, and so may seem to be made by nature for that purpose
as much as other Oxen, and is by so much the fitter for that service, than any
other Oxen or Bulls whatsoever, by how much his strength is greater than
theirs, yet no man attempts to use him in it; or if any did, it were to no
purpose, forasmuch as I the Lord of nature have created this beast, as also the
wild Ass before spoken of, altogether untameable. This seems to be the meaning
of God in his discourse about the Reem. And hence also it appears, that the
Reem is not the Bisons, seeing he, as well as many other wild beasts, being
skilfully handled, proves tame and gentle, and may be formed to the use and
obedience of man.

It remains therefore, that this Reem is the beast called Vrus, because this
property of untameableness is ascribed to that beast. Caesar in his 6th book of
the Gallican war, says, The Vri, no not the young ones, will not be tamed by
men, wherefore being caught in pits, they are killed. Pliny also says as much
of them, Lib. 8. cap. 21.

And as in this particular, his untameable wildness, there is a full agreement
between the Vrus and Reem, so those other things which the Scripture speaks of
the Reem agree to him also, as those foreign Authors witness, who have written
his History. For Caesar writes, that he is in bigness, little less than an
Elephant, but of the kind, color and figure, or shape of a Bull. And Pliny in
two places ( lib. 8. cap. 15. lib. 28. cap. 10.) names wild Oxen as the Genus,
with respect both to the Vri and Bisontes.

The learned Doctor adds many more proofs out of ancient Authors, which the
Reader may peruse, if he please, at his leisure. And from all he concludes,

It is not therefore to be doubted, but that the Reems are the Vri; and indeed
so much the less, because not only the Northern Regions (in diverse parts of
which, it is said by Writers, that not only the Bisontes, but Vri, are found at
this day) are the proper soil where these Animals are bred, but the Eastern
parts also bring them forth. Pliny writes, that the Indian woods are full of
them, and so does Aristotle, I collect also out of Diodorus (lib. 3.) that the
Country of the Trogloditicks, which is seated at the bosom of the Red Sea,
opposite to Africa, has these Vri in it.

And though no Author does affirm, that Syria and Palestine yield these wild
Oxen, yet this does not hinder, but that in old times, when the Israelites
first inhabited those Countries, they were there; since it is no new thing,
that the whole kind of some wild creatures should be utterly extinct in these
Countries, where formerly they have abounded, of which England gives us a plain
testimony in Wolves. Dion also reports the same of Lions, which sometimes were
bred in some parts of Europe, but now for many ages have not appeared there.
And the same witnesses Ammianus (lib. 22.) concerning the Hippopotami in
Egypt, of which none are to be found now in that Country.

Thus far the learned Doctor, whose discourse may be of much advantage and
profit to the Reader, for the better understanding of this place.

But I find he has a great Antagonist, who though he agrees with him in the
negative part of his opinion and discourse, Bocha^tus part poster. l. 3. c. 27.
That the Reem here spoken of in Job, is neither the Unicorn nor the
Rhinocerote, nor the Bufalus, nor the Bisons; yet he does not agree with him in
the affirmative part of his opinion, that the Reem is that savage beast or wild
Ox called Vrus; but first gives a large account why the Reem cannot be that
beast called Vrus, nor any of that kind; and then concludes, that it is a kind
of Goat, or of the Goatish kind, by name the Oryx, being an animal in color
pure white, in stature tall, in disposition fierce and untractable, in his gate
stately, lifting up his head and horns on high. That this beast is the Reem
here spoken of, he proves by various testimonies, taken especially out of the
ancient Arabian, Chaldean, and Hebrew Writers, and endeavors to remove several
objections arising from the seeming incompetency of any beast of the Goatish
rank or kind, to answer the description given of that noble animal called Reem,
both in the Text and in many other places of Scripture.

Thus the learned are much divided in opinion about this creature, and upon
which to determine is not easy.

Yet because the word Reem is every where in Scripture rendered by our
Translators (as also by many others of great authority) Unicorn; I shall leave
that matter of difference to the Readers judgment, and do that reverence to
our Translation, as to open the Text distinctly, in all that is here said by
the Lord concerning the Reem, under that name or title, Unicorn.

Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee? In these words, the Lord presents
man, as it were, inviting, wooing, hiring the Unicorn to serve him. But when he
has used all his skill and cunning, when he has done his best and worst too,
that is, used all manner of means, the Unicorn will not by any means be wrought
upon, to come under man's yoke, or do his work. Will the Unicorn Be willing to
serve thee?

To will, is an act of reason, and therefore to be willing, is not proper to
irrational Animals; yet to will and to be willing, may allusively be given to
them: They have a kind of will, and an understanding befitting their kind.
(...) voluit propensa animo suit unde (...) pater, a propensa voluntate erga
liberos.
The Hebrew word signifies to will with much readiness and propensity of mind,
it signifies willingness with delight; and thence comes the Hebrew word for a
Father, because a Father is willing and ready to take care of, and provide for
his children, though it cost him much travel and pains. But,

Number acquiescet aut consentiet ex suapte natura, ut tibi subjiciatur?
Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee? will he be a ready servant to thee?
he will not. As if it had been said, The Unicorn is an indocible, and an
untractable animal; he will not be brought to hand, he will neither bear the
yoke, nor wear the bridle; nor endure to be harnessed like the Ox and Horse;
let man do what he will, what he can with him, he will neither go to Plow nor
Cart, not he.

Hence note, First; Service should be done with willingness, or with the will.

It is the commendation of a servant, when he does his Masters work with his
will, more than with his hand. Man should be as willing to serve, as he is to
be served, as willing to obey, as to rule; nor does any man know truly how to
command, but he that knows how to obey, and when called, is willing to obey in
the service of God; nothing is done to him, unless it be done with the will,
and therefore the full effect of the work of the grace of God upon the heart of
man, is comprehended in this one word ( Psalm. 110.3.) Thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy power. They were once like the Unicorn in the Text,
that will not serve; but in the day of thy power, when the word comes upon them
in the power of the Spirit, they shall serve with all manner of dutiful
readiness and willingness. Some men are not at all wrought to the service of
God; others serve him but are not willing to serve, they do it by constraint,
not willingly; for base fear of loss, or for baser hope of filthy lucre, not of
a ready mind; upon which carnal terms the Apostle Peter warns the Ministers of
the Gospel, to take heed they feed not the flock of God (1 Epist. 5.2.) Nothing
but a day of power conquering the will, renders us willing to serve Christ,
willing to submit to the yoke of Christ, to be bound in his furrow, and to
harrow the valleys after him, that is, to do any work that he calls us to.
Service should be with the will, and it is so by grace. That Is the first thing
which the nature of the Unicorn is against, as to the service of man; he has
no will to it.

Secondly, Note; Some beasts have a kind of willingness to serve man.

That some beasts have such a willingness, is more than employed, while it is
said, that some have not. As the wild Ass before was spoken of in opposition to
the tame, so here the Unicorn is spoken of in opposition to the Ox or Horse;
who though they are not properly willing to serve, yet they will not always
refuse service, but freely at last, or after a while, take the yoke and receive
the bridle. The Apostle says ( Romans 8.20.) The creature is made subject to
vanity, not willingly. The creatures are not willing to serve the lusts of men,
yet many of them are willing to serve the occasions and necessities of men.
It Is through the sin of man that the creature is made subject to vanity; but it
is through the appointment of God that the creature is made subject to duty,
and that with a kind of willingness.

Thirdly, It Is said here of the Unicorn, as of the wild Ass before; Can thou
make him willing? when thou have used fair means, foul means, one way or other,
will he serve thee? he will not.

Hence note; It is hard to change nature.

Naturam ex pelias furca licet usque recurret. La^pus pilum non antevum mut^t.
Beasts hold fast their natural qualities. The Horse, the Bullock, who are tame
by nature, will come to hand; but the wild Ass and the Unicorn, whose nature is
quite opposite to service, will never be broken nor brought to it: Thrust out
nature with a fork it will return again. Till nature is quite altered and
changed, acts will not change. It Is thus with man, considered in nature, who as
he is compared to a wild Asses Colt ( Chap. 11.12.) so he may be compared to an
Unicorn. Will man be willing to serve God? no, not by any moral persuasions;
no, nor heartily, he may hypocritically, by any outward benefits, nor by any
hard usages. Though (as Solomon says, Prove. 27.22.) thou should bray a fool
in a mortar among wheat, with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart
from him. A carnal man will never submit quietly to duty, till God has changed
his nature, and made him a new man, or, till his mind is renewed after the
image of God. Conversion is first a change of our nature, and then of our way.
This makes conversion so difficult a work. Good education and humane
instructions, may change a man's way, but nothing less than the power of God can
change his nature. Man is naturally as unwilling to serve God, as the wild
beasts are to serve man: He is as stout and as stiff as the Unicorn, as cruel
and fierce as the Lion, as crafty as a Fox, as crooked and cross as any
creature; unless his heart be changed, he will never to purpose change his
course. Man cannot change the course of the Unicorn, because he cannot change
his nature; and could not God change man's nature, he could never really change
his course.

Fourthly, Observe; That any of the creatures, especially strong ones, are
brought to hand, or to the service of man, must be ascribed to the power and
goodness of God.

The Horse would no more serve man than the Unicorn, nor would the Ox serve man
more than the wild Ass, unless the Lord had put another spirit or disposition
into them, than he has done into the Unicorn.

Fifthly, Observe; That any of the creatures are unserviceable to man, is to be
ascribed to the sin of man.

At first, all creatures were subject to man; not only the Horse, and the Ox,
and all the now tame creatures, but the fiercest Lions, Tigers, Bears,
Unicorns, were all in subjection to man, according to that sovereign power
given man by God, in the day that God made him ( Genesis 1.27, 28.) So God created
man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female
created he them. And God blessed them, and said to them, be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the
fishes of the sea, and over the fowls of the air, and over every living thing
that moves upon the earth. The original grand Charter of man's Sovereignty, was
extended over the Unicorn and the Lion, etc. And therefore when creatures are
not willing to serve man, especially when they rise up against man, let man
remember his sin in not obeying the Sovereign command of God. Had not man been
unwilling to submit to and serve God, Quod non omnia animalia homini serviunt
signum est and po^na peccati.
no creature had been unwilling to serve man. We may see our own neglect or
refusal to serve God, in the refusal of any creature to serve us; we may see
our own rebellion against God, by the rebellion of the creatures against us.
Unless man had departed from God by sin, none of the creatures had departed
from their subjection to man. The sin of man loosed the creatures from that
bond of service to man, in which, and to which they were created.

Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee? Observe, Sixthly; Those Creatures
which will not do service unto man, but live merely to themselves, are wild or
fierce.

These clearly resemble the condition of those men who live only to themselves,
or who serve none but themselves. Whatever some men do they serve themselves
only, they respect no man's good, either spiritual or temporal, besides their
own; were it not that they had a chief respect to their private ends and
interests in serving, they would never serve. A gracious spirit is willing to
serve his neighbor, to serve his brother, as well as or with himself. Christ
tells us, his Disciples should be so far from serving themselves only, that
they should not serve themselves at all; he that will be my Disciple (says our
Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 16.24.) Let him deny himself, that is, not serve nor
seek himself, either contrary to the good of others, or with a neglect of their
good. Therefore they who in all they do, do all for themselves, live upon no
better terms, nor to any nobler ends, than the Unicorn or wild Ass, who are not
willing to serve any man. Let others sink or swim (say such) they care not,
they will look to their own.

Seventhly and Lastly, Though God has made a sort of creatures that (as the
case stands) will not serve man, nor contribute any help to him; yet these
creatures live not in vain to God, nor are they altogether unserviceable to
man, though they have no will to serve him. For,

First, They declare the power and wisdom of God, both in making and governing
them, and in that they declare his praise. God would not give any creature a
being, that did not one way or other, set forth his praise in the world;
there is much of God shining in those creatures, which man has no service by (
Psalm. 148.) Praise him ye Dragons, and all Deeps. Dragons praise God, they
raise up a revenue of glory to God, though man get no service from them.

Secondly, Such creatures adorn the universe; the world is beautified with
their variety.

Thirdly, Even such creatures serve man when they are dead, though they will
not while they live; some parts of them are Medicinal, and many useful to man.
The Unicorn, who will serve no man living while he lives, yet his horn is
accounted a great Antidote against Poison, and so is a means to prevent the
death or prolong the life of many men. So then, there is no creature but is
serviceable to God and man some way or other. And though it may be truly said
of some men, as of the Unicorn, with respect to man, they will not serve God,
yet God has service by them. Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee?

Or abide by thy Crib? A Crib is that in which an Ox or an Ass feeds, ( Isa.
1.3.) The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; that is, the
vessel in which he uses to be fed. Solomon says ( Prove. 14.4.) Where no Oxen
are, the Crib is clean, that is, the Crib is not used, and so remains clean. If
none come into a Room, the Room is clean. In one sense, where Oxen are, the
Crib is clean, that is, they eat up all the fodder put into it. But in Solomon's
sense, where no Oxen are the Crib is clean, because no fodder is put into it.
The Lord having said, the Unicorn will do no work, adds also, he will not abide
by thy Crib. As he will do thee no service, so he will put thee to no charge;
that is a piece of ingenuity in the Unicorn, as he does no work for man, so he
looks for no wages nor reward from man: which may be a reproof to those men,
who are very unwilling to serve others, yet are very willing to abide by their
Crib; they like it well to eat and drink upon you, as long as you will, and
possibly whether you will or no, but will not do a stroke of work; Such a one
we call proverbially a Lurdane, from the lazy Danes, who long since Lording it
in this Kingdom, would eat and drink in a good well-stored house, but refused
all labor. The Unicorn is to be commended above such idle drones, who use
their teeth more than their hands, as if they were born only to feed their
bellies, or to live upon the sweat of other men's brows; for he has a kind of
honesty in him, as he does you no work, so he will not trouble your Crib.

Hence note; Some creatures will rather run the adventure of starving, than
work for their living.

They will rather endure hunger and thirst, than be put upon labor. There is
much of this also in some men's spirits; it is so with all those whom Solomon
calls sluggards; they prefer hunger and ease (which some calls a dogs life)
before plenty with industry, and a threadbare back before a sweating brow.

Secondly, From the connection, in that the Text says, will he serve thee? will
be abide by thy Crib?

Note; Whomsoever we call to our service, we should provide a Crib for him.

We ought to feed those that do our work. If the Unicorn would labor, he
should not want a Crib, nor should any laboring man want a Table; It were a
most unrighteous thing in the sight of God and Man if he should. As the Apostle
gives the rule (2 Thessalonians. 3.10.) He that will not work, let him not eat; so on
the contrary, he that does work, all the reason in the world he should eat;
therefore the Apostle James (Chap. 5.4.) denounces a woe against rich men, for
detaining or keeping back, either in whole or in part, the hire of the
laborers who had cut down their harvest. Hire kept back, cries; for what? for
wrath and vengeance upon them that detain or keep it back. The law of God given
by Moses (Deuteronomy. 24.15.) commanded that the laborers hire should be paid him
presently; his hire was not to be kept from him, no not for a night. As if the
Lord had said, he has been willing to serve thee all the day, therefore let
him carry his wages home at night, to comfort his Wife and Children. The Lord
is very jealous in this thing; if a beast serve he must have a Crib; Moratur ad
praesepe D^mini, qui verbo Dei audiendo indesinenter d^t operam. August.
and shall not man?

One of the Ancients applies this in a spiritual sense, to hearing the Word of
God: The wicked will not serve God, nor will they abide by his Crib; they will
not come where their souls may be fed to eternal life, where they may have
clean Provender, as the Prophet speaks ( Isa. 30.24.) that is, sound and
wholesome doctrine, directing them both what to believe, and how to live, that
they may be saved and live for ever.

The Lord having in this 9th verse set forth the lawless life of the Unicorn;
First, By his unwillingness to serve man; Secondly, By his independence upon
man for his livelihood: Proceeds to confirm and illustrate the same thing, the
stoutness or pride of the Unicorn, and so his utter unserviceableness unto man,
by his refusal to be engaged in any of those labors which are necessary to
husbandry. First, The Plowing, Secondly, The Harrowing of the ground. Thirdly,
The Inning or Bringing home of the corn.

His refusal of the first of these services, we have in the former part of the
next or tenth verse.

Verse. 10. Can thou bind the Unicorn with his band in the furrow? Thou can
not. Beasts use to be bound with cords to their work, they will hardly else
abide by their work. Neither reason nor religion binds beasts to their work,
(...)
therefore cords must. The word here rendered to bind, signifies very fast and
strong binding, and such is binding with cords. Moses uses the word ( Deuteronomy.
11.18.) with respect to the Divine Law, which God commanded the people of
Israel, to bind as frontlets between their eyes, and so to hold them fast for
ever. The word is used also ( Neh. 4.6.) to note the fixing of stones in a
Building or Wall, by Lime, Cement, or Mortar, And all the Wall was joined
together unto the half thereof; that is, the Wall was fastened and cemented
half high. Now says the Lord, Can thou bind the Unicorn? (...) proprie funis
densus, and crassus cujusmodi est lorum quo boves aut equi ad arat^um ligantur.
Drus. Fune suo forte vau in (...) paragogicum est, qu^le in (...) filius, aut
fune suo dicit, quia tunc ipsius erit, cum eo Vincietur. Drus.
Can thou make him fast with his bands: The word signifies a thick and
strong band, which will hold pulling and not break; A threefold cord (says
Solomon Eccles. 4.12.) is not easily broken. Can thou bind the Unicorn in his
band? Some make the Pronoune his in the Hebrew to be only Paragogical, without
any necessary signification in the construction; but I conceive there is
somewhat peculiar in it, when he says, can thou bind the Unicorn with his
band. Every beast has his special band or way of fastening to his work; so
that, when it is said, Can thou bind the Unicorn with his band? it seems to
sound as if it had been said, have thou a proper band for the Unicorn, as I
know thou have for other beasts, the Horse, Ox, and Ass? have thou a band
which will hold him to his work? I know among all thy tackling, thou have none
will do it; he will break thy bands, and cast thy cords from him, as stubborn
and proud men are said to do the bands and cords, that is, the laws and
commands of God ( Psalm. 2.2.) Many beasts have their bands, the Unicorn will
have none, he will not be bound; or if he be, he breaks his bands, and refuses
to obey; either he will not come to hand, nor admit bands or cords to be put
upon him, or he strives against them and casts them off. In a word, it is as if
the Lord had said; Thou can not get the Unicorn into his gears (as the
Husband man speaks) thou can not harness him as thou do a horse, nor yoke
him as thou do an Ox, to Plow or Cart; he will not touch thy work. Can
thou bind the Unicorn with his band, In the Furrow, or for the Furrow, or to
the Furrow.

The Plough makes Furrows, (...) porca, terra inter duos sulcos clata porcam
appellant, vel quod frumenta porriga^, vel quod aquam porro arceat. Drus.
Sulcus, porca, and lira, sunt arationis parts.
and Furrows laid together make Ridges: Both are expressed ( Psalm. 65.10.) Thou
waterest the Ridges thereof abundantly, thou setlest the Furrows thereof. Can
thou bind the Unicorn with his band in the Furrow?

Or will he Harrow the Valleys after thee? When the Plough has laid the
Furrows, harrowing follows. The Plow leaves the clods too gross for the
reception and growth of the seed; therefore the Harrow is employed to break the
Plowed ground yet more, and to crumble the clods yet finer. We find both these
parts of Husbandry set down ( Isa. 28.24.) Does the Plowman Plow all day to
Sow? does he open and break the clods of the ground? when he has made plain
the face thereof? does he not cast abroad the fitches, etc? Here Is a
description of this work of the husbandman Plowing and Harrowing, or making
plain the face of the ground, all in an allegory, intending a very spiritual
work of God, in breaking and harrowing the heart of man by affliction, and
making it thereby fit to receive the seed of the Word. Thus also spoke the
Prophet ( Hos. 10.11.) Judah shall plow, and Jacob shall break his clods, that
is, Jacob shall Harrow. The Prophets meaning is, that the Lord would bring them
into a laboring state of life, even into captivity, where they must Plow,
because they had Plowed iniquity, and had not Plowed up the Fallow ground of
their hearts by repenting of their iniquity. Will the Unicorn Harrow The
Valleys after thee?

Some render the word, Furrows, which lie like Valleys between the Ridges. But
the word more properly signifies Valleys; and they are most commonly Plowed
and Sowed with Corn, as Hills are reserved for Pasture. Will he Harrow the
Valleys After thee?

That is, will the Unicorn be led by thee? The Harrower goes before the Horse,
or that which draws the Harrow, and the beast follows; or thus, will he
Harrow the Valleys

After thee? That is, after thou have Ploughed them. As if the Lord had said,
will he either be driven or led? thou can not make him Harrow? thou can not
lead him on in that work. Thus we have the Unicorns refusal of those labors,
in which other beasts, the Ox and the Horse especially, are very commonly used.

Now for as much as the Husband-mans work is described, by Plowing and
Harrowing.

Note, First; We cannot get our ordinary food without much labor.

The Husband-mans life, is a painful life; Plowing and Harrowing are hard
labors; and what is all this for? but to bring forth the necessaries of man's
life, bread to strengthen man's heart, and by consequence what ever else is food
for man. Adam was commanded to dress the Garden, and to keep it, (Genesis 2.15.)
Adam was not put into that pleasant Garden, only to take his pleasure and to
eat the fruit of it; but he was put into the Garden to dress it, and to keep
it. Even Adam was to eat upon his labor, though not such labor as man now
eats upon; that came in by sin after the fall; labor was imposed upon man,
not only as a duty, but as a penalty. It was imposed upon man before the fall
as a duty, but it was imposed upon man after the fall as a penalty, ( Genesis
3.17, 18, 19.) Cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shall thou eat of
it all the days of thy life. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread,
till thou return unto the ground. Our ordinary bread is not easily come by;
remember the Husband-mans labor. Hence the Apostle, when he would show what
pains God takes, either immediately by the work of his Spirit, or mediately by
the labor of his Ministers, to convert and build up souls in the faith, he
tells us (1 Cor. 3.9.) That we are Gods husbandry, and Gods building. As if he
had said, great pains has been or must be bestowed upon you, that your souls
may be saved, and that ye may bring forth fruits of righteousness unto eternal
life. The Lord has his spiritual Plow-men, his Laborers, his Oxen; by these
the faithful and industrious Ministers of the Gospel are emblem'd, and set
forth in the holy Scriptures, (1 Cor. 9.10. Rev. 4.7.)

Note, Secondly; There is no Sowing without Plowing.

You must stir up and break the ground, before you cast the seed into it; it is
not else fit to receive the seed, and improve it for a harvest. The Scripture
speaks first of Plowing, then of Sowing ( Isa. 28.24, etc.) The Plowman opens
the earth, and breaks the clods before he casts in his seed, the cumin, the
fitches, and the principal wheat. He does not Plow for Plowing sake, but for
Sowing; and when he has Plowed he leaves not his work, till he has Sowed
what he Plowed. This method does the Lord use in his spiritual husbandry; the
Plow of repentance must break up the Fallow ground of the heart, and the Harrow
must smooth the face of the soul, before it be fit to bring forth. The Spirit
makes frequent use of these Metaphors ( Jer. 4.6.) Plow up the Fallow ground of
your hearts; read also ( Hosea 10.12.)

Further, Harrowing comes after Plowing, and either before or immediately after
sowing (there is some variety as to husbandry in this point) that the seed sown
may be preserved from being devoured by the Fowls of the air, it must (unless
sowed under Furrows) be Harrowed. Harrowing helps the seed to spring more
freely, and grow more thrivingly. And thus it is also in spiritual husbandry;
When the seed of the Word is Sown, the heart must be Harrowed, else the Seed
will miscarry. In that Parable of the Sower ( Mat. 13.) some seed fell upon the
highway, which was neither Plowed nor Harrowed. This Highway ground,
signifies those careless hearers who receive the Word in a formality only; the
Fowls of the air (evil spirits) quickly picked up that, because it was not
covered by Harrowing. Now there are two Harrows, by which the Seed of the Word
cast into the Valleys and Furrows of our Hearts, is covered and secured, that
it may bring forth fruit to perfection; these are meditation and prayer. By
meditation we hide the word in our hearts, and by prayer we obtain a blessing
upon it from God, both for the securing of it, and our fruit-bearing according
to it. There are two resemblances in Scripture, setting forth the use of
meditation and prayer about the word received; The one, is chewing of the cud;
the other, is Harrowing. Clean beasts under the Law chewed the cud; and wise
men, both under Law and Gospel, Harrow their land; a godly man does both in a
spiritual way, while he meditates in the Word, and prays for a blessing upon
it. Thus husbandry for our daily bread, teaches us what course the Lord
expects we should take for our souls, that we may bring forth fruit, and answer
the end of receiving his Word. The Unicorn will not be brought to either of
these parts of the Husband-mans labor, and his refusal is aggravated in the
next Verse, by the ability which he has for both.

Verse. 11. Will thou trust in him because his strength is great? or will thou
leave thy labor unto him? The Unicorn has strength sufficient; he is a beast
stronger (say Naturalists) than either the Ox or the Horse; but, Will thou
trust him because his strength is great? The word notes trusting with much
confidence, and rest of the mind; as it is said ( Isa. 12.2.) I will trust, and
not be afraid. Confidence, upon a good ground, leads us into a full, as well as
a good security; I will trust, and not be afraid, for the Lord Jehovah is my
strength, says the believing soul in that place. But says the Lord here to
Job, Will thou trust this strong beast without fear or jealousy? Will thou
trust him, Because his strength is great? The strength or force of his body is
great, very great, but the force or stubbornness of his will, that is, his
wilfulness is far greater, (...) Proprie significat vigorem illum corporis
animalis, qui consisit in humido radicali.
even so great, that it will not suffer him to lay out the strength of his body
for the service of man. We find strength often attributed to the Unicorn in
Scripture ( Numb. 23.22.) He, (that is, God, or Israel, through the presence of
God with him, as was showed before) has as it were the strength of an Unicorn.
It Is not said, he has as it were the strength of an Horse, or of an Ox, which
are very strong creatures, but of an Unicorn; thereby implying, that the
Unicorn is a creature of such great strength, that he knew not where to find a
stronger. The Unicorn has strength enough for his work, but he has no mind to
his work; and therefore will thou trust him because his strength is great?

Hence note, First; Great strength is required for great work.

There are some works that are done, not so much by strength as by art, or as
it were, by slight of hand; such a work a feeble weak man may do: but there are
other works which require great strength; all the wit, and skill, and learning,
and cunning of men, cannot do them, unless they have a suitable, that is, a
great portion of strength for the doing of them. David (Psalm. 144.14.)
describing the temporal felicity of his people, makes this request for them,
That our Oxen be strong to labor. The labor of the Ox is great, and therefore
he needs great strength to do his work, and go through with his labor.

Note, Secondly; They who have great strength, may do great works.

Great strength is a great advantage for service. If the Unicorn would employ
and put out his strength, he might do much. Strength of body is a talent, much
may be done by that; strength of mind is an excellent talent, much more, very
much more may be done by that. But when a man has much strength of body and
mind together, what may not he do! Let those who have much strength, consider
how they use it. For a man to have the strength of an Unicorn, much bodily
strength, and make no use of it, is to become more beastly than the Unicorn. A
strong man rejoices to run a race (Psalm. 19.5.) He that has great strength,
may run a great race. A race requires great strength, and he that has
strength, or is a strong man, should rejoice to run it. A strong man, if he
have an heart and a will to his work, delights in his work more than in his
reward.

Note, Thirdly; Some have strength enough to do much work, to do great and good
things, yet are not at all to be trusted with the doing of any thing that is
great or good.

Strength is not always to be trusted. There is a twofold trust in strength;
First, There is a trust in strength as to confidence in it for success; and
thus we are not to trust any strength in the world, neither our own nor others.
Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm (Jer. 17.5.)
The arm of flesh is too weak to be trusted in, though never so strong; though
it have the strength of the Unicorn, it must not be trusted; no creatures
strength is to be trusted in, as to dependence upon it. Secondly, There is a
trusting of strength as to the using and employing of it; thus strength may be
trusted. We may trust the strong that they will use their strength for us, only
we must not rest in their strength. They who (like the Unicorn in the Text)
have great strength, and yet are not to be trusted that they will use it, are
in a much worse condition than they who have no strength to use, or to make
them any way useful. There are three sorts of men to be considered, in respect
of strength.

First, Some have a will to do more than they have strength to do; they have a
will to do more in ordinary work, than they have strength to do, and they have
a will to do more in extraordinary work and duty, than they have strength and
ability to do. The Apostle speaking of the labor of love or charity, in the
ministration of the good things of this life, to those that stand in need, thus
commends the Macedonians (2 Cor. 8.5.) For to their power, I bear them
record, and beyond their power, they were willing, etc. He means, not the
power of their bodies, but of their purses and estates. Some are willing beyond
the power of their estates, to relieve the necessities of others; and some are
willing beyond the power of their bodies, to labor not only for the supply of
their own necessities, but in any public service. To have a will to labor
according to our strength for labor, shows an honest heart; but to have a
will to labor beyond our strength for labor, shows an Heroic heart. But

Secondly, Most have strength to do more than they have a will to do; they are
like the Unicorn, and that upon a double ground: First, Some are so lazy and
idle, that they will not do what they have strength to do. Thus Solomon
describes the sluggard ( Prove. 21.5.) His hands refuse to labor. He has
strength enough in his hand, but for idleness he will do nothing. Secondly,
Others are so proud, that though they have strength enough to labor, yet they
will not; they are so stout, so stubborn, so high-minded, that they sco^n to
work or do service; they think themselves too good to take pains: I shall say
too little, if I say, these are in a very bad frame. They are right Unicorns,
who are so stout that they will not serve, nor be bound to attend any service.

There is a third sort, who have strength to do service, and they have also
will to do it; they have will, and they have strength, but they want an
opportunity to do service. This may be the case of a good man, who is like the
laboring Ox; A good man has always a will to work, and may have strength for
his work too, yet many times wants work. As they in the Parable ( Mat. 20.6,
7.) answered when questioned, Why stand ye all the day idle? It was not (so
they excused themselves) because they had no will to work, or had no strength
to work; but (say they) No man has hired us; we have not been called to work,
we know not where to have a days work. Such there are, who have will and
strength, while they want a call. Thus the Apostle spoke concerning the
Philippians (Chap. 4.10.) Ye were careful, but ye lacked opportunity. The door
was not open, and so ye could not do what ye desired, and had both a mind and
an ability to do. The point in hand leads us to the middle sort of persons
(truly shaddowed by the Unicorn) who though they have much strength to do
service, yet they have no mind to serve, but hide their Talent in a Napkin, and
put their Candle under a Bushel: These are not to be trusted, though they are
well furnished. I may say to any man concerning such men, as the Lord to Job,
concerning the Unicorn; Will thou trust them, because their strength is great?
because their strength of mind, their strength of body, their strength of
estate is great? Can we trust all rich men that they will do works of charity,
because their estate is great? Can we trust all healthy men, who have sound and
able limbs, that they will take pains, because their bodily strength is great?
Can we trust all knowing men, who have quick parts, and excellent gifts, much
knowledge, that they will go through with their work, because the strength of
their minds is great? We can hardly find any to trust, what strength soever
they have, but those who have received strength of grace from God, and so have
strength of faith in God, strength of love, strength of affections to God,
strength of zeal for God. And even they who have strength of grace, may fail
their trust very much ( Job 4.18.) Behold he put no trust in his Servants, and
his Angels he charged with folly. The Lord could not be confident of Angels,
who are mighty, in strength. If God should leave Angels to themselves, they
would soon fail; it is because Angels are confirmed by grace (Christ being the
head of Angels) that they stand fast to their work, and abide by their duty,
else the Lord could not trust Angels with all their created strength; much less
then could the Lord trust the best of Saints with all the spiritual strength he
has planted in them, did he not continually confirm them, and quicken them (to
the work which he has called them to) by his holy Spirit. No further than any
man trusts in Christ for strength, or makes Christ his strength as well as
his righteousness, is he to be trusted with the doing of any work, any more
than the Unicorn, how much soever his strength is? Many are set a work, and do
work, because their strength is great, but none (in a due sense) can be
trusted, but they who make Christ their strength, and look daily to him for it.
Will thou trust him, because his strength is great?

Or will thou leave thy labor to him? This latter part of the Verse is of the
same importance with the former, yet I shall touch a little upon it. Will thou
leave thy labor to him? Labor is taken in Scripture two ways;

First, For the very act of labor. Jacob said ( Genesis 31.42.) God has seen
mine affliction, and the labor of my hands. God knows (said he to Laban) what
pains I have taken, what hard work I have been at in thy service; and how hard
he had been at work, he told Laban (ver. 40.) Thus I was in the day, the
drought consumed me; and the frost by night, and my sleep departed from me. To
such hard work in spirituals the Apostle exhorts; Be steadfast; and unmovable,
(...) Labor, a radice (...) laboravit, defatigatus fuit.
always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord (1 Cor. 15.58.) The word in the Text which we
render labor, signifies a laboring to weariness, or a labor which causes
weariness. Strong labor, diligent labor wearieth a strong man; and though an
industrious person is not weary of his labor, yet he may be wearied with his
labor; yea, the more industrious he is in laboring, the sooner he may be
wearied with his labor.

Secondly, Labor is taken sometimes for the fruit of labor, or for that which
is got by labor; the reward, and wages given and received for work and service
done, is called labor ( Psalm. 128.2.) Thou shall eat the labor of thy hands.
No man can eat the acts of his labor, but every man should eat the fruit of
his labor; labor brings in bread, and that bread is sweetest which comes in
by labor. The Lord threateneth his people ( Deuteronomy. 28.33.) strangers shall eat
thy labor, that is, the increase that comes in or has been gotten by thy
labor, even that which thou have labored for. And it was a mercy bestowed by
the Lord upon his Israel (Psalm. 105.44.) that they inh^rited the labor of the
people, that is, they dwelt in the houses, which they had built; and enjoyed
the gardens, which they had planted; and reaped the fields, which they, the
Heathen, had sowed; In a word, they had the fruit of all their labors. Some
understand the word here in this latter sense, Will thou leave thy labor unto
him? that is, Fruges tuas labor tuo partas. Pisc.
will thou allow him any of the fruit of thy ground, seeing he refuses to work
in thy ground? surely, thou will not. Laboring cattle have somewhat for their
labor, they share in those good things which are the product of their labor
(1 Cor. 9.9.) Thou shall not muzzel the Ox that treads out the corn. But
though it is a truth, that laboring cattle eat of, and are fed with the fruit
of their labor; yet here, by labor, I understand the very act of labor, not
the fruit of it. Will thou leave thy labor to him? that is, will thou leave
thy business with him? will thou trust him with thy Plow or with thy Harrow?
And (consider the dependence) if thou dare not trust him, then thou will not
leave thy labor unto him.

Note hence, First; It is not Wisdom to leave our work to such as we cannot
trust.

Our work will be ill done, or half done, or not done at all by those that we
cannot trust. We trust those much, to whom we leave our business; and there are
three things requisite in those to whom we leave it.

First, That they have strength and ability for it; there is a necessity of
that: No wise man will trust or leave his business with him that has no
strength to do it, no ability for it.

Secondly, That they be subject and obedient to us. No wise man will leave his
business in the hand of those who acknowledge no obedience nor subjection to
him, how much strength soever they have. An unsubmitting strength will work
against us rather than for us.

Thirdly, That they be faithful. No man will leave his business to a person of
strength and in subjection to him, if he be not honest to him. Solomon has
sufficien^ly cautioned us against trusting such, while he says ( Prove. 25.19.)
Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble ('it is true also in time of
peace) is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint. A b^oken tooth cannot
chew our meat, and a foot out of joint can worse go a journey; an unfaithful
man will prove a worser servant to us, than the worst of these. And as it is
thus among men, they will not leave their business with an Unicorn, with one
that has strength, but yields no subjection, nor ever showed any faithfulness;
so God will not leave his labor, his work and service to such as are like the
Unicorn; he will not leave it in such hands, as have great ability to carry it
through, yet want obedience to his will, and faithfulness in his work. There
must be a concurrence of these three, strength, subjection, and faithfulness,
in all those to whom the Lord God, the God only wise, will leave his labor, or
commit the doing of any service for him. But where these three meet and center
in any person, strength of body and mind, submission of will, and faithfulness
to a work; how great things may they do in the service whether of God or Man?

Secondly, Observe; A will, a mind to work, or a w^lling mind to work is better
than great strength.

As the Unicorn with his great strength, so they who are like the Unicorn in
strength may do little or nothing. But they that have only a little strength,
and a mind to be doing, have done, and may do much. Little strength is a kind
of weakness, yet where there is a willing mind, weakness will do more than
great strength without a willing mind. We have a common saying; John is a good
servant when Will is at home. Willingness to work, works better than bare
strength: We have this conclusion ( Neh. 4.6.) So built we the wall (Nehemiah
spoke there of the Jews returned from Babylon) And all the wall was joined
together unto the half thereof. For the people had a mind (or as the Hebrew is,
(...)
an heart) to work. The wall of a great City being soon raised half up, the
reason given was, because they had a mind to work. The Jews at that time, were
a people under so much weakness, that the enemies j^ar'd them with it ( ver.
2.) What will these feeble Jews do? will they fortify themselves? will they
sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will they revive the stones out of
the heaps of rubbish? etc. Will they work miracles? remove mountains? But how
feeble soever they were, the work went on amain, For the people had a mind, a
heart to work. Though they were no Unicorns, no people of great strength;
though they were feeble Jews, yet they attained to half their work quickly:
Strong hearts and feeble hands, will dispatch a business better and sooner,
than strong hands and feeble hearts. It Is thus, as in corporal so in spiritual
labor, where there is a mind to the work, though we have but a little
strength, we shall do great things. This was the high commendation of the
Church of Philadelphia (Rev. 3.8.) Thou have a little strength and have kept my
word, and have not denied my name. He does a great deal of work for God, who
keeps the Word of God. But how unfit the Unicorn is, or any strong one like the
Unicorn, to be trusted, or have labor left with them, appears further in the
next verse.

Verse. 12. Will thou believe him that he will bring home thy seed, and gather
it into thy barn. (...) in Hiphil (...) credidit fisus est. Credere in Deum,
and credere Deo, synonyma sunt, reperitur etiam credere in Deo. Drus.
Here is another piece of service which the Unicorn might not be trusted with;
Will thou believe him, etc. The root-word signifies that act of faith which we
put forth upon God, for our free justification and eternal salvation, as also
for our sustentation under, and deliverance from any trouble inward or outward,
of soul or body; in and for all which the just live by faith. There is
believing God, and believing in God, both which are expressions sometimes of a
like importance; Will thou believe him, or in him, says God of the Unicorn? As
if he had said, Suppose thou could get a promise from the Unicorn, that he
will bring home, (...) quod reddat, Mont relaturum esse. Jun.
or return thy seed (so the Hebrew strictly) that he will make thy seed to
return; or (as we render fully) bring it home; Will thou take his word, or
believe him that he will keep his word, that he will indeed return or bring
home Thy seed?

Credesne quod relaturus sit somen tuum ad terras tuas? Vatab.
Seed may be taken two ways.

First, For that which is to be sowed; it is ordinary with the Husbandman, to
call that seed-corn which he reserveth for sowing. The grain or corn intended
to be sowed on the earth, is properly seed-corn; in allusion whereunto the
Psalmist says ( Psalm. 126.6.) He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing
precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves
with him. The people of God mourning and praying, sow precious seed. Believing
prayers and repenting tears never failed, nor shall ever fail, of a merciful,
of a plentiful Harvest, or of a plentiful Harvest of mercy. Some understand
this Text thus; Will thou believe that he will return thy seed? will he do this
service for thee? will he carry thy seed, which is to be sown, into the field?
But though that be a piece of service to carry the seed-corn into the field,
yet the scope of the place does not well comply with it here; and therefore
leaving that interpretation, I shall rather

Secondly, Take seed for ripe corn, or for that which is reaped; as in Haggai
(Chap. 2.19.) Is the seed yet in the Barn? That is, is the Harvest yet come in?
No, the seed is not in the Barn. So, in this place, seed is that which has
been sown and grown up, and ready to be gathered into the Barn. And that may be
taken two ways;

First, Thus: Number credes ei, quod dum humum tuam ei arandam committis, ita apt
eam arare possit ut tandem reddat tuam sementem, vel ut ex ejus labor
proveniat and crescat seges ut tandem demetatur and in aream deportatur ad
triturandum. Merc. Sperandum non est ut ager a Monocerote subactus sementem
acceptam cum usura reddat. Sanct.
Will the Unicorn by plowing and harrowing the ground, procure that thy seed
shall return again to thee? or that the seed which is sown, shall come home to
thy Barn, yielding a good crop, so returning what was sowed with advantage and
increase? Will thou believe him that he will cause thy seed thus to return home
to thee? Surely no; do not believe that he will do thee any such service, for
he will deceive thy credulity if thou do.

Secondly, Thus: Will thou believe that he will draw the cart, and so help thee
home with thy corn at Harvest? This Exposition is most favored, not only by
our Translation, but by the words following in the latter part of the verse,
both which intimate, that the seed here spoken of, is the seed reaped, rather
than that to be sowed. Will he bring home thy seed, And gather it into thy barn?

Seed to be sowed, is carried into the field, not into the barn; seed or corn
reaped, is carried into the barn, not into the field. As if it had been said,
The Unicorn will do thee no service: As he would not go to plow, so neither
will he go to cart, for the gathering of thy seed into thy barn. Sowing,
reaping, and gathering into the barn, are the three principal parts of the
Husband-mans labor; and therefore our Lord Jesus Christ showing how the fowls
of the air live purely upon the providence of God without labor, says ( Mat.
6.26.) They sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your
heavenly father feeds them.

The word which we translate Barn, is used ( Numb. 18.27. 2 Samuel 6.6.) and in
both places it is rendered, Threshing-floor. The threshing-floor is usually in
the barn, and therefore the same word may well signify both. Will thou believe
him that he will bring home thy seed, and gather it into thy barn?

Hence note, First; The labor of beasts is very profitable to man.

The Ox and Horse bring the seed home formally when it is reaped, and they bring
it home or make it to return vertually when they labor and take pains about or
for the sowing of it. The Psalmist having prayed ( Psalm. 144. verse. 13.) That
our garners may be full, affording all manner of store, presently adds ( verse.
14.) That our Oxen may be strong to labor; for (Prove. 14.4.) where no Oxen
are, the crib is clean. Not only, First, Because there is no need to fill the
crib, where no oxen are to eat up the fodder, as was showed a little before:
But, Secondly, Because where no Oxen are, there is nothing to fill it. The crib
must needs be empty, when the barn is empty; food fails both for man and
beast, where there are no Oxen. Barns and garners are full, when the Ox is
strong to labor, or because the strong Ox has been in labor: For (as it
follows) Much increase comes by the strength of the Ox. Why does Solomon
impute increase to the strength of the Ox? Surely, because the Ox being strong
is also willing to labor and lay out his strength, and so, much increase
comes by the strength and labor of the Ox, though that alone will not do it.
For that there may be an increase, these five things must concur.

First, The skill and industry of the Husbandman.

Secondly, The strength and labor of the Ox or Horse.

Thirdly, The virtue and fatness of the earth.

Fourthly, The showers and influences of heaven.

Fifthly, And above all, the blessing of God. Old Isaac said of his Son Jacob
(Genesis 27.27.) See, the smell of my Son is as the smell of a field, which the
Lord has blessed. As there is no increase without the blessing of God, how
much soever men or oxen labor, so there is great increase (the Lord adding his
blessing) by the labor of men and oxen. Labor and increase usually go
together; and where no labor is, there (except by miracle) is no increase:
Where no labor is, the barn is empty, the crib is empty, the belly is empty,
the purse is empty. Of doing nothing comes nothing, but want and misery. It Is
said, when the Ox is weariest, he treads surest: To be sure, they who are most
wearied by honest pains-taking, tread surest upon honest profit.

Secondly, observe; Seed sown is not lost, but returns and comes home again.

That which was scattered abroad in the field, is gathered into the barn. Some
may think when they see the Husbandman cast his seed into the ground, that he
casts it away; but by the labor of the Ox, by the skill of the Husbandman, and
the blessing of God upon all, the seed comes home again. Thus the Apostle
spoke in a spiritual sense; He that ploweth, should plow in hope; and he that
thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope (1 Cor. 9.10.) It should be
so according to the ordination of God, as to the faithful Ministers of God (of
whose labor in plowing up souls by the word, and sowing those souls with the
word, the Apostle there treats) And it is so through the benediction of God, as
to laborious Husbandmen and their cattle, in plowing and sowing the soil of
the earth. Yea, thus it is in all we do, our actions (good or bad) are as seed
sown, which will certainly come again, they will not be lost. Good done, will
assuredly turn to good; and evil done (and not undone by repentance) will as
surely turn to evil. The Apostle gives us this double assurance ( Gal. 6.7, 8.)
Whatsoever a man sows, that (not numerically, but specifically) shall he also
reap: For, He that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but
he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. And
thus in special, works of charity, or our distributions to the necessities of
others, are more significantly called sowing ( Psalm. 112.9.) He has dispersed,
he has given to the poor (That is, he has sowed his alms abundantly; what
then? It follows) His righteousness endures for ever, his horn shall be
exalted with honor. To give to the poor, especially to Gods poor, to the godly
poor, or to those that are made poor for Gods sake, is sowing good seed; and he
that sows thus, shall receive a fruitful crop. Grain sowed in the field, may
yield a good increase; but that which is rightly sowed in the bowels of the
poor, shall certainly yield a better. What we give, is like seed sowed in the
field, which increases thirty, sixty, an hundred fold: What we keep by us, is
like corn stored up in the garner, which we bring forth and spend, and there is
an end of it. Here Is great encouragement to do good, yea to abound in doing
good to others. What we so part with, is not lost, but sowed; it will come back
to the barn, it will come home again, and that with a great increase. And
doubtless where there has been a plowing up of the heart by a work of grace,
there will be a free sowing in every good work. And though we are not to do
good works, merely eying a return, or our personal advantage, yet we may have
an eye to it, as Moses had in his holy sufferings and services, to the
recompense of reward: yea, and take encouragement from the Lords bounty, to be
more in duty, more in charity, even unto bounty. We may consider the harvest
while we are diligent in sowing, yea, to make us more diligent in sowing.

Having thus opened the several properties of this creature, here called the
Unicorn, properly taken, and given out some meditations upon them, it will not
be (I conceive) either unuseful or unacceptable to the Reader, if for the
conclusion of the whole matter in hand, I show how the holy Scriptures,
together with some of the Ancients, make use of this creature, tropically, or
in a figure, to resemble and represent,

First, The state of the Church and people of God. Thus Moses reports Balaam
shadowing the power and blessedness of Israel, when he came and was hired to
curse them ( Numb. 23.22.) God (says he) brought them (that is, the children
of Israel) out of Egypt; he has, as it were, the strength of an Unicorn. Most
expound the word, He, collectively, concerning that whole people, as one body;
He, that is, Israel, has as it were, the strength of an Unicorn; that is, he
is exceeding strong. Some expound it of God: He, that is, God, who brought them
out of Egypt, the mighty God of Jacob, has as it were, the strength of an
Unicorn. God is indeed infinitely strong, stronger than the Unicorn. That which
is most eminent in any creature, or for which any creature is most eminent, the
Scripture often ascribes in a way of super-eminency unto God. The Lord has
strength like the strongest; and how strong soever he is, he is strong for his
Israel, yea, he is the strength of his Israel. So that if we take the word in
this latter sense, it reaches the same thing, setting forth the power and
strength of Israel, by the strength of the Unicorn; for the Lord, who is their
strength, will make them strong like Unicorns. Balaam spoke thus again ( Numb.
24.8.) God brought him (all Israel as one man) out of Egypt; he has as it
were, the strength of an Unicorn, he shall eat up the Nations his enemies, and
shall break their bones, and pierce them through with his arrows. Thus also
Moses spoke or prophesied of the Tribe of Joseph (Deuteronomy. 33.17.) His glory is
like the firstling of his Bullock, and his horns are like the horns of
Unicorns, with them shall he push the people (or peoples, the word is plural)
together, to the ends of the earth, and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim,
and they are the thousands of Manasseh. Moses sets out the fruitfulness of
Ephraim, beyond that of Manasseh, ten for one; and in both, jointly shows how
powerful, how prevailing they shall be; even, as if they pusht their enemies
with horns like those of Unicorns. In all these Scriptures, the Lord
fore-shewed the wonderful force of the Jewish Church of old, his portion and
peculiar people, by that of the Unicorn. David also (as was said before)
expresses his assurance of a prosperous condition and great success, in the
same language ( Psalm. 92.10.) He shall exalt my horn, like the horn of an
Unicorn.

And we may affirm the Israel of God are like the Unicorn, chiefly upon this
account; because their strength and defense, or their strong defense is in, and
by their horn. And if any ask, what or who is that? I answer, Jesus Christ: Of
whom, Zacharias filled with the Holy Ghost, prophesied, saying ( Luke 1.59.)
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people,
and has raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his servant
David. Jesus Christ, is callen an horn of salvation for his people, Habes in
Mono^orote exemplum fidei robustae and generosae omnem servitutem diaboli, and
mundi aspernantis, and utrique impavide resistentis. Coc. Quod nullis hominum
viribus in servitium redigi potest, significatur populus nemini servivitu^us,
quamdiu unicum Deum coleret. Theodoret. quest. 44 in numeros.


First, Because he is the Strength and Defense of his people.

Secondly, Because he is the Glory and Honor of his people. Thus the Seventy
translate that ( Number. 23.22.) he has (as it were) the glory of an Unicorn. As
Jesus Christ is called a light to lighten the Gentiles, so the glory of his
people Israel (Luke 2.32.)

Thirdly, Jesus Christ is an horn of salvation to his people, as he is (like
the horn of an Unicorn, according to report, against bodily poison) the most
Sovereign, yea, the only antidote against the poison of sin, and the infection
of the world (2 Pet. 1.4.) By him we escape the corruption that is in the
world, through lust, that is, believing in him, we are preserved from those
poisonous lusts, which corrupt and infect this world.

Secondly, Some of the Ancients and Moderns too, make the Unicorns stoutness
and stiffness of spirit against doing any work for man; an emblem of that
gracious well-tempered stoutness and resolvedness of spirit in the faithful
servants of God, against doing any work at all for the Devil, as also in
refusing to do any sinful work at the will or command of man: In which sense,
it is both their wisdom and their duty not to serve nor please men (1 Cor.
7.23. Gal. 1.10.) Thus Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered Nebuchadnezar
(Dan. 3.18.) We will not serve thy gods. These were no willful men, though they
said, We will not: Their understanding was in the answer as well as their will,
and their conscience for God, as well as either. And in this sense the Apostle,
who so often exhorts to faithfulness and diligence in the service of man,
admonishes us, Not to be the servants of men, (1 Cor. 7.23.) And in this
sense, (though he had said, I please all men, in all things for their profit,
that they might be saved (1 Cor. 10.33.) and counsels every man, to please
his neighbor for his good to edification (Romans 15.2.) yet) concludes of
himself, If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ (Gal.
1.10.)

Thirdly, The Unicorn is spoken of in Scripture, as an Hieroglyphick of those
evil men, who are enemies to the Church of God ( Isa. 34.7.) And the Unicorns
(we put in the Margin the Rhinoceros) it is this Hebrew word) shall come down
with them, and the Bullocks with the Bulls, etc. How shall the Unicorns come
down with them? Not as we come down from a hill, or high place upon our feet,
but they being destroyed shall be cast or thrown down. These Unicorns in the
Prophet, are all those proud and mighty men of the world, who oppose, oppress,
and persecute the Church of God, called out of the world to faith in Christ,
and salvation by him, as appears fully ( ver. 8.) These for their stubbornness
against the will and ways of God, are justly compared to, or called Unicorns;
For, as Unicorns will not serve men, so these will not serve God; they will
neither Plow nor Harrow, they will neither go nor come at his command.

And as the enemies of the Church, so, the enemies of Jesus Christ himself, or
they who persecuted, pursued, and afflicted him to death, are set forth under
this title, in that prayer of David a type of Christ ( Psalm. 22.21.) Save me
from the Lions mouth, for thou have heard me from the horns of the Unicorns.
Christ prayed, Save me from the Lions mouth, that is, from my greatest enemies:
Thou have heard me from the horns of the Unicorns, that is, of the Scribes and
Pharisees, of Herod and Pontius Pilate, against whom Christ had help when he
prayed, and got victory over them all, by his death and sufferings. In arcano
sermon Monoceros ferus, jugi impatiens indomitusque peccator est. Franc. Joan.
in paraph. libri Job.


Lastly, The Unicorn (according to the description here given of him) resembles
all refractory and rebellious sinners, who will by no means be reclaimed to the
service of God, who will not receive the yoke of Christ though easy, nor bear
his burden though light, but remaining obstinate and obdurate in their sins,
will only do what they will, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, and being to
every good work reprobate. And as Naturalists say of the Unicorn, he may be
slain, he will not be taken; Interemi potest, capi non potest. Plin.
so we may say of such men, they will sooner loose their lives than their
wills: They are like natural bruit beasts (of whom the Apostle Peter speaks, 2
Ephesians. 2.12.) made to be taken and destroyed. Such beasts were the Egyptians, of
whom it is said ( Psalm. 89.10.) Thou have broken Rahab in pieces, as one that
is slain. Some beasts are broken and tamed, but Egypt (called Rahab for
strength and pride, or for pride in strength) was a beast that would not be
broken and tamed by all those plagues of God poured upon it at Land, and was
therefore broken and slain in the Red Sea.

Thus we see how the Church and faithful people of God, resemble the Unicorn in
some things; as also, how the wicked of the world, or the world lying in
wickedness, resemble him in other things.

JOB, Chap. 39. Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 13. Gave thou the goodly wings
unto the Peacocks? or wings and feathers unto the Ostrich?

14. Which leaves her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in dust,

15. And forgets that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beasts may
break them.

16. She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not hers: her
labor is in vain without fear,

17. Because God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted to her
understanding.

18. What time she lifts up her self on high, she scorneth the Horse and his
Rider.


THe Lord having put several questions to Job, about the wild beasts of the
earth, questions him in this context, according to our translation, about two,
but according to some other translations and readings, about three sorts of
Fowls of the Air. Our translation mentions only the Peacock and Ostrich,
others add the Stork.

Bochartus de animalibus scriptura part poster. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Yet it is the opinion of a very late and learned Author, that the whole context
of these six verses contains the description of one Fowl only, and that the
Ostrich. It cannot be denied, but that the first verse of this context, or the
13th of the Chapter, has as various translations, by all sorts of Authors, as
any (if not more than any) in this book; yet he grants, that most who have
translated it into Latin, and all that ever he saw, who have translated it
into the Mother language, of any Country, render it, the Peacock. And therefore
referring the Reader to the perusal of his reasons and authorities, which are
many and cogent, why he interprets the word Renamim, the Ostrich, I shall only
touch at some of them in passage, as I proceed to open the Text, as it is
expressed in our own translation.

Gave thou the goodly wings unto the Peacocks? That the Hebrew word here
used, signifies a Peacock, is clear in all those Lexicographers that I have met
with. Another word is used (1 Kings 10.22.) which yet Buxtorfius says is by
some rendered Parrats, and they are often brought in ships from far Countries.
This I desire the Reader to take notice of, that there is a wonderful variety
and difference of opinion among Interpreters, about the proper names of
Animals, Plants and Gemms; and therefore no wonder if some render the word
Chasidah in the following part of this verse, which is usually taken for a
Storke, the Ostrich; and others, the word Renanim at the beginning of it,
Ostriches, which we and almost all others, render Peacocks.

The Peacock is described only by his wings in the former part of the 13th
verse, Gave thou the goodly wings unto the Peacock.

The Ostrich is described, not only by her wings and feathers, in the same 13th
verse, but by four distinct qualities, in the context of the five verses
following;

First, By her carelessness and forgetfulness of that which she should be very
tender of, her eggs, when she has laid them; this we have in the 14th and 15th
verses; Which leaves her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust, and
forgets that the foot may crush them, etc.

Secondly, She is described, by her unnaturalness to her young ones, when her
eggs are hatched; this we have at the 16th verse, She is hardened against her
young ones, as though they were not hers.

Thirdly, She is described, by that which is the reason of both the former, her
want of wisdom and understanding, at the 17th verse, which verse tells us also
whence it comes to pass, that she has so little of these excellent endowments,
even Because God has deprived her of wisdom, etc. As if he had said, if you
would know a reason, or have an account, why the Ostrich is thus forgetful of
her eggs, thus unnatural to her young ones, it is this, God has deprived her
of wisdom, neither has he imparted unto her understanding.

The Fourth thing which she is described by, is her swiftness of foot or wing,
for both are here to be taken in, testified by her scorn and contempt of her
swiftest pursuers; When she lifts up her self she scorneth the Horse and his
Rider, at the 18th verse. Thus you have the parts of this context, with respect
to these two winged Creatures or Fowls of the Air here (according to our
reading) described the Peacock and the Ostrich. Thus the Lord having showed his
unsearchable wisdom, shadowed in those other creatures formerly enquired of,
proceeds still in the same argument, though upon a different subject. The
power, wisdom and providential care of God, is manifested in and about all his
creatures; as much in and about the feathered-fowls of the Air, as the
four-footed beasts of the earth, of one kind or other.

Verse. 13. Gave thou the goodly wings unto the Peacocks. Hebraei subaudiunt
(...) number dedisti? Merc. An fecisti? Pisc.
Those words gave thou, are not expressed in the Hebrew Text; that is marvelous
concise, which has occasioned both differences and difficulties, in the
explication of it. The Text is only this, goodly wings to the Peacocks, we say,
gave thou the goodly wings unto the Peacoks? The Jewish Doctors generally
make the same supplement. Some expositors express it thus, have thou made the
goodly wings of the Peacocks? I conceive the difference is not great, whether
we read, have thou given, or have thou made? for doubtless, God in giving made,
or in making gave, The goodly wings unto the Peacocks.

Master Broughton translates proud wings. The Peacock is a beautiful bird, and
a proud one too: The Peacock is gorgeously clothed, as I may say, by the hand
of God. Gave thou the goodly wings? (...) ter tantum occurrit semel in Call.
cap. 20. l. 8 semel in Hiphtael. Pro. 7. 18. and hic in Niphal. est autem
lascivire, exultare, gloriari. Alis pavo exultat. Merc.
no, it was I the Lord, not thou, O Job, that gave the goodly wings unto the
Peacocks. The word which we translate goodly, is very proper to the Peacock;
the root of it signifies to exult, to boast, to glory, and therefore many
translate, gave thou the exulting or the rejoicing wings unto the Peacock.
Though the Peacocks wings cannot properly exult or boast, yet because they are
an occasion of exulting and boasting to this creature, therefore they may be
said to do so. Hence Master Mercer translates The Peacock boasts with his wings
or of his wings, he is filled as it were with joy, beholding his wings. And
this gives one reason why the learned Bochartus is persuaded that the Ostrich
is here intended, because the Peacock has not goodly wings as the Ostrich
has, all the most beautiful feathers of the Peacock being placed in his tail
or train, which is richly painted and adorned with various well-shadowed
colors to the eye, when he spreads his tail, and prides himself in his plumes.
But we need not stay upon this objection; the wing may well be taken for any
feathered part. As Moses says ( Genesis 7.14.) every bird of every sort, or as
the Hebrew is, of every wing, came into the Ark. And though the Peacock
boasts chiefly in his train, Penna struthionis similis est pennis herodii and
accipitris. Vulg. Quis haec legens non miretur novitatem interpretationis?
Drus. (...) deducitur a radice (...) quod est cantare, gloriari, laetari,
ovare. Quare proprie est penna, vel al^ laetantium and ovantium. Pavo est
animal gloriosum; Gemmantes quippe cum laudatur expandit colores adverso maxim
sole quia sic fulgentius radiunt, quos spectari gaudet. Plin. Quem non gemmata
volucris ^unonta caud^ Vinceret --
as being most beautiful, yet he has beauty in his wings too. Gave thou the
goodly wings Unto the Peacock?

The Vulgar Latin translates, the wing of the Ostrich, is like the wing of the
Hawke; but that translation is so wide, that one says, Who reading this,
wonders not at the strangness of the interpretation? The Greek translation of
the Septuagint is as wide and dark as that, I shall not trouble the Reader
about either, nor about many more which he may find collected, not only by
Bochartus, but by several others.

The word which we translate Peacocks in the plural number, comes from a root
which signifies to cry, or to make a loud noise, to make a cry in joy and
triumph, and so it may be rendered, The wings or feathers of rejoycers and
triumphers. The Peacock may well be so called, because he is a loud-voiced
shrieking bird, glorying as it were, and triumphing in his wings and feathers.
The very nature and qualities both of beasts and birds, are often and elegantly
expressed in the Hebrew names. Gave thou the goodly wings to the Peacocks?

Hence Note, First; God will be owned even in bestowing feathers upon the birds.

Here the Lord takes off Job from having any hand in that gift, much more from
having the sole hand in it. The workmanship of God may be seen, and is to be
acknowledged, even in this, the feathers of a bird; and if the least, the
smallest things, among good things, are of God, how much more the greatest! If
it be of God, that the Peacock has his feathers? how much more that man has
reason, that man has wisdom and understanding! how much more that man has
grace and holiness! every good gift, and every perfect gift comes from above;
God will be owned, even in a feather, in the wing of a fowl. Gave thou? not
thou, but I.

Secondly, In that God takes it upon himself to have given feathers to the
Peacock, or to have made her feathers.

Observe, God has a care to provide every way for the necessity of the
creature, even of the unreasonable creatures, whether those that move upon the
earth, or those that fly in the air.

We read before, how the Lord feeds the Lions, how he feeds the Ravens, how he
feeds the wild Asses, how he provides food for Unicorns, and here he would have
us take notice, how he provides clothing for the birds; feathers, are to the
birds their clothing; they are to all birds good and warm clothing, and to some
beautiful and goodly clothing. While Christ ( Mat. 6.26.28.) spoke of clothing
the Lillies, and of feeding the Fowls of the Air, he would from thence infer an
argument of the Fatherly care of God over his people; Now in that God gives a
clothing of feathers to the Fowls, and does not leave them naked, it holds
forth these three things.

First, It is an evidence or proof of the goodness and munificence of God, in
providing sufficiently for the comfortable subsistence of all his creatures,
and for the ornament of some of them.

Secondly, It Is a confirmation of his childrens faith, in and dependence upon
him for outward things, for meat and clothing, with all necessaries of this
life.

Thirdly, It Is a reproof of their distrust and unbelief, with respect to
outward things. Certainly, the Lord who has provided feathers for the Fowls of
the Air, will provide clothing for his children and faithful servants.

Further, consider; The Lord has not only given wings or feathers to the
Peacock, but the Text says, he has given goodly wings

Hence learn, Thirdly; All birds are not of a feather.

That is, God does not give alike, no, not to birds. Some fowls of the air have
feathers only for their use, or to serve their necessity; all fowls of the air
have not gay feathers, nor goodly wings; all of them have not painted feathers,
Producit harum avium ponnas exempli loco ut ostendat se non tantum necessarium
victum sed etiam ornatum dare animalibus. Aves pennarum varietate insignes a
poetis pictae volucris dicuntur.
all of them have not (as Plinies word is, describing the Peacock) jewelly
feathers, gemmy feathers; some have but plain feathers to fly with, and to
keep them from the cold, but here the Peacock has goodly wings. And we read (
Ezekiel. 17.3.) of an Eagle full of feathers, which had diverse colors; we put in
the margin, Embroydering colors. God makes for some fowls of the air, such
coats as Jacob made for his son Joseph, whom he loved more than all his
children ( Genesis 37.3.) even coats of many colors; and such are his degrees of
dispensation also, with respect to the children of men. God gives clothing to
all, but not goodly clothing, not rich clothing; to some he gives goodly
clothing, he puts a glory upon their garments; he clothes some with scarlet,
and puts ornaments upon their apparel, as David in his mourning song spoke of
Saul, adorning his subjects, the people of Israel (2 Samuel 1, 23, 24.) When
Abraham sent his servant to woo for his son Isaac, or to fetch a wife for him,
he sent goodly clothing; his servant brought forth jewels of silver, and
jewels of gold, and raiment and gave them to Rebekah (Genesis 24.53.) Joseph (Genesis
45.22.) gave all his brethren changes of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave three
hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment. Thus the Lord deals with
men and women in this world; all have apparel to cover their nakedness, and
defend them from the sharpness of a Winter season, but some have goodly apparel.

Fourthly, In that these goodly wings given to the Peacock, are by some rendered
proud wings, and by others boasting wings.

Note; There is a temptation in gay worldly things, to puff up the mind with
pride.

The very Peacock having fine feathers, over-weenes himself, and is proud of
them. As we say, Fine feathers, make fine birds, so we may say, Fine feathers,
make proud birds. And no wonder if it be so with silly birds; for even wise
men, if they receive any thing that is goodly from the hand of God, are very
apt to be as proud of it, as the Peacock of his goodly wings. If the Lord does
but give us a few gay feathers, a little more riches than others, a little more
honor than others (these are gay feathers) or if the Lord give us better and
higher parts than others (these are gayer feathers) How hard is it for us to
keep down high thoughts, or not to soar high upon these wings and feathers, in
admiting thoughts and airy conceits of our selves, though the holy Ghost every
where way-layeth the pride of our hearts by many arguments, by this especially,
because all we have is given us by God, and we have nothing of our own. The
Lord has given man many goodly feathers, beauty and strength of body to many,
riches and honor to not a few, wit, learning, eloquence to some, and to others
spiritual gifts and graces, which are the goodliest feathers of all. Now seeing,
all these are given us, why should we be proud of any one of them? yea, how
humble should we be, though adorned with them all! Hence that Apostolical check
to proud ones (1 Cor. 4.7.) What have thou that thou did not receive? and if
thou have received it, why do thou glory or boast, as if thou had not
received it? In these words he more than implies two things; First, That they
who have received those goodlier feathers of spiritual gifts and graces, are in
danger of being lifted up by them. Secondly, That they ought not. The Angels
who fell, had goodly feathers, and they were lifted up, not only in pride with
what they had received, and were beholding to God for, but in pride to have
more, or get higher, and not be beholding to God for it. There is a temptation
in any good thing, a great temptation in goodly things, to pride; and therefore
we had need to pray when we have any thing that is goodly, whether it be
natural, civil, moral, or spiritual, to be kept humble and preserved from
pride. The Apostle Paul was in danger to be exalted above measure, through the
abundance of the revelations which he had, when caught up to the third heaven
(2 Cor. 12.3, 7.) The best men on earth may be overheated by what they have
received from heaven, and the flesh may take occasion, as, by the commandment
to work in us all manner of concupiscence (Romans 7.8.) so, by our raptures in
spirit, to puff us up with that special concupiscence called pride.

The Peacock here spoken of, is so far transported with his fine feathers, that
he may be called the picture of pride. We have a common saying in our language,
Such a one is as proud as a Peacock; or, he is a proud Peacock. A Peacock and a
proud person are alike in several things.

First, As the Peacock is proud of his feathers, so is he of his clothes. One
of the Ancients reproving pride in clothing, said, In habitu non calor sed
color requiritur, magisque vestium quam virtutum cultui insistitur. Bern.
in his time, It is not so much the warmth of their clothing, but the curious
dye or color of the cloth which is regarded; and most insist more upon the
trimming of their vestures, than upon the increase of their virtues.

Secondly, A Peacock, as he is proud of his feathers, so he loves they should
be seen, or he loves to show his fine feathers. The Peacock spreads his plumes,
so does a proud person. Not only he that is proud of his apparel affects to be
seen, but he that is proud of his gifts, knowledge, learning, eloquence, how
does he spread these plumes, and affect applause! As the vainglorious
Pharisees thought nothing they did in Religion worth the doing, unless they
were seen in doing it; so vainglorious persons think nothing they have worth
the having, unless they make others see they have it.

Thirdly, A proud man is like to the Peacock in his exulting clamorous voice or
cry: Such love to talk high, and are very loud; they love to be heard as well
as seen, and to hear themselves speak in the hearing of others.

Fourthly, The Peacock (say Naturalists) however he has very goodly feathers,
yet has but a very weak head. Pavo infirmum habet caput, superbus imbecille
judicium.
It Is so with proud persons; whatever fine shows they make, their intellectuals
are but course; and they that are proud of the strength of their heads, of
their wit and understandings, have indeed the weakest heads of all. There is
much folly lodged in that man's head, where much knowledge lodges, if pride
lodge in his heart too. And seeing God gives (in this sense) foolish men (as
this foolish bird) fine feathers, we need not envy them; for their folly in
being proud of their fine feathers, debaseth them more in the sight of God,
than their fine feathers can honor them in the sight of men. Usually proud
persons have little that is good in them; but how much soever they have, it
will be little more to them than a fine feather, because they think it so much,
that they are proud of it.

Fifthly, Naturalists say, the Peacock (and it is as true of a proud person) is
an Angel in aspect, Angelus aspectu, pede latro, voce Gehenna.
or to look on (he makes a goodly show) a thief in his foot, i. e. he goes
softly without noise, yet has a voice like hell, crying out and shrieking very
unharmoniously to the ear. A proud person may be an Angel in aspect, but he is
a thief in his feet, he goes softly, yet deceitfully; and there is a hell in
his voice. A loud boasting tongue is as troublesome and unpleasant to the ear,
as a brawling; and usually boasters are brawlers too: For, as Solomon has
concluded it ( Prove. 13.10.) By pride comes contention.

Lastly, Proud ones are like the Peacock, because that which persons are most
commonly proud of, is of little worth. The Peacock is proud of his feathers,
which are worthless things, fit only for children to play with. And though it
is a truth, that some men (as was said before) are proud of such things as are
excellent in themselves, and of a great intrinsic value, yet (as was also said
before) whatsoever a man is proud of, will (to his account) be no better than a
Peacocks feather. A man that is proud of his beauty and apparel, of his riches
and outward splendour, may truly be said to be proud of a feather; Solomon, the
wisest of Kings, and taught by the Spirit of God, has written vanity and
insufficiency upon all worldly things. And if a man be proud of his
understanding, knowledge, or any internal endowment (which are things of real
excellency) they all become vain to him; yea, if a man be proud of his graces,
though they shall never be utterly vain to him, yet so far as he is proud of
them, they are vain to him, being hindered by the present prevailings of
corruptions, from doing that which is one of the most proper works of them, the
keeping him humble, empty, and nothing in his own eyes. Gave thou goodly
wings to the Peacocks, And wings and feathers unto the Ostrich?

Several Translators (as was touched before) find two distinct fowls in this
latter part of the verse. An pennam Ciconiae aut Struthio camelo dares? Jun.
Mr. Broughton says, Gave thou feathers to the Stork and Ostrich? and so
others. Our Translators put it thus in the Margin, The feathers of the Stork
and Ostrich. The occasion of this difference in translating, arises from the
original word used last in this verse, which commonly signifies a feather only,
(...) Pluma pennae vel juxta quosdam Struthiocamelus, quasi pennatus dictus.
Burtorf. (...) Ciconia, sic dicta a benefice^tia quasi beneficam dicas a
nomine. (...) hic significat Struthiocamelum per antiphrasin, eo quod avis illa
minime sit benefica, ut quae laboret singulari (...) erga foetum suum. Pia
Ciconia, pietatis cultrix Ciconia. Petronius and Solinus.
yet is sometimes taken to signify the fowl it self, or a feathered fowl; and
because the Ostrich has the richest and most beautiful feathers, therefore it
is here translated, the Ostrich. The feathers of the Ostrich being that for
which she is most famous, the Ostrich her self may (not inelegantly) be
expressed by a word, which properly and strictly taken, signifies nothing but a
feather; but most interpreters taking that word in its proper sense to signify
a feather, take the former word, which firstly and properly signifies a Stork,
for the Ostrich. Gave thou wings and feathers to the Ostrich. The reason, I
conceive, why that word (Chasidah) which properly signifies a Stork, is here
rendered an Ostrich, is because the description given of the bird here intended
in the five verses following, does no way agree with the Stork, but fairly with
the Ostrich; for the Stork (say Naturalists) is of a very good and pitiful
nature, and has its name from a root in the Hebrew, which signifies kindness,
pity and tenderness, whereas the creature here described, is void of all
these, as will appear in opening this context. And therefore Grammarians tell
us, that the Ostrich is so called by the rule of contraries, merciful or kind,
for unkind and cruel; which way of speaking is usual in the Hebrew, as also in
other languages. Thus the Hebrew word for a Harlot, signifies one that is holy;
Harlots being most unholy, filthy, and unclean women, prostituting their bodies
to the lusts of others, and inviting them to unlawful pleasures.

And that we are not here to understand the Stork properly taken, but the
Ostrich, is plain for these three reasons; the first of which has been already
intimated, the bird here intended being of a quite contrary nature to the
stork. Secondly, The Stork has no such beautiful feathers as seem to be given
to the bird here spoken of, yet we must not believe that all those beautiful
colors in which Ostriches feathers are seen and worn, are natural to them; for
she has no feathers of note, of any color growing on her, but black and
white, all others are died and artificial. Thirdly, The Stork does not lay her
eggs on the ground, but builds on high in trees ( Psalm. 104.17.) As for the
Stork, the Firr-trees are her house, whereas the bird here mentioned, goes upon
the ground; though she has wings, yet not wings able to lift her up to a tree,
Struthio est avis quaedam appropinquans ad genus bestiarum; unde licet hab^at
pennas ad modum animalium alte volantium: non tamen se potest in alium elevare.
Aquin. Struthio est in confinio volucrum and reptilium, pennas quippe habet ut
avis, sed e terra non tollitur ut reptile. Mirum animal, alatum ut volucria
neque tamen volucre.
or take any lofty flight in the air. Naturalists describing the Ostrich, tell
us, that she is such a bird as is also a kind of beast. Some creatures are of
two kinds in one, living partly upon the earth, and partly in the water; here
the Ostrich may upon another account be numbered among these, he using the wing
to slutter a little in the air like a bird, yet mostly like a beast moving upon
the earth. And hence a learned Author places the ^strich between fowls that
fly in the air, and things that breath or move upon the earth. Pliny reports,
the Ostriches of Africa and Arabia to be very big bodied, as tall in stature as
a horse and his rider, and more swift of foot than any horse, being helped by
their wings, which yet are not strong enough to raise their bulkie bodies above
the earth.

Upon these grounds and considerations it is, that all these Interpreters, who
will have but one fowl of the air to be intended in this part of the Text, fix
upon the Ostrich, not upon the Stork; though the word Chasidah, which they
translate Ostrich, does properly signify the Stork.

Howbeit, some see no cogent reason why we may not expound the word Chasidah
properly by the Stork, and yet salve all the former objections, by rendering the
word Notsa an Ostrich. There is a necessity that we find the Ostrich in this
verse, because (as was said before) the description given in the five following
verses, is not applicable to the Stork, but Ostrich; notwithstanding, if while
we apply the word Chasidah to the Stork, the word Notsa may serve as well, if
not better, to signify the Ostrich. Why may we not (say they) take in both,
and so render the Text thus, Who gave wings to the Stork and the Ostrich? and
so all difficulties will be removed, and the word Renanim reserved free for the
Peacock.

But forasmuch as our translation puts the Ostrich alone into the Text, I shall
not add any thing concerning the nature of the Stork, but only of the Ostrich;
Gave thou wings and feathers to the Ostrich? (...) Robustus fortis hinc (...)
penna ola, quod in alis robur avium sit. (...) Plumo ^inchid (...) Volavit,
deducit, sed malim a (...) effloruit, quod in avibus plumae enascantur ut
flores and herbae e terra. Merc.


The word rendered wings, signifies strength; the strength of birds is in their
wings (as of man in his arms) and some birds are exceeding strong of wing.

The word rendered by us feathers, signifies in the root to fly, because
feathers are the instruments of flying; yet others derive it from a word, which
signifies to grow or flourish, because feathers grow and flourish upon fowls,
as herbs and flowers out of, and upon the ground. And the reason why some
conceive the Ostrich is meant by this word (Notsa) which we translate feathers,
is because the feathers of the Ostrich are so like beautiful flowers, or a
goodly garland of flowers. Great Princes in all ages having adorned their hats
or hair with the plumes of the Ostrich, set in ouches of gold, and bespangled
with the rarest gems or precious stones.

What the nature, the customs and qualities of the Ostrich are, will appear in
opening the latter part of this context. All that I shall add here, is,

First, To set down more fully the description which the natural Historian
gives of her. The African and Ethiopian Ostriches (says he) are the greatest
of birds, even as big as a beast, Plin. l. 10 c. 1.
in height they are taller than a horse and his rider sitting on his back; they
also exceed the horse in swiftness of foot, their wings seeming to be given
them only to help them in running, for they can scarcely fly at all, or lift
themselves much above ground. They are cloven-footed, or hoof-forked like a
Heart, their hoofs or claws serving them to gather up stones, which in their
flight or retreat, they throw backward upon such as hunt them. They have an
admirable concoction, digesting the hardest things which they swallow down; nor
is their folly less admirable, thinking themselves sufficiently hid, when their
heads are. Their eggs serve for cups to drink in, and their feathers adorn the
crests and helmets of the Warrior.

And besides the beauty of her feathers, their equality or evenness is so
remarkable, that among the Egyptians, the feather of an Ostrich was taken for
the symbol of equity; so that when they would signify a man of an equal spirit
and conversation toward all men, and in all things, they used to paint the
feather of an Ostrich.

Secondly, I shall add this also; That as in the Peacock we had the
representation of a proud person, so in the Ostrich the lively image or picture
of an Hypocrite, which may be held out and made good in these five particulars.

First, The Ostrich is a kind of middle creature (as was said) between a bird
that flies in the air, and a beast that goes upon the ground, having somewhat
of both, yet is properly neither. Thus it is with the Hypocrite or
false-hearted Christian; He stands between a godly man and a profane man, Sunt
animalia amphi^ia, quae non facile statuas an aquatilia sint, an terrestria
volatilia an terrestria ut vespertilio, qui est mus pennatus; and
Struthicamelus, qui est quasi Camelus alatus; utriusque naturae participes and
expertes. Sanct.
he is neither; he is not profane, in strict sense (though really he be so, as
the Hebrew word for a Hypocrite imports, yet (I say) in strict sense he is not
profane) because he makes a profession, and appears to men in a form of
godliness; yet he is not godly, because he only makes a profession, and appears
in a form of godliness, either denying, or at least, not having any power of
godliness. A Hypocrite hangs, as I may say, between God and man, between the
ways of holiness, and the ways of sin; he either halts between two Religions,
as Elijah told the Jews (1 King. 18.21.) or takes not one right step in that
one which he pretends to; he is (as it was said of the Church of Laodicea)
neither hot nor cold, but between both, lukewarm. As the Ostrich is a creature
between two, something like a fowl of the air, and something like a beast of
the earth, or (as the Latin word for an Ostrich implies) A Camel winged, a
winged Camel; so is a Hypocrite, a kind of a middle-man, between a good man and
a bad, in appearance very good, but in truth and reality stark naught; and by
so much worse than the worst of profane ones, by how much he had a mind to
appear better than the best, at least among the best of holy ones.

Secondly, This Ostrich, as he is described, is a creature without natural
affection; and so the Hypocrite and false-hearted professor, is always without
spiritual, Christian, gracious affections, and very often without natural and
mere humane affections. That Is one part of the character which the Apostle
gives of those who have a form of godliness, but deny the power (2 Timothy 3.3.)

Thirdly, the Ostrich has feathers, but cannot fly; the Ostrich spreads her
wings as if she would fly aloft, yet cannot make a lofty flight; she raises
her self no higher above the earth, than a man may hop or leap; her body or
earthly part is so ponderous, that her wings cannot raise her far into the air,
much less bear her up long there. It is so with the Hypocrite, he has wings,
and he seems to spread them, as if he had strong desire, and great designs
heaven-wards; he would make you believe he is both from and for above, yet he
cannot get off the earth; he is an earthly minded man, as the Apostle speaks of
such, Coelestia se quaerere simulantes, terrenis adhaerem.
though as to an outward profession, and some formal actions, he seems to soar
aloft, and live above the world, yet he ever drives an earthly trade, and has
some base carnal aim or other, in his highest services. The earth is every
natural man's center, and therefore though (as any heavy body, a stone or clod
of clay) he may be forced upward, yet when that impression is spent, he falls
down again to earthly things, which only are connatural to him.

Fourthly, The Ostrich is a creature of a mighty digestion, of a hot stomach;
and therefore is painted and figured with a piece of iron in her mouth,
implying, she digests iron. Omnia digerere potest Struthio.
Thus the hypocrite can digest the hardest things, even that which is harder
than iron, sin; that which lies upon the stomach of a godly man as heavy as a
stone, that is, which burdens his conscience, that the hypocrite can swallow,
it goes down easily with him, and is as easily digested; he can swallow this
and that sin without trouble, especially, if he can but do it unseen or in
secret; he makes no bones (as we say) of any thing, which may but feed some
lust, he has a conscience wide enough, and hot enough, and strong enough to
digest iron, any unlawful deed if it serve his turn, or may tu^n to his worldly
advantage. That which a man truly fearing God, and strongly resolved to do his
known will, and nothing else knowingly, cannot will, not do, nor touch with for
a world, that he can do, and will do for some poor pittances, much more for the
great things of the world.

Fifthly, Pliny says, the Ostrich being a very tall creature, Tanta eorum
stoliditas, ut cum colla frutice occulta berint latere se existimant. Plin. l.
10. c. 1.
is yet so foolish, that if she hide her head, she thinks herself all hid and
safe from danger; she concludes no man sees her, if she sees no man. Thus it is
with the hypocrite, if he can but be out of sight himself, he thinks none see
him, no not God himself ( Psalm. 94.6, 7.) They slay the widow and the
stranger, and murder the fatherless; yet they say, the Lord shall not see,
neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. They think they do all in such
secrecy, that as men do not, so God shall not behold it.

Lastly, The Ostrich has very gay feathers, of much more worth than the
Peacock, yet the Ostrich has no more wit than the Peacock; one is the emblem
of a proud man, the other of a hypocrite, both bravely clothed, yet with
nothing but feathers.

From both, I would infer these two or three things, which may hold out much of
the mind of God in this discourse with Job, and which some Interpreters
conceive God chiefly aimed at in this place, by telling Job or minding him,
that he had given goodly wings, and gay feathers to Peacocks and Ostriches. We
see those creatures which have little worth in themselves, have very goodly
ornaments put upon them by the hand of God. Hence we may infer,

First, God oftentimes bestows the gay and glitter of worldly things upon the
worst, the unworthiest among the sons of men; upon such as have no more wisdom
in them, than a Peacock or an Ostrich. And if so, then

Secondly, take this inference; We should not envy any sort of men in the world
their gay feathers. Job stumbled at this, and so did David, who said of
himself, I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked
(Psalm. 73.3.) David was troubled to see them garnished and trimmed like Peacocks
and Ostriches, flaunting with their feathers, while he poor man was chastned
every morning; yet he quickly saw he had little reason for this trouble, when
once he went into the sanctuary; For there he learned in what a slippery place
they stood, and therefore called himself ignorant fool and beast, for envying
them their gayest feathers, their greatest prosperity. ( ver. 22.) Let it not
offend us to behold bad men in the best array. Is any man offended because a
Peacock or an Ostrich has such goodly feathers? Surely, no man ought to
complain of or find fault with the dispensations of God, because he has
bestowed a richer suit of feathers upon the proud Peacock and the foolish
Ostrich, than he has upon the pious, kind-hearted, well-natur'd Storke, or the
innocent Dove. Why then should any be offended or murmur, if God give the good
things of the world to those that have no more goodness than Peacocks or
Ostriches, if he fills and adorns some bad men, with better things of this
life, than many that are good? The Prophet ( Ezekiel. 17.4.) gives the description
of an Eagle, having long wings, and embroydered feathers, or feathers of many
colors. Yet that Eagle was but a Heathen Prince, and he none of the best,
though one of the greatest of that sort. Bad men have their embroiderirs, the
paint of an earthly glory, and that is all the portion, all the good they are
ever like to have; As Abraham told the rich man in the Parable ( Luke 16.) Who
was clothed with purple and fine linen, and fared deliciously every day while
he lived; Son remember thou have had thy good things. Fine clothes and
delicious fare is the all of good (and how poor an all is that) which some men
desire, and which any ungodly man shall receive from the hand of God.

Thirdly, We may infer; Let all learn to be content with, and thankful for
their own clothing or portion in this world, though it be but mean, course or
plain, and much inferior to what they see others have. Argumentum videtur esse
tale. Sicut quaelibet avis suis plumis, ita tu, O Job, and alii homines sua
sort contenti esse debent. Scult.
Those birds which have but poor feathers are satisfied with them, as well as
the Peacock and the Ostrich with their gaudy ones. By this argument God would
persuade Job, to be quiet and patient, though his clothing at that time was
very mean, yea, though all the gay feathers of his former prosperity were
plucked often and he stripped naked, as he (poor man) said at the 21th verse of the
first Chapter; Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked shall I return
thither, that is, to the womb of the earth, man's common parent. Though we make
not a fair show (as the Apostle says some desired to do, Gal. 6.12.) in the
flesh; though we have not such goodly feathers on our backs, in our outward
robes as others have, let us be thankful for a dress of the meanest clothing,
and patient though dressed in sackcloth. God is a sovereign Lord, he is at his
liberty to give goodly wings and glorious feathers to this bird, and plain ones
to another: And the same liberty he may and does take and exercise when and
where he pleases, among the children of men. Gave thou the goodly wings to
the Peacocks? or wings and feathers to the Ostrich?

The Lord having thus described the Ostrich by her outside, her wings and
feathers, proceeds to show her inside, her disposition and qualities. And we
might expect, that a creature clothed with such lovely wings and feathers,
would have had some lovely and rare qualities, whereas the Ostrich has not one
that is commendable, all that is said of her signifying an ignoble disposition.
For first, she is forgetful and careless of that, which she should be very
careful of.

Verse. 14, 15. Which leaves her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the
dust, and forgets that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beasts may
break them. Here Is the folly, the carelessness, and blockishness of this
creature.

She leaves her eggs in the earth. The eggs of the Ostrich are great, and the
shell very hard; we often see them set curiously in gold or silver, and so used
as cups or drinking vessels. But of what worth or use soever her eggs are, she
uses them very coursely, and carries it toward them as if they were little
worth. Other birds, when they l^y their eggs, do their utmost to put them out
of danger, they sit upon them themselves, and hatch them; but the Ostrich (say
some) leaves them in the earth and is gone, she takes no further care of them;
where once they are laid, there she lets them lie. This (I say) is contrary to
the nature of other birds, who lay their eggs in nests, as much as they can
from danger, but she leaves them in the earth, And warmeth them in the dust.

Solis aestis sovet ova (sc. Deus) quae struthio-camelus in arena posuerat,
donec excludantur pulli. Jun.
Which is not to be understood, as if she left them there on purpose or
designedly to warm them in the dust, for that were a piece of discretion, but
she is reproved for improvidence; and therefore where it is said, she leaves
them, the meaning is, she looks no more after them, they are little beholding
to her, she will not (as some intimate) take pains, nor has she the patience
to sit on them, and hatch them as other fowls do. Several Authors affirm, that
the eggs thus left, are hatched by the heat or warmth of the Sun. This Rochartus
rejects as a mere dream, affirming, That all her eggs, so left in the sands,
are corrupted, not hatched; and tells us from others, that the Ostrich having
forgotten where she left her own eggs, happening upon the eggs of some other
Ostrich, sits upon and hatches them; according to which, the Chaldee says, She
brings young ones which are not truly hers. But I leave these things to the
consideration of the Reader.

Others give two reasons, why the Ostrich leaves her eggs in the dust, and does
not sit upon them; both which are very unsuitable to what God himself says of
the Ostrich. First, (They say) she leaves them and warms them in the dust,
lest she should break them with the weight of her body; but doubtless there is
no fowl so heavy, but may sit on her eggs, and not break them. The least bird
that sits upon eggs may break them if she be careless, and the greatest may
preserve them by care. Besides, an Ostriches egg is a very hard egg, and not
easily broken; therefore surely, that cannot be the reason. Secondly, That she
does not sit upon her eggs her self, because she wants feathers; her under
parts being bare and naked, and so very unfit to yield warmth. But if the
Ostrich did thus upon a natural instinct, there would be no reason to charge
her with folly, or to say God has deprived her of wisdom; for as the former
reason, so this would prove her to be a wise and provident creature, therefore
we must lay the reason somewhere else. And God himself has given us the true
reason, her blockish forgetfulness and unnaturalness, having no consideration
how soon her eggs may be spoiled.

Verse. 15. And forgets that the foot may crush them. That is, she has no
thought that they may take hurt, Ita stolida est ut non cogitat fieri posse, ut
ova sua, quae humi reliquit, pedibus serarum aut hominum premantur. Merc.
and therefore takes no care, nor makes any provision to preserve them from
hurt; she minds not, nor does at all apprehend the danger which her eggs are
^n: She forgets that the foot (of man) may crush them, Or that the wild
beast (that passes along in those wildernesses and desert places) may break
them.

The Hebrew is thresh them, which implies more than cracking, even breaking
them all to pieces.

Thus we see what report God himself makes of the Ostrich; but many other
things are reported of the Ostrich by natural Historians, which we have no
reason to believe, because they contradict the report which the Lord here makes
of her, unless they mean some other sort of Ostrich than is here described.
Aelianus l. 4. c. 6. 36.
For Aelian tells us, The Ostrich sits diligently upon her eggs, till the young
ones are hatched, and then is very tender over them. Both which the Lord denies
concerning the Ostrich in the Text, while he says, She leaves her eggs in the
earth, and warmeth them in the dust, and forgets that the foot may crush
them, etc.

Hence note, First; Among unreasonable creatures beasts or birds, there are
some farther from reason than others are.

Though none of the beasts of the earth, or fowls of the air, have Reason,
properly so called (that is the privilege of Angels and Men) yet there are some
of them, that by a natural instinct, show a great deal of reason in what they
do, both as to their own preservation, and the provision which they make for
their young ones; in which latter respect, especially this Scripture, takes
notice of the deficiency of the Ostrich.

Secondly, Forasmuch as the spirit of God reports this as the folly of the
Ostrich, that she leaves her eggs to so much hazard and danger,

Observe; To leave any thing in danger, or not to provide against danger, is a
great argument of folly.

It is a great piece of wisdom to foresee danger, and a greater to provide well
against it. A prudent man (says Solomon, Prove. 22.3.) foreseeth the evil, and
hides himself: but the simple puss on, and are punished. Noah heard of the
flood, and being warned of God, moved with fear (he both feared God, and was
afraid of the danger) prepared an Ark to the saving of his house, that is, his
household and family. In all cases, as it is our wisdom to forsee danger, so it is
our duty to provide against danger; not to leave our eggs, any thing we have,
much less our lives, least of all our own souls, or the souls of others, in
danger. How many leave the souls of their children, the souls of their
relations in the earth, yea, to the earth, or (as we say) to the wide world;
and forget what snares, what temptations they may fall into, what foot may
crush them, what wild beast may tread upon them; yea, many that have the charge
of souls, as Ministers, leave their flocks, and forget the danger that may come
to them, they forget that the foot may crush them, that Satan, and those wild
beasts, their lusts, may ruin and destroy them. We may say to such, as Eliab,
the elder brother of David, said to him (when he was sent by his father to
visit his brethren in the Camp) (1 Samuel 17.28.) With whom have thou left those
few sheep in the wilderness? do thou know what will become of thy sheep? thou
have left them for Lions and Bears to devour and to tear. So we may say to
many (who are hardened like the Ostrich against her eggs) with whom have you
left your flocks? with whom have you left those few sheep, those poor souls
left under your charge? may not wild beasts, Bears and Lions destroy them? Not
to foresee danger, shows some want of prudence; but not to provide against
danger foreseen, is an argument of greatest folly.

Again, consider this foolish creature the Ostrich, leaves her eggs at (as we
say) sixes and sevens, and is gone, she never troubles her self more with them,
yet they are preserved, and her kind is continued, though little thanks to her.

Hence we learn, Thirdly; There is a wonderful providence of God the Creator,
watching over those things which are left in hazard, by the folly of man or of
any other creature.

By how much the Ostrich is more neglectful, by so much the providence of God
is more watchful. In the carelessness of the creature, how does the care of God
shine forth! when they that are engaged to, or should provide for the good of
others, or to prevent their evil, neglect that duty, how wonderful is the
goodness and kindness of God in providing for them, and protecting them! David
had this confidence ( Psalm. 27.10.) When my father and my mother (like the
Ostrich) forsake me (that is, though my father and mother should prove so
unnatural, as to forsake me, and expose me to the wide world) yet the Lord will
take me up. How good is God, who takes care for them, for whom nearest
relations take none! The Prophet puts this question, Quanto struthio-camelus
stotidior est, and suorum ovorum oblitior, tanto Dei providentia solicitur and
benignior.
as if the negative answer were out of question ( Isa. 49.15.) Can a woman
forget (like the Ostrich her eggs) her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? Surely, if the answer were to be made to
this question in the light of nature, would it not be this? She cannot, it is
impossible she should. But how does the spirit of God answer in the Text? Not
absolute in the negative, she cannot; nor absolutely in the affirmatively, she
will; but mixtly or comparatively; Yea, they may forget; yet will I not forget
thee; that is, though it would be a very strange thing if they should, yet
possibly they may, but it is impossible that I should forget thee. Or thus,
though women should turn Ostriches, and forget their own issue, yet will I not
forget thee; that is, I will have thee in everlasting remembrance, as it
follows in the next words of the Prophet ( verse. 16.) Behold! I have graven
thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me.

And as the Lord will not forget his Sion, the Church, nor leave her to the
danger of being crushed by every foot; so whatever is left to hazard or danger,
whether, First, by any unreasonable creature, as here in the Text; Or secondly,
by unreasonable and foolish men (from whom to be delivered the Apostle begged
earnestly, 2 These. 3.2.) Or Thirdly, which the wisest men, with all their care,
and power, and diligence cannot secure from danger and hazard; there is a
wakeful eye of providence, that will take care in all such cases, especially,
in the last. For, when men have done their utmost, to keep the foot from
crushing us, and the wild beasts from destroying us, but cannon, then the care
of God appears most in doing it. And in the case of that double necessity, when
good men have done their best to keep us safe, but cannot; and bad men have
done their worst, to expose us unto, and leave us in danger, we may, and must
leave all to God, who naturally takes care of all creatures, and is the Savior
of all men (both as to temporal and eternal salvation, 1 Timothy 4.10.) especially
of them that believe.

Thus we have the first part of the description of the Ostrich, who being so
very foolish, not to discharge her duty to her eggs, God himself does it, his
providence orders the Sun to warm them, and the Sand to bring them forth. And
as the Ostrich is careless of her eggs, before they are hatched, so she neglects
her young ones as much when they are hatched, as is showed in the next verse.

Verse. 16. She is hardened against her young ones, as if they were not hers.
This verse gives us a farther description of that Bird-beast the Ostrich, by
her unnaturalness to her offspring; having left her eggs carelessly to hatch
or perish in the dust, she is as careless of her brood when they are hatched;
when the heat of the Sun (say some) by the providence of God, has done one
part of her duty, to bring them forth, she neglects the other part of her duty,
which is, to bring them up; and so the pains that she took in laying so many
great eggs (one tells us, her nest is usually sto^ed with fourscore eggs,
others say with twenty, the least say with twelve or ten) seems to be in vain,
she taking no care of them, not having any regard to them. This the Spirit of
God expresses in the beginning of the 16th verse, She is hardened against her
young ones; she is as forgetful of her chickens (if I may so call them) as she
was of her eggs. Rabbie Abraham reads thus, God has hardened her against her
young ones; and the reason that he gives for it, is, because the word is in the
Masculine Gender, which cannot well agree with the Feminine her. And we find it
in an active signification ascribed to God ( Isa. 63.17. Verbum (...) non alibi
quam hic and Isa. 63.17. occurrit, ac pene idem valet quod (...) in Hiphil.
obduravit. Merc.
) O Lord (said the Church there) why have thou hardened our hearts from thy
fear? Nor is it any where else found in the whole Bible, but in this place of
Job; in this sense the Rabbin expounds it here, nor is it either an impertinent
or an unprofitable sense. For as God sometimes judicially hardens the hearts of
men, so he does also naturally harden the hearts of some beasts and birds, and
makes them of a cruel disposition against their own kind, and then they l t
them sink or swim, and expose them to the greatest danger without any the least
provision for them.

The Septuagint or Greek Interpreters, do not read as we, She is hardened
against her young ones, but taking the same active signification of the ve b,
say thus; She hardneth her young ones; that is, she does not bring them up
tenderly, nor delicately, but leaves them to shift for themselves, and so
hardneth them. And the reason of that rendering may be this, because there is no
particle in the Hebrew expressing the word, against; we say, She is hardened
against her young ones, but the preposition commonly rendered against, is not in
the Hebrew; that says only, (...) con^ra non habeturin font, ideo malui
duriter habet aut tractat filios suos, potius quam indurat se contra filios
suos. Drus.
She hardneth her young ones, or, She is hardening her young ones; but the sense
rises much to the same point, whether we read, She hardneth her young ones,
or, is hardened against her young ones; for by being hardened against them, or by
using them hardly, she hardneth them. Many parents harden their children by
being hard to them. If we put the sense of both readings together, it will make
the matter more complete; she hardneth her young ones, by hardening her self
against them. Our reading is full and clear, She hardneth her self against her
young ones, or children; so the word (strictly taken) signifies.

As though they were not hers. Implying, that the consideration of them, as
hers, should have made her more tender of them; yet she carries it as if she
had no relation to them. The Hebrew is, For that they were not hers; which
here, as in other parallel Scriptures, is rightly sensed in our Translation,
(...) Videtur hic positum esse pro (...) ut saepe alias, Lamed pro Caph
usurpatur; sic erunt in carnem una^, i.e. quasi caro una. Drus.
As though they were not hers. As if it had been said, she could not do
otherwise, nor worse by them, if they were mere strangers to her, or such as
she had no title to. She deals no better with them, than as if they either were
not hers, or as if they were nothing to her, and she no way concerned in them.
Such is that complaint of the Church ( Lam. 1.) Is it nothing to you, all ye
that pass by (and see my sorrow) is it nothing to you? are you not at all
concerned? am I to you merely as a stranger, that you pass by and take no
notice of my sufferings? Thus the holy Ghost describes the Ostrich, she is
hardened against her young ones, as though they were none of hers, or as if she
had nothing to do with them.

Hence note, First; They that deal hardly with others, are hardened against
them.

When Pharaoh dealt so extreme hardly with the people of Israel, when he
increased their number of bricks, and denied them straw, and made them serve
with rigor, he was extremely hardened against them. That spiritual judgment,
hardness of heart, was deeply upon Pharaoh, when he dealt so hardly with the
chosen people of God, notwithstanding all the corporal judgments which God
brought upon him. And as it was in that case between Pharaoh and the children
of Israel, so in any case whatsoever, he that deals hardly with others, has
a heart hardened against them; as this beast-bird, the Ostrich (upon that
account) is said to harden her self against her young ones.

Note, Secondly; It Is an aggravation of hard-heartedness, to deal hardly with
those that are young and tender.

They that are grown up, they that are hardened, can endure hardship. The
Apostle Paul would have every believer, especially a Minister of the Gospel, to
endure hardship (2 Timothy 2.3.) It Is both their duty and wisdom to harden
themselves, who are like to endure hardship, and to find the world hardened
against them. All such should inure themselves to endure hard things, or to
suffer evil (as the word there is) as the good soldiers of Jesus Christ.
(...). Tu igitur perfer adversa. Bez.
Good soldiers, especially old experienced soldiers, will endure hardship;
but your raw soldiers, new listed soldiers, who never saw battle or siedge,
can hardly endure it. The Ostrich puts her young ones to hardship. We should be
very careful, if we put hardship upon any, to put it upon those only that are
fit to endure it; we should not put hardship upon young ones; it is the spirit
of an Ostrich, of a beast-bird to do so. Jacob had a tender respect to his
flocks, for this reason; when Esau would have journeyed with him, no, says he
( Genesis 33.13.) My Lord knows that the children are tender, and the flocks and
herds with young are with me, and if men should over-drive them one day, all
the flock would die. As if he had said, should I use these young ones hardly,
that are not fitted for hardship, I should destroy all. Jacob had a tender care
of those that were tender. The Ministers of the Gospel should take heed that
they harden not themselves against the young ones of the flock, such as are
newly come in to Jesus Christ, late Converts, Babes in Christ, as the Apostle
calls them (1 Cor. 3.1.) these should be dealt tenderly with. The Prophet
describes the tender care of Christ toward his people under this notion ( Isa.
40.11.) He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd; he shall gather the Lambs with
his arms, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are
with young; and shall his Ministers hurry and over-drive them? When any do so,
are they not as the Ostrich in the Text, hardened against their young ones, yea
against those that are with young?

Again, From that addition to her hard heartedness; not only is she hardened
against her young ones, but she is hardened as if they were not hers.

Hence note; It is most unna^ural to be hardened against those to whom we stand
engaged by near relation or natural bonds.

To look upon those as not ours, that are ours, is an extremity of hardness.
She is a hard mother indeed, who deals with her children as if they were not
her children. The Apostle concludes universally in the Negative ( Ephesians. 5.29.)
No man ever hated his own flesh, but loved it and cherished it, as the Lord
does the Church. Now as it is an unnatural thing for a man to hate his own
flesh personal, so his own flesh relational. Christ speaking of the world,
says ( John 15.19.) The world loves its own. The world does not love you,
says Christ to his disciples; yea, because I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you. The world and you are not of a piece, are not of
a Pedigree, nor of the same extraction; you are of another world, and have had
both a birth and a breeding, differing (toto coelo) heavenly wide from theirs;
and therefore it is no great wonder if the world hate you, who are not of it:
but the world loves its own. They have a nature more unnatural than the world,
who are hardened against their own relations. Jesus Christ ( John 1.11.) came to
his own, and his own received him not. Now, as not to be respected by our own,
so not to respect our own, is unnatural. It was the sin of the Jewish Nation,
that they did not respect Christ, they being Christ's own according to the
flesh. Their sin is great, and they do shamefully, who will not do what good
they ought and can for their own. The Prophet Jeremiah in his Lamentations
(Chap. 4.3.) speaking of the women of Jerusalem in that extremity of famine,
says, Even the Sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young
ones; but the daughter of my people is become cruel like the Ostriches in the
wilderness. The Prophet compares that people to the Ostrich, though that
cruelty of theirs to their young ones proceeded not so much from the hardness
of their hearts, as from the hardness of the times, and was to be charged
rather upon their necessity, than their nature. The famine upon them was so
great, and pressed them so sore, that they were so far from having any thing to
give their children to eat, that they were forced to eat their children; and
yet this necessitons hard-heartness of theirs toward their own, the P^ophet
upbraids them with, and reproves them for, while he said, The daughter of my
people is become cruel like the Ostriches of the wilderness. Let all own
relations to the utmost, and take heed of turning away from, and casting off
the care of theirs, as if they were not theirs. The Prophet ( Isa. 58.7.) puts
it among the duties of a fast, That thou hide not thy self from thy own flesh.
Then we keep a true fast, a fast that God has chosen, when we break our bread
to the hungry, and bring the poor that are cast out to our houses; when we
cloth the naked, and comfort the sorrowful, not hiding our selves from our own
flesh; by which, though we are specially to understand our kindred and nearest
relations in the flesh, yet it is true of mere strangers, of those who are at
furthest remove from us, as to either alliance or consanguinity, if they need
our help. God has made all men of one flesh, in the same sense that he has
made all men of one blood (Act. 17.26.) and therefore to hide our selves from
the help of any man in distress, is to hide our selves from our own flesh. It Is
much to be wondered, that a foolish bird should be forgetful of her young ones,
as though they were not hers; but it is to be abhorred in men and women,
especially in those that profess the faith of Christ, that they should no more
look to them that are theirs, than as if they were not theirs. The Apostle
gives this censure of, or sentence upon all such (1 Timothy 5.8.) If any man
provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own house, or (as the
Margin has it) kindred (if any man carry it toward them, as if they were not
his) he has denied the faith, and (in that point) is worse than an infidel;
for the common light of nature teaches infidels to take care of those that are
their own, and not to slight them, as if they were not theirs.

Farther note, Fourthly; The care of our relations (or of those that are ours)
does not dwell in us merely by nature, it is the gift of God.

The Apostle describing the best of Heathens ( Romans 1.) says, They were
without natural affection. Nature has not of it self natural affections. That
some beasts of the earth, and birds of the air, are very full of natural
affection, none can deny; but it must be granted also, that God has planted
those affections in them. If, that which we call natural affection, were purely
from nature, then every bird and beast would have the same natural affection;
but this Text tells us, the Ostrich has it not in her, she has no natural
affection at all toward her young ones; therefore there is somewhat in it
beyond nature that any creature has it; though we call it a natural instinct
to do so, Pro foetu curare non est naturae proprium, sed Dei authoris. Si enim
naturae esset, cur non and in hac bestia eluceret? Brent.
yet nature is not always furnished with it. In many creatures it is eminent,
in others it is not at all apparent. How great and tender is the care of a Hen
over her chickens? how eagerly will she fight in their defense? yet the Ostrich
will do no more for hers, than as if they were not hers; so that, were it not
for the care and providence of God, who is the father of, and provider for all
creatures, many of them would be little cared or provided for.

The Text proceeds to set forth the ill conditions of the Ostrich.

Her labor is in vain without fear. As if it had been said, Through her
carelessness, she is in hazard to lose all that labor, which according to
natures course she had taken in laying her eggs. In this sense, that promise is
made to the Church ( Isa. 65.23.) They shall not labor in vain, nor bring
forth in trouble, for they are the blessed of the Lord, and their off spring
with them. As there of them in the Negative, so here it is said of the Ostrich
in the affirmative, Her labor is in vain; that is, it is likely to be in vain,
and all but lost labor, as to her eggs and young ones.

Labor is in vain, when it turns to very small account. A Husbandman that
plows and sows his ground, if it scarce yield him his seed again, is said to
labor in vain, because he has got so little by his labor, though somewhat he
has got. A Student that has applied himself to his book, and gotten but
little knowledge, may be said to have studied in vain; much more is that labor
in vain, which turns to no account, or has no good effect at all; such as is
the washing of the Ethiopian or Black-moo^, whom how long soever ye wash, he is
never a whit the whiter. But above all vain labor, that labor is in vain,
which produces an effect quite contrary to the intent and purpose of the
labourer. Thus Pharaoh and the Egyptians labored in vain, to diminish the
Israelites; for (says the Scripture, Exodus 1.12.) the more they afflicted
them, the more they multiplied and grew. Thus also the Heathen Emperors
labored in vain to abolish Christianity; for the more they persecuted the
Christians, the more they were confirmed in the faith of Christ.

The Ostrich lays eggs for the increase of her kind; therefore if her eggs be
broken, or the young ones trodden under foot as soon as hatched, here is labor
in vain in the second sense at least, because no good comes of her labor.

Yet I may say, the labor of the Ostrich is here said to be in vain, not
because she has no effect of her labor, nor because the effect runs cross to
her intent, no, nor because she has but little fruit of her labor, but she is
said to labor in vain, because if God did not take more care of her eggs and
young ones than she does, her labor would be altogether in vain; for her
labor is (as it follows) Without fear.

What fear? There is a twofold fear; First, There is a fear puzling us with
distraction and amazement. Secondly, a fear urging us to activity and industry.
The Ostriches labor is without fear, that is, without such fear as should put
her upon endeavor to preserve her own eggs and young ones; she fears no evil
that may come to them, and so takes no care what becomes of them; she is a
fearless creature of any danger, and so a careless creature, as to the use of
any means for the prevention of danger. The Ostrich is not without all fear;
for they that have had best knowledge of this animal, have found her so fearful
a creature, that her fear, as well as her folly, is gone into a Proverb; a very
fearful man being said to be more fearful than an Ostrich. The Ostrich is here
said to be without fear, because she wants that provident fear which should
excite her to look after those that are hers, as a parent does or ought, after
the good of those that depend upon him. The Ostrich has no love for her young
ones, and therefore no fear about them. Though Aelian (as was touched before)
reports otherwise of her ( lib. 14. cap. 7.) but in this he is alone, and may
be suspected as to the truth of this relation, as well as about the number of
her eggs formerly mentioned, wherein others contradict him; and therefore, if
God took no more care than she (as was said) all her labor would be in vain.

Hence note; We labor in vain to have, if we labor not to preserve what we
have.

What is it to have eggs, if there be neglect of hatching them? what is it to
have young ones, if there be a neglect of bringing them up? Non minor est
virtus quam quaerere parta tueri.
It is as great a virtue to preserve what we have attained by labor, as to
labor for the attaining of it; and how much soever we labor for the attaining
of any thing, unless we labor for the preservation of it, both labors are in
vain. All labor is in vain that is not followed with a due care for the
preserving of what we labor for.

Note, Secondly; A due fear puts us upon the use of means, for the preservation
of our selves and our relations.

Res est solicit plena timoris amor.
What Is the reason why this Ostrich takes no care to hatch her eggs, to preserve
her young ones? She is fearless; had she a fear about them, she would take care
of them. As true love is full of solicitous fear, so due fear is full of
solicitous endeavor. Fear makes us both consultive what to do, and active in
doing it. And as it makes us both consultive and active about our outward
preservation, so much more for our inward and spiritual preservation. It is
said of Noah (Heb. 11.7.) That being warned of God of things not seen as yet,
moved with fear, prepared an Ark for the saving of his house. Noah had never
taken care to prepare an Ark against the deluge, but for these gracious
impressions of fear, that God would bring a dreadful inundation upon the world.
Fear moved him, and faith prevailed with him to prepare an Ark. The Apostle (
Phil. 2.13.) calls upon all believers to work out their salvation with fear and
trembling. If we have no fear about our salvation, we shall never work out our
salvation. Yet it is a truth, that they who have most assurance of their
salvation, are most in working out their salvation. Holy assurance is so far
from making us careless, that then we are most careful, knowing that the Lord
has joined the end and means together; knowing also, That they are in most
safety, who have most sense of danger; yea, that they who have most fear of
danger, are farthest from feeling danger. The labor of the Ostrich is in vain,
because she has no fear; her foolishness makes her fearless, and that makes
her careless; therefore no thanks to her, that all her labor is not lost or in
vain, that both her eggs and young ones do not utterly miscarry. Thus we may
profitably meditate upon the improvidence of this creature the Ostrich, and
learn wisdom from her folly, to make us more provident. But whence is it, or
how comes it to pass, that she is so foolish? The next words tell us.

Verse. 17. Because God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted
unto her understanding. In this Verse, a reason or an account is given of this
blockishness, carelessness and fearlessness of the Ostrich; it is, Because God
has deprived her of wisdom. More foolish than an Ostrich, is a proverb for the
greatest fool. The Hebrew Text may be read thus; God has made her to forget
wisdom. Now, as one may be said to forget that which he has not, so that which
he never had. In the description that Bildad gives of a wicked man ( Chap.
8.13.) he says, This is the portion of them that forget God; Oblivisci aliquis
dicitur, cujus nullam nuquam scientiam aut notitiam habuit. Drus.
And who are they? the words are a periphrasis of the wicked, To forget God is
their character; they may be said to forget God, who never had any true
knowledge or remembrance of him. Thus ( Genesis 41.30.) There shall arise after
them (that is, after the seven years of plenty) seven years of famine, and all
the plenty shall be forgotten to the Land of Egypt. In a time of famine, we are
rather quickened to remember former years of plenty, together with the wast that
we then made of it, and our unthankfulness for it. When the Israelites had
nothing but Manna in the wilderness, they complained ( Number. 11.5.) We remember
the fish which we did eat in Egypt freely, the cucumbers, and melons, and the
leeks, and the onions, and the garlic. Now, when it is said, that in the seven
years of famine, they should forget the seven years of plenty, the meaning is,
they should have no plenty at all; the forgetting of it was not the not having
of plenty in their memories, but the not having it in their hands. When a
people are in a time of trouble, they remember their former peace; and when in
straights, they remember their former liberty; but they are said in straights,
and trouble, and famine, not to remember their liberties, peace and plenty,
because they have none of them. Thus here God has made her to forget wisdom,
that is, she has no wisdom, nor knowledge, nor understanding; and when it is
said, according to our translation, God has deprived her of wisdom, we are not
to take it, as if God had taken that stock of wisdom from her which once she
had; but his depriving her of wisdom, is his not communicating wisdom to her,
or his not trusting her with a stock of wisdom; For so it follows, Neither
has he imparted to her understanding.

Sapientia struthioni non privative sed negative deest. Est inferioris
praestantiae non vitiosae naturae, vitium hominis natura est pecoris. August.
Sapientiam and intelligentiam nominat industriam naturalem Aquin. Sapientiam
dicit naturalem affectum in suos, aut artem conservandi, quod ex se natum. Drus.
This latter part of the verse explaines the former, and shows that the
Ostriches want of wisdom is noc privative, but negative; God has not taken it
from her, but not given it her. But here it may be demanded, has God given
wisdom, or imparted understanding to any fowls of the air? Are not these two
words, wisdom and understanding, too high for beasts or birds, indeed, for the
whole irrational part of the creation? I answer, as the Ostrich has no true
wisdom nor understanding, so neither has any beast or bird. Wisdom and
understanding taken strictly, are proper only to rational creatures, Men and
Angels; there is no wisdom where there is no reason: yet wisdom and
understanding are ascribed sometimes to brutish creatures, and here the
Ostrich, a brutish creature, is said to be deprived of them, or not to have
them communicated to her, because not so much as that shadow of wisdom and
understanding is given to her, which appears in some beasts and birds. Brutes
are said to have wisdom, because they have that which serves their turn for
their preservation; and some of them are said to have wisdom, because they are
indeed wiser, and more subtle than other brutes ( Genesis 3.1.) yet all their
wisdom is nothing to the wisdom of man. That natural affection and forecast of
beasts and birds, in providing for, and bringing up their young ones, is their
wisdom; of this wisdom God has deprived the Ostrich, neither has he imparted
unto her so much as this small parcel of understanding, not so much as this
shadow of understanding, which he has bestowed upon other, both birds and
beasts. And there appears somewhat in nature, as a proof, that the Ostrich is a
foolish bird, for her head is very little, and her brains (in proportion) much
less. And that any one Ostrich has not much brains, may be collected from a
piece of the Roman History, which reports, that Heliogabalus the Emperor had
the heads of six hundred Ostriches prepared for him at one supper, only for the
brains sake. It Is added also by the same Author, that the Ostrich is naturally
deaf, Bochartus.
and that there is no perfect anima else, in the whole compass of nature, that
is deaf or wants the sense of hearing. And needs must that creature have little
or no understanding, which has no hearing, that being the sense of discipline.
All these considerations confirm what this Text in Job speaks of her, that God
has not imparted to her understanding.

Hence Note, First; Some beasts of the earth, and birds of the air, have
somewhat that may be called wisdom, so much at least as serves their turn, and
directs them to do what is best for themselves and theirs.

Though the Ostrich is short of this short pittance of understanding, yet most
irrational creatures have it.

Note, Secondly; Whatever looks like wisdom and understanding, in a brute
creature, beast or bird, is the gift of God.

God is said not to give or impart wisdom an understanding to this brute
creature, therefore he gives it others. Wisdom, such as it is, in beasts and
birds, must be acknowledged to be a gift of God. Not only every good gift in
man, but every good gift in beasts, their strength, their swiftness, their
subtilty, and craft their forecast, are of the Lords plantation in them.

Thirdly, Note: God has not given a like portion or measure of wisdom and
understanding to all brute creatures.

Some have (in their capacity) a great deal, others very little, so little,
that they may be said to have none at all, as the Ostrich in the Text; who
(though in some things she has understanding, yet) as to her eggs and young
ones, is a careless, witless animal, As there is a difference among men in
wisdom and understanding; some have a great portion given them of God, others
have so little, that they may be said to have none: The natural man has no
spiritual understanding ( Isa. 27.11.) This is a people of no understanding;
therefore he that made them, will not have vercy upon them; and he that formed
them, will show them no famour. What! were they brutes and beasts? no, possibly
they were witty and subtle enough for the world, but they were a people of no
spiritual understanding. Men full of natural understanding may have none that
is spiritual. And As to natural and political wisdom and understanding, there
is a great difference among men: Some have enough to rule Kingdoms, others, not
enough to govern a family, no, nor their personal affairs; yea, some men are so
low in parts and understanding, that God may be said to have deprived them of
understanding, or not to have imparted wisdom to them. And this offers us a
ground of useful meditation. Let us bless God, that men have more wisdom than
brutes; and if any man have more wisdom and understanding than his neighbor,
let him acknowledge the goodness and bounty of God to him in it; for who has
made thee to differ in natural wisdom and understanding? As the Apostle speaks
of that great difference among men, grace and no grace, Who has made thee to
differ? how is it that one man has grace, and an other has no grace? has man
made himself to differ in grace? No, it is of grace that any have grace: So who
has made thee to differ in common wisdom and understanding? what, thy self?
surely no. You that seem to have as much wisdom above other men, as men have
above beasts, have not any of your selves; it is God who makes all men differ
from beasts in understanding, and it is he that makes one man differ, from
another in understanding. He that has almost as much understanding above other
men, as men have commonly above beasts has it all of God. Understanding is not
of nature, nor is it gotten (though it may be improved) by study and industry;
gold and silver cannot purchase it, nor can our pains procure it. What man
receives not, he has not; nor has any man more than he has received. Now if
common wisdom be of God, and we owe him the glory of it; how much more is
spirirual wisdom, which is to fear him, and spiritual understanding, which is
to depart from evil (Job 28. ult.) the gift of God!

What a mercy is it to have wisdom,

First, To know God in Christ, whom to know is eternal life.

Secondly, To know our selves lost, miserable and undone for ever without
Christ.

Thirdly, To know the difference between good and evil, between light and
darkness, truth and error, sound doctrine and damnable, right worship and
superstitious or idolatrous.

Fourthly, To know our duty, what is incumbent upon us in this life. The wisdom
of the prudent is to understand his way (Pro. 14.8.) where to walk, what to do,
that he may keep tite and close to God, to know upon what bottom he is settled,
and upon what ground he treads.

Fifthly, What a mercy is it for us, that live here on earth, to see our way to
that eternal life in heaven!

Lastly, What wisdom and understanding has God imparted to his people, and how
thankful should they be for it, that they are able, while on earth, to converse
and have communion with himself in heaven! The Apostle says ( Phil. 3.20.) Our
conversation is in heaven; with whom there? with God. True believers know how
to converse with God, and can say (in their measure, as the Apostle John, 1
Ephesians. 1.3.) Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.
This wisdom has God imparted to his faithful servants, and how thankful should
they be for it! The least ray of wisdom is from him; that in beasts, and that
in common men, much more that in godly men. The wisest in the world would have
had no more wisdom than an Ostrich, had not God provided better for them, and
given them a richer furniture of internals or intellectuals.

Further, consider this Ostrich as a goodly bird, having beautiful feathers,
yet not a dram of wisdom or understanding.

Hence Note, Fourthly; Many creatures have a bodily beauty and strength, yet
little wit and understanding.

The Ostrich has a bulky strong body, as well as beautiful feathers; but her
brains are as light as her feathers. And is it not so with some men? their gay
feathers are visible; but where is their understanding?

Note, Lastly; The same creature way want wisdom in one point, yet have it in
another.

The Ostrich, who as to taking care of her young ones, has no understanding,
is yet reported by Naturalists to be very subtle in some things; for when she
is pursued by the Hunter, she gathers up stones with her claws, and casts them
back to the hurt of her pursuers. It Is so likewise among men; some are wise
enough in this or that matter, while miserably blockish and defective in all
things else. And of all wicked men the Prophet has left this character, They
are wise to do evil, but to do good they have knowledge. And that the Ostrich
has this piece of knowledge and cunning, to do a mischief to those who intend
her one, may be collected from her confidence, in that case, spoken of in the
next verse.

Verse. 18. What time she lifts up her self on high, she scorneth the Horse
and his Rider. Before we heard of the folly of this creature, now of her pride
and confidence.

What time, or at the time when she lifts up her self, that is, her head, (...)
juxta tompus.
neck, and wings on high, that she may run the swifter; she scorneth, etc. And
this she does when beset by those who would take her, then she lifts up her
self on high, that is, as high as she can, though (as was said) very high she
cannot, and then she casts back stones upon her persecuters. Aelian. l. 14. c.
20. Plin. l. 10. c. 1.
And hence some conceive these words give answer to a secret or un-expressed
objection. For it might be said, If the Ostrich, which is of so heavy a body,
be likewise of so dull a wit, having no wisdom nor understanding; surely, then
she may be easily taken and destroyed? Not so neither; for God has provided
her a help against this time of danger, and therefore though she be of a heavy
body, and have little understanding in other things, yet she understands how to
shift for her self; she raises up her self as high as she can, and fluttering
with her wings (which she holds up like sails to the wind) she drives on amain;
though she keeps still upon her feet, Sublatis alis ut navigii velis cursu
pernicissiono vena^ores deludit.
or rises very little at any time above the ground, and is therefore said to
fly running, or to run flying, or, in a sort, to sail in the air, very lightly
touching the earth is, yet she is somewhat lifted up, and being thus lifted up,
She scorneth the Horse and his Rider.

As much as to say, she can outrun them all, and so cares not a straw for
them, let them do their worst; she scorns them, not because able to resist
them, or as if she thought her self stronger than they, but because by help of
her wings, though on her feet, she is swifter than they. So that, in plain
course they can never overtake her, and therefore not take her; only by some
slights and stratagems, she is entangled and taken; she may be over-reacht, but
she cannot be overrun. And so swift is her course, that is has long since
grown into a Proverb among the Arabians, who thus signify a man of great
expedition in business, He has ridden upon the wings of the Ostrich. What time
she lifts up her self on high, she scorneth the Horse and his Rider.

Hence Note, First; Dangers put all creatures to their utmost shifts.

The Ostrich being heavy bodied, has no great mind to run, and being short or
weak-winged, has little power to fly, yet when she must, she runs to purpose;
she will not lose her life to spare her labor. Great dangers make us do great
thing. Fear adds wings to our feet, and makes a heavy body mount and fly,
rather than go. The Ostrich (in that case) lifts up her self on high.

Note, Secondly; Nature teaches us to seek our safety above, or on high.

Though the Ostrich cannot sore aloft, in the air as the Eagle, yet she lifts
up her self as high as she can above the earth. Some seek for safety by
creeping into the ground, and running into the holes of the earth ( Isa. 2.19.
Rev. 6.16.) But the best way for our safety, when we are pursued, is by lifting
up our selves on high, and that to God; to get into his power, and mercy, and
goodness; that is our way, and that is our wisdom, when we are hunted and pursued
by our enemies. I (says David, Psalm. 121.1.) will lift up mine eyes to the
hills, from whence comes my help; that is, to God ( ver. 2.) When the Ostrich
is thus lifted up she scorneth the Horse and his Rider.

Hence Note; They who think they are out of danger, despise danger.

The Ostrich looks upon her self as out of danger, when she is on high, and
therefore scorns the Horse and his Rider. Danger is not to be laughed at, when
we are under or within the reach of it; but we may laugh at it when we are out
of the fear of it ( Job 5.22.) At destruction and famine thou shall laugh. Why?
because through the goodness of God thou shall be provided against them, and
prepared for them. A believer scorns the Horse and his Rider, his swiftest and
most eager pursuers, because he can lift up himself on high, or as the Prophet
speaks ( Isa. 33.16.) He dwells on high, his place of defense is the munition of
rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure; he is safe from
danger, and out of gunshot: This makes him laugh at danger, at trouble, and
the sword. God who sits in heaven laughs at his enemies, and has them in
dirision ( Psalm. 2.4.) why? because he knows, they who oppose him, can do
nothing to annoy him; they cannot ruin his kingdom, nor hurt his servants, how
much soever they molest them; he sits on high, he is above all his enemies. And
as God lifted up in himself, so a godly man, lifted up on high in God, upon the
wings of faith and love, scorns the Horse and his Rider: For as the Apostle was
( Romans 8.38, 39.) so he is persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels,
nor pri^cipalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor, depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate him from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord; that is, they shall not be
able to separate him, either from that love that Christ bears to him, nor draw
him off from that love which he bears to Christ. When once his soul is drawn up
to a due height in believing, he scorns all dangers, and in all these things is
more than a conqueror. A man that is a conqueror, much more he that is more
than a conqueror, may scorn all dangers, and conquer them who think they have
more than conquered him. From this whole verse take these brief inferences.

First, That which will not serve all turns, may yet serve many turns.

We might chink the wings of the Ostrich were given her to no purpose, because
he cannot fly aloft, nor make a lofty slight; Pennae struthionis currentem
s^lum adjuvani, volatilem non reddunt.
yet they help her for another purpose, they help her much in running, though
little or nothing in flying.

Secondly, That which is very beautiful may not be very useful.

The Ostrich has more beautiful wings than the Eagle, yet makes little use of
them. We may in appearance be fit to do that which we cannot do.

Thirdly, God does not usually give all to one: He bestows one thing upon this
creatures, and that upon another.

The Ostrich has goodly feathers, yet bad wings; the Eagle has no goodly
feathers, yet good wings. One man excess in this gift, another in that, scarce
any one has all (1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.) All have not the same gift, and none
have all gifts, that all may be kept in dependence upon God, and be humble one
toward another, seeing they must be beholding one to another. All men cannot
do all things; And though all godly men can do all things (which are commanded
of God as their duty) through Christ strengthening of them; yet some godly men
cannot do some things, which others can.

Lastly, That which is conceived, and may well be the design of God in
questioning Job about this creature, was to teach him, and us in him, the
wisdom of God toward unwise creatures, and the power of God in saving those
that are exposed to danger; and so to quiet both Jobs spirit and ours in
staying upon his providence, when we are in greatest straights. What though we
have not Eagles wings; yet between wings and feet we shall make a shift to
shuffle out of danger; and if we cannot out-fly, yet we may outrun the Horse
and his Rider.

JOB, Chap. 39. Verse. 19, 20, 21. 19. Have thou given the Horse strength? have
thou clothed his neck with thunder?

20. Can thou make him afraid as a Grasshopper? the glory of his nostrils is
terrible.

21. He paweth in the valley, and rejoices in his strength; he goes on to
meet the armed men.


THe Lord having occasionally mentioned the Horse, the hunting Horse, at the
18th verse of this Chapter, questions Job, ^qui generosissimi elegantissima
descriptio.
and enters a large discourse about the Horse, the war Horse, or Horse for war;
and is pleased to give us a most elegant and rhetorical descripcion of that
kind of Horses, exceeding all the fancies of the old Poets, and the strains of
Orators. The divine eloquence of this context, exceeds all competition and
comparison.

The war Horse is described two ways in this context, or with in respect to a
twofold qualification. Robur ejus in collo, animus in naribus indicatur, quibus
iras efflare dicitur.


First, With respect to his force, at the 19th verse; Have thou given the Horse
strength? have thou clothed his neck with thunder?

Secondly, To his fearlessness or courage, which is described in the six verses
following.

First, By his slighting of all danger; Can thou make him afraid like a
Grasshopper? (ver. 20.) He mocketh at fear (ver. 22.)

Secondly, His courage appears, as by slighting danger, so by that which is a
consequent of it, his forwardness to run upon danger; for so does he, that
goes out to meet the armed men, or armies of men, ver. 21. and turns not
away (as he does not) from the sword, ver. 22. And so does he, that swalloweth
the ground with fierceness and rage, that (for joy) believes not that it is
the sound of the Trumpet; that says among the Trumpets, Ha, ha, etc. ver. 24,
25.

If any should ask a reason, why God bestowed so much rhetoric upon a bruit
beast, upon a horse? I answer; God, who is infinitely wise and holy, will not
mispend a word; he will not lavish out lines vainly, as men often do; the Lord
therefore had this design and scope in speaking so largely and rhetorically of
this generous horse, even thereby, to set forth, his own power, wisdom and
greatness in making him, and to convince Job yet farther of his own weakness
and inability, as compared in some things with a Horse.

Verse. 19. Have thou given the Horse strength? The Hebrew word which we
translate Horse, is Sus, and thence the Latins have the word Pegasus (as some
conceive) which is as much as, The horse of the fountain; and by the very same
word, (...) Equus, unde Pegasus, quasi fontis Equus. Sus Latinis Porcum,
Hebraeis Equ^^ Flandris silentium significat. Cornel. a Lap. (...) a (...)
laetari. Rab. Becai.
in sound and letters, the Latins express a Swine, and another language,
Silence. One of the Rabbis says, he is so called from a word of the same, or
a very near sound, in the Hebrew, though not of the same letters, signifying to
rejoice, because the Horse is a cheerful beast. Others from an Arabic word,
signifying to govern or rule, because he is a docile creature, and soon submits
to government.

Have thou given the Horse strength? What Horse? The word is indefinitely put
in this 19th verse, and may be taken for any horse; yet the subsequent
description, restrains it to a particular sort of horses, horses of war, or war
horses. A horse is a very useful creature, and there are six several uses of
the Horse;

First, For travel, which is the ordinary use; we say, this is a good
traveling horse.

Secondly, For burden, the carrying horse.

Thirdly, For drawing Carts and Wagons, etc. the draught horse.

Fourthly, For pleasure, the hunting horse.

Fifthly, For swiftness, the race horse.

Sixthly, For war, the valiant horse; that is the Horse in the Text: Have thou
given the Horse Strength?

Every horse according to his usefulness needs strength, the war horse much
more. Have thou given that horse strength which needs so much strength? As if
the Lord had said, Job, thou see the horse is a strong and stately beast, a
beast of great force; how came he by his strength? have thou given it him, or
I? surely not thou, but I: It is I, who have made him strong; it is I, who have
filled him with courage, (...) a nomine (...) quod est vir, non qualemcunque
strenuitatem impart^t sed virilem and nobilem Plin. l 8. c. 24. Homer. Iliad. 4.
and fitted him for the battle. The Hebrew word, which we translate strength,
does not signify ordinary strength, but manly noble strength; a strength, not
only of outward force, but virtue. The Root notes, a great, a potent man. It is
not any kind of strength which is here intended, but an active strength; I may
say, a manly strength. Histories report strange things concerning the manly
strength of the Horse; his is a generous strength. Alexanders horse, called
Bucephalus, is famous for the greatness, both of his strength and spirit. Have
thou given the Horse strength?

Hence note, First; The strength even of a horse, is the gift of God.

God is infinitely strong and mighty; and whatsoever might or strength is found
in any creature, God is the Author of it: Strength in great proportion, is not
the portion of every creature. Solomon (Prove. 30.26.) speaks of the Coneys as a
feeble folk, they have little or no strength; yet that they have little
strength, or that little strength which they have is of God, as well as that
the Horse has great strength, or the great strength of the horse: The strength
of a beast is of God, as well as the strength of man. The strength of man's body
is of God, as well as that more excellent strength, the strength of his mind,
or the strength of his understanding, judgment and memory. All strength
flows from, and is to be ascribed unto the strong God. As no man gives it, so
let no man take it to himself. Glory not in strength; give God the glory of all
strength, even of the Horses strength.

Secondly, A Horse having received such mighty strength, yet is serviceable to
man, for very many, and very necessary uses, as was touched before, not only for
pleasure, for hunting and racing, but for burden and for travel, for draught
and for war.

Hence note; The power and goodness of God is much seen, and much to be
acknowledged, in making a creature so strong, yet subject to, and useful for
man.

Some creatures have great strength, yet are no^, nor will be subject nor
serviceable to man. It is said at the 10. verse of this Chapter, concerning the
Unicorn, Can thou bind the Unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he
harrow the valleys after thee? The Unicorn has great strength, but man can get
no service from him; he cannot bind him in the furrow, nor make him do him any
other work. Why is it that the Horse, who is of great strength, though possibly
not of so great strength as the Unicorn, is so serviceable? surely the reason
is only this, Because God by his power has subdued the strength of the Horse
to, and for the service of man. Who could break the Horse, who could handle and
manage him, if God himself had not brought him to hand? The Elephant, greater
in strength than the Horse or Unicorn, is yet made subject to the use of man,
by the power and appointment of God. Take five Inferences from both these
considerations: That the strength of the Horse, is of God; and that the Horse,
though mighty in strength, is by God subdued to the use of man.

First, If the strength of horses be the gift of God, then, do not glory in
their strength; though they are very strong, yet rejoice not in their strength,
but in God, who has given them their strength. David says ( Psalm. 147.10.)
The Lord delights not in the strength of the Horse. The Lord gives the Horse
strength, but he delights not in it; no, nor in the legs of a man; The Lords
delight is in them that fear him. The Lord tells us, he does not delight in
them, to teach us, that we should not delight in them. The Lord delights not in
the strength of a horse, much less in the strength of those men, who are like
Horses and Mules (of whom David speaks, Psalm. 32.9.) whose mouth must be held
in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto us, to do us a mischief. Some
men are strong in body, and strong in mind too; they have strong
understandings, and strong memories; yet a^e but like strong horses, that must
be held in with bit and bridle, else they will do more mischief with their
strength, than the strongest ungoverned horses. In these the Lord delights not;
he cannot delight in the strength of any who are strong to sin, and to do
wickedly; or (to give it in the words of the Prophet, Isa. 5.22.) Who are
strong to drink wine, and to mingle strong drink: such a strength some men
glory in, but the Lord abhors all that strength which is used and issued to the
darkning of his glory.

Secondly, As we are not to delight in the strength of horses, but in God, who
has given them their strength; so, whatever strength we see in the horse, or
in any other creature, we should give God the glory of it. Do not glory in the
strength of creatures, but in God, who gives them their strength; that which he
has given, or comes from him, should return unto him in daily praise, or in
the due acknowledgement of his power and goodness.

Thirdly, Use the strength of horses (I say also, your own strength) for God,
and not against him. We should take heed of employing the strength which God
has given a beast, against God; much more should we take heed of using our own
strength against him. When men employ the strength of a beast, or their own,
against God, they employ the gift against the giver, and so fight against God
with his own weapons.

Fourthly, If the strength of horses be of God, or be his gift, Then trust not
in the strength of horses: Use the strength of horses, but do not trust the
strength of horses. If you trust that strength which God has given to horses,
you make them your God. How often does God fo^bid trusting in the strength of
horses, as knowing that we are apt to trust in any thing that is strong, though
but a beast ( Psalm. 33.17.) A horse is a vain thing for safety, neither shall
he deliver any by his great strength. As if God had said, you think a horse can
save you, but know, he is a vain thing. And when the Psalmist says, A horse is
a vain thing, he does not mean it of a weak horse, but of (such a horse as is
here described) a horse of the grea^est strength imaginable, such a horse is a
vain thing to save a man, neither can he deliver any by his strength; and
therefore the Lord, when he promised great deliverances to his people (lest
they should expect it by the strength of horses) faith ( Hos. 1.7.) I will save
them by the Lord their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by
battle, by horses, nor by horsemen: As if he had told them, do not look after
creature strength to be saved by; a horse will be a vain thing to save you, and
I can save you effectually without horses; yea, I will. Hence the people of God
( Hos. 14.3.) when beaten off from all outward helps and trusts, are brought
in, speaking thus; Ashur shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses,
neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our gods:
Heretofore we thought to be saved by this and that, we thought, if we could
have horses enough they would save us; but now, Ashur shall not save us, nor
will we ride upon horses. We may collect from ( Psalm. 20.7.) how the spirit of
man runs out this way; Some trust in chariots, and some in horses; but we will
remember the name of the Lord our God. The Law of Moses gave great caution
about this thing, limitting even the King in this case; and that Law was made
for the King some hundred of years before they had a King ( Deuteronomy. 17.16.) He
shall not multiply horses to h^mself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt,
to the end that he should multiply horses: As if it had been said, take heed
you do not put your confidence upon the strength of horses; though the Law deny
not your King the use of horses, both for civil and military affairs, yet it
limits him that he shall not multiply them, lest, having many of them, he
should look upon them, as more than they are, or can be, his help, and so put
confidence in them. Hence also is that reproof ( Isa. 31.1.) Woe to them that
go down to Egypt for help, and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because
they are many, and in horsemen, because they are very strong. We see how the
spirit of man runs out to the horse which God has made strong, even forgetting
God who has made him strong. That people thought themselves strong enough with
horses without the strong God, and therefore the Lord told them at the third
verse, The Egyptians are men, and not God, and their horses are flesh, and not
spirit; that is, they are weak and not strong: not that they were weak in
themselves, but weak to save and deliver them, or to give them victory in
battle; they are but flesh, and not spirit: flesh notes weakness, and spirit
notes strength; so that, though a horse has a mighty strength, yet if you
trust to him, he is but flesh, that is, he is weak. And some conceive this was
the reason why the Lord commanded Joshua, in his war with the Canaanites, to
hough their horses; as the rule is given ( Josh. 11.6.) Thou shall hough their
horses, and burn their chariots with fire; that is, cut their nerves, or as we
say, their ham-strings. Why did the Lord command him to hough their horses? why
might he not preserve them for service in his wars? Doubtless it was, lest he
should think that horses could do the work. And therefore according to this
command of God, when David took a thousand chariots, and seven hundred
horsemen from the Moabites, he houghed all the chariot-horses, but reserved of
them for an hundred chariots (2 Samuel 8.4.) He would not multiply horses to
himself out of the spoils of the enemy, lest he should seem to trust their
strength and numbers.

Fifthly, Fear not the strength of horses. The Prophet says to the fearful (
Jer. 12.5.) If thou have run with footmen, and they have wearied thee, how
can thou contend with horses? When we have horses to contend with, it is a
very dangerous conflict. The Prophet by footmen and horsemen, intends lesser
and greater oppositions; when we have to deal with lesser difficulties, we have
to deal with footmen, but when with greater, then with horsemen. If then you
have to do with horses, either in the metaphor or in plain sense, fear them
not; why? for they are but creatures; and God who has given them their
strength, can take away their strength, and make them useless ( Psalm. 76.6.) At
thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and the horse are cast into a deep
sleep. Suppose a multitude of chariots and horses should come against us, yet
at the Lords rebuke, if he does but speak the word, if the God of Jacob do but
give a rebuke, the chariots and horses are laid in a deep sleep; that is, they
are as nothing or as dead. Death is a deep sleep; and therefore, though horses
have a mighty strength, yet be no more afraid of them than of that which is
dead; the Lord God who has given them their strength, can defend us against
their strength, or disable them, notwithstanding their strength, to offend us.
Have thou given the Horse strength?

Have thou clothed his neck with thunder? To cloth with, or to be clothed
with this or that, is a very common Scriptural phrase, metaphorically applied
to things, both corporeal and incorporeal. Of the first sort are all those
places of Scripture, where man is said to be clothed with skin and flesh (Job
10.11.) The flesh with worms and clods of dust. (Job 7.5.) The fields with
flocks (Psalm. 65.13.) The earth with Sea (Psalm. 104.6.) The Sea with clouds
(Job 38.9.) The heavens with blackness (Isa. 50.3.) Of the second sort, are all
those Scriptures which say, A person is clothed with righteousness (Job 39.14.
Psalm. 132.9.) With salvation (Psalm. 132.16.) With glory and beauty (Job 40.10.)
With power or strength (Psalm. 93.1. Isa. 51.9.) With the Spirit of God (Judge.
6.34. 2 Chronicles. 24.20.) With desolation (Ezekiel. 7.27.) With shame (Psalm. 71.13.
Psalm. 109.29.) And as both things and persons are said to be clothed with
these, so to be clothed with any thing, notes two things; either, First, that
such have much of it. Thus to be clothed with glory, is to be exceeding
glorious; and to be clothed with shame, is to be exceedingly ashamed; and to
be clothed with pride, is to be exceeding proud; and to be clothed with
righteousness and honor, is to be exceeding righteous and honorable; and to
be clothed with humility, is to be exceeding humble; and lastly, to be
clothed with the Spirit, is to be exceeding spiritual, and full of the Spirit.
Or, Secondly, to be clothed with any thing that is good, notes it to be very
becoming and ornamental to us, as rich and suitable garments are; or if it be
bad, that it is very disgraceful and detrimental to us, as filthy and uncomely
garments are. Now, here in the Text, when the neck of the horse is said to be
clothed with thunder, it must needs note somewhat, in which the horse exceeds,
and which is both an honor and an ornament to the horse. Have thou (says God
to Job, or I) clothed his neck with thunder?

There are various interpretations of the word which we here translate thunder.

First, Some affirm, That the word by us rendered thunder, Hic tonitru est (...)
eum tonitru, alias (...) dicatur. Vestimenti nomine intelligo Jubas densas and
cris^^antes. Cajet.
signifies nothing less than thunder, or that it does not signify thunder at
all, neither in a proper, nor in a metaphorical sense; but that it signifies
the horses mane. Nor can it be denied, but that this form of speaking is very
apt and elegant, to say, the neck of a horse is clothed with his mane; as
birds may be said to be clothed with feathers, or beasts with hair. And here
the mention of the horses mane is fitly brought in, because the scope of the
place is to set forth the chief signs and conditions of a generous stomackful
War-horse. For though the meanest horses have manes, and that of an ancient
Author be true, in part, of all horses, That the mane is given them for an
ornament; Zenophon in Comment. de re equestri.
yet generous horses have thickest and fullest manes hanging down, and covering
their necks, as the old Poets often describe noble and warlik^ Horses. And that
in this place of Job, not an ordinary thin or sho^t mane, but a thick and a
deep one is intended, we may collect from the word clothed, which will not
well agree with those of ordinary Horses. (...). Arnol. Bootius. Animad.
Sacrae. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 10.
The only difficulty with which this interpretation is attended, is how to make
it out that the Hebrew word (Ragnemah) signifies the mane of a Horse, it being
never used in any place of Scripture but this; and it is much questioned,
whither the word be to be found in the writings of any of the Jewish Rabbis in
that sense. The only answer is, that it is to be reckoned among those words (of
which there are several in Scripture) which are only once read or used; and so
the sense of them is to be given from the scope of the place where they are
used, not from their usage in other places, they not being used in any place
but one. This is a fair interpretation, that being granted, that the word
Ragnemah has no communion with the word Ragnam, which properly signifies
Thunder.

But, almost all other interpreters agree, that Ragnemah is the same with
Ragnam; and take the Hebrew letter in the end of it, to be only Paragogical,
and so not making any alteration at all in the sense.

Now this being the most received opinion, and our translators pitching
expressly upon it, saying, Have thou clothed his neck with thunder? It is
questioned what is here meant by the word thunder. No man can imagine that it
should be understood of proper thunder; and in what the metaphor is couched, or
whence to take the allusion, that is the doubt.

De strepitu monilium intelligit Munsterus. Instructos ostro alipedes pictisque
tapetis. Aurea pectoribus demisse monilia pendent. Virg. l. 5.
First, I shall not stay upon that weak conjecture, that by thunder we are to
understand the sound, noise or rattling, which is made by the armor, ornaments
or trappings, which are sometimes put upon the necks and breasts of war-horses,
when they go out to battle. We read that the Camels of Zeba and Zalmunna,
conquered by victorious Joshua, had ornaments upon their necks (Judge. 8.21.)
But surely, the word thunder suits not with such sounds; Thunder must needs
relate to somewhat that is terrible, not ornamental; and all the sound which
the rattling of a Horses arms or ornaments can make, is much too low for any
resemblance of thunder, or to be compared with it; nor will the general scope
of the question comply with any such interpretation. For when God says, to
Job, Have thou clothed his neck with thunder? The question denies; and the
meaning of it is, Thou have not, but I have. Whereas if it were understood of
artificial warlike arms of defense or ornaments, Job might have answered the
question affirmatively, and have said, Yes, I, or other men, have clothed the
neck of the horse with them. And the Lord possibly put this question, in
opposition to all such kind of defenses and ornaments; As if he had said, Thou;
O Job, have or may cloth the neck of the horse with rich ornaments, and
strong arms to defend him? but have thou, or can thou cloth his neck with
thunder? That Is my work alone. Therefore somewhat is here intended by thunder,
beyond what any man is able to cloth the neck of a Horse withal. (...). Sept.
Numquid indues collum ejus tremore? Pagn.


Secondly, Some render thus, Have thou clothed his neck with fear? another,
with trembling? But some may say, h^w does this serve to set forth the honor
and commendation of the Horse? yea, what can be said more improperly of a brave
Horse, or more unsuitable to the description here given of him, than this, that
his neck is clothed with fear and trembling? I answer, it is true, if we take
fear, as taking hold of or possessing the Horse himself: But if we take it for
that fear and trembling (which doubtless is the sense of those translations)
with which the Horse affects others, than to say his neck is clothed with
fear, that is, his appearance makes others afraid, is very proper to the
discourse in hand. And for as much as thunder makes the stoutest men fear and
tremble, the Horse, who does so too, when he rusheth fiercely into the battle,
and charge the enemy, may significantly enough, be said, to have his neck
clothed with thunder. How terrible a shock, even like a thunderclap, does a
stout valiant Horse make upon his adversary, with the force of his neck and
breast. And when Horses come galloping upon us with their full speed, it is
usual to say, Tonitru hic usurpatur de fremitu, aut hinnitu equi. Drus. Number
induists col^um ejus fremitu? Bez. Numquid adornas collum ejus sonitu
vehementi, i. e. Hinnitu? Vatabl.
they come thundering upon us.

Thirdly, Most Interpreters say confidently, that by thunder clothing the neck
of the Horse, the neighing of the Horse is intended. And some (who are not of
this opinion) conceive, that if the Hebrew word (Ragnemah) signifying thunder
properly, be here to be taken Metaphorically for neighing, then it were better
to render the Text (not as our last translators have done with thunder, but) as
many have done, and among them our old English translators with neighing; to
which effect they render this clause in our language thus, Have thou learned
him to neigh courageously. For (says that learned Author, who opposes this
reading) it is uncomely, when a word has two or more significations, to retain
that in the translation, which is least commodious to hold out the meaning of
the place in hand. And (says he) it is most certain, that the word thunder, is
never used in the Latin tongue; no, not by the boldest Poets, to signify the
neighing of a Horse. Arnold. Boot. Animad. Sacr. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 3. Tonare,
intonare, l. 3. c. 11. sect. 8.
Yet I see no cogent reason, seeing the Latin words which signify to thunder,
are applied to several clamours and noises, much inferior to thunder, why the
word thunder in the Noune may not be so applied; nor do I see any reason why
the neighing of a mighty Horse, being usually accompanied (when he is in a
rage) with fretting, chafing, and snorting, may not be allusively called
thunder or thundering. I am sure, the fretting and chafing of a woman is so
expressed by the Verb in the Holy Scripture (1 Samuel 1.6.) where it is said of
Hannah, Her adversary provoked her sore to make her fret; the Hebrew is, to
make her thunder. Now the fretting of a woman, though heightened to loud
brawling, and (if I may use so course a word) scolding, bears not so much
proportion to the noise of thunder, as the neighing, snorting, and fretting of
a great and generous Horse. When a Horse is enr^ged, we may say, sparks leap
out of his eyes like lightning, and a sound out of his mouth like thunder, aad
a breath out of his nostrils like smoke. And that the snorting and neighing of
Horses is dreadful, even like thunder, appears fully by that of the Prophet (
Jer. 8.16.) The snorting of his Horses was heard from Dan (that is, from the
utmost bounds of the Country) the whole Land trembled at the sound of the
neighing of his strong ones. The neighing of Horses, is a sign of their courage
and boldness, of their fearlesness and generosity; which probably was the
reason why the great Lords of Persia agreed, that meeting all together in one
place on Horseback, he should be chosen Emperor whose Horse neighed first
after they were met; they supposing it a good Omen or Sign, that the Rider
would prove a person of great courage and spirit, whose Horse first gave that
token of it: Upon what occasion the Horse of Darius neighed first, and so got
his Master the Empire, the Persian histories will inform the Reader.

But to the point in hand. It Is evident from what has been said, that it is no
uncouth, nor far fetched, much less forced metaphor, to express the neighing of
a furious fretting Horse by thundering. And as the word rendered thunder,
signifies (in the Verb) to be moved with choler and indignation, so a
noble-spirited Horse, charging an enemy, shows a high strain of rage and
indignation, in which respect, together with his neighing, his neck may seem to
be clothed with thunder.

And though it be said, that, as the neck is not reckoned among the instruments
of speaking in man, so it cannot be conveniently reckoned among the instruments
of neighing in a Horse, that properly belonging to the throat; and though I
grant that when the Scripture says ( Psalm. 75.5.) Speak not with a stiff neck;
the word neck is not there to be taken, for the means or instrument of speech,
but notes only the manner of speaking; namely, that there the Lord forbids
wicked men to speak scornfully, pertinaciously, or as Hannah expresses it in
her Song (1 Samuel 2.3.) that they should talk no more so exceeding proudly, nor
let arrogance come out of their mouth: Yet the throat being placed in and being
a part of the neck, we may by a common synecdoche, of the whole for the part,
avoid that difficulty. Nor does the metaphor of clothing (though, I confess
it, most suitable to the first interpretation, that of the mane) oppose this
third of neighing; For when a Horse neighs strongly, the sound coming out of
his mouth compasses him, his neck especially, round about as with a garment.
David describing a wicked man, says, he clothed himself with cursing (Psalm.
109.18.) Cursing goes out of the mouth of a wicked man, as neighing out of the
mouth of a Horse; and therefore, as when a man is much in cursing, he may be
said to cloth himself with cursing, as with a garment, so a Horse which
neigheth much, may (I conceive) be said to have his neck clothed with neighing.

Having thus far drawn out these expositions of this second question, which the
Lord put to Job about the Horse, Have thou clothed his neck with thunder? I
shall submit them to the Readers judgment, and only say, that the first (if
that word Ragnemah may signify a Horses-mane) is the clearest, and most
literal of them all; and that among the second sort of expositions, the third
is most received and approved.

From the first interpretation we learn, God has bestowed not only strength,
but ornaments upon the Horse.

The mane of a Horse is of little use (and therefore some cut it quite off) but
it is a great ornament to the Horse.

From the two last interpretations

Observe, First; The Horse in his heat and rage is very terrible.

Thunder is so, and so must he needs be, whose neck is clothed with any thing
resembling thunder.

Note, Secondly; It is of God that the Horse is terrible.

The Horse has thunder about his neck, but it is God who has clothed his
neck with it. If any Horse, or any other creature be delightful to us, God has
made it so; and if any Horse, or any other creature be thunder, dreadful and
terrible to us, it is the Lord who has made it so. This we find more clearly
held out in the next verse.

Verse. 20. Can thou make him afraid as the Grass-hopper: the glory of his
nostrils is terrible. In the first part of this verse, we have the courage of
the Horse set forth. That creature is full of courage, that cannot be made
afraid: Thus the Lord speaks to Job concerning the Horse.

Can thou make him afraid as the Grass-hopper? The Chaldee, with whom one of
the Rabbis joins, rendereth, Can thou cause him to make a noise like a
Grass-hopper. Abenefra. ut senitim edat.
Vehement motion causes a sound or noise in the air. When many grass-hoppers
fly together, they make a kind of rushing noise. This exposition agrees well
enough with the word, which at second hand signifies to make a noise, that
being caused by motion. Yet other considerations hinder from resting in this
interpretation. For seeing the whole discourse here, insists upon the
descrip^ion of a generous horse and his qualifications, the noise or sound
which a Horse makes in running, makes nothing to that purpose; for as much as
it is common to all Horses, even the basest sort of them, to make a sound with
their feet when they run. And if it should be granted that great and generous
horses have somewhat peculiar in this, and make a greater sound than common
horses in running, yet to take the comparison from the sound which
Grass-hoppers make in flying, does easily refute this exposition. We know
indeed, what Pliny says, Grass-hoppers make such a sound with their wings in
flying, Lib. 11. cap. 29.
that they may be thought some other kind of fowls: Yet we cannot therefore
believe, that it is a proper similitude, to compare the sound which horses make
in running (who, as Poets use to phrase it, make the earth tremble and groan)
with that crassing noise which Grass-hoppers make while they fly in the air.
For if the comparison may at all be taken from flying-fowls, great fowls were
much fitter for it, who use to fly in flocks together; Yet these greater fowls
make no very great noise in flying, much less can Grass-hoppers. And therefore
the Poets, both Greek and Latin, though they affect to shadow great sounds
and clamours, by a similitude taken from flying-fowls, yet they do not take the
resemblance from the sound which their flying makes with their wings, but from
the sound or chattering which they make with their bills while they fly;
Bootius animad sacrae.
of which the Reader may find many instances given by the learned Author named
in the Margin.

Seeing then fowls do not make any such noise in flying, as may serve for a
suitable resemblance of any great sound, surely that small noise which
Grass-hoppers make in flying cannot be a proper resemblance of it. Further,
here is nothing said of many, or of a troop and body of horses, but of a single
horse, or of horses singly and a part considered. Now that some one horse
should be compared with one Grass-hopper, as to the sound which the one and the
other makes in their motion, were no small absurdity.

This therefore may suffice for the laying aside of that first interpretation
of the whole clause, though the force of the word does not oppose it.

Secondly, Others read the Text thus, An commovebis eum in morem locustae. Drus.
Can thou make him move leap or skip like the grass-hopper: As if the Lord
had said, It is not of thee, O Job, but of me, that the horse has this
property to move himself like a Grass-hopper.

The motion of a horse may be compared to that of a Grass-hopper in two
respects. First, In respect of his swiftness. Secondly, Of his subsaltation, or
bounding and leaping. I conceive God had respect only to the latter, in these
words: for seeing this whole context does not handle the nature of the horse in
general, but only the marks or qualities of valiant horses; therefore the
mention of this (namely, the subsaltation of horses) is much more proper than
that of their swiftness or speed in running: For swiftness or speed in running,
is not appropriate or peculiar to generous horses; it being certain, that as
they excel the common sort of horses, both in the swiftness of their course,
and in the continuance or lastingness of it, so it is as apparent, that
ordinary horses will often run very swiftly, or with great speed for a time.
But as for that other motion of their bodies in which they imitate the leaping
or skipping of Grass-hoppers, that is proper to them.

And there are two sorts of this motion proper to generous horses. Bootius
animad. sacrae.
The one, in which standing upon two feet only, either the hinder or the
forefeet, the other part of their body is lifted up on high from the ground;
which motion (being very dangerous to the Rider) we call bounding or to bound.
The other sort of saltatory motion, is that, whereby the horse lifts up
himself, with his four feet quite off the ground, and goes as it were leaping,
or intermingles saltation or leaping with his going. There is a twofold
leaping. First, When a horse raises himself over a bar, hedge or ditch, this
is of daily use. The other, is only for pomp, when a horse raises his body
upon plain ground to show his activity, this we call curveting, as the proud
stately gate of a horse is by us called praunsing. Now of these two motions,
bounding and curveting, the latter is rather to be understood in this place;
that being most like the saltation, the leaping or skipping motion of a
Grass-hopper; ^osteriora locustae crura mediis longiora sunt, ut ambulet
melius, and ottollatur facilius de terra. Arist. l. 4. de part. Animal. c. 6.
and the other to be reckoned rather among the ill qualities, than the
commendations of a horse, which are here only taken notice of. Can thou make
him leap or move like a Grass-hopper? The Grass-hopper moves with a kind of
leap. Naturallists tells us, that the hinder-legs of Grass-hoppers are much
longer than their forelegs, to fit them for leaping; the Horse in his leaping
and curveting motion, clearly represents the motion of a Grass-hopper.
According to this exposition, the great agility and nimbleness of the horse is
set forth, Numquid effecisti ut equus motitet ese instar Locustae? i. e.
Fecistine equum agilem sicut Locustam? Vatabl Tunc illi agilitatem dare possis
qualem ostendit, cum Locustae modo substultat. Grot. Tremesacere. Jun. Pisc.
Locustae sunt fugacissimae, and facile aguntur ventis. Ad levem aliquem
strepitum aut motum aufugiunt Sanct. (...) Locusta, quae magna multitudine
volitat. Latinis Locustae videntur dictae quod locos urant, nam segates morsu
erodunt and tactu adurant. Rivet. Locustae equi cataphracti speciem habent.
as before his strength and courage. Have thou made the horse so agile or
active, that like a Grasshopper he does as it were, leaping fly, and flying
leap. A horse will do strange seats of activity if well managed. This
interpretation is much urged by several of the learned; yet I conceive the
purpose of these words, is rather to set forth the boldness, than the
nimbleness of the horse. Our Translation carries this sense clearly.

Can thou make him afraid as the Grasshopper. The Grasshopper is a weak and
frightful creature, he is soon scared, and quickly flies away. The word rendered
a Grasshopper, signifies a multitude, because they usually go by multitudes (
Prove. 30.27.) The Locusts have no King, yet go they forth all of them by bands;
they go, as it were, an Army of them together. The Latin word Locusta, is from
an ill effect of Locusts or Grasshoppers, because they consume, and in a manner,
burn up every green thing in the places where they come. Hence that allusive
prohibition ( Rev. 9.4.) There came out of the smoke Locusts; and it was
commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any
green thing, neither any Tree, etc. Now, though the Scripture compares these
creatures to a great Army ( Joel 2.25.) because they go out in great companies,
and do a great deal of mischief: And though ( Rev. 9.7.) The shapes of the
Locusts (there spoken of) were like unto horses prepared unto battle, that is,
completely armed; yet the Locusts are but a weak kind of Warriers, they are
quickly scared, they are fearful creatures. Can thou make the Horse afraid
like the Grasshopper? When the Lord says, Can thou make him afraid like the
Grasshopper, his meaning is, The Horse is of so stout a spirit, that he will not
only not be afraid like the Grasshopper, but no more afraid than a Lion. So
then, I conclude this part of the verse contains not a similitude, but a
dissimilitude between the horse and the Grasshopper; not a likeness between the
horse and the Grasshopper in nimbleness, but their unlikeness in fearfulness.
Can thou make him Afraid?

The word notes such fear as is caused by an Earthquake, (...) timore and
terrae motum indicat.
Isa. 13.13. Joel 2.10. Psalm. 109.23. Nah. 3.17. As importing, that though the
horse should hear a crashing or rushing sound, like that of an Earthquake,
when the ground under us opens and shakes, yet he is not moved nor quakes, as
Mr. Broughton renders. The horse is rather enraged, than scared like a
Grasshopper, by any noise; His spirit is rather whetted and inflamed, than cowed
(as we say) and cooled by the strongest alarms; as will further appear in the
latter part of this description. Horses are observed sometimes (as also men)
quaking before a battle, yet not for fear, but with indignation. Can thou
make him afraid? etc.

Hence note, First; The Horse is a valiant and stout-hearted creature.

Not to fear, is a sign of valor; but not to be made afraid, is much more a
sign of it than not to fear. When any one has such a spirit, that he does not
only fear, but cannot be made afraid, there is courage to the height: Such is
the courage of the horse, nothing can make him afraid.

Observe, Secondly; The courage, as well as the strength of the Horse, is from
God.

As every creature is not strong, so not courageous. Some are very fearful, so
fearful, that they are grown into a Proverb for fearfulness: Such are Hares and
Hearts, and the Ostrich before spoken of. Nor has every horse courage and
boldness. Horses given to start, are fearful. God puts such courage into some
horses, that nothing can make them start or fear. Courage is a gift of God
bestowed upon some men, and not upon others; some are courageous as Lions, and
others are fearful as Hares and Hearts, or Grasshoppers. We cannot keep some from
fear; we cannot make others afraid. Can thou make him afraid, as the
Grasshopper?

Note, Thirdly; Where God gives courage, it is not in man to make afraid.

The courage of the horse appears yet higher in the next verse.

The glory of his nostrils is terrible. The nostrils are very considerable in
horses, and the largeness or openness of them, is a sign of their goodness and
stoutness. The glory of his nostrils is terrible, or terror, that is, Meros
terroris naribus spirat. Bez. Efflat patentibus naribus ventum calentem irae
and auduciae indicem, quo videtur ille gloriari. Numquid posursti gloriam
narium ejus ut sit terror? i. e. number effecisti ut terreat h^mines fremitu
narium suarum. Vatabl.
very terrible, his breathings are mere terror. This expression of the Horse,
is somewhat like that given of St. Paul, while Saul (Acts 9, 1.) Saul yet
breathing out threatenings and slaughter. Paul, before his conversion, breathed
flames of fire, as it were, he breathed terror out of his mouth against the
faithful people of God. Thus here, The glory of his nostrils is terrible.

But, what is this glory of his nostrils? Some say, these words are a
description of his neighing; and I grant, that sound proceeding from his
nostrils, as from a trumpet, may well enough be called the glory of them; nor
can it be denied, but that the neighing of great horses is terrible. According
to which reading, some say, the word which we translate Nostrils, signifies in
this place, that sound of his nostrils called neighing; and that the word by us
rendered glory, does rather signify excellency or vehemence. And thus our old
English Translation gives it; His strong neighing is fearful; or as others; His
vehement neighing is terrible.

The Hebrew (as was touched before) is Terror; nothing being more common in that
language, than to use substantive words adjectively, or, as if they were
Adjectives. Taking this sense of the words, they describe generous horses
neighing, when they go to battle, as if they would thereby at once proclaim and
trumpet out their own courage, and terrify or daunt the enemy; or, as if they
would not only show their own fearlessness, but make their opposers afraid.
This is a fair interpretation, yet because (according to one Exposition given,
and much received, of the latter part of the former verse, Have thou clothed
his neck with thunder?) the neighing of the horse has been already spoken of,
I rather conceive, that these words, The glory of his nostrils is terrible, may
be expounded either of these two ways.

First, That his wide, fuming, -- Frenoque teneri Impatiens crebras expirat
naribus ignes. Sil. Ital. l. 6. Ignescunt patulae nares. Claud.
smoking nostrils (which are the glory and commendation of a horse) strike
others with terror. Poets describing the horse, fancy him sending fire out of
his nostrils, or breathing fire. And thus when God is angry, smoke and fire are
said to go out of his nostrils (2 Samuel 22.9.) Some understand that ( Isa.
2.22.) of an angry furious man. As if the Prophet had said, fear not man, make
no account of him, though enflamed with wrath and anger. The glory of his
nostrils is terrible.

Secondly, Reading the words thus (as was said) The glory of his nostrils is
terror; they may be expounded, not as implying the terror and fright which the
horse strikes others with, but which others would fright the horses with, while
they brandish their swords, shake their spears, sound their trumpets; from all
which terror, Bellum quod est aliis ad: terrorem, naribus ab equo parceptum,
est ci^ad gloriam, i. e. ad quandam animi magnitudinem. Aquin.
the horse is so far from running, that rather his courage is increased, and
his spirit heated. Such noises, clashings and clamours, will not scare the
horse, as they do the Grasshopper; but the terror or matter of fear which is
presented before him, is the glory of his nostrils, that is, it will but
provoke him to anger and rage, or excite his courage, which makes his nostrils
smoke like fire, it cannot at all put him into a fear, and that is his glory.

Hence note, First; That which any creature excels in, is his glory.

The horse glories in his strength; the courage and fierceness of the horse,
appearing in his nostrils, are his glory also. Whatever good man excels in, is
his glory: if he excels in knowledge, or in strength, or courage, or in
holiness, it is his glory; yea, men who excel in evil, count that their glory (
Ph^l. 3.19.) That which God excels in, is his glory; what is that? He (blessed
be his name) excels in pardoning our sins, in covering our iniquities, and
therefore, It is the glory of God to conceal a thing (says Solomon, Prove.
25.2.) that is, sin, by pardoning it. Kings must search out the matter, but it
is the glory of God to conceal a thing. That which any creature excels in, is
his glory; that which the Scriptures declare God to excel in, is his glory, and
that is mostly his pardoning mercy.

Note, Secondly; The greatest glory which some creatures have, is to be
terrible to others.

To put others in fear, is all their glory, all that they glory in; their glory
is not to save and to deliver, to comfort and to do good to others, but to vex
and to terrify.

From the second interpretation, take this Note.

That which is very terrible to some, is a glory to others. That is, It
occasions them to show their glory, or causes their glory to appear the more.
Terror is the glory of the horse; his nostrils are never so glorious, as when
you attempt to terrify him. When that which is terrible is put to a true
believer, then the glory of his soul breaks out, then he shows forth his faith
in God, hi^ integrity and faithfulness toward God; terror is the glory of his
soul, as terror is the glory of the horse, that is, it gives him occasion to
show forth his glory.

Verse. 21. He paweth in the valley, and rejoices in his strength; he goes on
to meet the armed men. These words give a further proof of the courage of the
horse, or a sign of it; for it is the property of the highest metal'd and best
spirited horses to do so, as impatient of a check by the b^idle, and desirous
rather to be spurred upon an engagement with the enemy in battle. He paweth In
the valley.

Why in the valley? because there battles, especially horse battles, used to be
fought, rather than upon hills or uneven grounds.

There is another reading of the verse; for the word translated to paw,
signifies also to dig: Hence some give it thus; Terram ungula fodit. Vulg. --
Cavatque tellurem. Virg. 3. Georg. Nec pes officium standi tenat; ungula
terram, crebra ferit, virtusque artus animosa fatigat.
He diggeth in the valley. The pawing of a horse, is a kind of digging; for he
hollows the earth, and makes a cavity in it by pawing. A mettl'd horse cannot
keep his feet, but will be traversing his ground, and pawing with his feet, as
vexed at any delay or stop of the battle; he cannot endure to be curbed by the
bit, having such a mind (as was touched before) to be upon the spur, in a full
carreer against the enemy. Of such pransings, or (as the Margin has it)
tramplings or plungings of the horse, Deborah spoke in her triumphant song (
Judge. 5.22.) He paweth in the valley.

Hence note; What we would fain have, or be at, we are very unquiet, and think
long till we are at it.

This we may take in a spiritual sense; A soul which has a mind to do good,
how impatient is he when he is stopped from doing it! A soul that has a desire
to have communion with God on earth, how much troubled is he to be hindered! And
a soul that has a great mind to be with God in heaven, how does he paw in the
valley of this lower world, till he get higher and ascend up to him! Austin
said, My heart is unquiet, I can have no rest till I am with thee again. So the
Apostle ( Phil. 1.23.) I desire to depart, I would fain be out of this world;
why am I thus wind-bound in the harbor? let me hoise sail and be gone. the
Seaman is troubled to lie at an anchor, when he would be under sail. Thus the
generous Horse paweth in the valley, and Rej^yceth in his strength.

Sibi placet in suo robore. Bez.
And because of that, he rejoices in the battle; and because of that, would
fain be at the battle. A horse being confident of his strength, goes on
cheerfully.

(...) Et vires denotat and alias praeterea doles.
The word rendered strength, signifies not only bodily robustiousness, but any
other abilities or excellent endowments. In which larger notion it is used (
Dan. 1.4.) where it is said, The children that were to be chosen and bred up
for the King, were such as had ability to stand in the Kings Palace; that is,
such as were well qualified for that service and attendance. In strength of
both kinds, a well disciplined horse may be said to rejoice.

The word rendered rejoices, may rather (say some) be here translated,
Exulteth, which imports somewhat more than rejoicing, or great rejoicing; and
may not unfitly be attributed to beasts, especially to horses, and chiefly to
such horses as this Text speaks of. Exultation is the expression of any inward
joy, by some outward act or gesture of the body; and to do that is very usual
with brave horses, who being proud of, at least much pleased with themselves,
are often seen pransing and jetting as they go, and even artificially forming
and composing their bodies, their heads and legs especially, at every step they
take. So that these words, He rejoices, or exulteth in his strength, seem to
imply, that the horse knows his own strength and powers. It is commonly said,
If a horse knew his strength, he were not to be dealt with; but whether this be
true or no, it appears by these words in the Text, that he has some knowledge
of his strength, else he could not be said to rejoice in it. And this is very
aptly inserted here, because hence it comes to pass, that the horse rusheth so
fiercely and fearlesly into the battle, which is the great scope of the whole
description given of him in this context. He rejoices in his strength.

Hence note, First; They that have much strength for any work or service, are
joyful to go on to it.

David (Psalm. 19.5.) compares the Sun to a strong man, that rejoices to run a
race, A strong man is not afraid of, nor troubled at the race, but rejoices
exceedingly in it.

Secondly, Note; What we have much of, or excel in, we are apt to rejoice in.

The horse has much strength, and he rejoices in it. This appears in all
things; If we have much riches, how apt are we to rejoice in them! If we have
much wisdom, or understanding, or parts, how apt are we to rejoice in them! and
therefore the Lord gives us that caveat ( Jer. 9.23.) Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom (as if he had said, If a man have a great deal of wisdom,
or but a little more than his neighbor, he will be glorying in it, as the
horse in his strength) and let not the mighty man glory in his might, nor the
rich man glory in his riches. All these stops upon glorying, show, that what we
have much of, we are apt to glory in.

Note, Thirdly; To rejoice in any strength, or in any thing but in God and his
favor, or as we enjoy God in any thing, is brutish, it is to rejoice as the
horse.

They only rejoice as Christians, who rejoice in their strength, and in their
riches, and in their graces, as they find God in them, and as they flow from
God. The Gospel way of rejoicing, is to rejoice in the Lord, not in our graces,
not in our wisdom, not in our righteousness, but in the Lord. The horse
rejoices in his strength, He goes on to meet the armed men.

The Hebrew is, He goes on to meet the Armor, (...) Arma significat sed
proprie tela, at que ea, quibus adorimur, and congredimur.

(...) est Graece (...) omne teli and armorum genus. Merc.

Hinc (...) osculari salutare, quod salutare, quod salutantes dextra, petant
atque occurrant invicem. Codurc.


or rather Arms; that is, offensive weapons, pikes and spears, which gall
horses, rather than defensive, such as shields, bucklers, and helmets, which
only preserve men from hurt and wounds; or we may take it in both, and so the
meaning is, the armed men. He goes on to meet them; he needs not be beaten,
nor whipped, nor spurred on to the battle. The courageous horse goes on, he
retreats not, he retires not, he is a volunteer in the War, he is pressed by
nothing but the nobleness and height of his own spirit, he goes to meet the
armed men; though they meet him with deadly arms, with sword and spear, yet he
goes to meet them. The word which we translate, Armed men, properly signifies
to kiss, or to salute, because they who come to battle, do as it were, join
hands and salute one another, though very coursely, rudely, and roughly. He
goes on to meet the armed men.

Hence observe; The sense of ability, much more confidence in ability, puts on
to activity.

The horse rejoices in his strength, he is sensible of, or finds his strength
for the war, and therefore he puts on.

Secondly, Note; Whatever any man has a mind or a delight to do, that he will
go on in, or is free to do.

The horse goes on to meet the armed men, he does not stand to receive a
charge, but he seeks it. What any have a great mind to, that they are very
forward in; you need not press a volunteer, nor spur a free, a valiant horse on
to the battle, you can hardly hold him in with bit and bridle. It Is so in any
service; where there is a heart set to it, with a love to it, O how do we go
forth to it! we need not to be haled nor driven to it. So in spirituals, a
heart of that temper, answers every call ( Psalm. 27.8.) When thou said, seek
my face; my heart said unto thee, thy face Lord will I seek. He presently
answers the Lords call to any duty, who has a heart for it. What zeal, what
freedom, what forwardness have we, to that we have a will and a mind to! An
up-hill way, is all down-hill to a willing mind.

JOB, Chap. 39. Verse. 22, 23, 24, 25. 22. He mocketh at fear, and is not
afraid, neither turns he back from the sword.

23. The quiver ratleth against him, the glittering spear and the shield.

24. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage, neither believes he
that it is the sound of the trumpet.

25. He cries among the trumpets, Ha, ha, and he smells the battle afar off;
the thunder of the Captains and the shoutings.


THese four verses continue and complete the description o^ the goodly valiant
War-horse, in his second qualification of boldness and courage, of which this
Text gives as many proofs as can be imagined or expected.

Verse. 22. He mocketh at fear. And what greater argument of valor than that?
Fear, (...) Sp^rnit quod plenum est timoris. Vata^l.

Contemnit omnia metuenda. Elegans prosopopeia est, qua tribuitur experti
rationis animali, quod hominis proprium est, sc. ridere arma.


the abstract is here put for the concrete; he laughs at fear, that is, at
those things which are most to be feared, or which carry the greatest command
of fear in them. It is usual in Scripture, to express things greatly to be
feared, by fear. As things greatly ly hoped for are called our hope, and things
rejoiced in greatly are called our joy, so things greatly to be feared are
called our fear; and in that sense, above all, God is called the fear of his
people; he is so much the object of fear, that the Scripture calls him fear.
Jacob in his treating and contract with his Uncle Laban (Genesis 31.53.) Swear by
the fear of his father Isaac, that is, he swear by God, who alone has this
high honor to be sworn by in a sacred way. To swear, is a great part of divine
worship, and is sometime put for the whole of worship. Jacob swear by the fear
of Isaac, that is, by God, who his father Isaac feared, and in whose fear he
walked all his days. Thus spoke the Prophet ( Isa. 8.12, 13.) Sanctify the
Lord of Hosts in your hearts, and let him be your fear, which is quoted by the
Apostle (1 Pet. 3.15.) Now as God himself is called fear, because he is so
exceedingly to be feared; so those things which carry in them much fear, or
which are much f^ared, in Scripture sense and eloquence, are called fear; He
scorneth or mocketh at fear. Those things which make others tremble, he, as it
were, makes a sport at and plays with them. So the words are an exposition of
what was spoken at the close of the 21th ver. He goes on to meet the armies,
or the armed men, who are much to be feared and dreaded.

In general, whatsoever is or may be matter of fear, that the horse mocks or
laughs at, that is, he counts no more of it, than we do of those things we
laugh at. Quae non curant hominis rident.
What men regard not, care not for, that they laugh at, mock at. We say of a
valiant stout-hearted man, he knows not what fear means. When once a Noble
person, in great danger, was admonished not to be afraid; he laid his hand upon
his breast, and said, Fear was never here yet, and I hope shall never enter.
Thus the Horse is here represented, as one into whose heart fear never entered;
he mocketh at fear, And (as it follows) is not affrighted.

(...) dejectus, abjectus, stratus, metaphoce consternatus fuit, mente jacuit.
The word which we render affrighted, imports the greatest consternation of
mind, when the mind lies, as it were, prostrate under utter dispondency,
breakings of spirit, and discouragements, ( Deuteronomy. 1.21.) Neither any dreadful
noise nor terrible sight, neither the appearance nor the reallity of danger,
abate the spirit or prowess of the Horse; He is not affrighted.

Hence, Note; Danger is the element of courage.

We see it in the Horse, and it is much more seen in courageous men. You can no
more cast down true courage by representing dangers, than you can drown a fish
by casting it into the water; it is in its element. It was the speech of that
great Alexander, being in a most hazardous undertaking, Now I see a danger
suitable to my mind, Jam video animo meo par periculum.
a match for my courage. The Horse mocketh at fear.

Note, Secondly; That which is not feared, is usually derided.

It is so with beasts, and it is so with men; and what more usual with some
men, than to mock most at those things which they should be most afraid of. As
there is a nobleness of courage in some men, which makes a mock of fear; so
besides that, there is a baseness of spirit, a stupidness in other men, that
make a mock at fear. Such was the spirit of Lots Sons-in-law ( Genesis 19.14.) who
when Lot reported to them, the most dreadful thing that ever was in the world,
a shower of fire and brimstone, ready to fall down from heaven, upon the whole
City to consume it, He was to them as one that mocked; the meaning is, his
Sons-in-law mocked at what he reported, they laughed at his admonition. Such a
kind of mocking at fear, we read in those hardened and debauched spirits among
the ten Tribes, when that good King sent and admonished them to return to the
true worship of God, and laid before them those dreadful judgments that would
surely overtake them if they did not (2 Chronicles. 30.10.) They laughed to scorn
the messengers, and mocked them: As if they had said, What do you tell us of the
wrath of God, and of his judgments, if we persist in our way and course; we
scorn your admonition, we regard not your threatenings. The character given of
that people (2 Chronicles. 36.16.) when wrath was breaking out upon them without
remedy, was this, They mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words. To
such mockers at fear, I might take occasion to say, as the Prophet in a like
case ( Isa. 28.22.) Be ye not mockers, least your bands be made strong. There
are some fears that it is our honor to mock at; but there are other fears that
will be our shame and ruin to mock at: Of all such, that will be true which the
Lord spoke by wisdom ( Prove. 1.26.) I will mock when their fear comes. They
who mock when fear, that is, when fearful things are threatened in the name of
the Lord; the Lord will mock at their fear when fearful evils fall upon them.
Sinners will have little mind to mock at last. Such mockers at fear are
prophesied of, before the coming of Christ, in those two Epistles which are of
a near complexion and constitution (2 Pet. 3.4.) Knowing this first, that there
shall come in the last days (mockers, or) scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, saying, where is the promise of his coming. And in the Epistle of Jude
(ver. 17, 18.) we have the same caution, Beloved, remember ye the words that
were spoken before, of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that they
told you, there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their
ungodly lusts. Take heed you be not found thus like the Horse mocking at fear,
though there be many cases wherein it is the honor of man, especially, of the
servants of God, to be in this point like the Horse, Who mocketh at fear,
Neither turns he back from the sword.

This latter part of the verse is only a confirmation of what was said before,
and therefore I shall briefly pass it. Those appearances or reallities of
danger, at which we are affrighted, cause us to turn back; but the horse not
being affrighted with, turns not back from, the sword. The Hebrew is, he
turns not back from the face of the sword; further, the Hebrew is plural,
from the faces of the sword. The sword has a face, it has (as it were) many
faces, and they all look very terribly; therefore not to be afraid of the faces
of the sword, is a high expression of fearlesness. Not to turn back from the
face of the sword may have this sense, not to fear when the sword is very near
him; when the sword looks the horse in the face, and makes dreadful faces, then
he turns not back from it, nor yields a foot of ground. The Horse does not only
mock at fear, or at things which are to be feared, when they are afar off, but
when they are near, even, when the sword is drawn and brandished before his
face. To talk great words, when an enemy is far from us, is the cowards guize;
but when we see his face, to stand to it, is the trial of courage. Plin. not.
hist. l. 6. c. 16.
The Lioness is a very fierce and stout creature, and yet it is reported, that
when she is fighting for her whelps (at which time she is most fierce and
furious) she casts her eyes down to the ground, as not being willing to behold
the weapons or hunting arms of those who pursue her. But though the natural
Historian reports some kind of fear in the Lioness, yet Solomon reports the
courage of the Lion altogether fearless and undaunted ( Prove. 30.30.) He
turns not away for any; The Hebrew says, from the face of any; we may say,
man or beast, that is, she takes not a step back for any; neither man nor beast
can make him afraid. An ancient Writer, describing the Lion, tells us, He never
fears, nor flies, nor hastes away in the sight of any; but though oppressed
with the multitude or number of his pursuers, he makes his retreat softly and
gradually, or by several stands, to see who dares engage him, as was showed
before at the 38th Chapter (ver. 39, 40.) Thus the valiant horse behaves
himself at the appearance and face of the sword; he does not only not turn
quite away from the sword, but does not so much as turn his eyes from it, but
looks it full in the face, though it shows a dreadful and bloody face. God,
who has made the horse for the service of man in war, has given him a spirit
suitable, he is not afraid of the sword, nor of any other weapon of war, as will
further appear from the next verse, when from these words, I have briefly Noted,

First; The face or appearance of the sword is terrible.

The sword is one of the most terrible things, which the Lord at any time
threatens against a sinful people; the face of the sword makes many men's faces
gather paleness, and puts a palsy into their hands.

Note, Secondly; Where there is true courage, not only dangers afar off, but
dangers at hand are not turned from.

It is said ( Psalm. 78.8.) that, the children of Ephraim being armed, and
carrying bows (they had both offensive and defensive weapons, yet) turned back
in the day of battle. They marched on possibly a great while very valiantly, as
well as any in the army, and possibly made great boasts what they would do; but
when it came to the day of battle, when they saw the face of the sword, then
says the Text, they turned back. A man of right metal turns not back, his
courage fails not, no not at present danger; and that is it which we are to
consider our selves in, as to our spiritual courage. It is an easy matter to
slight dangers when they are unseen and only talked of; but when it comes to
the day of battle, when swords are drawn, and you see their terrible faces,
then not to turn back, that is courage indeed. And so we may understand the
words of the Apostle ( Heb. 10.38.) where he brings in the Lord speaking thus;
If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. If any man draw
back as a coward, or takes his heels in the day of battle (for of that he spoke
in the 34th verse, telling us of those, Who endured a great fight of
affliction, even of those that took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and
doubtless were ready to take joyfully the spoiling of their lives too; If any
man in their case turn back f om the very face of the sword) My soul (says
God) shall have no pleasure in him; he is no soldier for me, he is not fit for
the spiritual warfare.

As in this verse we have the sword, so in the next, there is an ennumeration
of several other terrible Arms, the sight whereof gives no trouble to the
horse.

Verse. 23. The quiver ratleth against him, the glistering spear and the sword.
Yet he turns not back; so we are to connect it.

The quiver ratles against him. It was usual in those times to make much use of
bows and a^rows in war; and not only did the footmen use the bow, but the
horsemen too. (...) est pharetra, unde sagittae vocantur (...) filii
pharetrae. Lam. 3.
Some understand this rattling of the quiver, to be either of foot or horse that
come to charge; but we are rather to understand the rattling of the horse-mans
quivers. Most creatures take fright at rattling noises, but this rattling makes
not the horse either to start or turn, he flincheth not, nor draws he back at
the rattling of the quiver.

The quiver ratleth against him. There is a twofold interpretation of these
words, arising from the ambiguity of the preposition ((...)) by us rendered
against, which others translate by (super) upon, conceiving that here mention
is made of those weapons which the horse with his Rider bear; Phar^trae a
sessore suo gestatae fragrore non terretur. Bez.
as if the meaning were, The quivers which Archers on horse back, carry at
their sadles or by their sides, ratle upon him. But most (as our translation
has it) render that preposition by, against, and so understand the whole verse
of those arms, which the enemy or contrary party use in conflict. And that
this is the better and more proper exposition, is clear from the series and
tendency of the words; for here the valor and generosity of the horse is
painted to the life, toward which the mention of those arms, which the horse
himself or the horseman managing him bears, does not contribute the least
line or shadow; but the mention of those rattling arms or of the rattling of
those arms, which the adverse party bear and brandish against him, tends to a
notable demonstration of his courage. It Is a great evidence of a horses
boldness, to rush upon or charge an enemy, whose arms ratle against him, and
who holds out weapons purposely fitted to wound, kill, and slay all that come
near him. So that, what is said ( ver. 21.) He goes on to meet the armed men;
and ( ver. 22.) He mocketh at fear, neither turns he back from the sword, is
here further illustrated and heightened, by recounting several other deadly
weapons of which the horse is as dreadless. When the horse moves much, the
quiver ratles, so also do both spears and shields (as it follows in the Text.)

The glittering spear and the shield. Well furbisht spears and shields glitter,
or (as the Hebrew has it) flame. The heads and points of spears being
burnished and brightened, seem like burning fire or flames; yet the horse is
not moved by them. We read of a flaming sword in a higher sense ( Genesis 3.24.)
as here of flaming spears and shields. Now as the clashing and rattling of
arms, so the brightness of them is terrible; but neither the one nor the
other, neither the rattling quiver, nor the glittering spear and shield trouble
the courageous horse. (...) saepe lancea reditur.
Mr. Broughton translates, not shield but, javelin, which is an offensive or
missive weapon; the word is rendered spear ( Josh. 8.18. 1 Samuel 174 5.) as also
at the 29th verse of the 41th Chapter of this Book. These things laid together
bring in, or make up a fuller proof of the horses courage; the quiver ratleth
against him, the spear and shield ratle too, yet he is not discouraged.

Hence Note, First; The confused noise of weapons in war, wounds the ear and
the heart, or the heart at the ear, as well as the sharpness of their point or
edge wounds the flesh.

It is matter of amazement to hear the sounding, the rattling, the clashing of
arms, and other dreadful noises that the field is filled with in a day of
battle ( Isa. 9.5.) Every battle of the warrior is with confused noise; and
it is much that the confusion of the noise, does not make a confusion in the
spirits of those that are engaged in battle.

Note, Secondly; Not to be terrified with noises and dreadful sounds, shows
strength and stoutness of spirit.

It is a piece of valor in the horse, not to be troubled with or at the
rattling of the quiver. The Lord to show that he would totally take away the
spirit of courage from his own people for their sins (who had been so valiant
to sin against him, and would run upon sin, notwithstanding the rattling of his
quiver, his threatenings, denounced against them) tells them ( Levit. 26.36.)
I will carry you into the land of your enemies. What then? And (says he) upon
them that are left alive of you, I will send a faintness into their hearts, in
the land of their enemies, and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them. Now
as it shows an extreme cowardice and faintness of spirit, to shake and run at
the shaking of a leaf; so to stand firm, to keep our ground and not be moved,
when there is such a noise and clattering, as even shakes the earth, and
confounds all the elements (as it were) this shows a mighty courage.

Verse. 24. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage, etc. Absorbet
torram, poetica locutio sic vorare viam, vorare literas. Drus. Helluones
librorum.
Still the expressions rise higher and higher, the courage of the horse
transports him so far, that he even swalloweth the ground. We say of some hard
and great students, they swallow up books, they make no bones of great books.
So here, to show the mighty courage and fierceness of the horse, he is
represented, as if he would eat up or swallow the very ground he treads on.

Yet many Expositors are not satisfied, that the Hebrew word here used ((...))
should be rendered to swallow; and therefore they translate, He diggeth the
earth with fierceness and rage; and expound it of his making holes in the
ground, by pawing in the valley spoken of verse 21. Master Broughton gives it
thus; With snaking and stirring he beats upon the earth: The Chaldee
Paraphrase says, ^acit foveam in terra. Tharg. Fodit. Pagn.
He makes a hole in the earth. The authority of the Chaldee (says Bootius)
gives credit to this exposition and strengthens it; because it shows, that the
word in the Syriack tongue (many of which are used in this book of Job) may
well signify to dig or make a hole, seeing from this Verb a Noune is derived,
which in that language signifies a hole or pit. And if we take this
interpretation (says he) the words would not be a bare, much less a needless
repetition of what was said ( ver. 21.) He paweth in the valley. For though
(according to this reading) the Text in both places speaks of hollowing the
earth, yet we may give this difference; the former being to be understood of
those lighter touches, which wanton lusty horses with one foot give the earth;
but this latter, of great and deep impressions which they make in the earth
with all their feet, while heated with a desire to charge the enemy, they are
restrained and held in, till the signal be given.

Secondly, Others laying a side the metaphorical sense of the word swalloweth,
expound it properly of his biting or gnawing the earth. A generous horse, Morsu
terram absorbere videtur.
to show how he would eat up the enemy when he comes at him, before he comes at
him, does not only paw in the earth with his foot, but gnaws the earth with his
teeth, as if he would swallow it up. And to swallow up a thing imports in all
languages, at least a supposed or conceited easiness of doing it. We, speaking
proverbially, use to say, we could do such or such a thing, as easily as we can
eat or drink. The horse when he cannot come presently to wreek his rage upon
the enemy, does it upon the earth; in gnawing of which he seems to tell his
enemies, that he will tear their flesh, and gnaw their bones as soon as he can
come at them. And I find one, who by earth in this place, understands men (as
all are) made of earth; but though it may bear a tolerable sense, to say, that
a horse in his fierceness and rage, would even eat or swallow up the enemy; yet
to expound the earth by the enemy, exceeds (says a learned Author) all
absurdity. But,

Thirdly, I rather conceive (as some of the Rabbis, and not a few of our
Modern Writers do) that by swallowing the earth with fierceness and rage, we
are to understand only the swiftness of his course or motion, when once he has
but the reins let loose to the battle, he will run as if he would swallow the
ground, and that shows his courage too. We say of a man that runs with speed,
Absorbere terram dicitur phrasi Hebraea velocissime currere. Bold.
he does not feel the ground: The horse is in such extreme have to be gone, and
to be at the battle, that he runs, as if he neither felt nor left any earth
under him. This interpretation is strongly contended for, by learned Bochartus,
in opposition to the former, and illustrated by many ancient testimonies
concerning the fierceness and swiftness of the horse, which the Reader may
consult if he please. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage.

Hence note; In strong and outrageous passions, we think we can do
impossibilities,

Even eat up the earth, and swallow the ground.

Neither believes he it is the sound of the trumpet. A verbo (...) credere aut
fidelem esse.
Beasts have some kind of faith; they do somewhat which looks like believing.
The O^iginal word signifies the proper work of faith.

But how can the horse be said, either to believe, or not to believe?

I shall give two interpretations of the words, in answer to this question.

First, thus: He believes not that it is the sound of the Trumpet; that is,
whereas it might be thought, that the sound of the trumpet should terrify him,
he regards it no more than a man does that which he does not believe, he cares
not for it, he is not at all troubled at it. Thus our old English Translation
has it; He regards not the noise of the trumpets.

Secondly, thus: He believes not that it is the sound of the trumpet; that is,
he has so great a mind to the battle, that when the trumpet sounds indeed to
the battle, he doubts it is not so, it is too good news to be true; he scarce
believes his own ears; or, he desires the battle so much, that he believes the
signal of it very little, and fears it is not so, but some false alarm. This is
a good and probable interpretation, it being usual among men (from whom in
proportion to beasts, especially to gallant horses, this affection may be
transferred) hardly at first to believe or give credit to those things which
they extremely desire and wish, yea, long for. In this sense it may well be
said of the Horse, He believes not that it is the sound of the trumpet.

Hence note; That which is much desired, is in some cases hardly believed.

It Is usually said, We easily believe that which we would or desire to have;
yet sometimes we hardly believe that which we would have; that is, when we hear
it is so, we are full of fears and doubts that the thing is not so, we are
afraid that we shall not obtain so wished and longed for an enjoyment; and do
therefore not only question the reports of others concerning it (as Jacob did
the report of his other sons concerning the life and high advancement of his
son Joseph in Egypt (Genesis 45.26.) for as soon as he heard it, the Text says,
His heart fainted, for he believed them not, Now, not only do some (I say) in
such cases hardly believe the reports of others) but even that which our own
eyes behold. It is said of the disciples of Christ, when he appeared to them
after his Resurrection, and showed them his hands and his feet ( Luke 21.41.)
They believed not for joy; they were so glad of the thing, they could not
believe their own eyes. In which sense we are to understand that of Job, at the
24th verse of the 29th Chapter; If I laugh^^ on them, they believed it not.
When the Angel told Abraham in the Tent ( Gen, 18.10.) I will certainly return
to thee according to the time of life; and lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a
son. Sarah over-hearing this good news, Laughed within her self (verse. 12.)
Though it pleased her exceedingly, that she should have a son, yet she laughed
also in unbelief, and was therefore reproved ( verse. 15.) If she had laughed as
Abraham did, at the day of Christ, who saw Christ's day and rejoiced (John
8.56.) that is, he laughed in faith, in assurance that it would come; but Sarah
laughed, as doubting, sure this will never be; though might she have had her
wish, she would of all things in the world, have desired and wished a son. Once
more ( Acts 12.15.) when Peter was in prison, and prayer made by the Church
night and day, doubtless they prayed in faith for his delivery, yet when Peter
was delivered, and knocked at the door, they said to the Maid, who told them it
was Peter, Thou art mad (verse. 15.) They could not believe it was so, while
they heard it was so, and had been earnestly praying it might be so. The
valiant horse desires nothing more than an engagement in battle, but believes
not it is the sound of the trumpet.

Thus of the second exposition of these words, Neither b^l^eveth he that it is
the sound of the Trumpet. Yet some conceive, that though it be true, that
generous and brave horses are not only not affrighted at the sound of the
trumpet, but rather rejoice (in their kind) at it, as is said expressly in the
next verse; yet it cannot be conveniently said, that he has so great a joy as
to produce this dis-belief: For so to rejoice, as to be in a manner overcome
with joy, and not to give credit to our eyes and ears, never happens, but as in
extremely great and extraordinary joys, so in unaccustomed and unexpected joys,
which surely cannot well be affirmed of that joy which horses are taken with at
the sound of a trumpet, signalizing a battle to ensue.

And therefore (because it avoids this difficulty) I shall rather adhere to
them, who render the words thus, Neither does he stand still (or keep his
ground) when the trumpet sounds. Neque consistit firmus, cum sonus tubae
editur. Jun. (...)
So Mr. Broughton renders expressly; Neither stands he still when the sound of
the trumpet is heard. This interpretation suits best with the scope of the
place; nor does the force of the Hebrew Verb oppose it: for the Adjective,
which comes from the Participle of it, is often used to signify firm, stable,
sure, durable; yea, and the Verb it self is often taken in that sense ( Psalm.
78.37.) They were not steadfast, or stood not fast in his covenant. So ( Deuteronomy.
28.59.) the Lord threatened Plagues of long continuance, that is, standing
Plagues, or such as should hold long, and not stir from the place. Thus also it
is said ( Exodus 17.12.) The hands of Moses were steady until the going down of
the Sun. The same word does elegantly signify, both to believe and to be
steady, or stand fast; seeing it is faith or believing in God, which alone
makes us steady or stand fast, in all occasions or temptations to the contrary;
and therefore in this place we may most conveniently render, He stands not
firm, he stands not still, or keeps not his place at the sound of the trumpet,
but is unquiet and in motion, as having an ardent desire to be in the battle,
as soon as ever he hears the trumpet sound. Stare loco nescit. Virg.
One of the ancient Poets expresses this quality of a valiant horse, almost in
the same words, and altogether to the same sense; He knows not how to keep his
place; or, he cannot (as we say) for his heart, stand still. So that as the
eagerness of the horse for the battle, even before the signal given, is set
forth in those words ( verse. 21.) He paweth in the valley; and in the former
part of this verse, where it is said, He swalloweth the ground with fierceness
and rage; so the same height of spirit after the signal given, is further
expressed in these words, thus translated, He stands not still (no ground
will hold him, he will be gone if he can get head) when once he hears the sound
of the trumpet.

Hence note; What we have much mind to do, we are glad of an opportunity to do
it, and readily embrace it.

The Apostle says of the old Patriarks ( Heb. 11.15.) Truly if they had been
mindful of (that is, if they had had a mind to) that Country from whence they
came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned. Now, as a man will
not do that for which he has an opportunity, when he has no mind to it; so if
a man has a mind to do any thing, how soon does he make use of the very first
opportunity to do it. And doubtless it was a great trouble to the Philippians,
who had a true desire to show their care of, and love to the Apostle Paul, that
they lacked opportunity to show it, and give a real proof of it ( Phil. 4.10.)
As opportunity is a gale to carry us on to action, so a willing mind is a gale
to carry us to the improvement of any offered opportunity for action. Let us do
good (says the Apostle, Gal. 6.10.) as we have opportunity. He that is slack
to do good when he has a fair gale of opportunity to it, declares plainly,
that his mind is becalmed, and that he has not the least breath or gale of
willingness in his mind to do good. It is our duty, not only to accept an
opportunity to do good when it falls tight in our way, but even to step out of
our way (so it be in a good way) to seek it. David's enemies sought occasion,
and so did Daniels (Chap. 6.) to do him a mischief; and shall not we seek
occasions to show mercy? etc. Let us (like the horse in the Text) no sooner
hear the sound of the Trumpet, a lawful call to any duty, for which we have
also an open door, but (as he) rejoice in it, stand still no longer with a
dull, shall we, shall we, in our mouths, but be gone, up and be doing.

Verse. 25. He says among the trumpets, ha, ha, and he smells the battle afar
off, the thunder of the Captains and the shouting. This verse seems to give a
reason of what was last said in the former, especially according to the latter
Translation of it. As if it had been said, Therefore the generous horse cannot
stand still, but is impatient of every moments delay, when he hears the trumpet
sound, because he is not only not astonished at it, but rejoices, wishing for
nothing more than the battle, of which he knows the sounding of the trumpet to
be a signal.

He says among the trumpets, Ha, ha. Some render these words, not barely as
we, among the trumpets, (...) i. e. Quando tubarum clangor validus intenditur:
vox (...) constat praepositione Beth and particula (...) quae non est tantum
adjectitia and Euphonica sed copiam etiam significat. Codurc.
but thus; At the full sound of the trumpet; or, When the trumpet has sounded
long and sufficiently, then he says, Ha, ha. Reading the words thus, we may
connect them with the latter part of the former verse, Neither believes he
that it is the sound of the trumpet; that is, when the trumpet begins to sound,
he doubts whether it be to the battle or no; but when the trumpet sounds long,
when the sufficiency of the trumpet sounds, or when it sounds sufficiently, so
that it manifestly appears the battle is nigh, or at hand, then he says, Ha,
ha.

That the word de in Bid is significative, and imports sufficiency, is the
opinion of many interpreters, and that it is of the same sense in this Text, as
in that ( Isa. 40.16.) Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts
thereof sufficient for a burnt-offering. Thus here, at the sufficiency of the
trumpet, that is, when the trumpet sounds sufficiently, abundantly, or clearly;
or (as our old English translation has it) when the trumpets make most noise,
he says, ha, ha.

There are others of note, who judge that ((...)) de is only a syllabical
addition of no signification, or adding nothing to the Preposition () Be; Ad
tubae soninitum. Trem. Inter buccinas. Page
and so render the words only thus: At the sound of the trumpet; or as we,
Among the trumpets, he says, ha, ha. And that ((...)) De, is only expletive,
not significative, and so that word ((...)) Bid is no more than the
Preposition () Be, put alone, some would confirm by other Texts of Scripture,
where it is conceived to be so used ( Hab. 2.13.) Behold, is it not of the Lord
that the people shall labor ((...)) in the fire; and the people shall weary
themselves ((...)) for vanity? Arnold. Boot. Animad. Sac. l. 3. c. 11.
These words are sound also ( Jer. 51.58.) in both which (says a learned
Author) that ((...)) De cannot signify sufficiency, both the sense of the
place shows, and almost all interpreters agree. And this also may be further
confirmed by a like use of the same word, as it is put after Judge. 6.5. and
after Isa. 66.23. The Learned Reader consulting the original, will easily
observe (says he) that in both those places (...) has no special
signification.

Yet doubtless (considering that not one Iota or tittle in the Scripture is in
vain) that additional word has its use, and possibly is of more use than any
have as yet well understood. For though it be granted, as Rabbi David says in
his Dictionary, that (...) in all those places is paragogical; yet Paragoges
may have more in them, than merely the ornament of speech. Our Translators
intimate as much ( Hab. 2.13.) where they do not render barely, in the fire,
and for vanity, but in the very fire, and for very vanity. And therefore (with
the good leave of that learned Author) I apprehend (with the Rabbin, whom he
quotes, but likes not for this opinion) that in all places where this word is
used, it has a special force, declaring the greatness and continuance of the
thing spoken of. And so in this place, we may take the meaning thus: As the
generous horse is always forward for the battle, so when the trumpet begins to
sound; but when the trumpet sounds long (as the Lord spoke to Moses at the
giving of the Law, Exodus 19.13.) then the horse (being fully assured that the
battle will suddenly begin) is mightily affected with a kind of joy, which he
expresses as well and as fully as he can in his language, saying, Ha, ha, now
it is as I would have it.

That this Interjection, ha, ha, imports joy and exultation, Emittit
exultationis vocem. Aquin.

Alacriter se ad pugnam parat. Scult.

Ad lituos hilarem intrepidumque tubarum prospiciebat Equum. Statius l. 11.
Theb.


all agree; and it may note, not only that inward joy with which the horse is
affected at the sound of the trumpet, but also that outward expression which he
makes of it by neighing, which may not improperly be called his ha, ha; the
sound which we hear in the air, when a horse neigheth, symbolizing much with
this Interjection, ha, ha, spoken by a man. And all men know (who know any
thing of the qualities or customs of gallant horses) that it is usual with them
to neigh when they are much pleased, and are upon a near attainment of their
desire, or the enjoyment of their pleasures. Comparing the latter part of the
former verse, according to the second exposition of our Translation, with this,

Observe; Assurance of what we would have, breeds extreme joy and triumph in
his spirit that would have it.

When the horse finds it is the battle indeed, then he rejoices greatly. Men
often break out into such exclamations, when having been long doubtful of a
thing, and fearful how it might issue, they at last see its issue answering the
utmost of their wishes and expectations ( Psalm. 40.15.) Let them (says David)
be desolate for a reward of their shame, that say, Ah, ha, Ah, ha; that is, let
them be rewarded with desolation, for their shameful doings, in saying, Ah, ha,
Ah, ha, because they see me cast down. To say, Ah, ha, at what is done, is as
much as to say, it pleases us well, it gives us high content. Thus also they
cried out ( Psalm. 35.21.) Ah, ha, our eyes have seen it. As the vision we shall
have in heaven, is faith perfected in the highest assurance imaginable; so in
any case in this world, what of our desires our eyes see, we take high content
in. It is comfortable when we have some hope of what we desire; but when we
once see it, then we cry Ah, ha, if what our eyes see, be to us as theirs was
to them in the same Psalm, where they are again brought in saying, Ah, ha, so
would we have it (ver. 25.) now it is as it should be; we have been looking for
such a day a long time, but now it is come; Ah, ha, Ah, ha, So would we have
it. And consider it either in natural or spiritual things; there is a time as
to spiritual things, when we do not believe the silver trumpet of the Gospel
sounds mercy to us, that sin is pardoned, that God is gracious; but when once
there is a convincing sufficiency of the trumpets sound, when once our unbelief
is fully overcome, and our hearts wound up to assurance, then the soul is in
its triumph, and cries out (as the horse, when he perceives the desired battle
approaches) Ah, ha, Ah, ha.

This content of the horse appears yet further in the next words.

He smells the battle afar off, the thunder of the Captains, and the shouting.
These words hold out another matter, which does much set forth and commend the
honor of the horse, and his desire of the combat; He smells the battle. To be
in battle pleases him so well, that the smell of it is to him a delightful and
pleasant odor. The very stink of a Camp (as the Prophet calls it, Amos 4.10.)
is a sweet perfume to his nostrils. He smells a battle, He smells the battle
afar off.

(...) Odorari, Olfacere.
The Hebrew word signifies properly to smell, or take the scent of any thing.
And almost all interpreters, ancient and modern, retain that signification
here; yet some there are who take smelling, in this place metaphorically, for
perceiving, fore-apprehending, or presaging. Sentit aut praesentiscit.
For the Hebrew (as some very well skilled in that language assure us) having
no word which answers the Greek and Latin words (noted in the margin)
signifying to perceive and feel, (...). Sentire.
makes use of this word in the Text for those purposes. Thus it is said ( Judge.
16.9.) When it (that is, the thread) touches (or as our old translation has
it, feels) the fire. So ( Isa. 11.3.) He (that is, Christ the Messiah) shall
be quick of understanding in the fear of the Lord. The Hebrew is, He shall
smell or be quick-scented in the fear of the Lord. His very senses shall be, as
it were, touched with or dipped in the fear of the Lord, that is, he shall
religiously sense or judge all things. The fear of the Lord shall be the rule
or guide of all his senses, as it follows in that verse, He shall not judge
after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears,
that is, according to outward appearances and reports. Thus we may take the
word in this passage; the horse smells, that is, he perceives or
apprehends the battle. Praesagiunt pugnam. Plin. l. 8. c. 42.
Naturalists report wonders about the understanding of the horses, and his
sagaciousness in foreseeing or presaging battles: And this he does, says the
Text, Afar off.

Our translation (with most others) take the Hebrew word as an Adverb of place;
(...)
yet some conclude it to be an Adverb of time. So it is used ( Isa. 25.1.) where
the Prophet be speaks the Lord thus; Thy counsels of old (that is, those
counsels which thou, O Lord, have had a long time ago, or long before time) are
faithfulness and truth. We also render the word, by long ago (1 King 19.25.)

But it may be objected, Though the word in those places notes time, yet it
cannot do so in this place of Job; for in those places alleged, it signifies
a vast space of time before, whereas here in Job, if it denotes time, it is but
a very short space of time, no more than the space of time, between giving the
signal of a battle by sound of trumpet, and the joining of the battle. To this,
the answer is; That this Hebrew word may be applied to a short space of time,
as well as to a long one, seeing both the Greek and Latin words (set in the
Margin) of the same signification, (...) Olim.
are used to note sometimes a very long, and sometimes but a short space of
time.

Now according to this sense of the word, this latter clause of the verse is
thus translated; He smells, or, perceives the battle is near at hand, or
will shortly be: Which gives a very fair meaning of the Text, if that word,
which all grant signifies time as well as place, does also signify a short, as
well as a long space of time; for then the verse runs clearly thus, At the full
sound of the trumpet, he says, Ha, ha, smelling (or perceiving) that the
battle is at hand. I leave this to the Readers judgment. Our own translation
is an undoubted truth, both as to the signification of the word, and the
experiences of the thing. A Gallant horse trained up, and accustomed to War,
when he sees much stirring in an Army, and hears the trumpets sounding,
perceives a battle will be, though the armies be possibly a good distance of
ground one from the other. Thus he smells the battle afar off, especially when
he hears that which follows in the close of the verse.

The thunder of the Captains and the shouting. This is music to him. Here are
two other antecedents of a battle, which the horse takes notice of.

First, The thunder of the Captains or Princes; that is, of the great
Commanders and Generals of the field; who when they give out the word, they
give it with a loud voice, they thunder it out. It Is no time to whisper when
armies are ready to join battle; and therefore Commanders lift up their voices
like trumpets, or like thunder out of the clouds, that the Soldiers may hear
them. And when Captains or Generals give exhortation to the Soldiers, they
thunder out arguments to encourage them, and fire their spirits to the battle.
The horse does as it were hear this thunder; oh! it pleases him when the
military oration is made, and the Captain General gives order for the battle.

And the shouting. What Is that? Surely, the acclamation of the whole army: when
the Captain, Confusus clamor exercitus Praeparantis se ad praelium. ^^quin.
or Commander in chief, has made his military Oration, then usually the
Soldiers shout and make an acclamation, in token of their willingness to
fight, and readiness for the battle: Thus the horse smells the battle afar off,
the thunder of the Captains and the shouting. The whole verse may be read in
this form; At the sufficient sound of the trumpet, and the exhortation of the
Captains, together with the acclamations of the Soldiers, he says, Ah, ha,
(or rejoices) perceiving that the battle (though the armies be not yet joined,
but keep their ground at a distance) is at hand, or will suddenly be.

Having opened this whole context concerning the horse, and given several
observations from the parts of it; I shall for the close of all show how aptly
this description of the horse represents, or is applicable unto two very
different sorts of men.

First, The Horse, as here described, is the emblem of a bold and hardened
sinner. The Spirit of God speaks this expressly ( Jer. 8.6.) I harkened, and
heard (says the Lord) but they spoke not aright, no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, what have I done; every one turned to his course (what
course? his sinful course, how?) as the horse rusheth into the battle; as the
horse mocks at fear, and will not turn back from the sword; As the horse will
not be affrighted at the rattling of the quiver, nor at the shaking of the
spear; so hardened sinners rush on, though you tell them there is deadly danger
in it, and that the Sword of the Word points directly at them, and will cut
them off: Yea, they will not turn back, though the Lord should brandish a
flaming sword, as he did against Adam, to keep him from the tree of life, so to
keep them from the tree of death; they, will for all this, rush on as the horse
to the battle. The wicked man is thus described, in one place of this book of
Job (Chap. 15.25, 26.) where Eliphaz says of him, He stretches out his hand
against God (here is war with God) and strengthens himself against the Almighty
(that is, draws all his forces together; and what then? just as the horse in
the Text) He runs upon the thick bosses of his buckler, even upon his neck. A
wicked man, like the horse, runs upon God, even upon the thick bosses of his
buckler. The Lord is there represented, by Eliphaz, as holding out a buckler
against the sinner; what is that? the Law, his Word of command, that is Gods
buckler; and this buckler has thick bosses and sharp points, especially, in
the middle, a great boss with a pike, such are all divine threatenings, yet the
sinner runs, as a horse, upon these thick bosses of Gods buckler, his severest
threatenings. Thus the horse, and a bold sinner are alike.

Secondly, The horse is also the emblem of a bold Saint, or of a faithful
servant of God. Such, specially, were all the holy Martyrs; St. Austine.
A chief among the Ancients says expressly, that in the Horse the Martyr may
be seen; whom none account valiant but God himself, and they who are born of
God. I may Parallel a holy Martyr and the Horse, in every particular mentioned
in this context. First, As the horse is said to receive his strength from God
(have thou given strength to the horse?) so it was God who gave strength to the
Martyrs, to stand it out in the day of battle. Secondly, As God gives courage
to the horse, so it was God that gave courage to the Martyrs; and such courage
he has sometimes given, as has made poor weak women as strong and courageous,
as the horse in the Text: Persecuters could not make the old martyrs run like
Grasshoppers; they have even mocked at fear, and would not turn back from the
face of the sword drawn out against them; no rattling of the quiver, nor
clashing of weapons could terrify them; they have not been affrighted with
Lions, Bears, Tigers ready to devour them; they have not been affrighted with
the fiery furnace, nor with the most exquisite torments that the wit or malice
of man could invent. Jesus Christ having instructed the Church his Spouse (
Cant. 1.8.) what to do, he at the 9th verse commends the Church in two things.
First, For her courage. Secondly, For her beauty. For her courage first, at the
9th ver. and in that respect he compares her to a Company of horses in
Pharaoh's chariots. But why does he compare the Church to a Company of horses
in Pharaohs Chariots? I answer, it is well known, that the Kings of Egypt were
called Pharaoh, and Egypt was very famous for horses of war: therefore Christ
makes this comparison, to show, that the Church b^ing directed to keep close to
the shepherds tents, must expect that the world or the false Church, would vex
and persecute her; but faith Christ, my spouse is like a company of horses in
Pharaoh's chariots, that is, she will be as valiant in this war, in standing
for the truth against all false doctrine and idolatrous worship, as the most
valiant horses that ever were in Egypt, or in any part of the world have been
in any day of battle. Experience (we know) has made this good; for the true
Spouse of Christ, though poor, comtemptible and weak, though women and even but
children, though helpless sheep and tender lambs, yet in battles of suffering
for Christ, they have become as mighty as the mightiest war-horses, they have
withstood all the powers of the world undauntedly, and made them admire their
courage, yea, vexed and madded them with their courage. Who but the Lord could
arm his people with spiritual weapons, with power and courage, to overcome all
their enemies, or to over-overcome them, as the word is ( Romans 8.37.) which we
render, more than conquerors; over what? over sword, and nakedness, and perils,
and danger, and death; we more then overcome all these (says the Apostle
there) though we are killed all the day long, and counted as sheep for the
slaughter, as he speaks at the 36th verse. And hence the Prophet said ( Zach.
10.3, 5.) that though the Church, there called, the house of Judah, be weak
like a flock, yet the Lord makes them as his goodly horse in the battle. Our
late Annotators give the sense of the Prophet in those words expressly thus.
Now that the Lord has turned his favorable countenance toward his people, he
has endowed them with valor and strength; so that of sheep they are become a
great war-horse, with which the Lord will overcome and trample down his
enemies; which may in part be understood of the Maccabeees victory, but most
perfectly of the whole Churches victories over the world and the devil. This
victory the Church obtains over the devil by resisting, and over the world by
suffering.

Thus far of the valiant horse. The Lords discourse proceeds from this noble
beast of the earth, to those noble birds of the air, the Hawk and the Eagle.

JOB, Chap. 39. Verse. 26, 27, 28, 29. 26. Does the Hawk fly by the wisdom, and
stretch out her wings toward the South?

27. Does the Eagle mount up at thy command, and make her nest on high?

28. She dwells and abides on the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the
strong place.

29. From thence she seeks the prey, and her eyes behold afar off.

30. Her young ones also suck up blood: and where the slain are, there is she.


IN this context the Lord passes from the beasts of the earth, to give a
further demonstration of his power and wisdom, appering in the fowls of air;
and here we have two instances, both in birds of p^ey, The Hawk and the Eagle.

Job is first questioned about the Hawk in the 26th verse; In which the Hawk is
set forth two ways. First, In general, by her flying, Does the Hawk fly by thy
wisdom? Secondly, in special, by the course of her flight, and stretch forth
her wings toward the South?

Secondly, Job is questioned about the Eagle, concerning which (Queen among
birds) fix things are here expressly set forth, or distinctly expressed.

First, Her high flying or mounting upwards, in the former part of the 27th
verse, Does the Eagle mount up at thy command?

Secondly, Her high nesting or making her nest on high, in the latter part of
the same verse; does she, at thy command, make her nest on high?

Thirdly, She is here discribed by the choice of her abode, dwelling or
habitation ( ver. 28.) she dwells and abides on the rock, on the crag of the
rock, and in the strong place.

Fourthly, We have here the sharpness of the Eagles appetite, and her quick
endeavor to get food for the satisfying of it, in the former part of the 29th
verse. When she is abiding upon the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and in her
strong place, from thence she seeks her prey; she is not idle there.

Fifthly, She is described by the sharpness of her sight, in the latter part of
the 29th verse, her eyes behold afar off. As if the Lord had said, though she
dwells thus high upon the rock, and the crag of the rock, yet this does not
hinder her in the pursuit of her prey, for her eyes behold afar off.

Sixthly and Lastly, We have here the matter, or nature of her own food and
diet, together with the food of her young ones. We have here (as I may say) a
Bill of the Eagles fare ( ver. 30.) it is blood, and the flesh of the slain,
Her young ones suck up blood; and where the slain are, there is she: That Is her
chief food and diet, the flesh and blood of the slain. These are the
particulars which the spirit of God lays down in the descriptions, both of
the Hawk and Eagle.

From the whole I shall give only this general note, as to the Lords purpose in
speaking of these birds of prey, the Hawk and the Eagle, rather than of the
Dove, or of any other fowl of a more harmless nature. I say, the Lord does this
to show, that seeing his providence disposes of, and watches over these fowls
of the air, which are so able to shift for themselves, and are in their kind so
little useful to man; then surely, he will not neglect man, nor any creature
that is of necessary use to man.

Verse. 26. Does the Hawk fly by thy wisdom? The word rendered Hawk comes from a
root which signifies a feather or plume of feathers; because, feathers are the
instruments by which the Hawk flies. The same word signifies also to fly; the
Hawk being a fowl of such an excellent flight, may well be expressed by a word
which properly signifies flying.

The Hawk is numbered among the unclean birds in the Law of Moses, which the
Jews might not eat of ( Levit. 11.16. (...) accipiter a radice (...) quod
plumam vel pennam significat, quasi nomen habeat in Hebr. a volando.
Deuteronomy. 14.15.) The Hawk in its kind, or all kinds of the Hawk, are excepted out
of their food, or not admitted at their table. Those creatures which were
useful to get man some kind of food, might not then be at all the food of man,
in the Jewish Nation.

Nor will it be unprofitable, upon this occasion, to take notice how the Lord
then set bounds and limits to the appetite of man, which is so apt to exceed:
He forbids several creatures to the Jews, for some of which, possibly, we can
give no reason but his Soveraignity, he would have it so; and others were
forbidden, because possibly, feeding upon them was not so wholesome for the
body of man; and others God did except from the table of the Israelites,
because of some quallities which he did not like in them; and for that reason
it is conceived the Hawk was excepted. The Jews might not feed upon the Hawk,
because she is a bird of prey, and lives by ravening and killing other birds;
such was the law among the Jews: and though that law be now taken away, Dicitur
Latin accipiter ab accipiendo, propter insitam et insatiabilem rapacitatem.
Accipiter avis regia, quae plus animo qu^m angulis estarmata, and quod in
quantitate corporis natura denegat, hoc ei invirtute, and a^dacia animi
rependit. Isidor. l. 12. Noctuae a caeteru avibus infestatae auxiliatur
accipiter, and bellum partitur. Plin. l. 10. c. 17. Falco sacer di^^issime
volat, nec deserit ad duarum triumve, aut quatuor horarum spatium, ac si in
aere immotus consisteret. Albert.
as the vision showed Peter (Act. 10.15.) yet there are few that make Hawks
their meat, or eat of them.

The word by which the Hawk is expressed in the Latin, signifies to take or
catch, whereby her ravening nature is denoted, because she catches and snatches
all she can for her living. Some of the Ancients tell us, that the Hawk is a
very princely bird, who though she h^th not much in bulk of body, yet has much
in the generosity of her mind, and is therefore joined here with the Eagle, as
if this were the Princess, and the Queen of birds. And some report, that there
is no other among all the fowls of the air, that dares contend with the Eagle,
but the Hawk. Aristotle reckons up ten sorts of Hawks, and Pliny sixteen: But I
shall leave that discourse to Faulconers. It is enough for the opening of this
Scripture, to intimate somewhat in generat of the Hawk.

Does the Hawk fly. The Hawk is described as flying. Some creatures are for
going, some for running, but the excellency of the Hawk is in flying: And
flying here is not to be taken in a general sense, as opposed to running or
going, for so it is common to all the birds of the air; there is not the least,
not any of the winged kind, but can fly little or much: But when he says, Does
the Hawk fly? flying is to be understood specially, of swift flying, and of
long continued flying. The Hawk flies with wonderful swiftness. Hence among the
Egyptians, the Hawk was a Hierogliphick of the winds. And as the Hawk moves
with wonde^ful swiftness, so with great perseverance. Naturalists tell us, and
it is the experience of many, that the Hawk will abide upon the wing, two,
three, yea, four hours together in the pursuit of, or in waiting for her prey;
and hence some of the Ancients have made the flying of the Hawk, or the Hawk in
his flying, an emblance of perseverance. The Hawk moves in the air, as if he
abode immoveably there.

Does the Hawk fly by thy wisdom, or understanding? Thou see how
perseveringly the Hawk flies, and how cunningly, or wisely, to her best
advantage: Does the Hawk fly thus by thy wisdom, or have thou taught the Hawk
to fly thus? have thou instructed the Hawk to make this use of her wings? no,
the Hawk flies by my wisdom, I have given her this strength, and taught her
this skill, for God takes it unto himself, it is by my wisdom and instruction
that the Hawk flies.

The Vulgar Latin reads thus, Does the Hawk feather her self, Numquid per
sapientia^ tuam plumescit accipiter. Vulg.
or get her feathers by thy wisdom? Our Translation runs to the use of her
feathers, this to the grows of her feathers; as if it had been said, Does the
Hawk get her feathers by thy wisdom, or have thou set her feathers so exactly
in her wings? This reading may be taken two ways. First, Do thou make the
Hawks feathers grow at first, do thou plant those feathers in her wings?
surely, no. Secondly, Do thou renew the Hawks feathers? When the Hawk has
mued or least her feathers (as they who are acquainted with Hawks know their
natural custom is) do thou cause them to grow again? surely, no, thou did
neither at first plant her wings with feathers, nor when she has cast her
feathers, do thou cause those feathers to renew; that is a good reading: But I
shall keep to our own. Does the Hawk fly by thy wisdom?

Hence note, First; The Lord has given man some creatures more to serve his
pleasure, than his necessities.

Whatever service the Hawk does to man in catching the prey, the Partridge, or
Phesant, or other fowl, man might serve himself of them (as many do) some other
and cheaper way, and not by hawking. The Moralists could say (speaking of such
like creatures) Man was loved by the supreme Maker of all things, Vsque ad
delicias homines a supremo conditore amantur. Senec.
even to his delight and content. God has given such swift wings to the Hawk,
not only to set forth his own power, but for man's pleasure. Hawks are for the
sport and delight of Princes and great men; and seeing God has made some
creatures for the delight, more than for the necessity, for the pleasure, more
than for the need of man; O how should man take heed of displeasing God! Does
the great God of heaven and earth provide Hawks for man's pleasure, and shall
man take no care to please God! It Is lamentable to consider, how most men
displease God by oaths and profanations of his Name, while they are taking that
kind of pleasure. And I may say, there is no kind of sport which the indulgence
of God has allowed man, wherein God is more provoked and dishonored, than in
this: What swearing, what cursing, is there in following this Game; If Hawks
and Spannels please not men in the pursuit of their pleasures, how is the Name
of God rent and torn, to his high displeasure! How vain is that man, who takes
pleasure in sin, or who sins in taking his pleasure! He makes his short
pleasure-time a seed-time (without repentance) of his everlasting pains and
sorrows.

Secondly, Whereas the question is put, Does the Hawk fly by thy wisdom?

Note; It is by the wisdom and teaching of God that the Hawk flies.

Not only has the Lord put the general power of flying into the Hawk, as into
other birds, but that special excellency to fly so swiftly and strongly, so
cunningly and artificially. It Is not so much the Faulconer, who teaches the
Hawk, as God; then let us admire the wisdom of God in the properties of every
creature. It must be confessed, that Hawks do strange things; but but whence is
it? it is of God. Does the Hawk fly by thy wisdom; can thou manage the Hawk,
or bring her to thy Lure; can thou make her go off after her prey? can thou
reclaim her at thy pleasure? Thou can not; only God can. And hence we may
infer, If the flying of the Hawk be from the wisdom of God, then see the wisdom
of God in the goings and doings of man. The way of man (says the Prophet, Jer.
10.23.) is not in himself; it is not in him that walks, to direct his steps;
the wisdom of the Lord does it. If the wisdom of the Lord orders the flying of
a bird in the air, surely then it is the wisdom of the Lord which manageth the
motions of men on earth; he orders both the course and discourse of man: when
he pleases he can take wisdom from the wisest men, and make even Judges fools.
Judges are supposed and accounted the wisest among men, yet the Lord can befool
them so, that they shall not be able to see the things that belong either to
their own peace, or the peace of others. The Lord, who gives wisdom to beasts
and birds, can take it from men. Does the Hawk fly by thy wisdom? That Is the
general; then follows a special instance concerning the course of the Hawk; And
stretch (or spread) her wings toward the South.

The word rendered South, signifies the right hand. (...) Auster, meridies, a
radice (...) dexter, dextra, quasi plaga dextera, quia versis ad orientem, ad
dextram partem est meridies.

Number edoctus a te accipiter, novis plumis, abjectarum veterum loco, receptis,
alas Austro versus calore solis, vegetandas expandit. Bez. Aelian. l. 14. c. 12.

Accipiter tempore mutationis pennarum expandit alas suas ad Austrum, qui est
ventus calidus: ut apertis poris veteres pennae dicidant, and novae
renascantur. Aquin.


The South is so called, because when a man turns his face to the East, or
Sunrising, then the South is on his right hand.

But why is the Hawk said to stretch forth her wings to the South? we may
expound it two ways.

First, Thus: She stretches her wings to the South, when she is upon the
change of her feathers, of which a touch was given before. As if the Lord had
said, When the time comes, that the Hawk casts her feathers, does she by thy
wisdom (for that we are to take in) stretch her wings toward the South, (as
Naturalists tell us she does) for the cherishing of her new feathers? The South
wind being a warm wind, opens the pores of the body, and then the old feathers
easily fall off, and the new ones come on; therefore when the Hawk loses her
feathers, she stretches out her wings toward the South. And as the wild
unmanaged Hawks, who are at their own liberty, turn themselves to the South at
such times, so the Places where Faulconers keep Hawks to train them for
service, are built toward the South, that the warmth of the Sun may help the
growth of their feathers.

It Is not unworthy our remembrance, which some teach allegorically from this
natural instinct of the Hawk, helping her self more easily, both to cast and
recover her feathers. A sinner in his natural state, is so feathered as he
comes from the old Adam, that he had need to cast the old and get new ones. Now
if the sinner would do thus, or when he does thus, he is taught by the wisdom
of God (not by the wisdom of the flesh) to stretch himself toward the South,
that is, toward the pleasant wind, and warm Sun of the Spirit of God, by which
his old feathers of sin drop off, and those new feathers of grace and holiness,
of faith and repentance, of meekness and humility, of patience and self-denial
come on. Thus man is feathered by the second Adam, when he has cast those of
the first; He turns himself to the South, he applies himself to Jesus Christ,
the Sun of righteousness, whose blessed warmth fetches off his old black
feathers, and clothes him with new and beautiful ones. The Lord who teaches
the Hawk to stretch her wings to the South, must teach us to stretch our selves
to the Lord Jesus Christ, that our old feathers may fall away, and that we may
be renewed by his Spirit.

Secondly, There is another account given about the Hawks stretching her wings
to the South; for not only when the Hawk renews her feathers, does she return
to the South; but wild Hawks that are at liberty, living in colder climates,
use in Winter to change their quarters, and turn to the South, that is, to
those coasts which are more favored by the Sun, In australem plagam avolat
hiberno tempore. Plin. lib. 10. c. 8.

Gesner. de avibus.

Arenis etiam sole calescentibus accipitrem gaudere accepi, atque in illas se
mergere. Codurc.

Accipiter dictus (...) quasi omnoculus. Bold.


as they who write the nature of beasts and birds make report. All kind of
Hawks are tender, and cannot well abide the Winter cold, but get into the Sun,
and sometimes dust themselves in the sand, when heated by the Sun, as in very
hot seasons they delight to bath themselves in water. It is said, that the
Egyptians used of old to picture, or represent the Sun in the shape of a Hawk;
First, because the Hawk is a great lover of the Sun; Secondly, because of the
lively heat and sp'ritfuness of the Hawk, like that of the Sun; Thirdly,
because of the longevity of the Hawk (the Hawk is a long-lived creature.)
Fourthly, because of the quick-sightedness of the Hawk, whence they called the
Hawk All-eye. And Lastly, because of the swiftness of the Hawk. The Hawk flies
with such a speed, as if he did emulate, or would imitate the Sun. The Hawk
being thus like the Sun, and such a lover of the Sun, they shadowed the Sun by
the figure of a Hawk; all which may give us some intimation of the ground of
what is here said, That she stretches her wings toward the South.

Hence note; God has given irrational creatures a knowledge of what is most
convenient for their own preservation.

Why does the Hawk spread forth her wings to the South? she finds it best for
her, and therefore does ( Jer. 8.7.) The Stork in the heaven, and the Crane,
and the Swallow know the time of their coming; Whither? surely to some warmer
climate, when the weather is cold and offensive to them in the place where they
are; and when the heat returns to the coasts from whence they came, thither
they return again; They know the time of their coming, they know when it is good
for them to be in one Country, and when in another. And is not this a rebuke
(as the Prophet there applies it) unto a man, who many times knows not what is
good for himself, knows not the judgment of the Lord; that is, what God would
have him do, or what course to take in such a time and season, or under such a
dispensation of providence; knows not (as I may say) Winter and Summer, heat
and cold, and so is not so wise as the fowls of the air generally are, or as
the Hawk in particular is here said to be, Who stretches her wings to the
South. All the children of men have, and the children of God know they have a
South to stretch their wings unto; that is, the goodness and power of God, as
the Psalmist spoke, Under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, till
these calamities be overpast. I will stretch my self to the South, to the love
and favor of God; it is best for all men to stretch their wings toward those
wings of God in an evil day. All should do as the Lord gives the invitation (
Isa. 26.20.) Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut the doors
about thee; hide thy self, as it were, for a little moment, until the
indignation be over-past. Thus the Lord directs his people to stretch
themselves to the South, when it is cold and hard weather abroad in the world;
and the creatures spoken of by the Prophet, as well as the Hawk in the Text,
will rise up in judgment against us, if we stretch not our wings to the South,
when we feel the Northern cold, and Winter frost taking hold of us.

I shall pass from this part of the verse concerning the Hawk, when I have only
minded the Reader, that some have found a twofold resemblance in the Hawk.

First, They resemble the Devil and evil spirits, to the Hawk, because of their
devouring nature. The old Poet said, Odimus accipitrem quia semper vivit in
armis. Ovid.
We hate the Hawk, because she is always in arms. And so is the Devil, he is
always in arms, and at war with the Church of God, and with the souls of men;
and we ought always to be in arms against the Devil, yea, to take to our
selves the whole armor of God, spoken of ( Ephesians. 6.) to resist him, and defend
our selves.

Secondly, The Hawk is like wicked men, especially in three things;

First, For their ravenous nature, they love to destroy and live upon the spoil
of others ( Isa. 33.1.)

Secondly, They are like the Hawk, preying mostly upon those that are most
innocent. The Psalmist says, The wicked devours the man that is more righteous
than he. The Hawk pursues the Dove and poor Partridge, harmless creatures.

Thirdly, The Hawk is high-priz'd when alive, but when dead, cast out upon the
dunghill, no man regarding her. He that took great delight in his Hawk while
alive, will not call for it to his Table when dead. Thus wicked men may be in
great esteem while they live, but when once dead, they are as thrown upon the
dunghill, their memorial rots, and is unsavory. So much for the 26th verse,
wherein the Spirit of God calls Job to consider the nature of the Hawk at any
time flying, and sometimes turning her flight to the South. And now the
question passes from the Prince of birds, to the Queen of birds.

Verse. 27. Does the Eagle mount up at thy command, and make her nest on high?
The Eagle is a King or Queen, chief among the fowls of the air, (...) Cum sex
punctis, aquila; sic dicta, vel quod recto obtutu solemn aspiciat; and tunc
congruentiam habat cum verbo (...) vel quod volatum recta in praedam dirigat
and tunc, communicate cum verbo (...) Plin. l. 10. c. 3. and l. 35. c. 6.
as the Lion is among the beasts of the earth; and therefore the great King of
Babylon is shadowed by a great Eagle with great wings (Ezekiel. 17.3.) And the
Romans, who Lorded it long over the world, bare the Eagle in their Ensign.

The Hebrew word rendered Eagle, has a double derivation. According to the
first, it signifies to Behold. The Eagle is so exp^est, because she has (as
the Historian describes her) not only a quick and clear, but a strong sight,
able to look full upon the Sun shining in its strength, as if the name of the
Eagle in Engglish, were a Looker; the Eagle can look the Sun in the face. But
according to a second derivation given by Grammatians, it signifies strait, or
right forth. And the Eagle is so called, because she makes a direct course, as
it were by a strait line, in pursuit of her prey. Does the Eagle Mount up?

The word in the Hebrew, signifies to get high, very high, (...) Sublimis
elatus fuit, eminuit per metaphoram superbivit.
extreme high, and is therefore used in the Noune, to set forth the highness of
God ( Job 11.8. Psalm. 113.6. Isa. 5.16. Isa. 52.13.) It notes also the highness
of heaven ( Isa. 55.9. Psalm. 103.11.) which is called the Throne of God, and
the habitation of his Holiness, and of his Glory. It Is used also to denote the
height of a proud man's spirit, which would fain rise up to the high of heaven,
and be like to the most High, yea, higher than the most High (1 Samuel 2.3. Psalm.
131.1. Isa. 2.11. Ezekiel. 16.15.) In all these places, and many more, the word is
applied to the highness of a proud man's spirit, which though it be indeed the
lowest and basest thing in the world, yet it puts man upon high thoughts of
himself, and upon high designs for himself, he would be mounting like the
Eagle. Does the Eagle Mount up?

The Eagles flight, or mount, exceeds the Hawks; or any other of the winged
train, in three things;

First, In the swiftness of it. The Eagle has great and long wings ( Ezekiel.
17.3.) and she can make great have with them; therefore Solomon calling upon
us, not to set our eyes upon riches, gives the reason of his counsel ( Prove.
23.5.) For riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle
toward heaven; that is, they are suddenly gone, and will not return at thy
call. The Eagle will not come to the Lure, like the Hawk. To fly away as an
Eagle, notes two things concerning riches; First, That they will fly away
swiftly, speedily, they are soon gone; such is the Eagles flight. Secondly,
That they (often) fly away irrecoverably, there is no recalling them. The
Scripture often expresses the more than ordinary swiftness of men, by the
swiftness of the Eagle. David lamenting the death of Saul and Jonathan, gives
them this character (2 Samuel 1.23.) They were stronger than Lions, and swifter
than Eagles; that is, they were exceeding swift. Our adversaries were swifter
than the Eagles, said the poor captivated Church, when the Assyrian came in
against them ( Lam. 4.19.) Read also Deuteronomy. 28.49. Hos. 8.1. Hab. 1.8. Cicero
the Orator, in his second book of Divination, tells us, that when one who was
to run a race, reported to an Interpreter, Vicisti; ista enim ave volat nulla
vehementior. Cicer. l. 2. de divin.
that he dreamed he was turned into an Eagle; the Interpreter presently
answered, Then you shall overcome, or get the mastery: For the Eagle is the
strongest and swiftest of all flying fowls.

Secondly, The Eagle exceeds all, as in swiftness, so in the uprightness of her
flying: She flies right up; that is it which the Text takes notice of, She
mounteth up; she mounts up like an arrow out of a bow, Non obliquo tramite ut
caeterae aves vel per gyrum ut accipiter, sed recto sursum fertur. Aelian. lib.
14 c. 10. Aquila derem volatu superat, and sublimius evadit. Oppian.

Aquila in nuhibus.


whereas other fowls, when they fly high, they do it obliquely, or side-long,
by gyration, or fetching a compass; but the Eagle asce^ds directly, not (as I
may say) by winding stairs, but in a right line.

Thirdly, As the swiftness and uprightness of the Eagles motion, so the
highness of it is wonderful. The Eagle mounts till she is quite out of sight;
no bodily creature can reach the Eagles altitude. One of the Ancients says,
The Eagle soars above the air (he means, I suppose the lower region of the air)
as if she would visit the starry heavens: And hence it is said proverbially of
any thing which we cannot easily reach or come at, It Is an Eagle in the clouds.
Her common attribute or epithete is, The high-flying Eagle.

If it be questioned, why does the Eagle mount up so high? these two reasons
may be given of it;

First, That she may come down, or stoop with greater force upon her prey; and
that makes the Eagle so formidable to all the fowls of the air. Aquila (...) a
^oetis dictus.
And hence the Poets call her a Thunder bringer, because she mounts up on
purpose to that amazing height, that she may come down upon her prey more
forcibly, even like a thunderbolt. And thus proud men desire to get on high,
that they may more easily make a prey of, and crush (as the Eagle does) those
that are below them.

Secondly, The Eagle mounts thus high to please her self, it is suitable to her
spirit. Every one would be in action, as he is in disposition. The Eagle has a
high spirit, and she must fly high, and at high things. The Eagle will not
catch flies; she scorns that game. Does the Eagle mount up At thy command?

The Hebrew is, At thy mouth; so the word is rendered in several other
Scriptures ( Numb. 13.3.) And Moses by the commandment of the Lord sent them
from the wilderness of Paran; that is, he sent the men that were to search the
Land; The Hebrew is, Moses by the mouth of the Lord sent them to search the
Land. Again (2 Kings 24.3.) Surely at the commandment of the Lord came this
upon. Judah, to remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseth. As if
it had been said, When the enemy made inrodes upon the children of Israel and
Judah, how came this to pass? surely at the command of the Lord, or at the
mouth of the Lord, came this upon Judah. It is the word in the Text; Does the
Eagle mount up at thy command? or, at thy mouth? One would think, that it is
not only the Eagles nature to mount up; there is somewhat in that, but that is
not all, it is at the Lords mouth, at his command, and that we are specially to
take notice of here. What means this discourse about the Hawk and Eagle, but to
make us mount up our hearts to God, and acknowledge him in the motion of every
creature? It is at Gods mouth that the Eagle mounts up; but what is the command
that the Eagle receives from God? Does not the Eagle mount up by a natural
instinct, or according to the Law of nature planted in her? I answer, she does.
Yet because that natural instinct of the Eagle is of God, therefore we are to
look upon the Eagle mounting up; as by a special order and command of God. And
thus we are to understand the motion of all the creatures, Facit hoc aquila
naturali instinctu. Omnis autem naturalis cursus rerum, est quaedam motio
creaturae ad praeceptum Dei. Aquin. Dedistine hanc naturam aquilae ut attollat
se in altum? Vatabl.
as consequential of a command given out by God ( Psalm. 148.8.) Fire and hail,
snow and vapor, stormy wind, fulfilling his word, or his command. Though there
be a natural cause of the creatures motion, of the motion of the wind, of the
vapor, of the snow and hail, yet we must not stop at the natural causes, and
look no farther; neither rain nor snow fall, nor winds blow, but at the command
of the Lord: Not does the Eagle mount up at the bidding or teaching of man, but
at the command of God, acting her natural instinct in doing so. Does the Eagle
mount up at thy command?

Hence Note; The special motions of the creature are of God.

Man's mouth or command, cannot make any creature stir foot or wing. Who can
make the Eagle mount, the wind blow, or the rain fall besides God?

Secondly, As to the manner of this motion, its a mounting motion.

Note; The motion of the creature upward, has much of the command of God in it.

Some have (I know) mounting motions at the command of the Devil (the Lord has
the command of them, though they are not commanded by him) that is, the proud
imaginations, the lofty thoughts of man, these mounting motions, are not at the
command, but against the command of the Lord; the Lord suffers them, but they
are from Satan, he puffs men up, he blows them up with pride. But both the
natural moun^ings of the sensitives creatures, and the gracious mountings of
the new creature on high, are by the command of God. True believers have lowest
or lowliest spirits, yet highest and noblest aims, not grovelling on nor
bowing to the earth, but like an Eagle, mounting up on high: As this high
flight of the soul is highly pleasing unto God, so it is made by his strength,
and at his command. A believer flies high;

First, In the contemplation of divine things. What towering thoughts has he
concerning God, and the concernments of salvation by Jesus Christ! he is not
mingling his soul with the dust, nor mudding it upon the dunghils of this
world: As his conversation or trade is for things above, so his mind and
meditation is upon them.

Secondly, As he flies high in his contemplation about, so in his love to, and
desire of high things; he does not nakedly contemplate things above, as a
Philosopher may do, but he has strong affections to, and longings after the
enjoyment and possession of the things that are above; he is as much on high in
his desires and affections, Non ad praeceptum hominis, aut suam solius
voluntatem elevatur sanctus sed ^^gent* and ublevante De^. Jens.
as he is in his studies and speculations. And in both respects he mounts on
high, in the power and at the command of God; who, as he has taught the Eagle,
so man much more, whither, and how far to ascend. And he therefore mightily
triumphs over this lower world, because his soul is lifted up as an Eagle, by
and upon the wings of divine support and acceptance. Does the Eagle mount up
at thy command?

And make her nest on high? The Eagle does not only mount on high (that may be
from a sudden overture or occasion) but she makes her nest on high. The word
which we render on high, signifies separated, because high places are places
separated from ordinary concourse. Eagles covet to make their nests in places
furthest remote from all access both of men and beasts. The best of high
things, spiritual things, are separated from this world, they are above the
wisdom and way of the world, and that is the reason why the world cannot bear
them. I touch that only from the notation of the word.

The Eagle makes her nest on high. But does she so, O Job, at thy command? do
thou direct her, where to make her nest or how? It seems the Lord teaches
birds to make their nests. The least bird is directed by God as well as the
Eagle: It is by his counsel that some birds make their nests very low, and that
others (among which the Eagle especially) make their nests on high. Pliny
says, no man can reach or touch the Eagles nest. Nidos ejsu nemo attigit,
indificat in excelcissimis rupibus. Plin. l. 10. c. 6.
We look and find birds nests in every bush, but who ever found the Eagles
nest, such an Eagles nest as is here spoken of: There are (I grant) some Eagles
that make nests in high trees, but the Eagle here intended makes her nest upon
in accessible rocks. When the Lord would reach the hight of man's wisdom, in
setting himself above the reach of d^nger, it speaks thus ( Jerem. 49.16.)
Though thou should make thy nest as high as the Eagle, I will bring thee down
from thence, says the Lord. It Is a proverbial speech, and it is joined with
setting our nest among the stars, in the 4. v. of the Prophecy of Obadiah. The
Idumeans, with and about whom the Prophet there spoke, dwelt in mountanous
places, and slattered themselves in the strength and safety of the country, as
if it had all been an Eagles nest. The Eagle makes her nest so high that it is,
as it were, next to the stars. But why does the Eagle make her nest so high?
there are two or three rersons given of it, by the searchers of nature.

First, For her safety, high things probably are most out of danger, there is a
hight which is very dangerous, and there is a hight that is out of the reach of
danger, such is the height of the Eagles nest.

Secondly, Naturalists say, the Eagle makes her nest so high, because she
cannot, without some difficulty, raise her self from the earth; if she sits
low, she cannot easily mount up, she has a heavy body though a strong wing:
and therefore the wisdom of God instructs her to make her nest on high, that
she may with that advantage rise out of it, and mount up from it. The Eagle
does not as the Ostrich, lay her eggs in the dust, or in the sand, but she
makes her nest in high places, that so she may be both safe in her nest, and
the sooner take her flight out of it.

Thirdly, The Eagle makes her nest on high, because there the air is purest,
and she is greatly delighted and pleased, with the purity and sweetness of the
air.

Gaudet ex hisce speculis coelum contemplari. Oppian.
Fourthly, It Is said also the Eagle makes her nest on high, because she loves,
from thence, as from a watchtower, to behold and feed her eyes, upon the fair
and beautiful face of the heavens.

In these four respects we should be like the Eagle, and make our nest on high.
The Eagle does not only mount high, but makes her nest on high. Some men mount
high, that is, have high notions and speculations, in which they seem to be
rapt up (as the Apostle once truly was) to the third heavens; yet they make not
their nest on high, they do not abide there, their delights are here below, and
so is there nest, the residence and rest of their souls. The nest of the rich
man's soul, in the Gospel, was in his full barns. O how many speak high,
discourse high, profess highly, heaven-high; yet, when all is done, their nest
is upon the earth; They talk as high as the Eagle mounts, yet their nest is as
low as that of the O^trich, in the dust. Let us remember, as to mount high, so
to make our nest on high. The Apostle could say (1 Phil. 3.20.) Our
conversation is in heaven; not only must we be speaking high, but acting on
high too; we must sit and brood there, as the Eagle upon her nest. Let us say
of God, as Moses the man of God did in his prayer ( Psalm. 90.1.) Lord, thou
have been our dwelling place in all generations; thou art so, and thou shall be
so for ever. Thus we are taught, not to imitate the foolish Ostrich, building
our nest in the dust, but like the noble Eagle (being lifted up by the mighty
power of the holy Spirit) making our nest or taking up our rest in heaven,
which is, as the highest, so the safest place of all.

Thus far of the Eagle in two of her properties. First, Her high flight.
Secondly, Her high nest.

The third thing spoken of in this context concerning the Eagle, is the choice
of her abode or habitation.

Verse. 28. She dwells and abides on the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and
the strong place. As the Eagle flies very high, so she abides on high places.
Sicut aquila motum habet in altum, ita etiam in altis conversatur, quod
pertinet ad nobilitatem naturae suae. Aquin. (...) a raradice (...) mansit per
noctem unam pernoctavit. Sola sine clangore, sine murmuratione conversatur in
montibus. Plin. l. 10. c. 3. Arist. l. 9. c. 32. de naturae animal. (...)
Dentem vocat preminentiam, aut quod praeruptum est in rupe. Drus.
Her abiding so high, shows the nobility and generosity of her nature; she does
not only mount upon high sometimes, and make her nest on high in breeding time,
but she dwells on high, she dwells and abides there. The word which we
render abides, signifies properly tarrying for a night, or taking up a
nights-lodging; but we are not to confine the Eagles abode to a night, to this
or that night, here the word notes constant, continued residence, she dwells
and abides on the rock, there is her place, her palace, there this Queen of
birds keeps Court, there she abides, excepting in two cases. First, When she
is minded to mount up and take her pleasure. Secondly, When she flies off to
seek her prey, as will appear further in the next verse, but take her generally
there she abides. Naturalists describe a sort of Eagles, which choose, and love
to dwell in or inhabit woods, plains, and by the sea shore; but the Eagle here
described dwells on the rock, and not only so, but Upon the crag of the rock.

The Hebrew is, upon the tooth of the rock. Master Broughton renders, In the
edge of a rock. The crag of a rock does much resemble both a tooth and the edge
of a thing; for it is sharp like an edge, and appears in form like a tooth: Now
upon that part of the rock, which is most craggy and stands out like a tooth,
there the Eagle abides, there she pearcheth. And Naturallists tell us, though
she pearches upon a hard rock, yet she is very careful of her talons, least
they should be blunted or receive any injury from the hardness of the rock, she
is very curious of them, knowing of what use they are to her. Thus she abides
upon the rock, and upon the crag of the rock; or upon the tooth of the rock. It
does not satisfy the Eagle to build or abide upon any part of the rock, but
she chooses that part of it for her habitation which is most inaccessible, lest
she should have any disturbance by ill neighbors, or the air be insected with
ill smells. Saint Hierome says, the Eagle builds in this manner, least Adders
or Snakes should spoil her Eaglets or young ones; and that the Amythist-stone,
which is an Antidote or preservative against poison, is found in her nest. She
abides on the crag of the rock, And the strong place.

We might well enough conceive, that when it is said she dwells on the rock,
that she dwells on the strong place, for the rock is a strong place; yet the
Holy Ghost is pleased to set it out distinctly, (...) Aux propugnaculum munit^o
cognationem habet cum verbo (...) quod venari est Hebraeis. Moller. in Psalm.
91. v. 2.
On the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the strong place. Master Broughton
translates it, On a fortress; she dwells on the rock, as on her Castle or
Tower. The word signifies any place of defense, and Grammarians tell us, it
comes from, or has near cognation with, a word that signifies to hunt or
pursue the game; and the reason given for it, is, because when persons are
pursued in war or troubled in peace (as weaker birds by birds of prey) they
have their recourse to strong places for refuge and safety. The Eagle needs a
strong place, for she has enemies, and therefore is taught to fortify her
self, or to get into strong places for he^ security against them. From all
these expressions, that the Eagle dwells on the rock, upon the crag of the
rock, and strong place,

Note; Nature teaches the creature in general, much more man, to provide for
his own safety.

That is, God has put such an instinct into the nature of all the creatures,
as to provide for their own safety; The Eagle will dwell on the rock, she will,
not venture herself every where. And according to the state and condition of
creatures, such is the provision which they make for their safety ( Psalm.
104.18.) The high hills are a refuge for the wild Goat, and the stony rock for
the Coney. The wild Goats have their refuge, and the Coneys have their refuge,
and they are taught whither to fly from the face of danger. There is no
creature but has a refuge in time of danger, and therefore we commonly say,
Times of danger discover our refuge.

Now if the Lord has taught the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the earth
to look to their own safety, to get to the rock, and the strong place; then
doubtless, he has taught his servants, all that are godly, to seek and hasten
to a refuge, both for their spiritual and corporal safety. David often
discovers his refuge in the Psalms (Psalm. 18.2.) When at the first verse, he
had in plain language called the Lord his strength, I will love thee, O Lord,
my strength; he presently adds a number of metaphors, to shadow out the same
thing, The Lord is my fortress, my rock, and my deliverer, my God, my strength,
in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high
tower. He calls God his rock twice in that verse. God is not only a rock, but
the only rock in which his faithful people find shelter. Moses said in his
prayer ( Psalm. 90.1.) Lord thou have been our dwelling place in all
generations. Where do believers dwell? in God himself; as the dwelling of the
Eagle is in the rock, so the dwelling of a believer is in God, his rock. They
may be sure of safety who are so housed, who are housed in God ( Psalm. 91.1.)
He that dwells in the secret places of the most high, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty: I will say of the Lord, he is my refuge, and my
fortress, my God, in him will I trust. Thus, as the Lord has taught the Eagle
to look out a strong place for her self, so he has taught his people; and it
will be as much their wisdom, to learn of the Eagle to provide against danger,
as to learn of the Ant to provide against hunger.

As in this 28th verse we have had the dwelling of the Eagle described, so in
the next, we have both the sharpness of her appetite and the quickness of her
sight.

Verse. 29. From thence she seeks her prey, and her eyes behold afar off. The
fourth thing considerable in the Eagle, is the sharpness of her appetite; she
has a great heat of stomach, and a strong digestion, therefore she must be
seeking prey.

From thence. That is, from the rock her dwelling place, from the tooth of the
rock; From thence she seeks her prey. And it is conceived, that the reason why
she builds so high is, that she may from thence with more advantage spy out and
seek her prey. The Hebrew is she diggeth her prey from thence. That an Eagle
should dig, and dig in the air, is an elegant expression. Diligent seeking or
searching, is signified by digging in the Hebrew language. They that dig for a
thing seek it earnestly; and therefore to show how earnestly the Eagle seek her
prey, she is said to dig for it. The Lord to show the open sinfulness of Israel
told them ( Jer. 2.34.) In thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the
poor innocents. That which is in a man's skirts is easily seen; and hence the
Lord adds, I have not found it by secret search, or as the Margin has it, by
digging; that is the force of the word, it notes a diligent search or seeking;
the Eagle seeks, as if she were a digging for Her prey

What is her prey? The Eagle has a strong stomach, and the word here used
signifies any thing eatable. Naturalists say she feeds upon fowls of the air,
the Dove, etc. she feeds also upon Sheep, Lambs, Hares; and it is said, she has
a great mind to Hares, they being not only meat, but medicine to her.
Naturalists tell us also, that the Eagle feeds upon fish, and that in her
flight she can discern the fish in the Sea: and some tells us, that she loves
shellfish, the Crab-fish especially very much; this is her prey: from thence
she seeks her prey, whither moving in the air, or upon the land, or in the
water; she seeks her prey wherever it is to be had, and she will have it if it
be to be had above ground, yea, if it be to be had in the water.

Hence note; Hunger makes active.

We say hunger breaks thorough stone-walls or strongholds. Whither will not
the Eagle dig to satisfy her appetite? I need not stay upon the general truth;
I would only add this, it is certainly so in spirituals. Soul hunger, our
hunger after righteousness will make us active. Those Eagles, the Saints,
having a strong appetite to the things of God, will dig for their satisfaction,
they will seek after food for their souls till they are satisfied. Sometimes
possibly there is a glut of food, and then they will scarcely look after it;
but if once they are pinched with famine, then they look after food. That of
the Prophet ( Amos 8.11.) answers this of the Text, I (says the Lord) will
send a famine among you: not a famine of bread, but of hearing the Word of the
Lord. And what then? Why then they shall wander from sea to sea; and from the
North even to the East, they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord,
and shall not find it. The Eagle here seeks her prey and gets it; but they
shall seek the Word of the Lord, and not have it, because they were unthankful
for it, and unprofitable under it, when they had it. It Is a sad hunger to be
pincht. with the want of the word, which is spiritual food; but that is a
blessed hunger which is not from want of, but from a true and strong desire
after the Word or spiritual food. True believers, abiding in a right frame,
have a great desire and hunger after spiritual food, even when there is
greatest plenty of it; when there is (as we say) a glut of it, they are not
glutted with it; the more they are satisfied with it, the more they would have
of it; their appetites and satisfaction are interchangable; they are hungry,
yet satisfied; they are satisfied, yet hungry; and therefore they are always
seeking their spiritual prey. It is a sore judgment when they that have had
much of this spiritual food, and have not had a hunger after it, are cut short
and deprived of it. The Lord often lets those hunger after it in want, who have
not hungered after it in enjoyment.

As the Eagle has an eager appetite, a sharp stomach; so an excellent eye, a
sharp sight, as it follows.

Her eyes behold afar off. To behold or see, is the work of the eye, and to
behold afar off, is the excellency of the eye in that work. The Eagle seeks
after her prey, and her eyes behold afar off. Some render which her eyes behold
afar off, that is a good reading; the conjunctive particle and is not in the
Original Text, and therefore we may supply it by the relative (which) as well
as by the conjunction (and) Naturalists tell us, that the Eagle has so sharp a
sight, that when she is mounted quite out of our sight, out of the sight of any
man, and is as it were in the clouds, that even then she does perfectly behold
her prey, and that is afar off indeed; even at that distance she beholds the
Hare in the bush, and the fish in the water. There are almost incredible things
related, as to the accuteness of the Eagles sight; and the reason given by some
of her quicksightedness, is this in nature, because her eye lies very deep in
her head, and so has a great advantage in seeing, the light being the more
compassed by, and the rays the more strongly gathered into her eye. I shall
not discuss the validity of this reason, all agreeing in the thing, that the
Eagle sees very exactly and afar off: And as she has a very clear, so a very
strong sight, so strong that she can steadily behold the Sun shining in its
strength (as it was touched before) those beams which blind us, and oppress our
eyes, are pleasing to hers. It has been a torture which some Tyrants have
used, to hold open a man's eye directly to the Sunbeams, and so blind him, and
quite extinguish the sight of his eye. Now that which blinds us, and puts out
our eyes is pleasant, delightful, and as some express it, healing and
refreshing to the eyes of the Eagle: and hence it is said of her, that she tries
her young ones, whether they be of a right breed or no, in this manner; she
holds them up to the Sun, and if they can bear the beams of the Sun with open
eyes, Phaebaea dubios explorat lampede fatus. Silius Ital.
they are right, otherwise spurious. The Eagle is so sharp-sighted, that, An
Eagles eye is the proverb for a sharp sight. Her eyes behold afar off. Not in
the sense we find the phrase used ( Psalm. 138.6.) where it is said, Though the
Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly, but the proud he knows afar
off, that is, he regards them not. We put a word of that significancy in the
Meeter, He contemning, knows them afar off, that is, as persons that he cannot
abide to have near him. The proud and lowly are alike near in place to God, yet
not in respect. But of that only by the way. The Eagles beholding things afar
off, is not (I say) like the Lords beholding persons afar off; those things
which are afar off, in place from the Eagle, she sees them as if they were at
hand: Thus she beholds afar off.

Hence, Observe; God has given more excellent senses to some sensitive
creatures than to others of that kind, yea, than to those of a higher kind, the
rational.

Not only does the Eagle exceed other fowls of the air, but all the men on
earth in eyesight. And as an Eagle has a natural eyesight beyond man; so a
godly man has a spiritual eyesight beyond all other men, the eyesight of
faith, by which he sees not only things afar off, but things invisible, yea,
him that is invisible, as Moses did ( Heb. 11.27.) A believer has an Eagles
eye; his eyes, as hers, behold afar off.

Verse. 30. Her young ones also suck up blood, and where the slain are, there is
she. This verse holds out the sixth property of the Eagle; what kind of food she
and her young ones live upon is here expressed.

Her young ones. Or her putters forth. By which we are to understand such young
ones as are ready to put forth feathers, but cannot yet fly abroad to shift for
themselves; or they are so called, (...) pulli avium a flore, quod eflorescunt,
and emergiant ex ove. Merc.
because young ones are put forth of the eggs. What do they? they suck up
blood. The word notes a very greedy sucking, it is a double word, and so
implies, as it were, a double drinking, a drinking with such have, that they
are ready to choke; and so Master Broughton translates it expressly, Her young
ones near choke swallowing blood, they swallow it so greedily that they are
ready to choke themselves with it; that is a good reading. The Septuagint, (...)
consperguntur Sept. velurantur. August.
say her young ones are sprinkled with blood, as they that feed upon raw flesh,
especially when newly killed or torn, are speckl'd or sprinkled with blood: Her
young ones are rolled or wallowed in blood, says another. All readings show
what provision she makes for her young ones while under her keeping, and how
they keep themselves when gone off from her hand; she brings up her young ones
to her own trade, feeding them with flesh, and acquainting them with the sweet
of blood; she and her young ones are all of a diet. It Is said of the Eagle,
that she never drinks water, nor is at all thirsty; but both she and her young
ones suck up blood.

Hence note; What young ones are used to, that they will afterward follow.

Young Eagles are used to blood in the nest, and therefore delight in blood all
their days afterward ( Prove. 22.6.) Train up a Child in the way he should go,
and when he is old he will not depart from it. If a Child be trained up in a
good way, he will not depart from it when he is old; it is usually so, or
probably it will be so. Though the golden youth-age, of some has ended in a
leaden old age, yet it is most probable, if a Child be bred up in a good way,
Progenies, ^stimulante fame festinat ad illam.
he will hold it, and if in an ill way, he will hardly leave or be beaten out
of it: Usually, such as the institution and instruction of youth is, such will
their after-conversation be. Her young ones also suck up blood, Quam primum
rupte praedam gustaverit o^o. Juven. Satyr. 14.
and, as it follows, Where the slain are, there is she.

This shows us yet more fully, what the Eagle lives upon. Where carcasses be,
resort they, says Mr. Broughton. Some interpret the Text, (...) Non pro
occisis sed mox occidendis accipio. Bold. Aelian. l. 14. c. 13.

Vnaquae Jovis appelatur corns non attingit, sed ad victum ei herba sotis est.
Aelian. Aristot.


not of bodies slain, but of bodies to be slain; where battles are to be
fought, thither the Eagle resorts. Natural Historians tell us, Eagles will
prefage or smell a battle, some say, seven days before it is sought, others
three, at least two; so that not only where the carcasses are, but are like to
be, thither the Eagles gather. Yet some contend very much, that there is a sort
or race of Eagles so noble, that they will not feed upon a dead carcass, but
live upon he^bs; but that most Eagles feed upon bodies slain, none deny. This
Scripture of Job is alluded to by Christ himself ( Mat. 24.28. Luke 17.37.) and
both upon the same accounts, the destruction of Jerusalem, the glorious coming
of Christ, and the end of the world. In Matthew he says, Wheresoever the
carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together: And in Luke,
Wheresoever the body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together. St.
Matthew says, Where the carcass is, and St. Luke says, Where the body is.
There are various interpretations of these two Scriptures, both quoted (as is
generally conceived) from the Text under hand. Some expound them only of the
destruction of the Jews by the Romans, and give the sense thus; That whereas
Christ had foretold the destruction of the Jewish State and Temple by the
Romans, and that it should fall upon all places, Dr. Hammond
even at once like lightning, so that it would be in vain for them to run from
one City or Country to another, in hope to avoid the vengeance, because
wheresoever the Jews should be, or whithersoever they should retire to hide and
save themselves, thither would the Romans Armies come (whose Ensign was the
Eagle) and finding them out, slay and destroy them. As if the Lord Christ had
said, This threatened desolation, will be universal and unavoidable; where ever
any Jews are, there the Romans will be. Thus the whole body of the Jewish
Nation is compared to a carcass or body, and the Romans to Eagles. That ancient
Prophecy ( Deuteronomy. 28.49.) may be applicable to this final destruction of the
Jewish Nation; The Lord shall bring a Nation against thee from far, from the
end of the earth (as swift) as the Eagle flies, a Nation whose tongue thou
shall not understand.

But though it be both very probable in it self, and very suitable to the words
of Christ in St. Matthew, that the dest^uction which the Roman Eagles broug^^
upon the body of the Jewish Nation, is there employed; yet Christ speaking of
his own coming to judge the world (as well as of the Romans to destroy the
Jews) there is (I conceive) more in it than that, when Christ says,
Wheresoever the carcass is, there will the Eagl^^ be gathered together. And why
may we not say, that Christ compares himself to the carcass or body, and
believers to the Eagles, who shall reso^t and be gathered to him wheresoever he
shall appear? Taking the words in this latter sense.

Some expound them of true believers gathering to Christ, as the carcsse or
body, every day by faith. One of the Ancients says, when Christ being laid in
the grave, Euthymius. Theophilactus. Ambrosius.
was first resorted to by Mary, the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen, and
Mary the Mother of our Lord, and by the Apostles, then were the Eagles gathered
about the carcass: And ever since Christ arose from the dead, believers have
gathered together about him, and fed upon him as crucified, or as that blessed
carcass who procured life for them by his death; wheresoever Christ crucified
is preached, thither true believers gather, and many who believe not are added
to the Church.

Again, others expound it of the Saints gathering to Christ at the last day.
Our late Annotators dealing with these words, as reported ( Luke 17.37.) say,
that by the flight of the Eagle is signified the sudden assembling of the
Saints unto Christ coming unto judgment, answerable to that of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 15.52. as also to that, 1 These. 4.17.

Now though according to this allegorical interpretation of the Texts in St.
Matthew and Luke, Christ is the carcass, and believers the Eagles; yet I shall
close my interpretation of th^s Text in Job, to which both the Evangelists
allude, by showing that in other Scriptures, such things are spoken of Christ
himself, as hold out a likeness between him and the Eagle, in many respe^^s

First, As the Eagle is the royal bird, the Princess or Queen of birds, so
Jesus Christ is the Prince of the Kings of the earth (Rev. 1.5.) And again (
Rev. 19.16.) King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. As the Eagle among birds, so
Christ among both men and Angels, has the pre-eminence.

Secondly, As the Eagle mounts up, so also did Jesus Christ ( Psalm. 68.18.)
Thou have ascended on high; yea, so high has Christ ascended, that the Eagl^
cannot follow him: The Heaven to which natural Eagles mount, is (as I may say)
but a pavement to that which Jesus Christ ascended to Christ had a high slight,
he mounted up to the heaven of heavens, far above all visible heavens. ( Ephesians.
4.10.) he is made higher than the Heavens ( Heb. 7.26.)

Thirdly, Has the Eagle a piercing eye? so has Jesus Christ; he (not only
from the height of the clouds, whither the Eagle mounts, but) from the highest
heavens, can look into the secret of every man's heart, even into the hell of a
bad man's heart, and see what is doing there, what is lying there. It was said of
Christ while on earth ( John 2.25.) He needed not that any should testify of
man, for he knew what was in man; and still he looks quite through man, through
the wisest, closest, and most reserved among the sons of men. All things are
naked and open before the eyes of him (this Eagle) with whom we have to do; his
eyes behold afar off.

Fourthly, Historians tell us, the Eagle fights or wars with Dragons and
Serpents, and overcomes them. Jesus Christ, this Eagle, has fought with that
great dragon the devil, and bruised the head of the Serpent ( Genesis 3.15.)

Fifthly, The Eagle is very tender and careful of her young ones. Now, as an
Eagle (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12.) stirs up her nest (that is, those in
her nest) fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them,
bears them on her wings; so the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no
strange God with him. God bare the Israelites on Eagles wings (out of Egypt)
and brought them to himself (Exodus 19.5.) that is, he brought them speedily and
safely, and so he bore them all the years of their journeying in the
wilderness. The Eagle bears her young ones upon her wings, that they may be
safe (she must be hurt before her young ones can, while she bears them there.)
Thus Christ bears his people on his wings, yea, in his bosom, The eternal God
is their refuge, and underneath are the everlasting Arms (Deuteronomy. 33.27.)

Sixthly, Naturalists tell us, the Eagle gives her young ones of her own blood,
Aelian. l. 14. cap. 14.
when she cannot get other blood for them to drink or suck. This is most true
of Christ; he suffered himself to be wounded for us; his hands and feet, yea,
his very heart was pierced, that we might have his blood to drink in believing.
My blood (says he, Joh. 6.) is drink indeed.

Seventhly, The Eagle is long lived. Aquila vocatur (...) propter longae
vitatem: vivit annos centum. Epiphan.
The Greek expresses her by a word signifying longevity; and some give the
reason, not only from the excellent temperament and constitution of her body,
but also because she lives in such pure air, free from ill vapors and noisome
smells. Jesus Christ is not only long lived, but he lives for ever, he was from
everlasting, and will be to everlasting, he is the King eternal (1 Timothy 1.17.)
the eternal father, (Isa. 9.6.)

Thus we see how Christ is like the Eagle, in these seven particulars; I shall
show seven more, wherein true Christians also are like the Eagle.

First, Does the Eagle fly high? so do they by the wings of faith; They mount
up (says the Prophet, Isa. 40.31.) with wings as the Eagle.

Secondly, Has the Eagle a clear sight? does she see far off? so Saints by
faith can see far off ( Isa. 33.17.) Their eyes see the King in his beauty,
they behold the Land that is very far off. Which Scripture, though it be
properly and literally meant of beholding King Hezekiah in his earthly glory,
yet it is much more verified of a believers seeing his King, the Lord Jesus
Christ in his heavenly glory, and of his beholding Heaven, which may well be
called the Land of farness and distances, or (as we translate) The Land very
far off. Stephen the Protomartyr, had a clear intellectual spiritual eye, when
he said ( Acts 7.56.) Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man
standing on the right hand of God. Believers have a clear Eagle-eye here, and
they shall have a much clearer eye hereafter, when they shall see Christ as he
is (1 John 3.2.) All Saints will be more than eagle-eyed in glory.

Thirdly, Does the Eagle dwell on a rock? so does every true believer ( Isa.
33.16.) His place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks; bread shall be
given him, his water shall be sure. The Apostle tells us who the rock is (1
Cor. 10.4.) The rock which followed them was Christ.

Fourthly, Does the Eagle renew her strength? So do believers when any oldness
is coming upon the new creature (as it does sometimes) then they renew their
strength by looking to Jesus Christ, who is at once their righteousness and
their strength: He satisfies their mouth with good things, so that their youth
is renewed as the Eagles (Psalm. 103.5.) As the Lord often b^ings his people low
by bodily sickness and weakness, and then renews their natural health and
strength: So when there are decays and declinings upon their souls, he renews
their spiritual health and strength ( Isa. 40.31.) They that wait upon the Lord
shall renew their strengh, and then (as was said before) they shall mount up
with wings as Eagles. The Eagles youth is renewed by the growth and succession
of new feathers (of the same kind) in the place of the old; but a believer
renews his youth or strength, by casting off gradually the remainders of the
old man which is corrupt, and by putting on more of the new man (who is quite
of another kind) created after God in righteousness and true holiness (Ephesians.
4.24.)

Fifthly, Can the Eagle look fully upon the Sun? Surely helievers have not only
as clear, but as strong a sight as the Eagle, they can look upon Jesus Christ
the Son of righteousness with open face. For as this Son of righteousness has
said, behold me, behold me (Isa. 65.1.) and again, Look to me and be ye saved,
all the ends of the earth (Isa. 45.22.) that is, all ye that dwell on earth,
even to the ends of it; so he gives a power, or a spiritual eye to behold and
look upon him; and that beholding or looking is a healing to them, as the
beholding of the Sun is to the natural eye of the Eagle ( Mal. 4.2.) To them
that fear my name shall the Son of righteousness arise with healing in his
wings.

Sixthly, Do Eagles suck blood both young and old? so do believers. The first
living of the new creature is upon blood; every godly man drinks the blood of
Jesus Christ by faith, as offered to him, both in the promises and in the
Ordinances of the Gospel. A believer could not live a moment, nor have any
subsistence in grace, if he had not (as the Eagle) blood to suck in and drink.
A godly man is nourished, by a believing contemplation upon the sufferings of
Christ, and the effusion of his blood.

Seventhly, Does the Eagle feed upon the slain? so believers feed upon Christ
as slain. Christ by his death is become our food to eternal life, ( Joh. 6.51,
53.) Though the raised and glorified body of Christ be entered into the full
possession of a divine and eternal life, and though we by faith look to Jesus
Christ, not according to the flesh, nor as dead, but as living and sitting for
ever at the right hand of the Father, there making intercession for us; yet we
must look to him as entering into the holy place by the sacrifice of himself,
and with his own blood, not with the blood of others (Heb. 9.24, 25, 26.) The
Apostle told the Corinthians, I determined to know nothing among you, but Jesus
Christ and him crucified; that is, so to know him as to feed upon him my self,
and so to make him known to you, that you might feed upon him also.

Further, It is considerable, that as believers in Scripture are compared to
Eagles, and the Lord is said to have born the old Church of the Jews upon
Eagles wings; so under the Gospel Eagles wings are said to have been given to
the Christian Church, whereupon she was born out of the reach of danger ( Rev.
12.13, 15.) And when the Dragon saw that he was cast to the earth, he
persecuted the woman that brought forth the man-child. And to the woman were
given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly into the Wilderness,
(that is, convenient and sufficient means to further her slight and retirement)
into her place (wheresoever it is) where she is nourished for a time, and
times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent. All the means of the
Churches escape from danger are shadowed by two wings; not but that God has
more means than two, by which his providence works and procures the safety of
the Church; but, because it had been improper, speaking of her flight, to
express more wings than two: For the Seraphims, which are described, having
each one six wings (Isa. 6.2.) yet two of them only were put to that use of
flying. And these two wings given the Church, are said to be the two wings of
an Eagle, because among all the winged tribes, Eagles are st^ongest and
swiftest of wing; they can fly fastest, and they can fly furthest, as in
height, so in length. Nor are the wings given the Church, barely called the
wings of an Eagle, but of a great Eagle, implying not only the best kind of
wings, but the best wings of that kind; not only the wings of an Eagle, but of
a great Eagle. By all which is meant, the wise and tender care of God over his
Church in times of greatest danger, when the Dragon become a Serpent, or the
Serpentine Dragon seeks most to annoy her.

Thus far the Lord has been interrogating Job, not only about the inanimate
creatures, the Heavens, the Air, the Sea, the Earth, but also about several
Animals; in the least of which, because they not only have a being, but life,
sense and motion, more of the power, wisdom and goodness of God shines forth,
than in the greatest of the former. And all the questions proposed to Job in
these two Chapters have (as has been hinted heretofore, and should be
constantly minded) this general scope to convince (as then Job, so now) all
men, both of their own nothingness, and of the all sufficiency, wisdom, care
and power of God, who has so wisely made, and does so wisely dispose of all
the creatures which he has made. And therefore, man who has received more
from God than they all, and of whom God is more tender than of them all, should
submit to the dispose of God in all things without disputing about, much more
without murmuring at, or complaining of his dispensations in one kind or other.

The Lord (though he had done much in the way of interrogating) has not yet
done interrogating Job concerning the works of his hands. Nevertheless, before
he proceeded any further, to enquire of him about the creatures, he saw it fit
to feel his pulse a little, by a close application of what he had already said,
mingled with high language and cutting reproofs, thereby to try what effect
this forepassed discourse had wrought upon him, or whether he were come to a
more humble and submitting frame than before, as will appear in opening the
former part of the Chapter following.

JOB Chap. 40. Verse. 1, 2. 1. Moreover, the Lord answered Job, and said,

2. Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty, instruct him? he that reproves
God, let him answer it.


IN the two former Chapters we have heard what the Lord said to Job out of the
Whirlwind, with what questions he apposed him about the works of Creation and
Providence: To all or any of which Job being unable to make Answer, especially
to give a present and perfect Answer, the Lord (it seems) gave him some little
respite to recollect himself, in expectation of his Answer; but finding him
silent, proceeds in this Chapter, to urge him yet further upon the whole
matter, for an Answer; yea, the Lord having said all this to him, ^sets it home
upon him with this sharp reprehension.

Moreover, the Lord answered Job, and said, shall he, etc. As if he had said, O
Job, had thou diligently considered my work of Creation in making, and my
work of Providence in governing this whole world, even the motions of the least
and most inferior Creatures therein contained; surely thou had never
ventured to think what thou have uttered, and now thou can not but see how
unduly thou have complained of my proceedings with thee; nor can thou be
unconvinced how unable thou art to enter into the secrets of my Counsel, for as
much as the causes of many lesser and common things in the world are secrets
unto thee, and such as exceed the reach of thy understanding. Thus we may
conceive the Lord at once speaking to, and severely reprehending Job, in the
words which follow.

Verse 2. Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? Shall he, or
can he, surely he shall not, surely he cannot. There are several readings of
this former part of the verse; I shall only name four, and then come to the
explication of the words as they lie in our Translation.

Ra^bi David.
First, The words are rendered thus, Is it wisdom or learning to contend with
the Almighty? This reading puts the latter words first. Is it wisdom or
instruction, or is that man well instructed, or well in his wits, who contends
with the Almighty? The sense of that reading is plain, and the improvement of
it might be very useful: for indeed these two are utterly repugnant and
contrariant, Non est, ille eruditus, neque been obsequens divinae disciplinae,
qui deo castiganti obstre^it and litem intendit. Vatabl.
To contend with God, and to be wise; to contend with God, and to show our
selves well taught. That man has not received instruction either by or about
divine correction, who mutters or quarrels at God correcting him: For how wise
soever he is in his own eyes, he shows himself a very fool, at least, as to
that point or attempt, very foolish. So then it is a great truth which this
reading holds forth, Is it wisdom, is it learning, to contend with the
Almighty? Whosoever does so, erres in doing so, and will at last both see and
feel his error by sad experiences.

Secondly thus, Should he be instructed who contends with the Almighty? This
Translation may have a double interpretation. First, Surely that man deserves
not to be instructed, but corrected, who contends with the Almighty; he
deserves not to be taught, but to be punished. Should he be taught that
contends with the Almighty? Doubtless only, as Gideon taught the men of
Succoth, (Judge. 8.16.) with briars and thorns of the wilderness; that is, with
severest chastisements. Secondly, Should he be instructed, that contends with
the Almighty? That is, is a learner a competent match for God? is one that
needs instruction and teaching, fit to take up the bucklers and enter the field
of dispute with God? He had need to be a Master, not a Scholar; a Teacher, not
a Learner, that undertakes to deal wi^h God. That man had need be skilled and
well furnished, he had n^ed be (as ^e speak) his Crafts-master (and all little
enough, yea all too little) who contends with the Almighty.

Thirdly, The word which we render to instruct, Numquid contendet cum
omnipotente, quem ille castigat? Lavat.
signifies also to correct: taking it so, the Text is thus rendered, Shall he
contend with the Almighty, whom he corrects; or, Shall a man corrected by or
under the correcting hand of the Almighty, contend with him? Shall any give God
words for his blows, or expostulate the matter with him? No man may (with such
a spirit) say unto God, What do thou? whatsoever he suffers; nor may any man
be displeased with what God does, whatsoever he is pleased to do either with
himself or others.

Lastly (which was hinted in the second) Does not contending with the Almighty
deserve chastening? Certainly it does; or, Is not chastening due to contending
(that is, to contenders) with God? Nonne contentioni cum deo castigatio, upple,
debetur?
Doubtless it is. He that will contend with God, though but in words, is worthy
of no answer nor satisfaction but in blows. Every one of these Translations
has a fairness in it, as also with the Hebrew Text; but I shall insist upon
our own reading only, and give you some few notes from that.

Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty, instruct him? There is a twofold
contending.

First, By force and strength of arm, or strength of arms. We cannot suppose
the Lord speaking here of such a Contention. There were a sort of robustious
men, Giants, of old, (...).
called fighters with God; and many profane Atheists have blasphemously set
themselves against heaven, as if they would pull God from his Throne. Such as
these are not the Contenders with God here intended; Job was far from being a
man of that spirit.

Secondly, Qui offert se disputaturum cum eo. Aqu.
There is a contending with God by force of Argument, or by reasonings. This I
conceive is here meant; Job was often found in these contendings with God. But
shall any think to logic it with God? to enter a dispute with God? to argue
with or reply upon him, as the Apostle speaks ( Romans 9.20.) O man, who art thou
that reply against God? Arguing and replying are a kind of contending, and
this is of two sorts;

First, With the Word of God, declaring what God would have us do, or what God
would have us believe. Thus many contend with God, even as many as submit not
to his Word. This is a common quarrel, whether the Word of God or man's will
shall stand, whether the Law of God or the lusts of men shall carry it, and
bear the sway. The Apostle is express in it ( Romans 8.7, 8.) The carnal mind is
enmity against God; and if so, then it contendeth with God, for enmity will be
contending; and what kind of contending is there meant, appears in the next
words, it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. Every
natural man, till subdued and conquered by grace, is contending with the Word
of God; he submits not to what God would have him do, nor to what God would
have him believe; he will not form either his faith or his life as God would
have him. Infinite are the Contentions of man with God in this notion; but
neither is this the contending here aimed at, and I would speak to no more than
is directly to the scope of the Text. Therefore

Secondly, There is a contending with the works of God, or with what God
himself has done or is doing. Thus also there are many Contenders with God in
the world, and this is the Contention here spoken of; a Contention about the
works of God, what God either has done or is doing. All the debate which Job
had with God, was about his dealings with him. God had laid him low, and stripped
him naked; God had broken his estate, and filled his body full of sores and
pains; God had wounded his spirit, and filled his soul with gall and wormwood;
God had withdrawn hiimself or his comforts from him, and his friends were
against him, or at best, but miserable comforters were they all: Now though he
was a patient man, yet under these pressures he often broke out into impatient
speeches. Thus Job contended with the Almighty, Moreover the Lord answered Job,
and said; shall he that contendeth with the Almighty (about what he is doing)
Instruct him?

Shall he have the better of him, and be able to teach him, or put him in a
better way than he is in? Shall he give God the rule, the law how to guide the
world more equally in general, or him in particular. Whether the Contention
lies about the providence of God to the whole world, or any Nation, family, or
person, it comes under the same question, Shall he that contendeth with the
Almighty instruct him? That is, Can he direct God to do and order things
better, or put them into a righter or more equitable course than they are
disposed in? No, he cannot. Who is the pleader (says Mr. Broughton) that will
instruct the Omnipotent? let him come forth and try his skill. Thus the Lord
(yet in a tender and fatherly way) derides the folly of Job, who would needs
attempt (upon the matter) to teach him who is perfect in knowledge, and to
overruled his decrees and determinations, who is not only, The Lord Chief
Justice of all the World, but Justice it self, and the sole rule of it. Shall
he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him?

Hence observe; First, There is a spirit in man, in weak sinful man, ready to
contend with the Almighty God.

The question in the Text may be resolved into this position, There are
Contenders with God. There are Contenders with the Word of God (as was showed
before) There are Contenders also with the Works of God, or with God about his
Works, as I shall show further now; and this will soon appear, if we do but
compare the 4th verse of the 51th Psalm, with the 4th verse of Romans 3. In the
Psalm David made Confession of his sin, of that special enormous sin Adultery,
with the Murder that followed it. Against thee only have I sinned, and done
this evil in thy sight, that thou m^ghtest be justified when thou speak, and
clear when thou judge. As if David had said, I humbly confess my sin, my
adultery and my murder; that whenever the Lord shall bring any chastisement
upon my person or upon my family, when ever he shall afflict me or mine
greatly, he may be justified in so doing; or that all the world may see that
God had great reason to correct me, and so justify him in it. For some
possibly may say, with wonder, at the hearing of it, What! the Lord correct
David? such a man as David? so holy a man as David? so just and upright a man
as David? Yes, and the Lord is just in doing it; and D^vid confessed his sin;
that God might be justified when he should speak terrible things, and be
cleared when he should judge, that is correct and afflict him terribly; as the
word is used (1 Cor. 11.31.) If we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged, that is, we should not be chastened, as it is expounded ( verse. 32.)
When we are judged (says the Apostle there) we are chastened of the Lord, that
we should not be condemned with the world. Now those words spoken by David, are
applied by the Apostle ( Romans 3.4) to vindicate the honor of God against all
aspersions whatsoever, in his proceeding with man; Let God be true, and every
man a liar, as it is written; that thou might be justified in thy sayings,
and might overcome when thou art judged. In the Psalm the words are active,
That thou may be clear when thou judge. But St. Paul following, as I
remember, the Septuagint, renders them passively, That thou may overcome
when thou art judged. As if he had said, Some take upon them to judge God (they
who judge him, contend with him) that is, they judge and pass sentence upon
his works; now (says the Apostle) Let God be true, and every man a liar, that
thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art
judged; that is, that all men may see and say thou art righteous, though thou
afflictest the godly (for they sin) and though thou condemnest the wicked, for
they sin and repent not of their sins.

These two Scriptures considered either apart, or compared together (besides
many more which might be called into this service) are a clear proof that there
are Contenders with God about his works. Yet possibly some may say, surely
there are none to be found so bold and presumptuous; What contend with God?

I answer, First, There are some who do it very openly, avowedly, and with a
bare face; they stick not to speak their dis-satisfaction concerning the works
of God, and belch out blasphemy against what he has done, or is doing in the
world. Such doubtless were they, of whom it is said ( Isa. 8.21.) They shall
pass through it hardly bestead and hungry; and it shall come to pass, that
when they be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their King and their
God, and look upward; not in faith and patience, as they who in such
extremities call earnestly and humbly upon God, but in passion and vexation, as
they who wickedly curse God, and depart from him. Such also are they spoken of
( Rev. 16.9.) who being scorched with great heat at the pouring out of the
fourth vial upon the Sun, blasphemed the Name of God, who had power over those
plagues, and repented not, to give him glory.

Secondly, I answer, There are many who do this secretly, or within their
teeth; they bite in their words, yet it is the language of their hearts in
tumultuating thoughts, arising and working there about the works of God: and
thus a good man, a Job (who was a good man of the first form) may be found
contending with the works of God. Any discontent with the works of God, is a
degree of contending with God about them. Any secret rising of heart against
what God does, is, in this sense, a striving with God; yea our being not fully
pleased and satisfied with what God does, is in some sense a contending with
God: And if all this be to contend with God, how many are there that contend
with God! and who almost is there that does not? Who can say in this thing, my
heart is clean? Who can say, but at one time or other, he has contended with
God. Remember, when we would have things after our mind and mode, when we are
not free to comply with the will of God, this is to contend with God. There are
two Cases, as to the common state of the world, in which the hearts even of
good men, are very apt to rise against the work of God.

First, When they see the wicked prosper, and carry all before them in the
world; then they are ready to say, Why does God suffer this? Jeremiah had much
ado to keep his heart from contending with God in this case ( Jer. 12.1.) And
David could hardly keep his from it ( Psalm. 73.2, 3.) As for me, my feet were
almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped; for I was envious at the foolish,
when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. And for this he befooled himself (
verse. 22.) So foolish was I, and ignorant; I was as a beast before thee. Thus
David was, and many more have been offended at the work of God, in giving good
to bad men; and that is the first Case.

Secondly, When good men are vexed, oppressed, and trodden under feet, as mire
in the streets; what risings of heart, and what unsatisfiedness of spirit is
there in many good men! In both these Cases there is much contending with God,
though in both, our hearts (upon many accounts) should acquiesce and rest in
the will of God; who, in the former, does not declare himself a friend to evil
men; nor does he in the latter, declare himself an enemy to those who are good.

But seeing there is a spirit in man, even to contend with God; let us watch
our selves in this thing, that such thoughts rise not: or let us carefully
suppress them as soon as they are risen. It is good for us, and our duty, to
keep down the Contendings of our hearts with men, for we are very apt to be out
with one another. It Is sad to see breaches, the fruit of heart-burnings,
between man and man. But much more should we keep down those contendings, yea
q^ench the first sparks which may kindle heart-burnings about the works of
God, for they may soon come to be Contendings with him. For the close of thi^
point, take these four Considerations, which may move all sorts of men to watch
their hearts against Contendings with God, whether as to his dealings in the
world, or with themselves.

First, Remember, Whatsoever the Lord does, he may do; for he is an absolutely
sovereign Lord, and therefore not to be contended with about any thing he does,
because no way accountable for any thing he does, as has been showed upon
several occasions offered in opening this Book. He is Lord of our being, and
has given to all life, breath, and all things, as the Apostle told the
superstitious Athenians (Acts 17.25.) and may not he do what he will to all
beings, in whom all have their being; and who has given all things to all
which concern that being? He is our Maker, and has not the potter power over
the clay, to do what he will with it? Has not the Creator power over the
creature, to dispose of it as he pleases? ( Isa. 45.9.) Let the potsheard
strive with the potsheards of the earth. If any will be striving, let them
strive with their like; potsheards with potsheards, not potsheards with the
potter, to whom they are so unlike. The Lord used no other a^gument but this to
quiet all ( Psalm. 46.10.) Be still, and know that I am God; remember that, and
you will either not begin, or quickly have done contending with God: Yet in
that Psalm the Lord is represented making most dreadful work, Come, behold the
works of the Lord, what desolations he has made on the earth. Though God make
that which was as a garden, to become a desolate wilderness, yet contend not
with him; be still, and know that he is God.

Secondly, Remember whatsoever work the Lord makes in the world, it is all
righteous work^; there is nothing amiss in it. He is a rock (said Moses, Deuteronomy.
32.4.) His work is perfect, for all his ways are judgments (not as judgments
are opposed to mercies, but to injustice, as it follows in that verse) a God
of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he. To this David gives
witness ( Psalm. 145.17.) The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in
all his works. Not only is he righteous and holy in this and that way or work,
but in all his ways and works; in ways of judgment as well as in ways of
mercy, in ways of destruction as well as in ways of salvation. He is
righteous in pulling down as well as in building up, in rooting up as well as
in planting. Now if there be a righteousness in all the ways and works of God,
who shall contend with him about any of his ways or works?

Thirdly, All the works of God have an infinite wisdom in them; they are done
wisely, even in exactest wisdom; and shall we fools contend with him, who is
not only a wise God, but the God only wise (Romans 16.27.) and all whose works
are done in, and according to the Idea or platform of his own infinite and
eternal wisdom. The foolishness of God (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.25.) is
wiser than men; that is, the wisest men are mere fools to God; or that work of
God, which some men call foolishness, is infinitely more wisely done, than the
wisest work that the wisest men in the world ever did, or can do, with all
their wisdom.

Fourthly, Let all that fear and love God, especially, take heed of contending
with God about any of his works; for God is good to all such in all his works,
and all his works are good to such. Shall any contend with God about that which
is for their own good? Not only are those works of God good to such which are
good in themselves, that is, which we call good, being favorable providence,
and for our comfort and support in this world; but even those works of God
which we call cross providence, or providence which bring the Cross with
them, are all good to such, even to all them that love God; and are the called
according to his purpose (Romans 8.28.) Shall they contend with God about any
thing, who hear and may be assured, that he has an intendment of good to them
in all things? ( Psalm. 73.1.) Truly God is good to Israel; that is, though he
afflicts them, and the Cup be very bitter which he gives them to drink, yet he
is good to them. Or thus, Truly God, not the world (or though the world be not)
is good to Israel. Once more, we may take the Psalmist thus, Truly God is good
to Israel, not so (as to them) to the world, though (as it follows in the
Psalm) they enjoy never so much worldly good.

These Considerations may persuade all not to contend with God about his works,
to which I shall add only this counsel. If the works of God are grievous to
us at any time, let us go the right way to work in our Contendings with him.
For I do not urge this point, as if we should sit still, and let the Lord alone
(as he seemingly said to Moses, Exodus 32.10.) when he deals out hard and
grievous things to us. There is a contending with God by supplication and
prayer, by mourning and humiliation; this becomes us when the works of God are
hard, when they are breaking, desolating, scattering, and afflictive toward
us. Take heed of discontent with providence, yet wrestle and contend earnestly
with God by prayer, when providence go hard with you, or with the whole Israel
of God. Moses in a holy manner assaulted God and contended with him in that
case, and therefore the Lord said to him (in the place last mentioned) Let me
alone, as we say to a man that contends and strives with us, Let me alone.
Moses was contending with the Lord about that dispensation, but it was in a
gracious way: and so may we, yea so must we. The Lord expects prayer in all
such cases, which if it be (as it ought to be) earnest and fervent, is a
striving, a contending with him, very pleasing and acceptable to him. When the
providence of God were grievous to Jacob, and he feared they might be much
more grievous to him, the Text says he wrestled with the Angel; but how was
that? the Prophet Hosea tells us (Chap. 12.4.) it was by weeping and making
supplication. The Apostle uses the same expression ( Romans 15.30.) I beseech
you brethren, that you strive together with me in your prayers to God for me;
that is, let you and I set our shoulders to it, wrestling with God in the
actings of faith for mercy. This is a dutiful contending with God, a blessed
striving with God; Let us strive so, and we shall (as Jacob did) prevail with
God, and obtain the blessing. We may warrantably and confidently venture upon
this contention with God; as for any other, take heed of it, so bear it, why
should we meddle to our hurt, as the King of Israel cautioned the King of
Judah, when he would needs be contending with him (2 Kings 14.10.) The Lord may
contend with us, and he will when we give him cause; yet he has assured his
people that he will not contend for ever, nor be always wroth ( Isa. 57.16.)
But we must humble our selves under his mighty hand always (as the Apostle
directs, 1 Pet. 5.6.) and not contend with him at all, unless in the sense and
way last opened. It is as much our duty to let God do what he will, what he
pleases with us, patiently, as to do readily whatsoever his will and pleasure
is.

Secondly, In that the Text says, shall he that contendeth with the Almighty
instruct him?

Observe; They who contend with God, or are discontent with the works of God,
seem to themselves able to instruct and teach God.

That Is the thing at the bottom which the Lord would convince Job of.
Discontented persons seem to say unto God, they could put things into a better
way, if they had the handling of them; or that they could model the government
of the world more equally, if it were in their hands. Such is the pride and
sinfulness, or the sinful pride of man's heart, that he thinks himself able to
instruct God, and teach him to mend his work. Some have been so arrogant and
presumptuous, as to say, they could have mended some things in the natural
fabric of the world, had they been the contrivers of it; and many have said,
at least in their hearts (where the fool says there is no God) that they could
mend the providential fabric or course of it. Beware of these presumptions.
Remember, it is our duty to be instructed by God, to receive instruction from
God. Woe to those who would give him instruction ( Job 22.22.) Acquaint thy self
now with him, and receive the law at his mouth, that is, the rule of all thy
actions, but do not give the law to him. No man has mo^e need of instruction
than he who thinks he can give instruction to God. It is said proverbially,
when we see an inferior, much more a smatterer in any Art or Science, offer to
control a perfect Artist; What, A Sow or a Swine teach Minerva! Sus minervam.
how much more may we say so of the most learned, that control God or contend
with him about his works! The works of God of every kind are so exact in every
kind, that it is impossible to find any real defect or redundancy in them. To
go about to mend them, is to mar them; to alter them, were to deface them.
Those things which men call or count the blemishes of Gods works, are the true
beauty of them; and what they contend with him about, is the commendation of
them, and the glory of his workmanship. And as at last Jesus Christ will
Present the whole body of believers, or the persons of all that believe, to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing (Ephesians.
5.27.) so he will at last represent the providence of God, or his works of
providence, both in the Church and all over the world, without spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing. Only here will be the difference, the Church will be
presented not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing (she has had her spots
and wrinkles, and many such things) But the works of God shall then be
represented, as never having had any spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; that
is, then it shall be made appear, that they were always without spot or
wrinkle, altogether just, righteous and perfect.

Further, From the whole sentence, in that here we have an intimation of man's
contending with God, and presuming to instruct him, take these two inferences
from it.

First; There is much pride in the heart of man.

There would never be any contending with God, were there not much pride in the
heart of man; For (Prove. 13.10.) only by pride comes contention: If so, then,
where no pride is, there is no contention. There are indeed several other
occasions of contention; some out of covetousness, others out of malice,
contend with their neighbors, yet all may be resolved into this, the pride of
man's heart; pride bears part with all the occasions and causes of contention.
It should be matter of great humiliation to us, that our hearts are proud at
all; but that they rise even to such a hight of pride as produces contention,
and trying Masteries (as it were) with God himself, how should that humble us.
And if to contend with man, our equal, be a symptom of pride, what is it to
contend with God, who is infinitely above all men!

Secondly, Take this Inference from it.

There is a great deal of folly bound up in the heart of man. If man were not
vain and foolish? he would not willingly do any thing, that should have the
least signification of a contention with God, much less that which can signify
nothing else. Solomon says, fools will be meddling; it is highest folly to be
thus meddling with Gods matters. Again, it is a sufficient proof of our
ignorance and folly, to attempt (in any way) to instruct God or teach him,
either what to do or how to do, either when to do or in what measure to do, or
toward whom to do any of his works; but they who are unsatisfied with the
works of God, and in that sense contend with him about them, make an attempt
always in some of these respects, sometimes in all of them, to instruct and
teach him: Is not their folly manifest to all men, who are not as foolish as
themselves? Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him?

He that reproves God let him answer it. This second part of the verse is of
near alliance to the former. Contending with God, is indeed a reproving of God:
These two Acts expound each other yet more distinctly, to reprove supposes,

First, The finding of a fault.

Secondly, A rebuke given for that fault. There must be a fault found, else we
cannot justly reprove; Qui vult Deum arsuere, aut cum Deo disputare, respondeat
ad unum aliquod eorum, quae in medium attuli^. Drus.
and a fault being found we may justly rebuke the fault. So then, to reprove
God implies a finding of a fault with Gods works, and then a kind of rebuking
God for that fault; and if all this be in a reproof, rhen to reprove God for
any of his works, is a daring work indeed. I grant the word rendered reprove may
be taken in a milder sense, He that argues or pleads with God; Our reading
hightens the sense of the Hebrew word, or takes it in the highest sense, he
that reproves God Let him answer it.

That is;

First, Let him answer the former question, whether he be able to instruct God
or no, or (according to the other reading) whether he does not deserve
punishment for contending with God?

Secondly, Let him answer it, that is, let him answer all those questions
proposed in the two former Chapters. As if God had said, Job, thou have
reproved my works, yet can not answer my questions. So Master Broughton
carries the sense; Let the reprover (says he) of the puissant speak to any
one of these things.

Thirdly, Let him answer it, that is, let him answer for so doing, let him bear
his punishment. There is a twofold answering; First. A Logical answering.
Secondly, A Forinsecal answering. Or there is an answer in Schools, and an
answer in Courts.

And answer in Logic is made three ways. First, By denying. Secondly, By
granting. Thirdly, By distinguishing or limmitting the proposition and matter
proposed. Logicians in Schools answer by denying, or by granting, or by
distinguishing. The distinguisher grants somewhat, and denies the rest.

An answer in Law, if the matter be criminal, is made by pleading guilty or not
guilty to the Indictment. If the matter be civil, to answer, is to show our
right, to take off the charge, or defend our title. There is also an answering
in Law by submitting, and that two ways. First, By submitting to the mercy of
the Court. Secondly, To the penalty of the Law.

Now, when the Lord says in the Text, Let him answer it; I conceive we may
take it not only in a Logical sense, let him answer it (if he can) by
reasoning, but in a Court sense, let him answer it by bearing the penalty of
his rashness and folly; as we say to one that has wronged us, It shall cost
you dear, you shall answer it: I conceive (as was said) we may understand it
here both ways. Let him that reproves God answer it, either as a disputant in
Schools, or as a defendant in Courts of Law; and if he cannot answer it as a
Logician, by giving a reason for what he has done, he shall certainly answer
it in Court, by undergoing the penalty of the Law, for what he has done.

Some translate thus, He that argues with or reproves God, ought to answer it;
that is, he must not think it enough to put in a charge or to give a reproof,
but he must make it good. He that reproves a man ought to give a ground of his
reproof; how much more he that reproves God! The Text concludes it should be
so, yea, that it shall be so. He that reproves God let him answer it.

Hence note, First; It Is dangerous, it is at our peril, to find fault with what
God does.

He that does so, must and shall answer it; there is no avoiding it. There are
two sorts of reproving which are our duty. First, The reproving of other men,
when we have an opportunity and a call ( Levit. 19.17. Gal. 6.1.) As all they
who reprove God shall answer it; so many shall answer it, because they have not
reproved men. Secondly, It is a duty to reprove our selves, and a great point
of wisdom to see what is reproveable in our selves. Many are quick-sighted at
finding faults in others, but very blind as to finding out their own. I may
add, it is both a great duty, and a sign of much grace, meekly to take and
receive a reproof from others* Now, as it is our duty to take a reproof from
others, when we have failed, and to see our own faults and reprove our selves
for them; as also wisely to reprove others for the faults we see in them, so it
is our sin, danger and peril, to reprove God, in whom there is no fault, nor
can be. And if any say, we never had a thought of reproving God, know, if you
find fault with the works of God, you reprove God; to find fault with what God
has done to you, or your relations, is to reprove God, and this you must
answer, or answer for it. Nemo in officina audet reprehendere fabrum; and audet
homo in hoc mundo reprehendere Deum? August. in Psalm. 145.
Will a Master in any Art, endure that an ignorant person should find fault
with his work? how then will the Lord take it, if men shall come into his great
shop, the world, and find fault with this and that, and the other work of his?
There is no temptation that Satan our great enemy does more follow us with,
than this, even to make us find fault with the works of God. There are these
two things about which Satan labors much; First, to keep us from finding out
the faults of our own works, which are almost nothing else but faults. Satan
would persuade us that we have done all well, when we have done that which is
altogether evil, or stark naught for the matter of it, and how does he hinder
us from seeing our faults, in the manner of our doing good works! he would not
suffer us to have the least suspicion that we may have done evilly, while we
have been doing good. Secondly, Satan's great business is to put us upon finding
faults (where none are) in Gods works. Almost all the murmurings of the sons of
men, arise from this misconceit in man, that there is somewhat amiss in the
works of God toward them, or that he has not dealt well and wisely with them.
This false and blasphemous principle Satan would plant and water in the hearts
of all men, as he did (to the overthrow of mankind) in the heart of the first
man: This, this is his work; and he has got a great victory over that soul,
who either sees not the faults of his own works, or finds fault with the works
of God.

Further, these words, Let him answer it, may imply the Lords gentleness and
mildness in speaking to Job. The Lord does not thunder against him, but says,
come let me see what you can answer, let me hear what you can say in favor of
your self, either to show the equity of what you have said in reproving me, or
any iniquity in what I have done in afflicting you; I give you free leave to
speak for your self. Some insist much upon this sense, and it may yield us this
note; God is very gracious in condescending to man.

He is willing we should answer for our selves, and do our best to clear our
selves, when we have done our works amiss, or have spoken amiss of his.

JOB, Chap. 40. Verse. 3, 4, 5. 3. Then Job answered the Lord, and said,

4. Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my
mouth.

5. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, but I will proceed no
further.


IN the former verse, the Lord urged Job to answer; He that reproves God, let
him answer it. Job being thus urged by the Lord to answer, gave his answer, and
the answer which he gave was this in general, That he could not answer: Or, we
have here,

First, An humble confession of his utter inability to answer.

Secondly, His settled resolution not to answer. His inability to answer,
appears at the 4th verse, Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will
lay my hand upon my mouth. His resolution not to answer, or only to give this
for an answer, That he could not answer, is expressed in the 5th verse; Once
have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea, twice, but I will proceed no further.

Jobs spirit, it seems, was much appaled by the Lords appearance to him, and
immediate parlee with him; his understanding also was much puzzled, yea,
non-plust, with those many and intricate questions which God had put to him;
and therefore he submits, at once acknowledging he had done amiss in his
overfree discourses before, and promising that he would run that course no more.

Verse. 3. Then Job answered the Lord, and said, What he said by way of answer,
follows.

Verse. 4. Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer? Behold. Job does not conceal
nor cover, but calls all eyes to the view of his own vileness. Behold. Let God
behold, let Angels behold, let men behold, what now I my self behold, that I am
vile.

The root of the word, which we translate vile, (...) Et levem and vilem ac
contemptum esse significat.
signifies three things. First, To be light, or of little weight; and because
light things are lightly esteemed, therefore it signifies, Secondly, To be
contemned, or that which is contemptible; and, Thirdly, Because light things,
and things contemptible, are also vile things; therefore, as we translate, it
signifies vile. As if Job had said, I am light, I have no substance, no
solidity in me; I am but as chaff, or, as a feather, I bear no weight, I
deserve no esteem, no respect, I am vile. As the Hebrew word for honor and
glory is derived from a root which signifies heaviness or weightiness, whence
the Apostles phrase in the Greek tongue (2 Cor. 4.17.) which we translate, an
exceeding weight of glory. Glory is such a weighty thing, that we must have
other manner of shoulders, other manner of strength, than now we have, before
we can be able to bear the weight of it. Flesh and blood, as it is unrefined,
or merely natural, would soon sink under that weight. Now I say, as glory and
honor are expressed by a word which signifies weightiness; so that which is vile
and contemptible, is expressed by a word that signifies lightness, or to be
light. Thus says Job, Behold, I am light, or, Behold, I am vile.

There are two other translations of these words; whereof, the one refers to
the speeches, the other to the actions of Job.

First, The old Latin translation says thus, Qui leviter loquutus sum
respondere quid possum. Vulg.
I have spoken lightly; how shall I answer thee? Ours refers to his person, I
am light, or, I am vile; that to his words, I have spoken lightly. To speak
lightly, or vainly, is to be vain and light. Some words have a great deal of
weight in them: words of truth, words of soberness, holy words, gracious words,
are weighty words; evil words, impertinent words, unprofitable words, specially
corrupt, filthy, sinful words, are light words; how many words soever of those
sorts any man speaks, they are all light words, they have not a grain of
goodness, and therefore not a grain of weightiness in them. That Is a good sense.

(...). Ecce leviter feci. Aquila.
Secondly, One of the Greek translators renders, Behold, I have done, or, acted
lightly. There is lightness in our actions as well as in our speeches. We say,
such a man is of a light, that is, of a vain carriage; and we say of another,
he is a grave man, or there is gravity in his carriage. Thus some speak and act
gravely, or weightily; others speak and act loosely, lightly. When Job says,
Behold, I am vile, it may take in both, I have spoken lightly, I have done
lightly, and therefore I am light, therefore I am vile, or contemptible.

Cum nihil si^. Sept.
Yet further; The greek Septuagint translates, I am nothing; they carry the
sense to the lowest and least imaginable: There is nothing less than nothing.
How shall I answer thee, seeing I am nothing? All that I am is so light a
thing, that I am nothing at all; that is, nothing of worth, nothing of value; I
am of so little validity, that I have scarce any entity. From all these
readings, we may fully gather up Jobs sense in this self-abasing confession,
Behold, I am vile.

Lastly, For the clearing of these words, consider, we are not to understand
Job when he says, I am vile, as speaking only with reference to his then
present, sad, sorrowful, deplorable condition: sometimes such are accounted
vile by men, who are low and mean in the eye of the world. Job did not count
himself vile upon that consideration, because stripped of all his worldly
greatness, power and glory, health and strength; he did not call himself vile,
because of the present dispensation of God toward him, but he called himself
vile, with respect to the common natural condition of mankind, or as he was a
sinful man, though his providential condition had been never so good and
prosperous. Behold, I am vile.

Hence observe, First; Man at his best estate is vile.

David says, he is even then altogether vanity (Psalm. 39.5.) and what is vile
if that be not? or what can be viler than that which is altogether vanity? Man
is vile,

First, If we consider the matter of his body: Was he not originally made of
the dust, and molded out of the clay, which we tread upon, and trample under
feet? In which sense, among others, the Apostle ( Phil. 3.21.) calls o^r body a
vile body; the materials of it being vile, it i^ ^^so vile.

Secondly, Man is very vile, ch ^^^y vile, through the sinfulness both of his
nature and life. Sin re^ders us vile indeed; corruption makes us of no
rep^^ation. Th^ugh man, as to the matter of his body, might have been called
vile i^ the day of his creation, yet he had never deserved that diminishing
title, if he had not sinned. Sin has degraded man, and laid him low; sin has
dishonored man, and made him vile, even viler than the dust out of which he
was made.

Thirdly, Man is vile, with resp^ct to all those evil consequences and effects
of sin, which have possessed, or are ready to possess, First, our bodies; such
are weakness, sickness, pains, and all manner of diseases. Secondly, our names;
such are reproach, infamy and disgrace. Thirdly, our estates; such are poverty
and want. Fourthly, our persons; imprisonment and restraint. Fifthly, our
souls; such are blindness and ignorance in our minds, stubborness in our wills,
inordinacy in our affections. These consequences of sin, as well as sin it
self, especially those consequences of sin which are themselves sinful (as
those last mentioned are) render us vile.

From this first Observation, take these four inferences.

First, If man be vile in that threefold respect before spoken of (he is so in
many more) then let not any man prize himself much. We do not prize vile things
without us; why then should we much prize our selves who are vile? We are very
apt to have thoughts of our selves beyond our selves, or to think of our selves
beyond what is meet. Did we remember that we were vile, high thoughts of self
would soon down, and we would cease from our selves, as well as from other men,
saying, Wherein are we (men) to be accounted of? (Isa. 2.22.) The best man, of
mere men, has but a little breath in his nostrils, and he has much sin in his
soul; wherein then, or for what (as a natural man) is any man to be accounted
of? Did we know our selves more (understandingly) we should know our selves
less (valuingly) In which sense Job said ( Chap. 9.21.) Though I were perfect,
I would not know my soul. It is our ignorance, who and what we are, which
causes us to have high thoughts of our selves; as it is our ignorance, who and
what Christ is, which causes us to have such low thoughts of him, and such
slow or slight desires after him ( Joh. 3.10)

Secondly, As because we are vile, we should take heed of prizing our selves
much, so we should more take heed of being proud of our selves at all. Indeed
where the former is, where any person, man or woman sets too high a price upon
self, it is very hard to abstain from pride in self; for, pride in self, arises
from over-prizing of self: We first think too well of our selves, and then are
lifted up in our selves. As it is through the power of faith, that our hearts
are lifted up to God and in God; so whenever our hearts are lifted up in our
selves (glorying in our own seize) or to our selves (gaping after our own
ends) it proceeds from pride.

Thirdly, See the exceeding goodness of God, who has put honor upon vile man.
We have made our selves vile, and so we should reckon our selves; yet the Lord
is pleased to esteem his people highly, and make them honorable ( Isa. 43.4.)
Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable. Job was vile
(as he confessed) in his own sight, yet he was precious in Gods sight. And thus
the Lord estimates all that are godly, all that are true believers; though vile
and of no value in themselves, nor in their own sight, yet precious they are in
his sight; Since thou wast precious in my sight thou have been honorable. We
are never truly honorable, till precious in the sight of God. There is a
bubble which the world calls honor, a wind of fame, with which many are much
affected, and with which some are invested, who are not at all precious in the
sight of God. The best, the truest honor, arises from preciousness in the
sight of God; they who are esteemed by God, are indeed persons of estimation.
His grace showed favorably and freely to us, his grace working mightily and
effectually in us, puts a blessed worth upon us, though we are vile in our
selves, and so accounted by the world.

Fourthly, See the goodness of God in this also, that though we are vile, yet
he is pleased to set his heart upon us, and to mind us. We little mind vile
things; light things, trifles, we lightly pass by. We are but a light thing, a
vile thing in our selves, yet God not only has us in his heart, but sets his
heart upon us. Thus spoke Job in the lowest ebb of his outward felicity, and
he spoke it admiringly as well as truly ( Chap. 7.17) What is man, that thou
should magnify, and that thou should set thine heart upon him! When he
says, What is man? it is as it he had said, Man is but a vile thing; yet the
Lord is mindful of him, yea, magnifieth him. And though the Lord forbids us to
set our hearts or affections on earthly things ( Col. 3.2.) on the best of
earthly things, all which are comprehended under that one word or title, Riches
(Psalm. 62.10.) And though the reason why he forbids us to set our hearts upon
these things, is because they a^e vile, yet he is pleased (O infinite
goodness!) to set his heart upon us though we are vile, and considered as
sinful, much more vile than they, even than the vilest of them. We have the
like question put again ( Psalm. 144.3.) Lord, what is man that thou take
knowledge of him, or the son of man, that thou make account of him? What is
man! It Is a diminishing question, implying, that man is a vile thing, or a
nothing. Is it not then a wonderful thing? is it not the fruit of rich and free
grace, that God should take an account, or make such an account of man? And if
God sets his heart upon man, who is so vile, how should man set his heart upon
God, who is so infinitely excellent! God may be said to descend, surely he
condescends exceedingly, when he sets his heart upon vile man. The Lord
humbles himself (says David, Psalm. 113.6.) to behold (that is, to take any
notice of, or to take into his consideration) the things that are in heaven,
and in the earth; how much more does he descend, condescend and humble himself,
when he sets his heart upon vile man! Now, does God set his heart upon vile man
(which is an humbling to him) and shall not vile man set his heart upon the
great and glorious God, which is not only his duty, but his felicity, his
honor, and exaltation!

Again, Job says, I am vile. What was Job? a godly man sure, a holy man by
Gods own testimony, yet even he speaks at this low rate of himself, Behold, I
am vile.

Hence note, Secondly; The better we are, the less we esteem our selves; and
still the better and better we grow, the lower are our thoughts of our selves.

There is no greater argument of height in grace, than low thoughts of self.
Next to faith in Christ, self-denial, or to deny our selves, is the great duty
of the Gospel ( Mat. 16.24.) Now, as to deny our selves is to be very low in
our own eyes, so it is one of the highest acts of grace in us, and requires not
only truth of of grace, but much strength of grace to act it. And hence it
comes to pass, that the higher and stronger any are in grace, they are still
lower and lesser in their own sight, bacause true height and strength of grace
works the soul to more self-denial. And therefore, as a godly man is vile, so
he is made more sensible of his own vileness, the more he increases in
godliness; so that, if any have low thoughts of him, he has lower of himself.
None can think him lower in truth, than he thinks himself; I am light, says
he, I am vile. Though he well understands his state, his privilege, and his
interest in Christ through grace, and understands it so well, that he values it
above all the world, and would not part with it for the whole world, yet he is
still vile in his own eyes, and low in his own rate-books. Abraham, the chief
of believers, said ( Genesis 18.27.) Behold, now I have taken upon me to speak
unto the Lord, who am but dust and ashes. So David (2 Samuel 7.18.) What am I?
and what is my fathers house, that thou have brought me hitherto? How sensible
was he of his own vileness, who spoke thus, who yet was a man after Gods own
heart, and the best of Kings?

Further, Consider the time when Job was brought to this humble confession and
acknowledgement of his own vileness; he had not spoken thus before, but was
much in justifying himself, especially as to the sincerity of his heart and
ways, and he did it even to offense; but the Lord having dealt roundly with
him, he cries out, I am vile.

Hence, Observe; The dealings of God with man aim mostly at this great mark,
to humble him, and to make him see his own vileness.

We quickly see, or are quick-sighted to see and take notice of any good in us,
or done by us, to make us proud instead of thankful; but we are dull of sight
to see or take notice of that in us, or done by us, which may humble and lay us
low: And therefore we put God to it to show us our vileness, by severe and
humbling dispensations. There are two great things which God would bring man
to. First, To make him know how vile he is. Secondly, To make him know how
excellent, how glorious himself is. The Lord never left battering Job by
afflictions, and following him with questions, till he brought him to both
these points; Behold I am vile (says he in this place) I know thou can do
every thing, and that no thought can be with holden from thee, said he
afterward ( Chap. 42.2.) in which words he highly exalted God, in the glory
both of his power and wisdom. As one great purpose of the Gospel is to exalt
man and lift him up unto a most glorious condition in and through Christ; so
another great purpose of the Gospel, is to lay man low in himself, or to take
him quite off from his own bottom. The Apostle often insists upon that, as one
grand design of the Gospel with respect to man (1 Cor. 1.26.) Ye see your
calling brethren, that not many wise men after the flesh, etc. are called. He
tells us at the 29th verse why it is so, Even that no flesh should glory in his
presence; But ( ver. 31.) that according as it is written, he that glories,
let him glory in the Lord. All the dealings of God, both in Law and Gospel,
both in his providence and in his ordinances, tend to bring man off from, and
out of himself; and till that be effected, neither ordinances nor providence
have their due effect upon him. We must come to Jobs acknowledgment, that we
are vile, that we are nothing, and that God is all to us in Christ, before we
are Christians indeed.

Fourthly, The former discourse shows, that God was come very near to Job, he
spoke to him out of the whirl wind, his appearance was very dreadful: And then
Job cried out, Behold I am vile.

Hence Observe; The more we have to do with God, and the nearer God comes to
us; the more we see, and the more we are made sensible of our own vileness.

Vnusquisque sibi dum tactu very luminis illustratur, ostenditur. Greg.
Man is clearly discovered and known to himself, when he beholds God in the
shinings of divine light, and not till then. Job was higher in his own thoughts
than became him, till God came thus near to him; and when God came yet nearer
to him, and discovered himself (as he afterward did) yet more fully to him,
then Job did not only say (as here) I am vile, but I abhor my self, and repent
in dust and ashes. This first approach of God in so eminent and illustrious a
way or manner, wrought much upon him, but the second more. The light of God
shows us our darkness, the power of God our weakness, his wisdom our folly, his
purity our uncleanness, his Majesty our vileness, and his Allness or
alsufficiency being seen, gives us to see our utter deficiency and nothingness.
Still in proportion to the nearness of God to us, or our nearer and clearer
apprehensions of him by faith, we are carried further out of, and further off
from our selves; and thus it is in our attendance upon God in the Ordinances of
worship. The reason why many come to ordinances with proud hearts, and go away
proud, is, because they have little or no communion with God in them by faith,
or God does not manifest himself to them by his blessed Spirit. They who have
seen the power and glory of God in the Sanctuary (as David professed he had
sometimes done, and longed to see it again ( Psalm. 63.1, 2.) they will say with
the same David (Psalm. 131.1, 2.) Lord, our heart is not haughty, nor our eyes
lofty, our soul is like a weaned child.

Lastly, Job was waiting for the goodness of God to him, or for deliverance out
of his sad condition; and doubtless he was convinced, that the most probable
way to it, was to leave off contending with God, and to be found humbling
himself before him, in this or a like confession, Behold, I am vile.

Hence note; There is nothing that does more sweeten and molifie God (or, I may
say, any ingenuous adversary) toward us, then an humble acknowledgement of our
own vileness and unworthiness.

When our hearts are truly humbled, mercy and deliverance are at hand. Job was
no sooner made deeply sensible of his vileness, but mercy came in. The only
skill of this excellent wrestler (as one calls him) was to cast himself down at
Gods foot. There is no way to get within God and to prevail with him, Sciebat
Jobus contra spiritum humilem inermem esse Dei manum.
but by submitting to him. The Lord lays down his rod, when we lay down our
pride; and casts his sword out of his hand, when we cast our selves at his
feet. And in all our afflictions, whether personal or national, till we
acknowledge (not formally, but in a deep sense of our own vileness) that we are
vile, in vain do we cry for deliverance, or hope for mercy. When we are lowest
in our own eyes, we are nearest to our exaltation; when once we say in our
hearts we are nothing, we deserve nothing, we have spoken lightly, we have done
lightly, salvation will not tarry. (1 Pet. 5.7.) Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God, and he will lift you up in due time. If we would be lifted
up out of any affliction, we must be at this humbling work. We shall never work
(as I may say) upon the heart of God, unless we are thus at work with our own
hearts, or till this work be done upon our hearts. Our great work lies within,
especially in a day of trial and tribulation, such as Job was in. Job was
speedily reduced to his former honor and greatness, when once (through grace)
he had wrought his heart to this confession. Behold, I am vile; What shall I
answer thee?

As if Job had said, truly I have nothing to answer thee; Thou, O Lord, have
given such demonstrations of thy greatness, of thy power, of the excellency of
thy wisdom, of thy goodness, that I have nothing to say, but this, that I can
say nothing. What shall I answer thee? I know not what to answer, or I have
nothing to answer. As in a great strait, when we know not what to do, we
usually say, What shall we do? So here, it shows that Job was no way able to
answer, when he said, What shall I answer? The Hebrew is, What shall I return
or turn back? We may exemplify this passionate interrogation, by that of the
Patriark Judah (Genesis 44.16.) when Joseph would have detained Benjamin (having
found the cup in his sacks mouth) Judah said, What shall we say unto my Lord?
what shall we speak? or how shall we clear our selves? Here are three questions
to show that he had nothing to answer. First, What shall we say to my Lord?
Secondly, What shall we speak? Thirdly, How shall we clear our selves? Truly,
we know not what to say, nor speak, nor how to clear our selves. The plain
truth is, we have nothing at all to answer for our selves, but to yield our
selves to thy mercy. Thus Job, I am vile, what shall I answer thee, the great
God, the holy God, the mighty God, the wise God? what shall I answer thee?

Hence note; When God is opponent, no man can be respondent.

God can put such questions, and make such objections, as no man is able to
answer. Thus spoke Job at the 3d verse of the ninth Chapter; If he (that is,
God) will contend with him (that is, with man) he cannot answer him one of a
thousand: Which implies, that not only not one among very many men, but that
not one among all men, or that not any man is able to answer, if God will
contend. The Apostle says of all men in a state of sin ( Romans 3.19.) We know,
that what things soever the law says, it says to them who are under the law;
that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before
God. If the Lord should make objections against, or charge sinners, according
to the strictness and severity of the law; the best, the holiest of men could
not find an answer, or no answer would be found in their mouths: how much less
could any answer him, who not only were altogether born in sin, as all are, and
as the proud Pharisees told the poor man in the Gospel he was ( Joh. 9.34.) but
abide and continue in sin? How will the mouths of all such be stopped with a
sense of their self-guiltiness? how mute, how answerless will they stand before
God? or say, as Job in the Text (but in a ten thousand times sadder plight than
he) What shall we answer? It is the happiness of humbled sinners that they have
Christ to answer for them, seeing in that case no sinner can answer for
himself. And such is the Majesty and glory of God, when it breaks forth in any
case to a poor creature, that it leaves him quite answerless, and takes away
not only all matter of dispute, but of speech; and therefore Job resolves upon
silence, as appears by what he says in the last clause of this verse.

I will lay my hand upon my mouth. As if he had said. That all may see I know
not what to answer, I will stop up the conveyance of answers. What this
Scripture phrase, to lay the hand upon the mouth, imports, has been opened (
Chap. 21.5.) In brief, Jobs meaning in resolving thus, was, as if he had said,
I will impose silence upon my self. Or thus, Lord, thou shall not need to
silence me or to stop my mouth, I will do it my self; I know not what to answer
thee; but if I did, if I could gather up something that might look like an
answer, yet I will not answer, I will lay my hand upon my mouth.

Further when he says, I will lay my hand upon my mouth, it may imply, that he
would fain have been answering, though he could not tell what to answer. The
tongue, if left at liberty, if not checked, will be making answers, Constituo
linguae licentiam per^niter coercere.
when it cannot answer any thing to purpose; and therefore as David said (
Psalm. 39.1.) I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.
So would Job here, while the Holy one was before him, fearing he might give
further offense, while he went about to take off offenses. The tongue of a good
man needs a bridle; and the better any man is, the more he bridles his tongue.

Job had offended with his tongue; though he had not spoken wickedly, yet he
had spoken rashly and inconsiderately, and now he says, I will lay my hand
upon my mouth.

Hence note; We should be very watchful over that which has been an instrument
or an occasion of sin.

He that has offended with his mouth, should lay his hand upon his mouth, and
take order with his tongue. It is better to be silent, than to offend in
speaking. Socrates l. 4. hist. Eccles. cap. 18.
Pamb^ (as the Church Historian reports) confessed, that in forty nine years he
had scarcely learned the meaning of, or the duty contained in the first and
^econd verses of the thirty ninth Psalm, concerning the due restraint and
government of the tongue.

Secondly, Note; Hoc suppli^ii gonus linguarium appellant. Sanct.
It is necessary sometimes to abridge our selves in what we may do, lest we
should do what we may not.

This is a holy revenge; and it is one of those seven effects of Godly sorrow
which works repentance, not to be repented of (2 Cor. 7.11.) We should (in some
cases) forbear to speak at all, for fear we should speak amiss. They who are
truly wise, are much ashamed to speak, when once they see their error in
speaking, or how apt they are to err in speaking; and therefore lay that
penalty upon their tongues, either to spare speaking, or to speak very
sparingly. It Is seldom that the tongue is left loose but it speaks loosly, and
it often speaks those things which give occasion of offense both to God and
man. As all iniquity shall (at last) stop her mouth (Psalm. 107.42.) that is,
evil men (the abstract is put for the concrete) shall be so ashamed and
confounded for their evil deeds, that when they are charged with them or
convinced of them, they shall hold their peace, as if their mouths were
stopped, or like the man that came to the feast in the Gospel without his
Wedding Garment, they shall be speechless (Now, I say, as all iniquity shall
stop her mouth for shame) so it is good for the best sometimes to stop their own
mouths, for fear they should speak any iniquity. This godly fear, as well as a
gracious shame, for what he had spoken amiss before, caused Job to say,
Agnoscit se imparem esse sustinendae disputationi cum Deo, illo summo and
aeterno bono. Pro unum and duo licet vertere semel and bis; sic (...) semel in
anno intrabit Pontifex fanctum sanctorum. Levit. 16.34. Drus.
I will lay my hand upon my mouth, which resolve he further confirms in the
next verse.

Verse. 5. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea, twice, but I will
proceed no further. Once have I spoken. That is, once have I spoken amiss: not
that he never spoke but once, for he had spoken often; but once he had spoken
amiss, and been too forward with his tongue.

But I will not answer. That is, I will not speak so again. But had Job spoken
amiss but once? he confesses more in the latter part of the verse.

Yea, twice, but I will proceed no furthor. Once, yea twice. Some Interpreters
are much in showing what that once or twice speaking should be.

First, Some say it was that he so importunately desired to plead with God.
Secondly, Others, that he did so much justify himself; for though he did well
in maintaining his integrity, yet his over-doing it or being so much in it, was
not well. Others, That his once was his complaining of the afflictions of the
godly, especially of his own, as if they were too heavy, and he not weighed in
an even balance, at least afflicted more than needed. That his twice, was his
heightning the prosperity of the wicked, as if God favored them; at least,
that he did not punish them as they deserved, nor show displeasure enough
against them. But we need not stay upon such particulars, nor take once and
twice strictly. This expression, once, yea twice, implies only, that he had
spoken often; I have spoken not only once, but twice, that is, I have spoken
several times amiss. The first step beyond once is twice; and who knows how
much beyond twice he had spoke? when he said once have I spoken, yea twice, the
meaning plainly is, I have several times spoken amiss. We had this form of
speech ( Job 33.14.) where Elihu told Job that the Lord speaks once, yea
twice, yet man perceives it not; that is, he speaks often, in a dream, in a
vision of the night, and man understands not the meaning of it. So here, I
(says Job) have spoken once, yea twice, or many times.

But I will proceed no further, or I will not add says the Hebrew. I will no
more apologize for my self, nor stand in my own defense (for in so doing, I
shall stand in my own light) but lay my self low in the presence of God. As if
he had said, My sin is already too great, in that I have diverse times spoken
too boldly and freely, if not presumptuously about thy proceedings, but I will
refrain from offending in that kind any more. The sum of all that Job had
spoken may be thus conceived. Now Lord I confess to thee, and before all the
world, my sin and folly in questioning any of thy dealings with me, instead of
submitting to them, especially in urging a hearing of my cause in thy presence:
Therefore I revoke my challenge, and cast my self at thy footstool,
acknowledging my self (in comparison of thee) every way vile and base, utterly
unable to satisfy any of thy demands. And, as I my self purpose, so I humbly
beg leave of thee, that I may be silent. I grant all that thou have said of thy
own greatness, and of my vileness, and I bewail my over-daring rashness: I will
not defend pertinaciously, what I have said unadvisedly; and to make sure of
that, I am resolved to say no more; lest carried out in hea^ of speech, I
should heat my passions; l^st, multiplying words, I should multiply my errors,
and so dash against the same reck again.

First, In that Job confesses once have I spoken, yea twice.

Note; A good man may fall often.

Once and more than once, once and twice, yea, more than twice. We cannot limit
the number, nor say to this or that number the failings or sinnings of a good
man may come and no further. Though it be very sad to multiply sins, yet the
best of men have multiplied them.

From the latter words, I will proceed no further.

Note, Secondly; Though a good man may fall often, yet a good man will not take
leave to sin often, no nor once.

He will not give himself a liberty to proceed or continue in sin. When he has
sinned once or twice, he does not say, possibly I may sin again, therefore what
should I trouble my self about it? who knows how often any man may sin? no,
though he knows not how often he may sin, yet he will not, give himself
liberty to sin, not only, not knowingly, but not at all, once more; but says,
in the strength of Christ, I will proceed no further, I will do so no more. A
gracious heart is so far from taking liberty to sin often, that he takes up a
resolve not to sin, and will to the utmost watch against and keep himself pure
from sin, especially from his special sin; as David did, who said ( Psalm.
18.21.) I have kept my self from mine iniquity. As if he had said, There is an
iniquity, which dogs me, and follows me, a sin, which easily besets me; but I
have kept my self, to the utmost of my power, from falling into that iniquity.
And, I say, though a good man may multiply iniquity, yet woe to those who give
themselves scope to multiply iniquity, or to commit any one iniquity. The voice
of true repentance is this, I will sin no more. Though I deny not, but a man,
who has truly repented of some particular sin, and sincerely purposed not to
commit it any more, may (being overpowered by corruption and temptation) be
overtaken with the same sin again; yet the voice of true repentance is this,
and thus the penitent soul speaks in truth, I will sin no more, I will proceed
no further.

Again, Job had been confessing his fault, his failings, Once have I spoken,
yea, twice. The words are a penitent confession, or the confession of a
penitent. Now says he, I will proceed no further.

Hence note, Thirdly; When sins and failings are heartily and penitently
confessed, they are not persisted nor persevered in.

He that has really confessed his sin, will (to his utmost) put a stop to his
sin; he will be so far from renewing or continuing in it, that he sets himself
might and main (and prays in aid from God) against it. True confession of sin
is always seconded and followed with forsaking of sin. The Prophet calling the
people of Israel to repentance, said ( Isa. 1.16.) Cease to do evil. It will
not avail us to say, we have done evil, unless we cease to do evil. The promise
of mercy is not to bare confessors, but to those who are also forsakers of sin
( Prove. 28.13.) He that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy
(Prove. 30.32.) If thou have done foolishly, lifting up thy self, or if thou
have thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, do no more; that is, do not
open thy mouth to speak a word in defense of it, do not put forth thy hand any
more to act it. Every unfeigned confession of any one sin, Confessio peccati
est professio desinendi peccare. Hilar. in Psalm. 136. Irrisor est non
poenitens, qui adhuc agit quod poenitet. Bernard.
is a real profession against that, and against all other sins. That man (let
him be who he will) is not a confessor of sin to God, but a mocker of God, who
confesses a sin, and takes no care to keep himself pure, not only from that,
but from every sin. The Apostle John does not only say, Whosoever is born of
God, does not commit sin, but, he cannot sin, because he is born of God (1
Epist. 3.9.) Not that he has not a natural power to sin; but he has not a
will, a mind to sin, or he sins not with the full consent or swing of his will,
or he has a sincere bent of will against every sin, and would sin no more. How
wicked and bent to backsliding were those Jews, to whom the Lord said by his
Prophet ( Isa. 1.5.) Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more
and more. The will of a wicked man is wholly for sin: the will of a godly man
(as such) is wholly against sin; so that when he sins, he may be said to sin
against his own will, as well as against the will of God; and therefore, being
convinced that he has sinned, though but in passion or by impatient words (as
Jobs case was) he gives his honest word for it (as Job here did) that he will
proceed no further.

In these three verses, Job has showed his repentance for his unwary speeches
and excesses in language; he has confessed his own vileness, and sits down as
silenced by God, yea, as imposing silence upon himself. Thus he is got a good
way in the work of humiliation; yet he was not come quite through, he had not
yet made such a confession of his sin, nor was his heart so humbled as it ought
to be, before God would raise him up; and therefore in the following part of
this Chapter, and in the next, God sets upon him again, and speaks to him a
second time out of the whirlwind. The Lord had begun to humble him, and Job had
begun to humble himself, yet the Lord deals further with him to humble him
more, and speaks to him again out of the whirlwind: What again out of the
whirlwind? Yes; Then answered the Lord unto Job out of the whirlwind, and said,
etc.

And not only so, but after the Lord had put many questions to him, about
himself, as before about several creatures, he had a reserve of two creatures
more to question with him about, that would more astonish him than all the
rest, Behemoth and Leviathan.

Thus we see, when once the Lord begins to humble a soul, he will make through
work of it, and never give it over, till he has brought him to the dust
indeed. Job was so far humbled, that he had no more to say unto God; but God
had much more to say unto Job, and all for this end, that he might humble him
more, as will appear in opening that which follows.

JOB, Chap. 40. Verse. 6, 7, 8, 6. Then answered the Lord unto Job out of the
whirlwind, and said,

7. Gird up thy loins now like a man; I will demand of thee, and declare thou
unto me.

8. Will thou also disannul my judgment? will thou condemn me, that thou may
be righteous.


IN the former verse Job gave out in the plain field, confessing himself
overcome, not by rigor and force of arms, but by reason and strength of
argument, or rather by that which is above all reasons and arguments, the
sovereign power and authority of God; and thereupon he resolved to meddle no
more, to answer no further; and that, though he had spoken once, yea twice, yet
he would not proceed, he would add no more, he had enough of it, he had
already spoken too much, much more (with respect to God) than came to his
share. Hereupon the Lord, at this 6th verse, begins again to speak and answer
him; and his answer is contained and continued quite through this fortieth
Chapter, together with the whole one and fortieth, and in it we may consider
these four things distinctly.

First, A p^eface, at the 6th verse; Then answered the Lord unto Job out of the
whirlwind, and said.

Secondly, We have here a challenge, at the 7th verse; Gird up thy loins now
like a man; I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.

Thirdly, We have in this answer of God, a reproof of Job, or a vehement
expostulation with Job, in the 8th and 9th verses; Will thou also disannul my
judgment? will thou condemn me, that thou may be righteous? Have thou an arm
like God? can thou thunder with a voice like him? Thus he expostulates, thus
he reproves.

Fourthly, We have here a large proof or demonstration of the greatness, power,
wisdom, and sovereignty of God, for the further conviction and humiliation of
Job. And this proof or demonstration of the power of God is laid down two ways.

First, By his providencial actings, in destroying proud and wicked men. This
we have in the 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14 verses; Deck thy self now with majesty
and excellency, and array thy self with glory and beauty; cast abroad the rage
of thy wrath, and behold every one that is proud, and abase him. As if the Lord
had said, these things I do; I look on every one that is proud, and bring him
low, I tread down the wicked in their place, etc. All this I can do, and do in
my providence daily; Job, can thou do so too? Thus we have a proof of the
great power and sovereignty of God taken from his judiciary proceedings with
proud men.

Secondly, He gives of a proof his great power by a double instance, from the
work of creation; as in the former Chapter by the works of providence alone, so
here by the works of creation and providence too. And this double instance is
given in two great vast living creatures; one of them the greatest upon the
earth, the other the greatest in the waters.

The first is Behemoth, the vastest creature that breaths upon the earth, who
is described from the 15th verse. of this Chapter, to the end.

The second is Leviathan, the vastest creature in the water, who is described
quite through the one and fortieth Chapter. The Lord having spoken of many
other creatures formerly, in the forming and ordering of which, his power and
wisdom shine forth; he reserved these two to close with, that Job by the
consideration of them, might see what a poor thing himself was, and how unable
to grapple with the great God, who made those great creatures; for that is the
general issue. If God has made such huge creatures as these, then what a one
is God! how mighty and powerful is God! what is the cause, if the effects are
such? what is the fountain, if we see such streams? Such is the drift of God in
this his last answer to Job, and these are the parts of it. We may sum up all
in this brief; here humane weakness and divine Power are compared together;
man's nothingness, with Gods Allness or Alsufficiency, that so man ( Job in
special) might be convinced, and conclude that he could no more charge God with
any fault, than he was able to resist his power.

So then, this whole oration or discourse tends to the confirmation of Job, yet
more, in believing the irresistible providence of God; which, when he should
well understand, he would no more doubt of his justice, nor accuse his
judgments of severity, nor would he any more desire to debate with God as he
had done.

Nor can these things be pressed too often upon the holiest among men, man
being not only by nature altogether unbelieving, but having so much unbelief
mingled with his graces, as sad experience teaches him at all times,
especially in times of great affliction and temptation. So much of the whole
answer, and the state of it; now for the particulars.

Verse. 6. Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said. Then. That
is, when Job said he could not, or he would not answer, or had no more to
answer, Then, the Lord answered; or, to go a little further.

Then. When Job had humbled himself, and said he was vile, even then the Lord
answered him, and he answered him out of the whirlwind.

Then the Lord answered Job. Not so much to his speech as to his silence; for
Job resolved to say no more, yet the Lord answered; and the Lord answered him
Out of the whirlwind.

At the first verse of the 38th Chapter, we read of this whirlwind, and of the
Lord answering out of it.

What a whirlwind is, was there opened, and several points of observation given
from it, which I shall not now at all touch upon, nor meddle with; and yet,
though the words in this 6th verse of the 40. Chapter, are the very same with
those in the first verse of the 38th Chapter, yet from their placing and their
repeating here, we may profitably take notice of some things for our
instruction.

Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said. The whirlwind being
here spoken of a second time, it is questioned by some, whether this were a
whirlwind of greater force, or of less than the former, or the same. The ground
of the querie is from a little variation which is in the Hebrew Text. In the
38th Chapter an Article is prefixed to the word whirlwind, which (say some)
intends the sense, noting it to be a very vehement whirlwind: But in the 40
Chapter, that article is left out; upon which they collect, That this latter
whirlwind was not so fierce, nor so vehement as the former. But this is only a
conjecture; nor can any thing be solidly grounded upon such Grammatical
differences; yea, some, notwithstanding that defect of the Article, conceive
the whirlwind here in this Chapter, was more vehement than that in the former
Chapter. But I shall not stay about that Querie, nor discourse any thing
concerning the nature of the whirlwind, which was touched before at the 38.
Chapter, but shall

Observe, First; God has terrible ways of revealing himself, as well as sweet
and gentle ways.

To speak out of a whirlwind, is a dreadful manifestation. The whirlwind, and
speaking out of it, notes a legal dispensation, or a ministration of terror,
such as the Law was published in, of which we read in the 19th of Exodus, which
was so terrible (says the Apostle, Heb. 12.) that Moses himself said, I
exceedingly fear and quake. The Lord has his Mount Sinai dispensations, in
thunder and lightning, and with a terrible voice; and he has also his Mount
Sion dispensations in sweet and precious promises, and Gospel Ordinances; he
has his beseechings, his intreatings, his wooings, his invitings. Divine
dispensations vary. It Is said (1 King. 1.6.) in the History of Eliah, that when
the Lord appeared, there was an Earthquake, and the Lord was not in the
Earthquake; there was a mighty wind, and the Lord was not in the wind; there
was fire, and the Lord was not in the fire: At last, there came a still small
voice, and there the Lord was. The Lord waved the dreadful manifestation of
himself, by winds, tempest, thunder, fire, Earthquake, and came only in a
still voice. The reason why the Lord does thus variously dispense himself,
sometimes in a whirlwind, sometimes in a gentle gale, is to answer the several
tempers and spirits of men; where the spirits of men will not bow, the Lord
knows how to break and bring them down; and where the spirits of men are
already bowed and broken, humbled and melted, the Lord knows how to comfort and
confirm them: He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax.
And when it is said, He will not break, the meaning is, he will bind up and
strengthen the bruised reed; And when it is said, he will not quench, the
meaning is, he will blow up and kindle the smoking flax, that is, weak
believers, or souls afflicted under the sense of their own weakness and
sinfulness, or sinful weaknesses.

'As it is a great part of the wisdom of the Ministers of the word, to divide the
word aright, that is, to give every one a portion suitable to his condition
(they must speak to some, as it were, in a whirlwind, in the whirlwind of the
Law; they must speak to others in a still voice, that of the Gospel; they must
threaten and terrify some, comfort and refresh others) So the Lord himself
deals; he has many ways of humbling the creature, and as many ways of
comforting the creature; he speaks in a whirlwind (as I may say) when he
threatens in the Law, he speaks dreadfully, sometimes by his providence and
judgments (there is a voice in them) he speaks terribly to us in our own
personal afflictions, and when under sad dispensations: All this is, as it
were, a speaking in the whirlwind. And he speaks graciously, winningly and
comfortably, or to the hearts of his people, even when he leads them into the
wilderness ( Hos. 2.14.) The Apostle says, Knowing the terror of the Lord we
persuade men; that is, we persuade men by the terror of the Lord: and so,
knowing the goodness and the mercy of the Lord, we persuade men; that is, we
persuade them by the goodness and the mercy of the Lord. I (says the Apostle,
Rom, 12.1.) beseech you by the mercies of God, present your bodies, etc. Of
some we must have compassion, making a difference; and others save with fear
(Jude verse. 22.23.) that is, we must put them in fear, that they may be saved,
or (as I may say) scare and fright them to heaven.

Secondly, Consider, who it is that the Lord spoke to in a whirlwind; he spoke
to Job: and who was Job? surely a very godly man, a man that feared God, a man
that had a very noble testimony from God himself, and yet here God spoke to Job
himself in a whirlwind.

Hence, Note; The best of men may sometimes need the terrible appearances of
God, to humble them and to bring them to a due confession of their sins.

Certainly God would not have spoken to Job in a whirlwind, if there had not
been cause for it; he would not have spoken twice in a whirlwind, if there had
not been double cause for it. The Apostle Peter says (1 Ephesians. 1.6.) Ye are in
heaviness through manifold temptations (that is, afflictions and trials) if
need be. We should never feel any affliction from the hand of God, never be in
heaviness, if there were not need. There is need that the holiest in this world
should sometimes be made heavy, or that heaviness should be upon them for a
time. We should always have calms and fair weather, never any storms, nor
tempests, nor whirlwinds from God, did not our needs call for it. As we every
day need bread, which is therefore called by Christ our daily bread; so most
days we need a rod, either the rod of his mouth to reprove us, or the rod of
his hand to chasten us: And we do so, especially, for these reasons.

First, To bring us into a deep sense of our own vileness, to humble us, to lay
us low.

Secondly, To make greater impressions upon our hearts, of the power and
sovereignty of God, of the holiness and righteousness of God. It is, that we
might know our selves more, and that we might know God more, that God speaks to
us in whirlwinds, in terrible dispensations.

Further, As this is a second whirlwind, as it is a second speaking to Job, a
good man, in a whirlwind,

Observe; God will not give over terrible dispensations and appearances, till
he has brought man to his purpose.

God has an end, a purpose in every work, and every work of his goes on, till
he has attained his purpose. As the word which goes out of the Lords mouth
shall not return unto him void, but shall accomplish that which he pleases,
and prosper in the thing whereto he sends it ( Isa. 55.11.) So the work which
God takes in hand, shall not be in vain, but shall prosper to the purpose for
which he undertakes it. Now if any ask what is the purpose of God in whirlwind
dispensations? that was showed before, even to make us more humble, and to have
higher thoughts of God in every respect.

But some may say, Job had very low thoughts of himself before, he had said, I
am vile; doubtless Job spoke this in great humility: why then does the Lord
speak to Job in a whirlwind again, seeing he was truly humbled at his first
speaking?

I answer, Though Job was humbled, yet he was not humbled enough, he was not
yet laid low enough, nor melted down enough, and therefore God spoke to him in
a whirlwind again. It would not serve his turn, barely to say I am vile, God
must have more of him than that, he must make a fuller confession of his fault
than that; God brought him at last to say, I abhor my self, and repent in dust
and ashes, which is a description of deepest humiliation. Now because Job was
not come to that, but had only said, I am vile (though there was matter of
great humiliation in that) the Lord questions with him again in a whirlwind.
This should be of great consideration to us in any day of affliction.

For if God has not his purpose in bringing the first affliction, we shall be
spoken to in a whirlwind a second time. We are apt to wonder and think it
strange, that God should speak terribly to us so often, that he should renew
our afflictions, and make us new crosses. We think, if we do but make a light
confession of our sins, and say, we are vile, presently the storm should cease,
and the affliction be removed. Let us not deceive our selves, Job had said he
was vile; yet God continued the storm, because he was not yet low enough. It Is
not enough for us that we are truly humbled. As there must be truth in our
humiliation, so there must be depth in it; for questionless, when Job said
before, I am vile, he did not dissemble with God, he was hearty in it, and
spoke his heart; what he spoke was from his very soul, and in sincerity, he did
not complement with God, he did not flatter God with his mouth, nor lie unto
him with his tongue, as the Israelites did ( Psalm. 78.36.) his heart was right
with God, as theirs was not ( ver. 37.) yet, because his spirit was not come
down as it should, therefore he must be awakened and humbled more with another
whirlwind, he must be further schooled, that he might give further glory to God
in his own abasement.

And hence we may infer; If the Lord spoke thus to Job, and may speak thus
terribly to any good man, once and again? Then with what terror, in how
dreadful a whirlwind, will God at last speak to all the wicked of the world?

If he spoke out of a whirlwind to a Job a gracious godly man, what will that
whirlwind be, out of which he will speak to a Pharaoh, to profane and
hard-hearted sinners! As our Lord Jesus Christ said of himself in the Gospel,
If it be thus done to a green tree, what shall be done to the dry? If God has
whirlwinds for his Jobs, for his own people, who are as green flourishing trees
in grace and holiness; what will he do with the dry sticks of the world? And I
may argue it as the Apostle does (1 Pet. 4.13.) If judgment begin at the house
of God, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel? what shall
their end be? no man is able to say, no nor to conceive how sad it will be.
Judgment begins at the house of God; God will not spare his own house, not his
own household, he will not spare his Servants and Children when they sin; he is
no cockering Father, he will correct his own Children; he will not only sweep
his house, but he will shake his house; and he shakes it, because it is no
better swept, nor kept more cleanly. And if for these, and such like reasons we
at any time see judgment beginning at the house of God, we may say with
astonishment, What will the end of those be who obey not the Gospel! What will
become of the wicked and ungodly, of those who openly profane and blaspheme
his Holy Name! O what appearances shall they have of God, and how shall they
appear before God! We read, in the 25th of Jeremy; of a Bowl of blood given him
to carry about to the Nations: A terrible message he is sent about; he carries
a Cup of blood about, and bids the Nations drink, they must drink it; and says
the Lord, If they shall refuse to take the Cup at thy hand to drink, then shall
thou say unto them, thus says the Lord of hosts, ye shall certainly drink:
Why? For lo, I begin to bring evil upon the City which is called by My Name;
and shall ye be utterly unpunished? As if the Lord had said, I have brought
evil upon Jerusalem, upon my own people, and they have drunk very deep of that
bitter Cup; and do you, O ye uncircumcised nations, think that you shall
escape? We may conclude, the Lord has a terrible storm to bring upon the
wicked and ungodly of the world, when we hear him speaking to his own people in
whirlwinds. Consider this ye that forget God (as such are admonished Psalm.
50.22.) lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. For our God
shall come, and shall not keep silence; a fire shall devour before him, and it
shall be very tempestuous round about him, as it is said at the 3d verse of that
Psalm. And Then, as it is threatened ( Psalm. 2 5.) shall he speak to them in his
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. That speaking will indeed be
speaking out of a whirlwind, which shall hurry them away into everlasting
darkness.

Thus far of the manner of Gods speaking to Job the second time; It was still
out of the whirlwind. Now follows the matter spoken, or what he spoke to him.

Verse. 7. Gird up thy loins now like a man: I will demand of thee, and declare
thou unto me. I shall add but little about this verse, because we have had it
almost word for word ( Chap. 38.3.) where the Lord thus bespake Job, Gird up
now thy loins like a man, for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me.

These words this second time spoken or repeated by God to Job, fall under
various apprehensions, these four especially.

First, Some look upon them merely as a challenge sent of God; Gird up now thy
self like a man, come stand to thy work, or rather stand to thy word, do thy
best.

Secondly, Others expound them as an irony or divine scorn, put upon Job to
humble him. Come, Gird up thy loin^ like a man; Don't flinch for it, stand to
it, thou will surely make good the day with me.

Thirdly, Many (in a milder sense) look upon these words, merely as Counsel
given to Job; as if the Lord had said, I mean to deal further with thee,
Therefore come now, prepare and address thy self to the business; I give thee
leave to make the best thou can of thy cause.

Fourthly, We may take these words, Esto bono animo, etc.
as spoken to Job for his Comfort and encouragement. The Lord seeing him as it
were sinking, and refusing to speak, says to him, be not troubled, be of good
cheer man, Gird up thy loins like a man. As the words are taken for a
challenge, and under the notion of a scorn put upon Job, I shall not stay upon
them.

This phrase (Gird up thy loins) was opened at the 38th Chap. it is a metaphor
taken from Travelers, or those that go about any business; who wearing long
garments, used to gird them up, that they might be more expeditious, whether
for labor or for travel.

Thus the words are matter of Counsel and encouragement given to Job, and under
that notion I shall Note two things from them.

First, As they are words of counsel, the Lord having further business with Job
or more to do with him, advises him to gird up his loins like a man.

Hence, Observe; When we have to do with God, we should put out our selve to
the uttermost.

To Gird up our loins like a man imports our best preparation; and such
preparation we need for every holy duty. When we are to pray, we had need gird
up our loins like men, for then we are to wrestle or strive with God, we must
work it out with God in the duty of prayer; and if our garments hang loose,
that is, our affections be upon the earth, and our hearts in the corners of the
world, how can we prevail with God in prayer? we must gird up our loins like
men, when we declare our desires and requests to God in prayer, and expect that
God should answer us. The holy Prophet complained of the Jews failing in this (
Isa. 64.7.) There is none that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself
to take hold of thee. Doubtless many called upon God in those days, but they
did not stir up themselves to take hold of God by faith, and so their prayers
went for no prayers. And when we go to hear the word (wherein God deals with
us) we had need gird up the loins of our minds, else we cannot mind the word
while we hear it, nor remember, much less practice the word which we have
heard. The Scripture often calls us to preparation for every duty: What can
discomposed persons, loose-spirited persons, loose-loin'd persons do with God
or for God? When we have any thing to do with God, any thing to do for God, we
should do our best, and be at our best, we should play the men. Master
Broughton expresses it well, though not clear to the words in the Original,
Let me see thy skill or how skilfully thou can handle the matter with me. The
Lord would have us show our skill when we have any thing to do with him, or to
do for him; we should then play the men and not the children, much less should
we play the fools, be sloathful, sluggish, and careless.

Especially we should do this with respect to the appearing of Jesus Christ in
the great day of our account: Christ himself gives the rule, Stand with your
loins girt, and your lamps burning, as those servants that wait for their Lords
coming. When Christ our Lord comes, all must come before him, but none shall be
able to stand before him, but they who stand with loins girt; that is, who are
ready, and in that readiness wait for his coming.

Secondly, Taking these words as words of encouragement: Gird up thy loins like
a man; Poor heart, do not faint.

Note; When God intends and purposes to humble his people most, he would not
have them despair in the least.

When God lays them in the dust, he would not have them sink in despair, but
be of good cheer. God loves to see his people humbled, but he does not love to
see them dejected. As God would have us sensible, so comfortable. Comfort ye,
comfort ye my people, said the Lord ( Isa. 40.1.) when he saw they were ready
to sink, he commanded comfort to be spoken to them. He gives Cordials and
Restoratives, when he is speaking out of a whirlwind; and therefore he said to
Job, Gird up thy loins like a man.

But however the Lord is either counselling or comforting Job in these words,
he checks and reproves him in the next.

Verse 8. Will thou also disanul my Judgment? will thou condemn me, that thou
may be righteous? These are words of reproof, and a very great reproof they
are. Here the Lord begins to chide and expostulate with Job.

Will thou. It Is a quick kind of speech; Irritum facere est simplex verbum
contrarium verbo confirmandi, aut natum firmumque aliquid faciendi.
such Questions have much spirit and life in them. How now Job, Will thou
disanul my Judgment?

But what is meant by disanulling, what by the Judgment, that God says Job
was about to disanul?

To disanul, is to make void, to frustrate, to break a thing, so as it shall
not stand in any stead, or be of any force; it is applied to the breaking of an
Oath, to the breaking of a Covenant, and to the disappointment of counsels and
purposes. Read Number. 30.14, 15. 1 Kings 15.19. Jer. 35.20. Psalm. 33.10, 11. Isa.
8.10. Thus says the Lord, Will thou disanul, or make void my Judgment?

(...) Ne repellas judicium meum. Sept.

(...). Numquid repelles judicium meum? Symach.


The Septuagint render it as a Negative Command, Do not thou repel or resist my
Judgment. An ancient Greek Translator renders it, as we, by way of Question,
What, will thou repel or oppose my Judgment? The word is applied to great
sinnings (Ezra 9.13.) And after all this that is come upon us, etc. seeing our
God has given us such deliverance as this, should we again break thy
Commandments? etc. But did Ezra think, that after that they should no more
break the Commandments? Taking a breach of the Commandments barely for
sinning, he could not express it so; therefore by breaking the Commandments,
he means disanulling the Commandments: What is that? It Is so to break the
Commandments, as if we would rescind and repeal them. There is such a kind of
sinning, as if men would not only sin against the Law, but sin the Law away,
or out of doors, as if men would sin the Bible out of the world: that is the
meaning of the word there, If we shall again break thy Commandments; for it
follows, and join in affinity with the people of these abominations. It Is not
breaking the Commandments by any sin, but to sin so as if we would make them
all void, and reverse the statutes of heaven. Thus the word is used by David
(Psalm, 119.126. An etiam mutabis judicium meum? Targ.
) which does much clear the sense of this Text, Lord, it is time for thee to
work; Why? for they have made void thy law. It Is the same word here in Job,
They have disanulled thy law. It Is high time for God to awake, to bestir
himself, and look to men, when they come to this height of sinning, to make
void and disanul his Law, by setting up their own lusts. Some would even enact
their own lusts, and throw down the Law of God. That Is the significancy of the
word here used; says God to Job, Will thou disanul my Judgment? Will thou
make it void, or break the course of it? Will thou change it, and put or
introduce somewhat of thine own in the room and place of it, as some gloss the
words? Will thou disanul My judgment?

Judgment, I conceive, in this place is taken for that course of
administration which God uses in the World, whether with particular persons, or
with Nations. As if the Lord had said, Think thou thy self not only able to
comprehend the reason of all my administrations toward thy self or others, but
will thou also presume to subject them to thy will and wisdom; as if thou
could administer them with more equality and righteousness, or to better
purpose than I have done? The course or way of Gods dispensation, is Gods
Judgment; and it is called his Judgment,

First, Because it proceeds upon the highest reason, upon the clearest acting
of Judgment and understanding; and in that sense it is always Judgment. For
God is a God of Judgment (Isa. 30.18.) That is, of the highest reason and
understanding in all matters that he does.

Secondly, It Is called Judgment, because oftentimes these administrations are
as a sentence pronounced and given out by God, whether against particular
persons or Kingdoms, and so have Judgment in them, that is, wrath and
punishment. Judgment is often put for punishment. In this sense we are to
understand it here. Will thou disanul my Judgment, particularly with thy self.
I have taken this course with thee, I have brought all these afflictions upon
thee, I have broken thy estate, I have broken thy body, I have broken thy
spirit; this is the course I have taken with thee: will thou disanul this
course that I have taken with thee? surely thou should not, I know thou
can not. So then, the Lord expostulates thus with Job, as if he would have
crossed all his proceedings and dealings with him, or would have rescinded as
it were the sentence and decree of God concerning him. Would thou have me to
change either the matter, manner, or measure of thy chastnings? No, my will,
not thine, shall be the rule of them. Will thou disanul my Judgment? Now from
this sense of the words,

Note, First; It is impossible to reverse, rescind, or disanul the Judgment of
God.

The Lord speaks to Job as attempting a thing beyond himself, or beyond his
power. What, says the Lord, will thou disanul my judgment? surely thou will
not venture at that, thou will not offer that; it is more than thou or any man
can do. The Lords judgment, or the way which he will take with any man, no man
can supersede or stop; no man can hinder him in it. What the Lord determines,
what he gives forth, it shall stand. Balaam could say ( Numb. 23.20.) The Lord
has blessed, and I cannot reverse it. The judgment of the Lord at that time
toward Israel, was a Judgment or Sentence of favor and mercy; therefore
says Balaam, The Lord has blessed, and I cannot reverse it. And if the Lord
gives out a Sentence of affliction, or commands a cross upon any man, who
shall reverse it ( Psalm. 33.10.) The Counsel of the Lord shall stand, and the
thoughts of his heart to all generations. They shall stand; who then shall make
them fall? The Sentences or Judgments of men are often disanulled by men, and
they may always be disanulled by God ( Lam. 3.38.) Who is he that says, and
it comes to pass, when the Lord has not commanded. The Lord can disanul all
the Judgments of men, of the wisest men in the world; but none can disanul the
Lords Judgments, and make them void. There are but two ways by which the
Judgment, that is, the Sentence, or the resolution and purpose of a man is
disanulled.

First, By the power of the party against whom the Judgment is given.
Sometimes there is a Sentence given against a man, which comes to naught, it is
made void; why? there is no power can execute it upon him: David spoke much in
that language, Ye sons of Serviah are too hard for me.

Secondly, Sometimes the Judgments of men are disanulled by a superior
Authority; one Court recalls or takes off the Judgment of another. But neither
of these ways can the Judgment of God be disanulled. If God give out a
Sentence against a person, his power, how powerful soever he is, shall never
hinder the execution of it; though he be (as it is spoken in Amos) as high as
the Cedar, and as strong as the Oak, yet he shall not hinder the Judgment of
God. And as there is no man has power of arm; or of arms, to hinder the
Judgment of God; so there is no Authority superior to, or above Gods. There Is
no Court above the Court of Heaven, to which appeal may be made, to get Gods
Sentence disanulled, or his Judgment reversed; therefore the Judgment of God
cannot be disanulled.

And seeing the Judgments of God, as taken for the Sentence which he has
declared against sinners, such as that ( Romans 2.9.) Tribulation and anguish
upon every soul that does evil, etc. cannot be disanulled; what cause have we
to bless God for Christ, who has endured that Judgment in his own person,
which could not be disanulled nor made void; and has also (as the Apostle
speaks, Col. 2.14.) blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that was against
us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his
Cross. Yet

Observe, Secondly; The Judgments of God are by him accounted as disanulled or
made void by us, when we do not submit to them, nor humble our selves as we
ought under them.

This was Jobs Case. Why does God ask him whether he would disanul his
Judgment? surely, because he had made many complaints (as has been showed in
this Book) about the dealings of God with him: The Lord interpreted this as a
disanulling of his Judgment. If we are not satisfied with the Judgment of
God, though it be a Judgment of anger and displeasure toward us, we, as much
as in us lies, disanul the Judgment of God. Let us often remember this, The
way of Gods proceeding with us, his way of administration toward us, is his
Judgment; now if it be a way of affliction, if he speak terribly to us, let us
take heed of complaining, lest we be found disanulling his Judgment. We may
come under the compass of this Charge before we are aware. As for instance;

If we shall say, we could bear any Judgment but this, any affliction but
this; this is to disanul the Judgment of God. Let us say, whatever the
affliction is, it is best for us, and God has most righteously brought it upon
us.

Again, If we shall say, we could be patient even under this Judgment of God
for the matter of it; but when we consider the degree of it, that it goes so
far, and wounds so deep, who can bear it? Thus Job complained ( Chap. 6.2.) Oh
that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances
together; for now it would be heavier than the sand of the Sea: therefore my
words are swallowed up. It was not so much the matter of his affliction, as the
degree, or weight, or extremity of it, which put him to those grievous
complaints. Now if we are not patient and quiet under that very degree of the
Judgment which God is pleased to heighten it unto, this is a disanulling of
his Judgment; therefore let us take heed of complainings upon that account.

Yet further, Others will say, If this Cross had been for a short time, we
could have born it; but it has been long upon us already, and we know not how
long it may continue, we can see no end of it. Take heed of these complainings;
for this also is to disanul the Judgment of God, if we find fault with the
length of the Cross. Though we may cry with the souls under the Altar, How
long Lord, how long, yet we must not say it is too long.

Lastly, There is this also at which many are much troubled, and so even
disanul the Judgment of God; for say they, if it were but in some one thing
that we were afflicted, we could bear it; but we are afflicted in body, and
afflicted in mind, and afflicted in our children, and afflicted in our estate,
we are afflicted in our credit, and in all our comforts; if it had been in some
one thing, we could have sat down quietly under it; but now it is affliction all
over. Take heed, for this also is to disanul the Judgment of God. And if any
of these be to disanul the Judgment of God, how soon may we do it? And if they
are not, as to either, free from this charge, who show some impatience and
trouble of spirit under the severer dealings of God, what shall we say of those
who openly murmur, and even rage against them?

Thirdly, Will thou disanul my Judgment?

Note; God takes it as a high affront, and a dishonor, when his Judgment is
touched, or when his Judgment is not quietly submitted to.

Will thou, says he, What! disanul my Judgment! The Apostle says, Let God be
true, and every man a liar. Let the Judgment of God stand, though we fall.

Fourthly, Consider what a huge boldness it is in a creature, to do or say any
thing which may be interpreted a disanulling of the Judgment of God.

Fifthly, Consider how sinful a thing it is for any to go about to cross the
administration of God. Somewhat we may do, in all the judgments or sad
dispensations of God; we may pray about them, and we may in an humble
submission expostulate with God about them; but we must take heed of an unquiet
spirit under them, or of any risings of heart against them: Pray we may about
them, earnestly, instantly, and importunately, and the more the better, yet
still quietly submit; and the more quietly we submit to them, the more fit we
are to pray to, and wrestle with him about them; that he in his own good time,
and in his own way, would remove them from us. Will thou disanul my Judgment?

Will thou condemn me, that thou may be righteous. These words may be taken
as an Exposition of the former. As if the Lord had said, Either I must be
condemned, that thou may be righteous, or thou must be condemned, that I may
be righteous; now whether it be meet that I or thou must be condemned, do thou
judge. While thou insistest so much upon thine own innocence, thou seem to
cast blame upon my Justice. Either I have wronged thee by afflicting thee
without just cause, or thou have wronged me by intimations that I have done so:
One of these must needs be true, seeing there is no middle between them.
Consider then which is most probable, that I have wronged thee, or thou me.
These are immediate contraries; so that the one being granted, the other must
be denied. Now will thou accuse me of injustice in afflicting thee, that thy
cause may be esteemed just?

But did Job ever accuse or condemn the Lord?

I answer, Not directly (as has been showed heretofore) It never came into
Jobs heart to accuse God of unrighteousness: but because by some misunderstood
speeches of his, they about him judged he had; therefore the Lord put this
question home to him, that he might exonerate and clear himself. The only
matters in which he might seem to condemn God as unrighteous, was his speaking
so much of his afflicting the righteous, and prospering the unrighteous; or his
insisting so much upon the defense of his own righteousness before men, seemed
to derogate from, or entrench upon the righteousness of God. So then Job did
not intentionally cast any aspersion or blot upon the Justice of God; he only
intended, in what he said, to show that the affliction that was upon him, was
not for his sin, but for his trial, when he spoke so much of his own
righteousness; and yet because he was a little too lavish in speech, and too
passionate, the Lord here puts this question to him, Will thou condemn me, that
thou may be righteous? It Is I that justify thee, and will thou condemn me?
The Lord is righteous, and all men are unrighteous; and shall any man do that
which casts a note of unrighteousness upon God. Will thou condemn me, that
thou may be righteous?

Hence Note, First; He that is much in the justifying of himself, when he is
under the Judgment, or afflicting hand of God, does upon the matter condemn
God.

Job was much in justifying himself, though not with an intention to condemn
God, yet the very action spoke this in the opinion of others, that he thought
himself not righteously dealt with, or at least rigorously dealt with. He that
maintains his own right too much in affliction, charge God with wrong, though
he never meant it: And therefore the Apostle says, Let God be true, Deum
injustitiae accusare videbatur qui justos affligerei. Merc.
and every man a liar. A godly man in a good frame, though he cannot charge
himself with any crime, nor is conscious of any way of wickedness, that he has
lived in, yet approves and justifies the Lord in all his dealings with him; and
therefore we must take heed (it is a tender point) how we justify our selves,
especially under the afflicting hand of God. If we justify our selves, there
is somewhat of condemnation cast upon God; therefore still you shall find that
the holiest servants of God in their Confessions charge all upon themselves.
Righteousness belongs to God, but to us shame and confusion of face. So spoke
Ezra, and so spoke Daniel. It is very dangerous to, and we quickly may, reflect
upon the justice of God, and derogate somewhat from him, by our justifying of
our selves.

Observe, Secondly; It Is our duty in all things whatsoever God does, to
justify him.

In dubio semper adversum nos pro deo sentiendum est. Merc.
As it is the highest grace which God manifests to the creature, to justify
man. It Is God that justifies; who shall condemn. So it is one of the most
excellent duties of man, to justify God. It is a high grace of God to man, to
justify man; but it is only the duty of man to justify God in all things.
Let him do what he will with persons or Nations, let him break them all to
pieces, let him lay all waste and desolate; in all this we are to justify God.
We should rather be willing to appear sinful, and that we are punished for our
sins and evil deeds, than so much as in appearance to question or make the
least doubt of the justice of God, or give others the least shadow of an
occasion to question or doubt it.

That of the Schoolman bears much weight in this case. Aquinas.
If (says he) two are equal, and a fault is to be laid upon one of them; it is
not reprovable, if one of them purge himself of the fault charged, although he
be blameable in the opinion of others; because man naturally loves himself
more than another. But where there is so great a distance, as between God and
man, man should rather take the blame to himself, though unjustly laid on him,
than cast it upon God; which he cannot do but unjustly. And therefore God in
arguing with Job, proposes the superlative excellency of himself above man.

Observe, Thirdly; We should be much in judging our selves.

Will thou condemn me, that thou may be righteous? Thou should condemn
thy self, and judge thy self; thy judgment is upon a wrong object. Self
judgment is good, but judging of God, oh how sinful is that (1 Cor. 11.31.) If
we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. Our business
is to judge our selves, and for not judging of our selves, it is, that we meet
with so many judgments from the hand of God. Therefore God judges us, because
we do not judge our selves. And therefore let every mouth be stopped; it shall be
so at last as the Apostle concludes ( Romans 3.18.) Every mouth shall be stopped,
and all the world shall become guilty before God. We are self-guilty, and
therefore should be self-condemned. It Is a dreadful thing in one sense to be
self-condemned, as it is spoken of the Heretic ( Tit. 3.11.) He is condemned
of himself: He is condemned of himself, while he does justify himself. It Is
the worst of condemnations, to be condemned of our selves, by justifying of our
selves; but it is good to condemn our selves, in judging or in humbling our
selves. David was much in self-censuring and self-judging: when he found
himself envying the prosperity of the wicked, and said, he had cleansed his
heart in vain, he soon after censures himself for both ( Psalm. 77.22.) So
foolish was I and ignorant, even as a beast before thee. As if God had said,
what a foolish creature am I, thus to condemn God in his proceedings, and to
talk of my own innocence. Let us not boast of, but (as Master Calvin expresses
it upon the Text) let us win our spurs by condemning our selves: For that is
the only way to honor and exalt God. If we would get honor to our selves, it
must not be by contesting with God, but by humbling our selves before him;
there is no obtaining with God, by contending with him, much less by condemning
him.

Verse. 9. Have thou an arm like God? or can thou thunder with a voice like
him? THe Lord at the 6th verse of this Chapter, entered upon a vehement
expostulation with Job, to humble him and bring down his spirit; and that Job
might be thoroughly humbled, here the Lord in this 9th verse shows what a
disparity there was between himself and Job, as before in his righteousness,
Will thou condemn me that thou may be righteous? art thou more righteous than
I? So here in his power.

Verse. 9. Have thou an arm like God? can thou thunder with a voice like him?
As if the Lord had said, Let me see what thou can do, or whether thou can
do like God, seeing thou carriest thy self so unlike a man? That Is the scope
and tendency of this 9th verse, as of those that went immediately before.

The whole verse consists of two convincing questions. The first, in those
words, Have thou an arm like God? The second, in these, Can thou thunder with
a voice like him?

Have thou an arm like God? The arm, properly taken, is a noble and an eminent
limb or member of man's body. Nor has any creature, nor is any creature so much
as said to have an arm but man. And some may say, seeing the arm is a bodily
member, how can God, who has no body, be said to have an arm? I answer; it is
true, God is a spirit, without distinction of parts; yet frequently in
Scripture, as humane passions, so bodily parts are ascribed to God improperly
or by a figure. And because the arm is a strong and noble member of man's body,
that member by which man puts forth the greatness of his strength, that member
by which he does and atchieves great things; therefore the arm in Scripture
signifies power, and is the emblem of might and strength. In this language the
Lord threatened old Eli the High Priest (1 Samuel 2.31.) Behold the days come that
I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy fathers house, etc. that is, I
will take away thy power, and the power of thy family. Thus ( Zech. 11.17.) Woe
to the idol shepherd, that leaves the flock, the sword shall be upon his arm;
that is, his power shall be broken, and he made useless, as that man is whose
arm is wounded. And as the arm notes ministerial power, so magistratical power,
whether abused or rightly used ( Job 35.9.) They cry out by reason of the arm
of the mighty; and ( Chap. 38.15.) The high arm shall be broken.

Now as the arm is put for the power of man, so for the power of God ( Psalm.
98.1.) O sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done mavelous things; his
right hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory. Read also ( Isa.
59.16. and Isa. 63.12.) and here in the Text, Have thou an arm like God? Is thy
arm like Gods arm? that is, is thy power like Gods power?

Hence, Note; First, God has a mighty power? He has an arm.

There are three Scripture expressions, which in a gradation hold forth the
power of God.

First, The finger of God ( Exodus 18.9.) When the Magicians could not imitate
Moses in the Plague of Lice, then they said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of
God; that is, the power of God is eminent in this miracle, it exceeds our
power, we not only cannot do the like, but nothing like it, as we did before in
semblance of those former miracles. Thus Christ himself being blasphemed by
some of the Jews, who said, He casts out devils through Beelzebub the chief
of devils, answered ( Lu. 11.20.) If I by the finger of God cast out devils,
etc. that is, If I by the power of God, or by the holy Spirit (so another
Gospel has it ( Mat. 12.28.) If I by the Spirit of God) cast out devils, etc.

Secondly, The power of God is expressed by the hand, which contains all the
fingers ( Isa. 59.1.) Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot
save, that is, his power is not abated; he has a long hand still, his power to
save is as great as ever it was. The same Prophet says ( Chap. 9.17.) The hand
of the Lord is stretched out still, that is, his power is still at work to
punish impenitent sinners. How much and how long soever God has punished
sinners, he can punish them longer and more; if they continue longer in sin, or
sin more and more.

Thirdly, We have here in this Text, and in many others, the arm of God (that is
more than his hand) signifying the fullness of his power. Not that there are
any real gradations in the power of God; but there are gradations in the
exerting and putting forth of his power. Sometimes God puts forth his power
(as it were) by a finger only, as Rehoboam said (1 Kings 12.10.) My little
finger shall be thicker than my Fathers loins; that is, the least that I will
do in my government shall be more afflictive and burdensome to you (if you call
it a burden) than the most that my Father Solomon did in his. At another time
God puts forth his power by his hand, you may see his whole hand, that is,
fuller and clearer evidences of his power, in what he does or has done, that
is, in his works of providence, whether in breaking down or building up. And
lastly, he shows his arm, his stretched-out arm, that is, the fullness of his
power. God has power, great power, mighty power, he has an arm, an
outstretched arm; and this arm of God is spoken of in Scripture for a
fourfold use.

First, For the safe guarding of his people; it is a protecting arm. The arm of
God with us signifies our safety. The Prophet, speaking of the dealings of God
with his ancient people, says ( Isa. 63.12.) He led them by the right hand of
Moses with his glorious arm; that is, his protecting arm, by which he saved
that people from the wrath of Pharaoh in their first advance out of Egypt, and
from the wrath of all their enemies, in all their encampings and marches to
Canaan, was very glorious. This glorious arm of his, is a defense upon all his
glory ( Isa. 4.5.) that is, upon his whole Church, for there his truth,
holiness, and holy worship, which are his glory, are held up, and held out. The
Church of God, is so much for the glory of God, that it is called his glory.

Secondly, As the Lord has a protecting arm from evil, so an arm delivering
and pulling out of evil. The deliverance which God wrought for the Israelites
in bringing them out of Egypt (Exodus 6.16. Deuteronomy. 5.15. and Deuteronomy. 7.19.) is said
to be done by an outstretched arm, that is, by his power visibly put forth,
and even to the utmost, in the wonderful effects of it. All the while God did
not deliver Israel out of their bondage, he might be said to draw in or hide
his arm; but when he delivered them, then he was said to stretch it out.

Thirdly, As the arm of God is for the protection and delivering of his people,
so for the destroying of his and their enemies. God has a destroying arm, and
of that Moses spoke ( Deuteronomy. 33.27.) The eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath are the everlasting arms; and he shall thrust out the enemy from
before thee (that is sometimes the work of the everlasting arms of God) and
shall say, destroy them.

Fourthly, The Lord has an assisting, helping, strengthening arm to carry us
thorough any good work or duty, which he calls us unto ( Isa. 53.1.) Who has
believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? that is, who
has received power to believe, and do according to what the Lord has
revealed? The arm of God works powerfully, not only upon the outward man, but
upon the heart of man, for the converting and saving of souls ( Psalm. 110.3.)
In the day of thy power thy people shall be willing. The power of God put forth
upon the inner man, for full conviction and sound conversion is greater than
any power, that works upon, for, or against the body of man. God has a
mighty arm for all these purposes, and for many more, even for as many as he is
pleased to make use of it, or employ it in.

And if any ask, How mighty is his arm?

I answer, No man knows how mighty it is; only this we know, It is Almighty.
What the might of Almightiness is, who can understand! Moses spoke admiringly
more than knowingly to this point ( Psalm. 90.11.) Who knows the power of
thine anger? The anger of God is beyond comprehension, and so is his love; Who
knows the power of his love? We are exhorted ( Ephesians. 3.19.) To know the love
of God, which passes knowledge. What the height, depth, length and breadth of
divine love are and anger, no man knows; nor does any man know the dimensions
of divine power. The Apostle speaking of God as a Spirit, says (1 Timothy 6.16.)
Whom no man has seen, nor can see. So we may say of God as powerful; no man
knows, nor can know how powerful he is. He must be as powerful as God, who
knows how powerful God is.

Only this we may say, First, his power is so great, that he can do all things,
and he can do all things with ease, There is nothing hard to God. Hard things
are easy to God. Some things are hard, and others easy to men; but to God all
things are alike. Not only is nothing too hard for the Lord, as he said to
Abraham (Genesis 18.14.) but the truth is, nothing is hard to him.

Secondly, His power is so great, that he can do whatsoever he wills or has
a mind to do ( Job 23.13.) He is in one mind, and who can turn him? and what
his soul desires, even that he does. And as the Lord can and will do whatever
he has a will to do, so to clear the point a little further, we may boldly
say, he has a will to do all things of these three sorts:

First, He has a will to do whatsoever he has promised, purposed, or
determined to do. Now, if we duly weigh what great things there are in the
promises and purposes, in the counsels and decrees of God to do in the world,
we may soon conclude with truth and sobriety, that great things will be done in
their proper times and seasons.

Secondly, The Lord does assure us, he has a will to do whatsoever we ask of
him in faith, and according to his will. If we have a rule for our asking, or
if we ask by rule, we have a Gods word for it, that it shall be done and given
to us according to our askings (1 John 5.14.) And this is the confidence that
we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.
What is that? is it only that he perceives or knows what we ask? no, his
hearing is the granting and giving what we ask. God is engaged by his gracious
promise, that his arm shall do all that we pray for right for the matter, and
aright for the manner, in faith and in sincerity.

Thirdly, It is the will of God to do whatsoever is for the real good of his
people, though (possibly) they ask it not. It is the will of God, not only to
do what we ask, but many times, more than we ask. As God is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think (Ephesians. 3.20.) so he actually
does for us much more than we ask or think. The Lord expects we should pray for
every good thing which he has promised; and therefore he had no sooner made
many large and most gracious promises of doing great things for the Church,
with this assurance ( Ezekiel. 36.36.) I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do
it. But presently he adds ( verse. 37.) Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for
this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them. We should extend
our prayers and our seekings to the utmost line of the word, or our prayers
should be commensurate both to prophesies and promises: Prayer helps them all
to the birth, and they seldom bring forth alone. And indeed prayer is nothing
else, in the matter of it, but a turning or putting the promises into
petitions, it is a suing out the good of the promise: Yet there are some good
things in the promises which we cannot reach, or at least are not mindful of.
There is a great latitude in the promises, The Commandments of God are
exceeding broad (Psalm. 119.96.) Who can find out all the duty of them! And
doubtless the promises are exceeding broad; who can find out all the mercy in
them! The Apostle Peter (2 Epist. 1.4.) calls them exceeding great and precious
promises; they are exceeding good, and they are exceeding great, they are as
great as they are good; and who has a heart great and good enough to see and
sue out all the good and great things in them? Now I say, though (possibly) we
ask not for all the good of the promise (at least not expressly) yet it is the
will of God to do all that for us, and to bestow all that good upon us which he
has promised. He has preventing grace; his first grace he always gives
unasked. When he begins to manifest himself to a poor soul to bring him out of
a state of darkness, is such a soul begging this of God? no; he is running
from, and rebelling against God. I am found of them that sought me not, says
the Lord ( Isa. 65.1.) Now, as they who are not the Lords, receive grace to
become his, unasked; so they that are the Lords, through grace, receive many
mercies unasked. God will not fall in giving all that he has promised, though
we fail in asking some things promised: His arm is powerful enough to do what
he wills; and this is the will of God, to fulfill or make good all his
promises. Men often out-promise themselves, but God does not. Have thou an arm
like God?

Hence take these inferences; First, If the Lord has such a mighty arm, Then
let us take heed we do not provoke the Lord to turn his arm against us.

That Is the use which the Apostle makes of this point, and which naturally
flows from it (1 Cor. 10.22.) Do ye provoke the Lord to anger? are ye
stronger than he? The Apostles sense hits the language of the Text fully; as if
he had said, Have you an arm like God? There Is no comparison between yours and
his; He can crush you before the moth (Job 4.19.) that is, as soon as, or
before a moth is crushed, which crumbleth to dust with the least or lightest
touch of the hand, or little finger.

Secondly, If the Lord have such an arm, Then let us labor to get and engage
the arm of the Lord for our help. Men love to be on the stronger side; and some
resolve to be on the stronger side, though it should be, or not regarding
whether or no it be the worser side. Now seeing all have a natural desire to
interest themselves where the greatest strength is, because there probably and
rationally the greatest safety and best shelter is; then, how should we labor
to get and assure an interest in God, which cannot be done, but by being on
Gods side (that is, by keeping close to him in all the duties of holiness and
righteousness) for doubtless he is strongest; his side is not only a good, but
the best, not only a strong, but the strongest side. Has any man an arm like
God? can all men, should they join all their arms in one, make an arm like
Gods? They cannot. Nor is there any arm strong, but in or by the strength of
Gods arm. As old dying Jacob spoke while he was blessing his son Joseph (Genesis
49.24.) The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him;
but his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by
the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. How were his arms made strong! How did
his bow abide in strength! It was by the hands (that is, by the power) of the
mighty God of Jacob. Nothing made him strong, nor to abide in strength, but the
arm of the mighty God. In this arm of God, the Church triumphed of old ( Psalm.
124.1, 2, 3.) If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, now may Israel
say, If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, when men rose up against
us, then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against
us: Their wrath was kindled into a burning flame, yet we were not burnt, much
less utterly consumed, because the strong God was with us, or because, as the
Psalm concludes, Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and
earth. What help can we need at any time, which he cannot give us, who made
heaven and earth without any help or helper? It is an impregnable Tower of
comfort, that at what loss soever we are, we may find help, or help is to be
had in God.

Thirdly, If God has such a mighty arm, Then let us trust him. We may trust to
his strength; and when his strength is indeed trusted to, our trust is
withdrawn from all other strengths. We may use the arm or strength of
creatures, while we trust in the arm or strength of God; but while we trust in
the strength of God, we must trust in no strength but his, nor, if we really
trust him, can we. When Senacherib King of Assyriah invaded Judah with a mighty
Host, Hezekiah thus encouraged his people (2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8.) Be strong and
courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor for all the
multitude that is with him, for there be more with us than with him; with him is
an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our
battles; and the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah King of
Judah. They had an arm; what arm? not an arm of flesh (like Senacheribs) but
the arm of the Lord for their help, and that carried the day. Created power is
too slight to be trusted; but the power of the Creator calls all for our trust.
We cannot trust creatures too little (as to success) nor can we trust God too
much. Has any man an arm like God?

A fourth Inference may be this; If the Lord has such an arm, such power, This
should encourage us to the duty of prayer.

We are easily persuaded to seek to him for help, who has strength to help,
especially when we know that he has an inclinableness of will to help us. Has
not the Lord a strong arm? has he not an inclinable will? Let us then in all
our needs pray as the Church did ( Isa. 51.9.) Awake, awake, put on strength, O
arm of the Lord (the Lord and his arm are the same) awake as in the ancient
days, in the generations of old; art thou not it that has cut Rahab, and
wounded the dragon? The Lord has a mighty arm, yet his arm or power seems to
be sometimes (as it were) asleep; that is, not to act, or not to take notice
how it is, or how matters go with the Church. Now, when at any time it is thus,
our duty is to awaken the Lord by earnest prayer; Awake, put on strength, O arm
of the Lord. It is a mercy when we have an heart to pray, and a God to pray
unto, who can quickly put on strength; that is, give undeniable evidences that
he has a strong arm, yea, infinitely the strongest arm; which may be

A second observation, taken or arising from these words, as spoken
comparatively, Have thou an arm like God?

The arm or power of the creature, is nothing to the arm or power of God; no
creature has an arm like Gods. There is nothing in the world considered in a
gradual difference, so unlike another, as the arm of God, and the arm of man
are. Man's arm is so small a thing compared with Gods, that it is a very
nothing, not so much as a candle to the Sun, nor as a drop to the Ocean, nor as
one single dust to the globe or body of the whole earth. No Rhetoric can speak
diminutively enough of man's arm, compared with Gods, nor can any divinity
uttered by men or Angels: yet how apt is man to have too high thoughts of man's
arm, and too low of Gods. Were it not that men are apt to have too high
thoughts of man's arm, and too low of Gods, this question had never been put to
Job, Have thou an arm like God? Job had been a man of as big an arm, as most in
his days. It Is said of him, that he was the greatest of all the men of the
East (Chap. 1.3.) And he said of himself (Chap. 29 25.) That he sat chief, and
dwelt as King in the Army. Now should we look upon Jobs arm, not as (when God
spoke this to him) lean and thin, and extremely fallen away, if not quite
withered, but as I was at best, fullest, thickest, strongest, before he fell
into that affliction, or after his restoration out of it; yet what was Jobs
arm or power, in his highest advancement, to the arm and power of God! might
not God then have said to him, as well as when he said it, Have thou an arm
like God? or has any man at this day? Surely (says David, Psalm. 62.10.) men
of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie, to be laid in the
balance (that is, if they are truly weighed, especially if they are weighed
with God) they are altogether lighter than vanity. For, First, the power of man
to help, is weak and vain ( Psalm. 33.16.) There is no King saved by the
multitude of an H^st; a mighty man is not delivered by much strength. And
that is an unquestionable truth, whether we understand it of his own strength,
or of the strength of any others, who come in and contribute their utmost to
his aid and assistance. And this is one reason, why the Lord calls us off from
trusting to the arm of man ( Psalm. 146.3.) Put not your trust in Princes, nor
in the son of man, in whom there is no help. True, may some say, it were a a
folly to trust in weak Princes, to trust in them for help, who have no power to
help; but we will apply to mighty Princes, we hope there is help in them; No:
those words, In whom there is no help, are not a distinction of weak Princes
from strong, but a conclusion, that there is no help in the strongest. That Is
strange; what? no help in strong Princes! If he had said, no help in mean men,
carnal reason would have consented; but when he says, Trust not in Princes,
nor in any son of man, one or other, who can believe this? yet, this is a
divine truth, we may write insufficiency, insufficiency, and a third time
insufficiency, upon them all; the close of that verse in the Psalm, may be
their Motto, There is no help in them. And if any shall trust in man for help,
some one of, if not all, these evils or sad issues will follow.

First, He will be deceived and disappointed; what he looked upon as a rock,
will prove but a sand; what he took for a Cedar, will prove but a reed, and the
more he leans upon it, the more it fails him, as the Scripture speaks.

Secondly, He will be ashamed and vexed ( Isa. 20.5.) They shall be afraid and
ashamed of Ethiopia, their expectation, and of Egypt, their glory; that is,
which they gloried in, and believed would b ing them in much glory, or into a
very glorious condition. They probably expected help from Ethiopia, but they
gloried in the fore-thoughts of that help which they presumed Egypt would give
them, but they gloried in that which soon proved their shame.

Thirdly, If any trust in any arm of flesh, it will bring a curse upon him (
Jer. 17.5.) Cursed be the man that makes flesh his arm, and whose heart
departs from the Lord. Nor does the Prophet only pronounce a curse upon that
man, but explains the curse, or tells him plainly what it shall be, both in the
negative, and in the affirmative; He shall be like the heath in the desert, and
shall not see when good comes, but shall inhabit the parched places of the
wilderness, in a salt land, and not inhabited. Then, cease from man whose
breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of? Whatsoever
account is to be made of man, this is not, that he should be trusted in. We may
apply to men for help, but we must not trust in them, as if they could carry
the matter for us; Have men an arm like God? Man's is but a weak and withered
arm; and as the arm of man is not to be trusted in for any help he can give us,
so

Secondly, The arm of man is not to be feared for any hurt he can do us. These
two have a near relation to, and dependence upon each other; for they who are
so strong, that we are ready to trust them, if we can make them our friends,
those we are as ready to fear, if they turn our enemies; and they who never
trust in man unduly, will not fear man but according to duty. And we have no
reason, if we consider that, and what, the arm of man is in the hand of God, to
fear the arm of man. The Scripture speaks often of the Lords dealing with the
strongest arm of man ( Ezekiel. 30.21.) Son of man, I have broken the arm of
Pharaoh, King of Egypt, and lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put
a roller to bind it, to make it strong to hold the sword. Pharaoh had an
hurting arm, an arm stretched out against the Israel of God; but God did more
than hurt, he broke that arm. And consider how the Spirit of God follows the
metaphor, It shall not be bound up. Pharaoh would fain have got his broken arm
set, hoping it might be stronger than ever: No, says God, It shall not be
bound up to be healed, to put a roller to bind it, to make it strong. As if the
Lord had said, Pharaoh may call for his Chyrurgions to bind up his broken arm,
yet it shall be without effect; all their skill and Chyrurgery shall be in
vain, his arm shall not be healed nor made strong. Again ( Jer. 48.25.) The
horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken. A savage beast cannot hurt us
when his horn is cut off, nor can a cruel-hearted man, with a broken arm. In
these and many other Scriptures we see, both that man's arm is in the hand of
God, and what God does often to man's arm; upon which considerations he infers (
Isa. 51.12.) I am he that comfort thee; Who art thou that art afraid of a
man that shall die, and of the son of man that shall be made as the grass, and
forgettest the Lord thy maker? As if the Lord had said, do thou hear and
believe that I have a stronger arm than man? and art thou, who have an interest
in me, afraid of a man? We have cause to fear man, when we do that which is
evil; the magistrates arm bears not the sword in vain, for he is the Minister
of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil (Romans 13.4.) But to
all them who remain peaceably in their duty to God and man, Jesus Christ has
said, ( Luke 12.4, 5.) Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after
that, have no more that they can do: But I will forewarn you whom you shall
fear; fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea,
I say unto you, fear him. Christ, who gave but a single prohibition of our fear
of man, gave a double charge to fear God, knowing that to be the best cure of,
and remedy against any undue or sinful fear of man.

Further, seeing God has such an arm, let us be much in the consideration of
it, let us often meditate upon the strength of his arm, his almighty power. The
mighty God is as a weak one to us, both for the doing us good, and the keeping
us from evil, till we sit down, and believingly meditate upon his almighty
power and greatness. As David called the faithful of old to view the strength
of Sion (Psalm. 48.12.) Walk about Sion, and go round her; mark well her
Bullwarks, tell her Towers. So I may call upon all to view the strength of the
God of Sion, and to remember his arm, which is the only strength, the Bullwark,
the Tower of Sion. Be still (says the Lord, Psalm. 46.10.) and know that I am
God. We never truly know either that God is, or what God is, we know him not to
be God, but carry it as if he were but a man, till we are still, that is,
composed into a deep silent consideration of his eternal power and Godhead, or
that he is God. And the godly have done so, especially in two cases.

First, When they saw little humane strength, little of man's arm for them.

Secondly, When at any time they saw the arm of man great and strong against
them. In both which cases we find David often in the Psalms, and other good
Kings wholly taken up in the thought of, and in acting their faith upon the arm
or power of God. Thus did King Asa (2 Chronicles. 14.11.) and thus did King
Jehosaphat (2 Chronicles. 20.6, 12.) O Lord God of our Fathers, art not thou God in
heaven? and in thy hand is there not power and might? so that none is able to
withstand thee? O our God, will thou not judge them? for we have no might
against this great company, that comes against us; neither know we what to do,
but our eyes are upon thee.

So much of the first humbling question in this verse, Have thou an arm like
God?

A second follows, or Can thou thunder with a voice like him?

To thunder may taken either properly, for the sending out of that loud and
terrible sound or crack, which we sometimes hear from the clouds, and so we may
understand it here, Who can make a thunderclap like God? Natural thunder is a
token of Gods power, and it is a dreadful token. Should I expound and prosecute
the Text in the letter, it is a great truth and of useful consideration. The
voice of God in thunder exceeds the voices of all men.

But in Scripture to thunder is often taken improperly, and so it signifies
any mighty speaking or speaking with mighty effect. Hoc instrumento efficar Dei
jussio sistens atque exhibens quicquid vult significatur. Loc.

Pericles olympius (sic enim propter vim eloquentiae dictus est) fulminabat,
intonabat consund bat Graeciam. Plutarch.


Hence those two eminent Apostles ( James and John) were called Boanerges, that
is, Sons of Thunder, because they preached so powerfully for the conversion and
salvation of sinners. And in the Chapter before the Text ( Job 39.25.) we read
of the thunder of the Captains, that is, of the Captains loud voice, giving
exhortations, orders, and commands, to their Army ready for battle. The power
that goes forth with the Word of God, is the thunder of his voice. It was said
of Pericles, a great Orator among the Grecians, that he did thunder and
lighten upon his Auditors; such was the power of his Rhetoric, that he did
shake, as it were, that whole country with his voice.

Now, as in the former question, the Lord set forth his mighty strength, in
acting, by his arm, Have thou an arm like God? So here he seeteth forth his
mighty power, in speaking, by thunder, Can thou thunder with a voice like him?

Hence, Note; The voice of the Lord is a powerful voice.

To thunder is to speak, but it is no ordinary speaking, that is intended by
it. To thunder is to speak, not only weightily, but powerfully, somewhat
passionately, if not displeasedly, and with a mighty impressing force, as also
with an extension and intention of the voice. To lift up the voice like a
trumpet (as the Prophet was commanded, Isa. 58.1.) has all this in it, much
more to lift up the voice like thunder; and such is the voice of God. The
strongest and most stentorean voice of man is but a whisper, and cannot startle
a Mouse, or give me leave to say (as we proverbially say) the strongest and
most musical-mouthed man, speaks but like a Mouse in a Cheese, his voice is
indeed a mere silence in comparison of the thunder of Gods voice. The whole
29th Psalm is a proof of it; which though it be true of the natural thunder,
yet it is chiefly to understood (as has been showed) of the metaphorical or
spiritual thunder, the power that goes forth with the speakings of God. And
that there is a thunder, a mighty power, accompanying the Word of God, may
appear in these particulars.

First, The bare saying voice of God is exceeding powerful. To say a thing, is
as little as may be toward the effecting of it. But if God do but say, let
such a thing be, it is so; yea, his saying (no more is expressed) gave all things
a Being: He only said, Let there be light, and there was light, etc. ( Genesis
3.3.) That saying was a commanding, as the Apostle expounds it (2 Cor 4.6.) God
who commanded light to shine out of darkness, etc. The saying voice of God has
a commanding power in it, that is, every thing is done and comes to pass as he
says ( Psalm. 33.6.) By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the
host of them, by the breath of his mouth. And if the whole world was the
product of a word from God, what cannot God produce in the world, by speaking
the word?

Secondly, How powerful is the expressly or directly commanding voice of God,
if his saying voice be so powerful! When the Lord gave the Law ( Exodus 19.16.)
what voices? what thunderings were then heard! The saying of God is a virtual
command, but he gives formal commands also. And when he gave the Law or Ten
Commandments, the thunder of his voice made all the people tremble, and stand
afar off: And if (as that notion has often been well enforced) God thundered
with such a voice at the giving of the law, with what a dreadful voice will he
thunder when he comes to Judge those who have broken, and impenitently
continued in the breach of the law.

Thirdly, There is a mighty power, as in the bidding, so in the forbidding or
restraining voice of God. He by the voice of his word can put a stop to
creatures, when they are in their strongest career and swiftest motion. What is
swifter in motion than the Sun? All creatures on earth or in the air, are but
sluggs to the Sun; the Eagle upon her wing is but a Snail to the Sun: yet God
can forbid the Suns motion ( Job 9.7.) He commands the Sun, and it rises
not; That is, if he send forth a prohibition to the Sun, it will not stir
forwards one foot, till he takes off his prohibition, and bids it fulfill its
wonted course; as in Joshua's days ( Chap. 10.12.) and at his command it will
go backward, as in the days of Hezekiah (2 Kings 20.11.) Further, The Lords
voice disanuls and makes void the commands of any creature ( Lam. 3.32.) Who is
he that says it, and it comes to pass, if the Lord have not commanded it?
They reckon (as we say) without their host, who hope to carry on any work
without Gods concurrence; for he can g^ve a negative to all our affirmatives,
and make all our wheels, either stand still or go backward.

Fourthly, There is a thunder in the teaching voice of God. His teaching voice
is a very still voice, yet it is a very strong voice; the soul falls down at the
sound of it. It Is promised ( Isa. 54.13.) that we shall be all taught of God,
that is, effectually taught; so taught, as to ^eceive instruction. The teaching
voice of God, makes the ignorant knowing, and the foolish wise. The Lord (said
the Prophet, Isa. 8.11.) spoke unto me with a strong hand, and instructed me,
that I should not walk in the way of this people. There had need be a strong
hand in the voice of that instruction, which keeps us out of the common walks
of the world. Yet, there is such a power in the teaching voice of God, that
like a thunderbolt, it over-throweth and so pulls down all the strongholds of
sin, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ (2 Cor. 10.4, 5.) Thus God thunders against sin, and
batters sinners; which is infinitely harder to do, than to battle and level the
walls of a City to the ground with thundering Cannon. The weapons of our
warfare, for the conquest of souls to Christ, are all laid up in, and fetched
out of the Arcenal of the holy Scriptures or Word of God; and, O what work have
they made in the world! How many have fallen, by submitting to them, to their
own salvation! and how many more have fallen, by resisting them, to their own
everlasting desruction!

Fifthly, There is a mighty power in the reproving voice of God. When God deals
verbal rebukes to sinners, as well as verberal, he often makes their beauty to
consume away like a moth (Psalm. 39.11.) The Lord professes to all hardened
sinners, whose consciences now give them no reproofs, and who presume God will
give them none neither, that he has thundering reproofs ready for them ( Psalm.
50.21.) I will reprove thee, and set them (that is, thy sins) in order before
thine eyes. O consider this (as it is advised in the next verse of the same
Psalm) ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, with the thunder of his
reproof.

Sixthly, There is also a mighty power in the comforting voice of God. O what a
virtue is there in those secret whispers, wherein God speaks peace to his
people ( Hosea 2.14.) I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and
speak comfortably unto her, or to her heart. A thunder (as to power) goes with
this voice of God: This has a power to settle a shaking or disconsolate soul,
and nothing but the power of Gods voice can do that. When none can comfort, the
Lord can. To comfort the conscience is (said Luther) as great a work as to make
a world.

Seaventhly, There is a mighty power, as in the promising or comforting voice
of God, so also in his threatening voice. The Lord thunders reproofs against
those that have sinned, and he thunders threatenings to keep all from sinning;
and how terrible that voice i^ the Apostle knew, who said, Knowing the terror
of the Lord we persuade men (2 Cor. 5.11.) And as the Apostle knew it by
believing it, so all final unbelievers shall know it by their sense and feeling
of it.

Eighthly, There is a thunder of power in the prophesying voice of God. When
the Lord fore-tells what shall come to pass, who can withstand it? We find
those prophesies, which hold forth the ruin of Christ's enemies and of his
Church, shewred in with thunder ( Rev. 8.15. and Rev. 11.19.) which did not
only show that those prophesies should be certainly and solemnly fulfilled in
their season, but that they should be terribly fulfilled, or fullfilled with a
terror, like that of thunder. All prophesies shall effectually come to pass and
be fulfilled; therefore power is in them.

Ninthly, What a power is there in the swearing voice of God. First, God swears
sometimes in his wrath (he did so against that people of old) I swear to them
in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest: And so powerful was that
oath, that not a man of them could come into Canaan, their Carcasses fell in
the wilderness. And as when the Lord swears in wrath; so, Secondly, When he
swears in love and mercy, there is irresistible power in that also. Thus God
swear and made oath to Abraham (Heb. 6.17.) Wherein God willing more abundantly
to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his counsel, confirmed
it by an oath; that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God
to lie, we might have strong consolation, etc. To David also God swear in love
( Psalm. 89.35, 36.) Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto
David. His seed shall endure forever, and his throne as the Sun before me, etc.
The oath or swearing voice of God is so strong, that we have reason enough both
of strong fears, when he swears in wrath, as he did against the children of
Israel; and of strong consolation, when he swears in love, as he did to
Abraham and to David. And woe to those who believe not when God swears either in
wrath or in love.

Tenthly, There is a mighty power in the Judging voice of God. When he shall
speak from his throne in that great day, what a thunder will there be in his
voice? When in that Judgment-day he shall acquit his elect, that voice will
have a ravishing power in it: And when his condemning sentence shall be
pronounced against the wicked, that voice will have an astonishing power in it,
beyond that of thunder. And it is to be considered, that in many places of
Scripture, where the eminent judgments of God are mentioned, his voice or
thunder is mentioned, as going before or accompanying, those solemn and
tremendous dispensations ( Psalm. 18.13. Psalm. 68.33, 34, 35. Isa. 30.30. Jer.
25.30. Joel 4.16.)

To conclude this point, seeing there is a power, like that of thunder, going
forth with the voice of God, in the effectual ministrations of his Word; let us
well consider, whether God has spoken to us effectually, yea or no; have we
known the thunder of his Spirit? has there come a mighty power upon us, with
the voice of his Word? if the voice has not reached our hearts, and reformed
our lives, we have not heard the thunder of Gods voice, but only the voice of
man, or a sound in the air beating the outward ear. Naturalists say from
experience, that by the power of thunder and lightning, the sword is sometimes
melted, while the scabbard is unhurt. And from experience, they that are
spiritual can also say, that the thunder of Gods voice melts the soul, while
it only touches the ear. Therefore we have reason diligently to enquire, what
power has come with the word spoken; have we found the commanding, the
promising, the threatening, the instructing, the comforting voices of God
effectual upon our hearts? Blessed are they who have been thus thunderstruck.
And all they who have been thus stricken out of themselves and into Christ, may
truly say, what that people said flattering and blasphemously, at the Oration
of Herod (Acts 12.22.) It is the voice of God, and not of man. Though the sound
of the words came in man's voice, yet the power of them came in Gods voice; for
who can thunder with a voice like him? or who indeed has any thing like such
thunder in his voice but he?

Further, the Lords design being to humble Job, in putting these questions,
Have thou an arm like God? or can thou thunder with a voice like him?

Note; Man is never convinced, either of his own weakness and unworthiness,
till he is taught to consider the power, greatness, and mightiness of God.

Till God is great and high in our thoughts, we are great and high in our own:
And when God is great in our eyes, we are little in our own, and so are all
things else; then our power is nothing to the power of God, our holiness
nothing to the holiness of God, our wisdom nothing to the wisdom of God. 'Ti^
good thus to compare our selves with God, that we may see and be convinced, how
infinitely below God we are in all that we have and are. David said ( Psalm.
39.5.) Mine age is as nothing before thee. It is so in all other things; our
wisdom is nothing before God, our holiness is nothing before God, our strength
is nothing before God. As those searchers of Canaan said ( Numb. 13.33.) We saw
the Giants there, and we were as Grasshoppers in their sight. We thought our
selves tall men, before we saw those high-statur'd Giants; but having seen
them, we were but Pigmies, yet, but as Grasshoppers. So we think we have a great
deal of power, and wisdom, and holiness, till we look upon God, and then we are
convinced of our own meanness and poverty. The Apostle says in highest truth
and honesty, as well as modesty (2 Cor. 10.12.) We dare not make our selves of
the number, or compare our selves with some that commend themselves; but they
measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves amongst themselves
are not wise. And why not wise? because they seem to be too wise, or think
themselves very wise. We get some opinion of our own wisdom, and holiness, and
goodness, and righteousness, comparing our selves with men like our selves; but
if we would compare our selves with God, we should soon see what poor things we
are. What pitiful creatures do we appear when compared with our Creator! and
we shall have profited well by this Scripture, if we make this use of it; and
leave priding our selves as men, by comparing our selves with men. One man
says, I am as good as that man; and another says, I am as wise as that man;
and a third says, I am as holy as such a man. O that we would but think what
the goodness, wisdom, and holiness of God are: such holy thoughts wrought upon
the heart, will free us from all high thoughts of our selves, and then we shall
look for our all in Jesus Christ; then, as the Prophet gives us the true form
of Gospel-speaking ( Isa. 45.24.) Surely shall one say, in the Lord I have
righteousness and strength. And so will every one say who sees (which is true
of all men) that his own strength is weakness, and his righteousness a filthy
rag, compared with the strength and righteousness of God: Our arm, our voice,
our self-all, or our all of self, will vanish and disappear, if once God appear
to us in the glory of his arm and voice. Have thou an arm like God? or can
thou thunder with a voice like him?

JOB, Chap. 40. Verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 10. Deck thy self now with majesty
and excellency, and array thy self with glory and beauty.

11. Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and behold every one that is proud, and
abase him.

12. Look on every one that is proud, and bring him low: and tread down the
wicked in their place.

13. Hide them in the dust together, and bind their faces in secret.

14. Then will I also confess unto thee, that thine own right hand can save
thee.


IN the former verse the Lord having questioned Job concerning his power (have
thou an arm like God? can thou thunder with a voice like him?) seems now to
put him to the use of his power. If thou have such an arm as I, and can
thunder with such a voice as I? then come on, Deck thy self with majesty and
excellency, etc. As if he had thus spoken to Job, I who have such an arm, I who
thunder with such a voice, can quickly de^k my self with such majesty and
excellency, I can quickly cast abroad such rage and wrath, as will abase and
utterly break all the proud ones of the earth, and destroy the wicked: Job,
can thou do this? can thou deck thy self with such majesty? can thou cast
abroad such a rage of thy wrath, as will abase and bring down the proud, and
destroy the wicked? if thou can do it, let me see thee do it.

So then, as in the former verse, we had a comparison between Jobs power and
the power of God, by way of interrogation, Have thou an arm like God? so here
God does the same thing with Job, by an ironical injunction, jussion or
command; Deck thy self with majesty; let us see what a man thou art, put thy
self into thy fairest dress, and most tremendous appearance.

There are two things in this context, in which Job is called to show himself
like God, if he could.

First, In the majesty and excellency, in the glory and beauty of his person (
ver. 10.) Deck thy self with majesty, etc.

Secondly, In the mighty effects of his anger and displeasure, ( ver. 11.) Cast
abroad the rage of thy wrath, etc. And this the Lord bids him do; First, More
particularly, In abasing the proud. Secondly, More generally, In destroying all
the wicked of the earth. (ver. 12, 13.) Now in case Job could approve himself
thus powerful, and appear like God, either in the majesty of his person, or in
the mightiness of his displeasure against proud and wicked men, then says the
Lord ( ver. 14.) I will confess unto thee, that thine own right hand can save
thee, that is, I will yield thee the cause, I will acknowledge that thou, who
can thus bring down the pride of men in the height of their iniquity, art
also able to help thy self out of all thy misery; yea, that thou art able to
contend with me, who often have done, and still can do these great things with
ease, with the turning of my hand, with a word of my mouth; yea, then I will
confess that thou art as I am, that thou art God as I am: But alas poor worm,
thou can do none of these things, therefore humble thy self and be quiet
under mine afflicting hand. This seems to be the general scope of the holy
Ghost in these five verses, even yet further to convince Job, that he had not
an arm like God, nor could thunder with a voice like him, forasmuch as he could
not put forth such acts, nor show such effects of power as God both had and
could put forth and show in the face of all the world.

Verse. 10. Deck thy self now with majesty, etc. Deck, or adorn thy self (the
word signifies to adorn, to put on ornaments) make as fair a show of thy self
as thou can. The Apostle ( Gal. 6.12.) speaks of some, who desired to make a
fair show in the flesh. The Lord bids Job make as fair a show of himself as he
could in flesh; Deck Thy self

Let thy majesty proceed from thy self. Thus it is with God; he needs no hand
to adorn and deck him, to apparel him, or put on his robes, as the Kings and
Princes of the earth need; others deck them, others adorn them and put on their
robes; but the Lord decks himself. Now says the Lord to Job, Deck thy self as
I do, With majesty and excellency.

Kings and Princes are decked with majesty and excellency at all times, a
majestic excellency is inherent in their estate; and when they show themselves
in state, or show their state, they put on their Crowns and Robes. Thus says
the Lord to Job, Put on majesty and excellency. Both words signify highness,
exaltation; and are often used to signify pride, because they that are high
and exalted, are usually proud, and are always under a temptation to be proud
of their highness and greatness. And these words which here in the abstract we
translate majesty and excellency, are rendered in the concrete, proud (verse. 11,
12.) Behold every one that is proud (verse. 11.) Look upon every one that is
proud (verse. 12.) (...)


Majesty is proper to Kings, and therefore we speak to them in that language,
Your Majesty.

Excellency belongs to persons of great dignity; we say to Princes and great
Commanders, Your Excellency, because they excel and exceed others in honor and
power. Moses spoke so of God ( Exodus 15.7.) In the greatness of thy Excellency,
thou have overthrown them that rose up against thee. In the greatness of thy
Excellency, or in the greatness of thy lifting up and exaltation; the word
notes both Gods high magnificence ( Psalm. 68.35.) and man's pride or haughtiness
( Psalm. 10.2.) The wicked in his pride (or haughtiness of spirit) persecutes
the poor. Deck thy self with Majesty as a King, and with Excellency as a
Prince; put on thy Emperial robes, and thy Princely garments. Yea, further,
Array thy self with glory and beauty. Dicimus etiam nidui dedecore vel
ignominia; nam quare ornamur vel dedecoramur ea eleganter nidu^ dicimur. Diu^


Here are two other ornamental expressions, Glory and Beauty. Glory is man in
his best array, or man's best array; yea, Glory is God in his best array, or
Gods best array. The perfect happiness of man in heaven is called glory; man's
best suit, is his suit of glory. Grace, Gloria est clara cum laud notitia.
Ambros. (...) Notat spendorem and claritatem, quae efficere potest assensum and
confessionem apud spectatores ad gloriam ipsius, quod omnia ^gat (...). Deus
non habet circundatum decorem, quasi superadditum ejus essentiae; Sed ipsa
essentia ejus decor est. Aquin.
which is our best suit on earth, is sometimes called glory (2 Cor. 3.18.) We
are changed from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord; that is, from
grace to grace. Man's first change is from sin to grace, his second is from
grace to grace, or from one degree of grace to another. Grace is glory begun,
and glory is grace perfected. Now, as glory is man's best suit, so glory is, as
I may say, Gods best suit. He is, as the God of all grace (1 Pet. 5.10.) so the
God of all glory; for all glory is to be given unto him, and his glory will he
not give to any other. The glory of God is twofold. First, Essential and
internal, for ever unchangeably abiding in himself; indeed the very Essence of
God is glory. Of this we read ( Exodus 33.18.) I will make all my goodness pass
before thee, I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee, and will be
gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy to whom I will show
mercy; this kind of glory I will show thee, but thou can not see my face and
live, that is, my essential glory.

Secondly, There is a providential or external glory of God; the manifestations
of God in his greatness, goodness and power, are his glory. Thus it is said at
the dedication of Solomon's Temple (1 King. 8.11.) The glory of the Lord filled
the house of the Lord; that is, there was a glorious and wonderful
manifestation of the presence of the Lord in his house. Whatever God manifests
of himself, whether his power, or his goodness, or his mercy, or his grace, or
his patience, or his justice, is his glory. The Lord often arrayeth himself
with these glories; that is, he declares both by his word and by his works,
that he is powerful, good, merciful, gracious, patient and just toward the
children of men. The Scripture calls God the glory of his people (Psalm.
106.20.) that is, it is the glory of any people, or that which they should
glory in, that God is known to them, or that they are owned by God. But the
idolatrizing Jews changed their glory into the similitude of an Ox that eats
grass; that is, they changed God, who was their glory, and in whom they should
have gloried, into the form of an in-glorious beast, while they either
worshipped the image of a beast, or their God in that image.

And it is considerable, that the Apostle ( Romans 1.23.) at least alluding to
(as the reference in our Bible intimates) if not quoting that place last
mentioned in the Psalm, whilst he speaks of the idolatrous Gentiles, does not
say (as there) They changed their glory, etc. for the true God was not the
glory of the Gentiles in those days, they owned him not as their only God
(having many Idol gods) nor did he own them as his people; and therefore the
Apostle did not, nor could he in truth say of the Gentiles, They changed their
glory, etc. But thus he says, They changed the glory of the incorruptible God,
into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed
beasts, and creeping things. The Gentiles did not change the incorruptible God,
their glory into an image, but they changed the glory of the incorruptible God
into an image, etc. And in that respect the idolatry of the Jews (a people
knowing the true God, yea, and glorying in him) was worse than the idolatry of
the Gentiles, who knew him not, nor ever gloried in him, nor accounted him
their glory. But to the point in hand. As that is Gods glory which manifests
his glory,

So in general, any thing which makes man shine forth commendably or
honorably to others, or gives him a pre-eminence above many others (as near
relation to God specially does) may be called his glory. Whatsoever is best in
us, or to us, is our glory. The soul of man is his glory, because it is his
best part. The body is a poor thing to the soul; the body is but a shell, the
soul is the kernel; the body is but the sheath (as the Chaldee calls it, Deuteronomy.
7.15.) the soul is the sword, though usually we take more pains for the body
than for the soul, as if we prized it more. When Jacob said ( Genesis 49.6.) O my
soul, come thou not into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor, be not
thou united; he meant (some say) the same thing by his soul, and by his honor
or glory, because the soul is the most glorious and honorable part in man, and
that which men should be most careful of. Thus likewise the tongue of man is
called his glory ( Psalm. 57.8.) Awake my glory, that is, my tongue. The tongue
being that organ or instrument whereby the wisdom and prudence of man is held
forth, and he made glorious in the world, it is therefore called his glory. The
tongue of man is also called his glory, because with that he gives glory to
God by praising him, and confessing his name, together with his truth, unto
salvation. And as glory is the best of man, so of any other creature (1 Cor.
15.61.) There is one glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, and another
glory of the Stars; for one Star differs from another Star in glory; that is,
there is one excellency, u^e, or operation in this Star, and another in that:
Or, One Star differs from another Star in glory; that is, their light,
influences and effects differ, some being more, others less operative upon
sublunary bodies. When the Lord said to Job, Array thy self with glory, his
meaning is, show thy best; and he means the same, when he adds, Array thy self
(with beauty.)

(...)
Beauty is the natural ornament of the body, of the face or countenance
especially. These two words, glory and beauty, are often joined together in
Scripture ( Psalm. 21.5. Psalm. 45.3.) where we render them honor and majesty.
We may thus distinguish between them, taking the one for that which appears
outwardly, in vestures and gestures, in actions and works; and the other as
importing that rev^^ence and veneration which is given to such, Verba
originalia fero sunt synonima.
as appear in that splendour and dignity, or which their splendour and dignity
stirs up in others: But we need not stand to distinguish them, the words being
often used promiscuously. And here the Lord is pleased to employ many words to
the same purpose, to show what great state he had need be in that contends with
him: As if he had said, O Job, although thou did not sit upon a dunghill, or
were not bound to thy bed by the cords of thy affliction, but did sit upon a
Kingly throne, shining in robes of royalty, could thou in all those ornaments
equal thy self to me, in majesty and excellency, in glory and beauty? Deck thy
self with majesty and excellency, etc.

Hence note, First; God himself is full of Majesty, of Excellency, of Glory,
and of Beauty.

I put them all together in one Observation, because the tendency of them all
is one. The Scripture often sets forth the Lord thus adorned, thus decked (
Psalm. 93.1.) The Lord reigns, he is clothed with majesty, he is clothed
with strength, wherewith he has girded himself. Again ( Psalm. 69.6.) Honor
and majesty are before him, strength and beauty are in his sanctuary (Psalm.
104.1.) Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord, my God, thou art very great, thou
art clothed with honor and majesty. This clothing, this array, which the
Lord called Job to put on, is properly his own; and though God will not give
his glory to another, yet here he bids Job take his glory, and show himself in
it to the utmost if he could. Many have affected or invaded Gods glory, but
none could ever attain or reach it. God calls man really to partake of glory
with him, but man cannot take his glory upon him and be man. The humane nature
of Christ could never have received nor born that glory, but as united to, and
subsisting in the person of the Son of God, according to that prayer of his (
John 17.5.)

More distinctly; If God be thus clothed, Then

First, We should tremble before him. Majesty is dreadful. The majesty of
Kings, who in nature are but men, is very dreadful; how much more the majesty
of God, who is King of Kings, the King immortal, and reigns for ever. We have
this trembling three times repeated, with respect to the majesty of God ( Isa.
2.10, 19, 21.) where the mightiest and greatest of the world, called there high
Mountains and strong Towers, Oaks and Cedars, are said to go into the holes of
the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the
glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth. And though
the people of God have great cause to rejoice at his majesty, as it is
prophesied they shall ( Isa. 24.14.) They shall lift up their voices, they
shall sing for the majesty of the Lord (nothing causes the hearts of the
righteous to rejoice, more than the majesty of God) yet they ought to rejoice,
and so they do, with trembling ( Psalm. 2.11.) or with a holy awe of God
impressed upon their hearts; for the majesty of God is a very dreadful,
tremendous, awful majesty. And the more we have truly tasted the goodness and
mercy of God, the more shall we tremble at his majesty; yea, the Lord will have
his majesty not only taken notice of, but trembled at; and therefore he
reproves those ( Isa. 26.10.) who would not behold his majesty. The majesty of
the Lord, like himself, cannot be seen or beheld in it self, yet it shows it
self many ways, though few behold it, or tremble at it; and the reason why
they tremble not at it, is, because they do not, or rather (as the Prophet
there speaks) will not behold it, no, not when it shines in the plainest
demonstrations, whether of wrath against wicked men, or of love and mercy to
the godly, as clearly as the Sun at noon day.

Secondly, As we should tremble at the majesty of the Lord, so admire his
excellency; they that excel others, especially they who excel all others in any
kind, are much admired. The Lord is clothed with excellency, how then should
we admire him! and say, Who is a God like unto thee? This God is our God.

Thirdly, Seeing the Lord is clothed with glory, we should glorify him; and
that, First, in his essential glory, Secondly, in the glory of his acts and
operations. We should glorify him for the greatness of his power, especially
for the greatness of his grace, because the grace and mercy of God are his
glory; as the Apostle spoke in that prayer ( Ephesians. 3.16.) That he would grant
you according to the riches of his glory (that is, of his grace and favor
toward you) to be strengthened with might by his Spirit, in the inner man. And
as the grace and goodness of God is his glory, so also is his holiness ( Exodus
15.11.) Who is a God like unto thee, glorious in holiness? Let us glorify God,
in and for all his glories, in and for the glory of his power, mercy, grace and
holiness.

Fourthly, God is arrayed with beauty. Beauty is a taking thing; then how
should our souls delight in the Lord! We delight in things that are beautiful,
we love beauty; how should this draw forth our love, our affections to God! All
the beauty of the world is but a blot, it is darkness, and a stained thing, in
comparison of the Lords beauty, the beauty of his holiness; and therefore if we
have a love to beauty, let us love the Lord, who is arrayed with beauty, even
with the perfection of beauty.

Lastly, In general; Seeing the Lord is decked with majesty and excellency,
arrayed with glory and beauty, let us continually ascribe all these to God.
What God is, and has showed himself to be, we should show forth (1 Chronicles.
29.11.) Thine, O Lord (says David) is the greatness, and the power, and the
glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in heaven and in earth
is thine. David ascribed all to God there, as also ( Psalm. 145.10.) All thy
works praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall bless thee; they shall speak of
the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power, to make known to the sons of
men his mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of his Kingdom: thy Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all generations. Thus
Saints are to blazon the name of God, and to make his praise glorious. The
Apostle Jude concludes his Epistle with this Doxology; To the only wise God our
Savior (that is, Jesus Christ) be glory, and majesty, and dominion, and power,
now and ever, Amen.

Further, to remember the majesty and excellency of God, may and should be,

First, an encouragement to serve him. Who would not serve a Prince, who is
decked with majesty and excellency, who is arrayed with glory and beauty? who
would not serve such a King as this? How ambitious are men to serve those who
are decked with worldly majesty and excellency? shall not we have a holy
ambition to serve the Lord, who is thus decked and arrayed!

Secondly, This may exceedingly hearten and embolden us against all the danger
we may meet with in the Lords service. If we encounter with hardships and
hazards in Gods work, let us remember, he that is clothed with majesty and
excellency, etc. can protect us in his service, and reward us for it; we can
lose nothing by him, though we should lose all for him, life and all.

Thirdly, This should fill our souls with reverential thoughts of God
continually. Did we know the Lord in these divine discoveries of himself, in
his majesty and excellency, in his glory and beauty, how would our hearts be
filled with high thoughts of him! we would neither speak nor think of God, but
with a gracious awe upon our spirits.

Fourthly, This should provoke us in all holy duties to do our best. The Lord
reproved the Jews (Mal. 1.8.) when they brought him a poor lean sacrifice;
Offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy
person? Shall we put off God, who is full of majesty and excellency, of glory
and beauty, with poor, weak and sickly services, such as our Governors, men in
high place and power will not accept from our hands, but turn back with disdain
upon our hands. The worship and service of God consists not in a bodily
exercise, nor in any outward beauty; he is a spirit, and must be worshipped in
spirit and in truth; that is, in truth of heart, and according to the truth of
his word, which the Apostle calls the simplicity that is in Christ (2 Cor.
11.3.) The glory and beauty of God is spiritual, and the beauty that he must be
served with, is, above all, the inward beauty of faith and love, and holy fear
in our hearts.

Fifthly, If God be thus decked with majesty, etc. This may assure us in praying
to him and calling upon him, that we shall not seek him in vain: It is worth
the while to attend such a God, and pour out our hearts before him. We may
safely depend upon God for all, seeing majesty and excellency are his. The
Lords prayer by which we are to form, or unto which we should conform all our
prayers concludes with this, thine is the kingdom, power and glory; all is
thine, and therefore we have great encouragement to ask all of thee. Men can
give to those that ask them, according to the extent of their power. There is a
confluence or comprehension of all power in the majesty, excellency, and glory
of God, and therefore he can give whatsoever we ask.

Now, as, that God is thus decked and arrayed with majesty and excellency, is
implied in this Text; so it is also implied, that he has thus decked himself,
while he says to Job, Deck thy self with majesty and excellency.

Hence observe, Secondly; The majesty and excellency, the glory and beauty of
God, are all of and from himself.

He is the fountain as of his own being, so of the majesty and excellency, of
the glory and beauty of his being; he decks and arrays himself, he is not
decked by others. Moralists say, honor is not or resides not in him that is
honored, but in him that honors; yet here honor is seated in him that is
honored. We honor God, and give glory to him, but we cannot add any honor to
him, all is originally in himself; he is the beginning without beginning of his
own majesty. And as Gods majesty is his own, so of his own putting on; he
borrows nothing from the creature, nor needs he any creature to deck him. He
is not what others will make him or have him to be, but what he is, he is of
and from himself.

Thirdly, Observe; The majesty and glory of the greatest among men, is the gift
of God.

Deck thy self with majesty, says God to Job; but Job could not deck himself;
he could not p^t a clothing of majesty, and excellency, of glory and beauty
upon himself. All that man has is received from God, and is but a ray from his
unconceiveable light. As all our spiritual a^ray, deckings and ornaments, are
put on us by God ( Ezekiel. 16.10, 11.) I clothed thee with broidered work, I
covered thee with silk, I decked thee also with ornaments, I put a jewel on thy
forehead, etc. So all civil ornaments are put on man by God. I girded thee
(said God of Cyrus, Isa. 45.5.) though thou have not known me; that is, I gave
thee all thy power and greatness, thy honor and dignity, though thou tookest
no notice of me in doing it, nor that I did it. Thus it is said of Solomon (1 Chronicles. 29.25.) The Lord magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all
Israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty, as had not been on any king
before him in Israel. And thus spoke Daniel to Belshazzar, concerning his
father Nebuchadnezar (Dan. 5.19.) And for the majesty that he (that is, God)
gave him, all Nations, People and Languages, trembled and feared before him.
All the majesty and excellency, all the glory and beauty of the greatest
Monarchs, is derived from God.

Fourthly, Observe; The majesty and excellency, the glory and beauty of man, is
nothing to Gods.

Christ says ( Mat. 6.29.) Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one
of these. Solomon was a King in the greatest majesty and excellency, glory and
beauty of any that ever was in the world; yet says Christ, he was not decked
like one of these Lillies: then how far short did his glory fall of the glory
of God! how does all the glory of the world vanish and disappear at the
appearance of the glory of God, even as the luster of the moon and stars does
at the rising of the thrice illustrious Sun! And as man's glory is nothing to
Gods, while it lasts or endures, so it is nothing to his in the lastingness and
duration of it. Dominion and majesty are Gods, and shall be ascribed to God
everlastingly. It is said of Ahasuerus (Esther 1.4.) that he showed the riches
of his glorious kingdom, and the honor of his excellent Majesty many days,
even a hundred and fourscore days; but the Lord shows his excellent Majesty
for ever and ever, for it abides for ever: and if so, what is the majesty of
man compared with the Lords ( Isa. 40.6.) All flesh is grass, and the
goodliness of it, as the flower of the field. The majesty and excellency, the
glory and beauty of man, is but the goodliness of flesh, or the best of a
fleshly, earthly state; and what is that, but the goodliness of a fading
flower, or of the grass that is cut down and withers, yea, which sometimes
withers before it is cut down, as David says ( Psalm. 129.6, 7.) the grass does
upon the house tops, which withers before it grows up; wherewith the mower
fills not his hand, nor he that binds sheaves his bosom.

Fourthly, note; The way to lay the creature low, is to consider the Majesty of
God.

Why does the Lord call Job to deck himself with humane majesty and excellency?
was it not to bring him to a due consideration of his own divine majesty and
excellency? Job must compare himself with God in his glory, that he might fall
down convinced, that himself had no glory.

Thus the Lord showed Job his own meanness and exility, by bidding him imitate
the divine Majesty and excellency.

Secondly, The Lord calls him further, to imitate him, if he could, in the
mighty effects of his power or in his powerful works, against proud and wicked
men.

Verse. 11. Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath. As if he had said, let me see now
what a man thou art, or rather, what a God thou art, when thou art enflamed
with anger.

Cast abroad. That is, furiously disperse and scatter thy rage or rages. The
word signifies a scattering after breaking to pieces ( Psalm. 2.9.) As a Potters
vessel, (...) notat confractionem cum dispersione. (...) indignatio a
transeundo, vel quod cito transeat. Ira furor brevis est.
when it is broken, is scattered abroad, so says the Lord, scatter abroad the
(rage) of thy wrath; the Hebrew word is, The passing of thy wrath. Rage makes a
speedy passage, it has a swift motion, and do thou cast it abroad while it is
stirring and in motion, let it not cool, cast it abroad hot. The word notes a
violent hurrying along, Scatter abroad the rage Of thy wrath.

Or as the Hebrew has it, of thy nostrils. Raging appears by breathing, or in
the quick stirring of the nostrils when we breath; but why would the Lord have
Job show his rage? The answers is, do it to the destruction of the proud.

Behold every one that is proud and abase him. Go, look upon proud ones in
thine anger, deal with them as they deserve. The word implies more than bare
beholding.

There is a twofold beholding of things or persons.

First, With favor, delight and pleasure ( Psalm. 33.18. and 34.15.) In both
places the Lord is represented, beholding or casting an eye upon his people,
with grace and favor, for their good and comfort.

Secondly, There is a beholding with anger and displeasure; that is the meaning
here: behold every one that is proud, behold them all, not only to take notice
of them who they are, but behold them as I do, in wrath and anger, Behold Every
one that is proud.

Be they few or many, great or small, show thy self against every one that is
proud, and Abase him.

Every proud man is as a mountain. Go, show thy self like me, behold those that
are as mountains among men, and make them valleys, abase them; that is the Lords
work, and the meaning of his word here; as if he had said, I have a power, that
though proud ones are as great mountains, yet I can make them as valleys. The
Lord speaks this again at the beginning of the Verse. 12. Look on every one that
is proud, and bring him low.

Here is an elegant repetition of the same thing, almost in the same words,
merely to enforce the matter look on every one that is proud, bend thy brows,
look frowningly upon him, as if thou would look him thorough.

And bring him low. The Septuagint say, quench him. (...). Superbum extingue.
Sept.
The proud man is all in a flame; now says God, behold this proud man and
quench him, extinguish him, put him out. Thus the Lord calls Job to express his
displeasure in these effects against proud men, that he might appear in wrath
like him: As if the Lord had said, I behold the proud man, and I abase him; I
look upon the proud man, and bring him low, now let me see you do so too. Can
thou with a look only abate their pride, and bring down the pomp of man?

Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath. Hence note, First; There is wrath in God.

God knows how to cast forth his wrath as well as to send forth his love,
Habet ira Domini suam energiam nunquam egreditur vana.
or shed it abroad (as the Apostles word is, Romans 5.5.) in the hearts of his
justified ones, by the holy Ghost, which is given unto them. The wrath of God
(says the same Apostle, Romans 1.18.) is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.
The wrath of God is such as we can neither, First, withstand, nor, Secondly,
avoid; there is, no out-running, no making an escape from it, but only by Jesus
Christ, and therefore the Apostle gives that glory to him alone (1 Thessalonians.
1.10.) Even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come. There is a wrath
to come, which God will scatter over all this sinful wicked world; blessed are
they that are delivered from it. Yea, not only is there wrath in God, but a
fierceness of wrath, terrible wrath, such as will cause the wicked (as was said
before) to run into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth,
for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he arises to
shake terribly the earth (Isa. 2.19.) Let us mind this wrath and the fierceness
of it; and let us bless the Lord, who has sent Jesus Christ ^o deliver us from
this wrath, and from the fierceness of it. When wrath shall be cast abroad upon
the wicked world, that it falls not upon the godly, is the fruit of highest and
freest love. And though they sip of the cup, yet that they drink not the dregs
of it is rich mercy ( Psalm. 75.98.) In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and
the wine is red, it is full of mixture, and he powers out the same (in this
pouring out (possibly) a godly man may drink somewhat of it, especially in a
time of common calamity) but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth
shall wring them out and drink them. It is of the Lords mercy, and because his
compassions fail not, that we are delivered from the fierceness of his wrath,
and from drinking the very dregs of the cup of his displeasure.

Consider further, upon whom this wrath will be exercised, Cast forth the rage
of thy wrath, behold every one that is proud, and abase him: This the Lord bids
Job do, to show what himself usually does.

Hence note, First; The Lord takes special notice of proud persons.

He beholds them, he locks upon them. As it is said Saul (1 Samuel 18.9.) He eyed
David from that day forward, that is (which was his great sin) he cast a
revengeful envious eye upon him: Thus when the holy God sees wicked men g^ow
lofty and proud, he eyeth and beholds them from that very day, with an eye of
just revenge, or with a purpose to break them and be revenged on them. God
beholds them, as I may say, with an evil eye, that is, with an intent to bring
evil upon them. He (says David, Psalm. 138.6.) knows the proud afar off. As
it is said of the Father of the humbled Prodigal in the Parable, ( Luke 15.)
When he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion. So God
quickly spies out a proud man, even a great way off, and has indignation
against him; or, as we may rather expound the Psalm, He knows the proud afar
off; that is, a proud man shall never come near him, he will not admit him into
his presence, much less into his embraces. To be known afar off, is to be far
from the favorable or respectful knowledge of God; yea, to those whom the Lord
knows afar off in this world, he will say in the next, I never knew you, depart
from me, ye workers of iniquity (Mat. 7.23.)

Secondly, Note; God is able to, and will cast down proud men.

That which he would have Job do, he himself (as was said) usually does; He
beholds the proud, and abaseth them, he lays them low. Nebuchadnezzar, that
proud Monarch, was brought to that confession ( Dan. 4.37.) Now I
Nebuchadnezzar praise, and honor, and extol the King of Heaven, all whose
works are true, and his ways judgment, and those that walk in pride he is able
to abase. If men will be proud and lofty, the Lord both knows very well how,
and is able very easily to bring them down. And as he knows how, and is able to
deal with proud men, so he desires and delights to deal with them, above all
sorts of sinners; his greatest contests are with the proud ( Isa. 2.12, 13,
14.) The day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and
lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up (in his own conceit especially) and
he shall be brought low, and upon all the Cedars of Lebanon, that are high and
lifted up, and upon all the Oaks of Bashan, and upon all the high mountains,
etc. What means the Prophet by these? is the Lord angry with trees and
mountains? These are but the shadows of great and proud men; the day of the
Lord shall be upon every one of them, and his hand will be heavy upon them in
that day. Proud men look upon themselves much above others; but as God is above
them, so he loves to show himself ahove them, especially when they show out
their pride. As Jethroe said to Moses (Exodus 18.9, 11.) Now I know that the
Lord is greater than all gods, for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he
was above them. God shows himself above all, when he acts above proud men,
and acts them down in their proudest actings.

And as the Lord delights to bring proud men down; so he will certainly do it,
he is resolved upon it, He looks upon every one that is proud to abase him.
The Angels that fell were proud, they kept not their first estate, but left
their habitation, they did not like the state wherein God had placed them; and
therefo e God cast them down, and he has reserved them in everlasting chains
under darkness unto the judgment of the great day (Jude 6.) When man in
Paradise began to be proud and would be more than God made him (God made him
above all earthly creatures, but he would be as God, as his Creator; he would
be, as it were, the founder of his own happiness; pride and unbelief at once
took hold of him and led him to his sin-fall, and) then followed his fall, his
judgment-fall; God cast him down, God abased him, and not only that proud man,
but mankind for his pride; they being in him, his pride was theirs. And to
this day God has all along set his face against all proud men, and the pride
of all men, ( James 4.6.) God resists the proud. The proud contend with God,
they, as it were, wage war with God, and therefore God will wage war and
contend with them, he resists the proud ( Prove. 3.34.) Surely he scorneth the
scorner, but he gives grace to the lowly. The Lord has two great works to do
in the world. The first is, to lift up and exalt the humble. The second is, to
humble and pull down the proud. These two are the daily products of divine
providence. And the Lord is so much an enemy to pride, that if he see it in any
of his own servants, he will abase them and lay them low for it; as we see in
the case of that good King Hezekiah, His heart being lifted up (not in
thankfulness, nor in zeal for the ways and things of God, as once it was, but
in pride) there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem (2 Chronicles.
32.35.) The Lord will not bear it, when his own bear or behave themselves
proudly ( Prove. 29.23.) A man's pride (any man's pride) shall bring him low; that
is, he shall be brought low for his pride, or his pride will bring him into
such extravagant ways as will be a means to bring him low.

Thirdly, Note; God can easily abase and cast down proud ones.

If any ask, how easily can he do it? I answer, He can do it with a look; Look
upon every one that is proud, and bring him low, says God to Job, show thy
self like me in this, I can do it as easily as look upon him. God by a cast of
his eye can cast down all proud men; as the Lord can help his people with a
look. David desired no more for his portion, but that God would lift up the
light of his countenance upon him ( Psalm. 4.6.) that is, that God would look
upon him favorably: And that prayer is made three times ( Psalm. 80 4, 7, 19.)
Cause thy face to shine upon us, and (we have enough) we shall be saved, we
shall be delivered, we shall be protected. A good look from God is all good to
man. God with a good look can save us; and if God withdraw his eye from any,
and will not look upon them, if he turn his back upon them, or hide his face
from them, his favor is withdrawn, and they are helpless. Now as God can save
his people with a smiling look, so he can destroy his enemies with a frowning
one. His look is as powerful and effectual to destroy, as it is to save; though
to look savingly be much more the delight of God (if I may so speak) than to
look destroyingly. It is said, God looked through the pillar of fire and the
cloud, upon the Hosts of Pharaoh, and troubled them, and took off the chariot
wheels ( Exodus 14.24.) Surely God abaseth the proud men of the world easily,
when he does it with a look. He indeed (as the holy Virgin spoke in her song,
Luke 1.51, 52.) Shows strength with his arm (or the strength of his arm) when
he scatters the proud in the imaginations of their hearts, and puts down the
mighty from their seats, and exalts them of low degree; yet all this the Lord
can do with a look from heaven, The habitation of his Holiness, and of his
Glory. Now,

If the Lord deal thus with proud men, take these inferences from it.

First, Has God such an evil eye upon proud men, will he cast them down? will
he certainly do it? and can he easily do it? Then woe to proud men; it is the
word of the Prophet ( Isa. 28.1.) Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards
of Ephraim; that is, to those who crown themselves with pride, and make that
their glory and their honor which will p^ove their shame and downfall: and
these the Prophet calls the drunkards of Ephraim (I conceive) he means not
those that drink themselves drunk with wine, but those that are drunk with
their own presumptions, with the pride of their spirits, or, as many also are,
with vain hopes and expectations. We have vain confidents and expectants so
expressed ( Nahum. 1.10.) While they are folded together as thorns, and while
they are drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry;
that is, while they are drunken with pride and self-confidence to carry all
before them, while they are thus folded together like thorns, in their plots
and contrivements, while they are drunken with false hopes, they shall be
devoured as stubble fully dry; that is, they shall be utterly consumed and
devoured.

Secondly, If there be such a woe to proud ones, if the Lord has such a bad
eye upon them, and is able to lay them low, and will certainly do it, and can
easily do it, we had need consider who are the proud ones. Pride is an evil
weed, yet it grows many times in the best soil, even in a good heart; and it
is no easy matter to find out who are the proud men intended in this Text and
Point; yet I answer,

In general, First, All they are proud who value themselves very highly, yea,
they are proud who put any undue value upon themselves; we can scarcely value
our selves any thing at all, but we shall overvalue ^ur selves, for we are
worms and no men, says David: He said also, What is man, O Lord, that thou art
mindful of him? Man is so small a thing, that the Psalmist could hardly tell
what he is, or what to make of him; sure enough man is no such thing as most
men make of themselves. Doubtless, if we have any high thoughts of our selves;
we over-think our selves; and usually they that have least true worth, have
greatest thoughts of their own worthiness. Man has lost all, is stripped of all,
as he comes into the world, yet he is proud as if he had all. As they that
have much are proud, or in great danger of pride, so it is a truth, that they
who have nothing are often proud too. The Apostle bids Timothy (1 Timothy 6.17.)
Charge them that be rich in this world, that they be not high-minded. And among
rich men, they who (as I may say, according to the phrase of the world) have
raised their own fortunes, are most apt to be proud; and there are two reasons
of it, First, Because of the change of their state; they were low and empty,
but now they are high and full. This change of their condition, changes their
disposition; and (as we say) Their blood rises with their good. Secondly, That
which they have is (say they) of their own getting; they think their skill and
their diligence has got it. Hence Job protested, If I rejoiced because my hand
has gotten much. Nebuchadnezzar boasted of his great Palace, because he had
built it; Is not this great Babel that I have built? Now, as they are apt to be
proud who have much, especially when it is of their own acquisition (though
indeed we have nothing merely of our own acquisition) so they who have little
or nothing, are not out of the danger of pride; poor and proud is so common,
that it is grown into a proverb. And they especially, who are poor in
spirituals, grow proud in spirit, as it was with the Laodicean Angel ( Rev.
3.17.)

But further, they are proud who lift up themselves in any thing of self; As,
First, in their natural parts, wit, understanding, memory, elocution; Secondly,
in their acquired parts, learning, knowledge, skill; Thirdly, in their moral
virtues, sobriety, temperance, justice; Fourthly, in their spiritual graces,
faith, love, self-denial ('it is possible to be proud for a fit of these, or to
have a fit of pride come upon us upon the exercise of these) Fifthly, in their
holy duties and performances, prayers, fastings, etc. Sixthly, in their legal
righteousness and good deeds, alms, charities. We seldom do well, or any good,
especially (as we ought, and duty binds us) much good, but we think too well of
our selves (that we are better than we are) or too much both of the good we
have done, and of our own goodness. As the great goodness of God, or the
greatness of his goodness appears chiefly in this, that he can make all things,
even evil things, and those not only the evils of trouble, but the evil of sin,
work together for our good ( Romans 8.28.) so the great evil of man's heart, or
the greatness of that evil, appears chiefly in this, that it causes all
things, even good things, and those not only the good things of this natural
life, but the good belonging to, and done in the power of a spiritual life, to
work to our hurt, sometimes for a time, and would to our ruin for ever, did
not the Lord overruled it. Seventhly, the favor which they have with men,
whether they be the mighty, the Princes and powers of the world, or the many,
the common people of the world. How are some lifted up, because they are the
darlings of the people, because the multitude eyes them, points at them, and
applauds them! To be lifted up in any of these things, or in any thing else
(and what is there, not only of an earthly, but of an heavenly pedigree and
extraction, in which the vain heart of man is not ready to be lifted up unduly,
forgetting God from whom all good comes; to be lifted up, I say, in any of
these things) lays man open to the wrathful resistance of God, and all such
God will bring down and abase; therefore let us be empty of our selves, and
beware of being found among the proud, yea, of being in any kind or degree
proud. It is dangerous to have any pride found in us, but woe to those who are
found proud.

Thirdly, If the Lord has such an eye to, and upon proud men, and will thus
bring them low, Then let us not be afraid of proud men; why should we be afraid
of them who are falling ( Prove. 15.33.) The fear of the Lord is the instruction
of wisdom, and before honor is humility. But what says the same Solomon
(Prove. 18.32.) Before destruction the heart of man is haughty. As soon as ever
we see any man showing a proud heart by pride of life, we may quickly conclude
the Lord is about to pluck him down. One very great reason why the Lord has
laid many, who were once as mountains, low as valleys, was the pride of their
hearts. When pride buds, the rod blossometh; that is, God is preparing for the
correction, if not for the destruction of proud ones. And as it is sad to see
pride bud at any time, so then especially, when the rod blossometh, that is,
when God is correcting us with his rods.

Fourthly, Then do not envy proud ones. We are apt to envy those that are high
in place, though they are proud in spirit; but, do not envy proud ones, how
high, how great soever you see them, for they are in danger of falling,
according to the truth of this Scripture, and many others. When proud men are
in their fullest ruff, and highest ascent, then they are nearest a dreadful
downfall; Before destruction the heart of man is haughty (says Solomon, Prove.
18.12.) and before honor is humility. And the Apostle Peter having given this
counsel to those who are humbled by affliction (1 Epist. 5.6.) humble your
selves under the mighty hand of God, subjoyns this comfortable promise in the
close of the verse, That he may exalt you in due time.

Fifthly, Then pride is a very provoking sin. The Lord who declares himself
against all sorts of sinners, declares himself most against proud sinners (
Prove. 16.5.) Every one that is proud in heart, is an abomination to the Lord;
and mark what follows in the same verse, though hand join in hand, he (that
is, the proud man) shall not be unpunished. Pride is the Devils sin, the Devil
is that Mystical Leviathan spoken of in the 41th Chapter of this Book, who is a
King over all the children of pride. They who are not subject to God (proud men
above all men are not) are the Devils subjects; He is a King over all the
children of pride. There are four things in which the provocation of the sin of
pride consists, any one of which may provoke God to pull down proud ones.

First, Proud men set themselves in the place of God, Lucifer (by whom the
proud Babilonian is meant) said ( Isa. 14.14.) I will be like the Most High.
Thus the Lord said of the Prince of Tyrus. (Ezekiel. 28.2.) Because thine heart is
lifted up, and thou have said I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, in the
midst of the seas; yet thou art a man and not God, though thou set thy heart as
the heart of God. See how that proud Prince thought to carry it as God, as if
he had been the founder of his own strength. How can the Lord but be provoked
with such an affront as this? Proud Babylon spoke this language, and at as high
a rate ( Isa. 47.8.) I am, and none else besides me (is not this to speak just
like God) I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of
children.

Secondly, As pride is an usurpation of the place and power of God, so of the
providence of God. A proud man knows not how to acknowledge God in any
mercy, nor how to be humbled under the hand of God in any affliction. He minds
not God either in what he enjoys, or in what he suffers; is not this a
provocation?

Thirdly, Pride must needs provoke God, as a proud man sets himself against all
the Commands and Laws of God. God cannot but be provoked, to see all his Laws
and Commands slighted by man. A proud man will keep no bounds, nor would he be
kept in any.

Fourthly, Pride is a Mother sin, it brings forth many other sins. As Unbelief
is a Mother sin, so is Pride ( Hab. 2.5.) He is a proud man, neither keeps at
home, who enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be
satisfied, but gathers unto him all Nations, and heapeth unto him all people.
The pride of the Assyrian put him upon other sins, upon oppression especially;
he could not keep at home, nor be contented with his own Dominion, th^ugh a
very large and vast one; he must go abroad, and invade other men's Territories;
his pride sent him to do mischief, and he enlarged his desire as hell. Proud
men must oppress and wrong others, to bring in fuel for their own lusts. Pride
calls in aid from many sins to serve its turn.

Lastly, If Pride provokes God, if he looks upon every one that is proud, to
abase him and bring him low; then how should we labor to be humble ones, that
the Lord may look upon us with a favorable eye, and so he does upon all them
that walk humbly with him. As God resists the proud, so he gives grace to
the humble, that is, favor. The humble shall have his favor, and the proud
his frowns. As to do justly, and to love mercy, is the sum of all duty to man;
so to walk humbly, is the sum of all duty to God ( Mic. 6.8.) They who walk
humbly, walk not only holily, but safely. They who are low in their own eyes,
are under the special protection of the high God.

The Lord having called upon Job to show the effect of his wrath against one
sort of bad men, the proud, calls upon him in the next words, to show the
effects of his wrath upon all sorts of bad men, comprehended under this general
word, The wicked.

And tread down the wicked in their place. The Lord bids Job do this if he
could (indeed he could not) that he might show himself a competent match for
God. As if the Lord had said, I tread down the wicked in their places, do thou
so too, if thou can. God had said before, Abase every one that is proud, and
bring him low; now he says, Tread down the wicked.

Tread them down, As mire in the street: We tread upon vile and contemptible
things. To tread upon any t^ing, a person especially, notes utter contempt of
him, and ab^olute conquest over him; and therefore ( Josh. 10.24.) to show the
complete victory which the Lords people had go^ over the Kings of Canaan,
Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the Captains of the men
of war which went with him, Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these
Kings; and they came near, and put their feet upon the necks of them. And
that is it which the Apostle gives (in way of promise) as an assurance of our
conquest over the evil spirit, the devil ( Romans 16.20.) God shall bruise (we
put in the Margin, tread; the Greek word signi^ies, to bruise by treading; God
shall tread) Satan under your feet shortly, that is, God will give you a full
and a final victory over the devil. We have a like expression or promise (
Psalm. 91.13.) Thou shall tread upon the lion and adder; the young lion, and the
dragon shall thou trample under feet. God will give his people power, not only
over hurtful beasts, but over men, which are hurtful as those beasts, and over
Satan, who is eminently shadowed by the Lion, the Adder, the young Lion, and
the Dragon; in that evil spirit all these evil beasts are trodden under feet,
that is, subdued and conquered. When David would show how he (in case he were
faulty) was willing to be made a very slave to his enemies, he phrases it thus
( Psalm. 7.5.) Let the enemy persecute my soul and take it, yea, let him tread
down my life upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust; that is, let him
have full power over me, let me be at his mercy, though he be merciless. Once
more (says the Church, Psalm. 44.5.) Through thee will we push down our
enemies, through thy name will we tread them down that rise up against us. Thus
the Lord bespake Job, Come, says he, Let me see you tread down the wicked, get
an absolute conquest over them, that they may rise up no more in this world to
do wickedly. Tread down The wicked.

The word wicked is often taken largely, so every man in a sinful state, may be
called a wicked man; every person unconverted or unregenerate, every person
that has not true grace, is wicked. There is no middle estate among men,
between good and bad, converted and unconverted; yet here the wicked are not to
be taken only in a large sense, for sinners in common, but strictly,

First, For the proud before spoken of, There the Lord said, abase the proud,
here he says, Tread down the wicked; that is, the wicked who are proud. To be
wicked and to be proud are the same: For as most wicked men are proud, so all
proud men are wicked; for pride it self is a great wickedness: and it is pride
that causes most men to do wickedly, even to rebel against God and his
righteous laws, to rise up against his ways and truths. When we have said of a
man he is proud, if we have not said all evil, we have said one of the worst
evils of him; and that which lays him open, as to suffer the worst penal
evils, so to do the worst sinful evils.

Secondly, If we take the words distinctly (as we may) then by the wicked are
meant gross and flagitious sinners, notorious sinners; for though, as I said
before, any one that has not grace, may be called wicked, yet properly, and in
Scripture sense, wicked ones are notorious, presumptuous, and flagitious
sinners, such as sin with a high hand, and with a stiff neck.

Thirdly, By the wicked we may especially understand oppressors, who are
troublesome and vexatious to others. As some are wicked in taking their own
pleasure, and in satisfying their vain desires; so many are wicked in vexing,
afflicting, and oppressing others. The Hebrew word for a wicked man, signifies
such a one as is both unquiet himself, and will not suffer others to be quiet.
In any of, or in all these three notions, we may expound the word wicked here;
the wicked are proud ones, or notorious evil ones, or oppressors of others.
Tread down the wicked In their place.

The Hebrew is, Under them. The word also signifies (as we render) a proper
place; and that is considerable. Tread them down in their place. The Lord does
not say in thy place, but in their place; which may note these two things.

First, Wheresoever thou find them, tread them down.

Secondly, In their place, that is, where they flourish most, where they are
best rooted, or most strongly secured; where they have the greatest advantages
and strengths to save them harmless. That is specially a man's place, Non est
difficile superbum hominem and petentem in alieno loco superare, quia in eo
minus habet potentiae. Sanct.
where he seateth and hopes to settle himself. Now says God, Tread them down
in their place. I do so, I destroy the wicked, when and where they think
themselves safest, where they think no hand can touch them, nor arm reach them,
there my foot shall tread them down. O Job, can thou do thus? or do thou
thus, Tread down the wicked in their place. And as it follows in the next
verse to the same effect.

Verse 13. Hide them in the dust together, and bind their faces in secret. That
is, Bring them to utter destruction, to condign punishment, even to death. Some
expound hiding in the dust, by laying in dungeons and filthy prisons. Secondly,
Others say to hide in the dust, notes death, or to lay them in their graves.
Dust thou art (said God to Adam, Genesis 3.19.) and to dust thou shall return.
That is, thou shall die, and be put in thy grave; which possibly, is called,
the dust of death ( Psalm. 22.15.) Hide them in the dust of the earth, let them
appear no more above ground to trouble thee or others. Hide them in the dust
Together.

That is either,

First, All at a time. Thus the Lord can do, he can destroy all the wicked at
once, at one time, in one hour. Or,

Secondly, Together; that is, in one place. God can gather the wicked all
together, and so make an end of them together, both as to time and place.

Yet I conceive neither of these are here intended; for God does not usually
destroy the wicked all at one time, nor all in one place; he has several times
and stages to act his providence in and upon, so that, to hide them in the
dust together, is but this, to hide them alike, to put them all into the same
condition, at one time or other, in one place or other, that they may be able
to do no more mischief.

And bind their faces in secret. That Is the last expression, showing what God
does, and what he bid Job do, Bind their faces in secret. There may be a
twofold interpretation of these words; either,

First, In allusion to men condemned, whose faces use to be covered; a Sentence
of death being pronounced and passed upon them, they were as it were hid from
the light of the living. Thus as soon as Ahasuerus the King had passed sentence
against Haman, they covered his face (Esth. 7.8.) or

Secondly, This covering their faces, may be an allusion to actually dead men,
whose faces if they die among men, especially among friends, are always bound
up and decently covered. When Christ called Lazarus out of the grave, the Text
says ( John 11.44.) He came forth, his face being bound about with a napkin.
So then, to bind their faces in secret, is as if it had been said, bring them
to death, or put them to death. Thus the Lord calls Job to that in three
particulars, which himself will certainly do.

First, To Tread down the wicked.

Secondly, To Hide them in the dust together.

Thirdly, To Bind their faces in secret.

The Notes which I shall give from these words, will be grounded upon that
threefold interpretation of the word wicked. And

First, As the wicked are taken for the same with the proud in the former verse.

Observe; Proud men are wicked men.

Behold (says the Prophet, Mal. 4.1.) The day of the Lord shall burn as an
oven, and all the proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble. The proud,
^^d they that do wickedly go together. The proud do wickedly, and are therefore
deservedly numbered among the wicked. Pride is the first of those seven things
which are an abomination to the Lord ( Prove. 6.16, 17.) There are six things
that the Lord hates, yea, seven are abomination to him. A proud look, that is
first; and if a proud look, then certainly a proud heart, and a proud spirit.
Proud persons have not only a chief, but the first place by name among those
whom the Lord abominates. And in that black Catalogue of eighteen sorts of
wicked ones, that shall trouble the world in the latter days, the proud are
not the last nor the least; (2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5.) In the last days perilous
times shall come, why? what shall make them so? The reason follows, For men
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud. Now though the
proud man comes in the fourth place, by name, yet he is in the first place as
to influence; for what is the reason why men over-love themselves? is it not
because they are proud, and have too high thoughts of themselves? David (Psalm.
119.21.) shows the wickedness of proud men, or that proud men are extremely
wicked, while he says to and of God, Thou have rebuked the proud that are
cursed, which do err from thy Commandments. The proud are such as continually
wander out of the ways of truth and holiness. Pride will not let us keep
Commandments ('it is the humble soul which keeps them) and therefore pride may
be called the breach of all the Commandments; and if so, proud men must needs
be the very firstborn of the wicked; and therefore David says of them, that
they are not only under the rebuke of God, but under his curse, which is the
peculiar portion and punishment of the wicked. And what the way of proud men
is, both in doing and speaking, the same David tells us ( Psalm. 75.45.) I said
unto the fools, deal not foolishly; and to the wicked, lift not up the horn,
lift not up your horn on high, speak not with a stiff neck, that is, be not
proud. Wicked men lift up their horn and tongue, they cannot but show their
pride in word and deed. The Devil is the wicked one (Matthew. 13.19.) The
highway ground having received the seed, it is said, the wicked one (that is,
the Devil) comes and catches it away. And when the world is said to lie in
wickedness, or in the wicked one (1 John 5.19.) The meaning is, the Devil
overrules the carnal world. Now, as the Devil is the wicked one, so he is the
proud one also. Pride was that wickededness for which God trod him down, and
his wickedness still continues in tempting men to, or in puffing them up with
pride. It is the business of the wicked one, the Devil, to make men proud,
because he knows pride will make them wicked, and do wickedly. Pride hardens
the mind (as Daniel says it did Nebuchadnezar, Chap. 5.20.) Now what
wickedness is there, which a hardened mind will not attempt to do! Pride put
Herod upon seeking the blood of Christ, who came to save and wash sinners with
his blood.

Proud men are very wicked as they despise other men (a proud man thinks no man
so good as himself, or himself too good for all other men) Some proud men are
so wicked, that they despise even God himself. The proud man lifts up himself
against the Word of God, slights the promises, regards not the threatenings of
God; his heart is lifted up against the Commandments of God, nor does he value
the comforts of God; he neglects the Ordinances of God, nor does he reverence
the Providence of God. He that does, or is ready to do all this, is surely a
despiser of God himself. How wicked a man is he, whose heart is lifted up both
against God and man!

Secondly, Consider the wicked proud man, as one whom God treads down.

Then, Observe; God punishes sinners with that which is most cross to their
lusts.

What more cross to a high-spirited man, than to be brought low; and who can
be brought lower than he that is trodden down. As God sometimes punishes
Drunkards with thirst, and Gluttons with hunger, and covetous persons with
poverty. There is one (says Solomon, Prove. 11.29.) that withholds more than
is meet (he doubtless is a covetous man that does so) and it tends to
poverty. So God punishes proud ones, by that which is most contrary to their
nature, he abaseth and lays them low. The Prophet tells us ( Isa. 3.16, 17.)
how the Lord would punish wanton women, who were proud either of their natural
beauty, or artificial dresses and ornaments. The daughters of Zion (says he)
are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and
mincing as they go, and making a tinckling with their feet; there is their
pride: but what was their punishment? the next words resolve us. Therefore the
Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and
the Lord will discover their secret parts; they were proud of that which
covered their skin, and therefore the Lord punished them with scabs, or covered
their skin with scurfe and scabs; and as there the Lord shows what he would
bring upon, so what he would take from them. (Verse. 18.) In that day the Lord
will take away the bravery of their tinckling ornaments about their feet, and
their Caules, and their round tyres like the Moon. And (Verse. 24.) it shall
come to pass that instead of sweet smell there shall be stink, and instead of a
girdle a rent, and instead of well set hair baldness, and instead of a
stomacher a girding of sackcloth, and burning instead of beauty. What could be
more contrary to the pride of these women, than that which the Lord brought
upon them, or punished them with. What do proud women more desire than beauty
and bravery? And what do proud men look after, but to be respected, honored,
and to have every one point the finger at them, or bow the knee to them? Now
when the Lord blasts proud women in their beauty and bravery, when he blasts
proud men in their honor and estimation, when he thus abaseth and treads them
down, he touches them in that which the spirit of pride prizeth most, and with
greatest regret parts from. Pride is a base height of spirit, therefore the
Lord abaseth the proud. There are five words in the Text, all tending directly
to cross the spirit of a proud man.

First, He shall be abased.

Secondly, He shall be brought low. A proud man would fain be high, he would
sit at the upper end of the Table, yea, he would sit at the upper end of the
World too; but, says the Lord, he shall be brought low.

Thirdly, What would a proud man do? He would tread upon the necks of all
others, but he shall be trodden under foot.

Fourthly, Where would the proud man be? He would be conspicuous in high
places, but he shall be hid in the dust.

Fifthly, He would be looked at by all men with admiration, but, says God, his
face shall be bound in secret; he loves to appear and make a fair show in the
flesh, but he shall not appear at all.. Proud ones cannot get so high, but God
in his Justice will get above them, and strip them of that wherein they have
chiefly prided themselves. Read ( Isa. 14.11, 12, 13, 14, 24, 25. and Isa.
23.9.) Those Scriptures tell us how the Lord deals with proud men, according to
their pride, or rather contrary to their pride; he gives them that which they
most disgust, and takes that from them which they most passionately desire.

Secondly, Take wicked men in the common notion, for those that do evil at the
highest rate, that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with
cart-ropes. Then,

Observe, First; Wicked men, that is, impenitent sinners, high-handed sinners,
are in a very sad condition, and shall come to a sad conclusion.

The Lord will tread them down ( Psalm. 9.16, 17.) The wicked is snared in the
work of his own hands, yea, the wicked shall be turned into hell. That is, the
utmost of sorrow and suffering shall be their portion ( Isa. 3.11.) Woe to the
wicked, for the reward of their doings shall be given them. (Isa. 57.21.) There
is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. As the tumultuousness of their own
spirits will not let them be at peace, so neither will the righteousness of
God.

Secondly, From those expressions, Tread down the wicked in their place, hide
them in the dust together, bind their faces in secret.

Observe; God will at last purge and rid the world of wicked men.

As wicked men would fain purge and rid the world of godly men, they would
destroy all the seed of the righteous; so certainly God will destroy the wicked
of the world, and rid the world of them, though not at once of every wicked
man, yet in their times and seasons, that they shall not do the mischief which
their hearts are full of. The last of the Prophets speaks as much of the Lords
vengeance upon all the wicked ( Mal. 4.1.) The day of the Lord. (speaking of
some great day of the Lords appearance) shall burn as an oven; and all the
proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble; and the day that comes
shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither
root nor branch. It Is utter ruin to be destroyed root and branch; such shall
the ruin of the wicked be. Thus also the Prophet Isaiah comforts the Church (
Chap. 52.1.) Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful
garments, O Jerusalem, the holy City; for henceforth there shall no more come
into thee, the uncircumcised and the unclean. The wicked of the world are the
uncircumcised, they have not the spiritual circumcision, the circumcision of
the heart; these shall no more trouble Jerusalem, nor tread in Zions Courts. (
Nahum. 1.15.) Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that brings good
tidings, that publishes peace; O Judah keep thy solemn feasts, perform thy
Vows, for the wicked shall no more pass through thee, he is utterly cut off.
The Hebrew is, Belial shall no more pass through thee: That is, such as cast
off the yoke of Jesus Christ, shall no more bring Judah under their yoke. This
is also witnessed by another holy Prophet ( Zech. 14.21.) In that day there
shall be no more the Cananite in the house of the Lord of hosts, they shall no
more mingle themselves with the faithful servants of God, much less rule over
them. Canaanites have often been in the house of the Lord, but the Canaanite
shall not always be there; God will sweep them out of his house. Answerable to
these prophesies speaks the last prophecy ( Rev. 21.27. Chap. 22.15.) which
some interpret of a glorious state of the Church here, and it is undoubtedly
true (as all agree) of the Church in glory: No unclean thing shall enter;
without shall be dogs. Then indeed, God will abase the proud, and tread down
the wicked, In their place.

Hence note, Thirdly; No outward advantages (and except those they have none)
shall stand the wicked in stead, or keep them from falling.

God will tread them down in their place; when they are where they would be,
upon their own ground, they shall be worsted. The Scripture speaks often of
treading down the wicked, notwithstanding their greatest advantages. Union is a
great advantage for preservation, yet ( Isa. 8.9.) Associate your selves, O ye
people and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear all ye far Countries,
gird your selves, and you shall be broken in pieces; take counsel together, and
it shall come to naught, speak the word, and it shall not stand. As if the Lord
had sad, I will not take you at an advantage, before you are gathered together,
before you are girded; I will not surprise you unarmed and unprovided; do your
best to save and secure your selves from my vengeance, associate your selves,
gird your selves, take counsel together, and then I will tread you down.
Neither strongest associations, nor wisest consultations, nor highest
resolutions, nor compleatest preparations for action (though ye have spoken the
word and are girt) shall avail you in the day of my wrath. Thus the Lord
bespake Jehoiakim by his Prophet ( Jerem. 22.15.) Shall thou reign because thou
closest thy self in Cedar? As if he had said, because thou do make such
provision for thy own safety, do thou think to be be safe? or can thou
shelter thy self against me? Again (verse. 23.) O Inhabitant of Lebanon, that
make thy nest in the Cedars (Cedars are high trees and strong) how gracious
shall thou be when pangs come upon thee, the pain of a woman in travel. The
Lord puts a scorn upon them, such a kind of scorn (but not as hers, without
cause) as Michal put upon David (2 Samuel 6.20.) how glorious was the King of
Israel to day. Were not you very glorious when you danced uncovered before the
ark? Thus, I say, the Lord puts a holy scorn upon the wicked, when they are in
their Cedar-nests; How gracious will thou be, when pangs of sorrow come upon
thee. Take one Scripture more ( Jerem. 49.16.) Thy terribleness ('it is spoken of
Edom) has deceived thee, (thou thoughtest thy self so terrible that none durst
touch thee, yet, thy terribleness has deceived thee) and the pride of thy
heart, O thou that dwell in the clefts of the rock, and hold the height
of the hill; though thou should make thy nest as high as the Eagles, I will
bring thee down from thence, says the Lord. Thou have all the advantages, thou
have a rock for strength, and thou art upon a hill for height, yea, upon the
height of the hill, thou art above all; but though thy nest were as the Eagles,
I will pluck thee thence. Thus the Lord treads down the wicked in their place,
in there fortifications, in their mounts and towers; when they have secured
themselves most by counsels, and friends, and strongholds, then and there he
treads them down, even in their place.

Fourthly, Note; God is known to be God, or shows himself to be God by
abaseing the proud, and by treading down wicked men.

I ground it thus. The Lord would have Job show himself like God, or act as God
does, by treading down the wicked. God made himself known to be God, by the
Plagues which he brought upon Pharaoh, as well as by the deliverance and
salvation which he wrought for Israel (Exodus 8.22. Exodus 9.14.) I will send all
my plagues upon thy heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, that
thou may know that there is none like me in very deed for this cause have I
raised thee up, for to show in thee my power, and that my name may be declared
throghout all the earth. Thus also said David (Psalm. 9.16.) The Lord is known
by the judgment that he executes, that is, by punishing the wicked he is known
to be the Lord. God is known by his works, as well as in his word: power and
greatness, and wisdom and justice are visible in his judgments.

There was a third sort of wicked men named in opening the Text, which I shall
but touch in this observation. Such they were described to be as are unquiet
themselves, nor will they suffer others to be quiet by their good wills; they
are troubled that any live peaceably by them: The Lord will tread down these
unquiet wicked ones also. The Scripture is full of this truth ( Isa. 33.1.) Woe
to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously,
and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shall cease to spoil,
thou shall be spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously,
they shall deal treacherously with thee.

Now the Lord having put Job to all these trials of his strength (thereby to
show himself able to contend with him) tells him plainly, if thou can do
these things, Vexatio verba minus limata extorsit, menpia and casta permansit.
if thou can abase the proud, if thou can tread them down, hide them in the
dust, and bind their faces in secret, Then Verse. 14. Will I confess that thine
own right hand can save thee.

Then will I confess.



That is, when thou have done all these things, Confessio pro laud and
honorifico testimonio saepe ponitur in Scriptura. Palmam tibi cedam, etc. Bez.
I will give an honorable testimony of thee, I will not hide thy power; and
then I will acknowledge, thou have some color to contest with me, and art able
to uphold thy self. These mighty acts are proper and peculiar to me; yet thou
seem to say, thou can do all these, else, surely thou had never offered
to contend with me. That Is the scope of these words, Then will I confess That
thine own right hand can save thee.

Or that thou can be a self-saviour, Hoc solius Dei est qui quod est, per se
est, and a quo omnis potestas and dignitas.
or that thou art self-sufficient, as I am, and have no dependence upon any;
and then thou need not complain that I do not help thee, for thou can help
thy self.

Thine own right hand can save thee. The hand is an instrument of help,
especially the right hand; and then the right hand saves, when it either keeps
us from danger, or delivers us out of it.

Quest. But did Job ever say his own right hand could save him.

Answ. Job never said it, nor thought it, his mind was pure from such
blasphemy; yet he sometimes spoke as if he had been somewhat more than a man,
especially, when he spoke of debating his matters and arguing with God.

First, In that the Lord says, in case Job could do all those things, he would
confess that his own right hand could save him,

Note; He that can destroy all others, can save himself.

Illa facere posse, and seipsum salvare unius, and ejusdem sunt virtutis.
There goes no more to save our selves out of any trouble, than to destroy all
others. The Apostle James says ( Chap. 4.12.) There is one lawgiver, who is
able to save and destroy. God is this lawgiver, he is able to do both; and
because he can destroy all, he can save all, and will save all that trust in
him. The devil is called a destroyer, he is called Abaddon in Hebrew, and
Apollyon in Greek, that is, a destroyer (Rev. 9.11.) but he cannot destroy all;
if he could, he would soon make sad work, none should be saved. There is but
one lawgiver, who can save and destroy, take away life and give life; he can
do the one as well as the other, and both as often as he will. The Lord has an
absolutely supreme power over men, and may dispose of them for life or death as
he pleases; even, eternal life and death, salvation and damnation are in his
hand; it is therefore a fearful thing to fall into the hand (the revenging hand)
of the living God (Heb. 10.31.) upon the neglect, much more upon the despising
and contempt of the covenant of life and peace by Jesus Christ, as it is said at
the 29th verse of that Chapter. Christ is the best friend and the worst enemy;
To him belong the issues from death (Psalm. 68.20.) and he has the keys af
death and hell (Rev. 1.18.) Let us rejoice with trembling before him, who is
able to save and destroy.

Secondly, Note; Man cannot save himself by the best of his power.

No, not by his own right hand. Man cannot save himself, First, from temporal
evils; he cannot save himself from sickness nor from poverty, he cannot save
himself from any danger that is ready to fall upon him; nor can the strongest
creatures save him ( Psalm. 33.17.) A horse is a vain thing to save a man, and
man is as vain a thing to save himself; a horse cannot deliver us by his great
strength, or by the greatness of his skill and wisdom. Secondly, much less can
man save himself from spiritual and eternal evils. While we consider, First,
out of what misery we are saved. Secondly, from what mighty enemies we are
saved. Thirdly, from whose wrath we are saved. Fourthly, what price was
required, that we might be saved. Fifthly, what mercy and grace were needful to
save us: we must needs confess, that our right hand cannot save us, spiritually
and eternally. Who can save himself out of the hand of that great enemy the
devil, and his legions of darkness? who can save himself from that gulf of
misery, into which sin has plunged us? who can deliver himself from the curse
of the Law, or from sin, the sting of death? who can deliver himself from the
power of his lusts, from the pride, unbelief, covetousness and hardness of his
own heart? Our own right hand cannot save us from any of these evils. The devil
and the world are too strong for us, and so is every lust and corruption of our
own evil hearts. Can we by any power of our own convert our selves, or preserve
our selves after conversion? Can we get out of the Kingdom of darkness by our
own power? or put our selves into the Kingdom of light by our own po^er? That
we are either temporally, or spiritually, or eternally saved, is all from the
power, from the right hand of God, not at all from our own. Unless we give all
to God, we take all from him. He that is our God, is the God of salvation, and
unto God the Lord belong the issues from death (Psalm. 68.20.) Salvation of
every kind, and the issues from every kind of death, are of the Lord.

Thirdly, Note; God can save alone, or by his own right hand.

That the Lord would have Job understand; and this we understand from other
Scriptures ( Psalm. 17.7.) Show thy mavelous loving kindness, O thou that
savest by thy right hand those that put their trust in thee. This is one of
Gods royal Titles, Thou that savest by thy right hand (Psalm. 98.1.) O sing unto
the Lord a new song, for he has done mavelous things, his right hand and his
holy arm has gotten him the victory (Psalm. 44.4.) Thou art my King of old,
commanding deliverances for Jacob. How easily can the Lord save with his hand,
who can save with his tongue, and deliver by commanding deliverances? Nor is it
one deliverance only which the Lord commands, but many, yea, any: That Psalm
gives it plurally, commanding deliverances. The Prophet speaks of this sole and
solitary saving power of God ( Isa. 59.16.) He saw that there was no man (that
is, no man that offered any help) and wondered that there was no intercessor
(that is, no man to speak a good word for them) therefore his arm brought
salvation to him, and his righteousness it sustained him. And again ( Isa.
63.5.) I looked, and there was none to help, and I wondered that there was none
to uphold; therefore mine own arm brought salvation to me. This is it which was
said before ( verse. 3.) I have trodden the wine press alone, and of the people
there was none with me.

Hence we may infer; First, If the Lords right hand can save alone, Then there
can never be too few hands for God to save us by.

There may be sometimes too many for God to save us by, but never too few. Why?
because he can save by his own right hand. The Lord said to Gideon (Judge. 7.2.)
The people that are with thee, are too many for me to give the Midianites into
their hands (they were so many, that the sole salvation of God would not
appear) lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, mine own hand has
saved me. Though we have but little strength, yet it may be too much for Gods
purpose, we being apt to boast our selves, when we have any hands to save us,
as if our own right hand had saved us.

Secondly, If God can save by his own right hand, Then, when we see none, when
we see nothing to save us by, let us trust God alone. If God be with us, we
have strength enough, and hands enough with us. It is all one with the Lord, to
save by few or by many, yea, by few or by none at all, for his own right hand
can do it.

Thirdly, Then trust in Gods right hand alone for salvation, how many hands
soever you have at any time at work for your salvation. This is our sin, that
when we have many hands to save us, we trust in them, rather than in the right
hand of God. The Lord often and usually makes use of man's hand to save us by
(Obad. ver. ult.) And Saviors shall come upon mount Zion to judge the mount of
Esau, and the Kingdom shall be the Lords. Now, though the Lord uses other
right hands to save us by, and to judge the wicked by, besides his own, yet we
must trust in his alone; for it is he alone that saves us, by what hand soever
our salvation is wrought or brought to us.

Fourthly, Observe; To save by a self-power, is the sole prerogative of God.

Only he who stands upon his own bottom, or subsists in and of himself alone,
can save or do any thing of himself alone. And as none can do any thing alone,
or by a self-power, but God; so none should presume that they can do, or
undertake to do the least thing alone. We may, yea, we must use our hands; that
is, Divinitatis gloriam sibi arrogant, and (quasi) Deum agere volunt.
do our endeavor for the accomplishment of every work (for God does not work
so as to let man stand still and be idle) but we must not so much as have a
thought, that we can effect any thing by our hands. That wise woman Abigail
intimated to David (1 Samuel 25.31.) that, if he had gone on to avenge himself
upon Nabal with his own hand, it might have proved grief to him, and offense of
heart, that is, trouble of conscience. Now, as we must not at all use our own
hand in avenging our selves, nor think of avenging our selves by our own right
hand (for says God, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it) so it is exceeding
sinful to imagine that we can save our selves, or do any thing, effectually,
toward it by our own hand. I may say these four things, to show the sinfulness
of such an imagination.

First, It is high presumption to think so. It was the presumption of the great
Assyrian (Isa. 10.13.) to say, By the strength of my hand have I done it, and
by my wisdom, for I am prudent; and I have removed the bounds of the people (he
had no mind to remove their bonds) and have robbed their treasures, and I have
put down the inhabitants like a valiant man. So we render the similitude, Like
a valiant man, and so do most interpreters; Arnold. Bootius, Animad. sacr. in
vetus test. lib. 3. cap. 2.
both ancient and modern; yet a late learned critic dissenting from them all,
renders, I have knocked them down, or slain them, like a beast or bullock for
slaughter or sacrifice. Which exposition he confirms, as by the sense of the
word there used, so by the custom of speaking in all languages, it being usual
to compare great slaughters of men to the slaughtering of beasts; but of this
by the way. Now, whether we take our reading or this, either of them sets out
the presumptuous boasting of the Assyrian King, that the strength of his own
right hand had done all those great things.

Secondly, It Is fleshly confidence, such a confidence as God will reject ( Jer.
2.37.) to think we can do any thing by our own hand.

Thirdly, It is a slighting of, and departing from God to think so ( Jer.
17.5.) Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm
(whether his own flesh or other men's flesh, what flesh soever it is that he
makes his arm, cursed be he, and what follows) and whose heart departs from
the Lord. As if he had said, every time we think to save our selves by our own
right hand, we do cursedly depart from the Lord. The truth is, we can no more
save our selves, than we can make our selves; we can no more preserve our
being, than we can give our selves a being; it is from the Lord that we have a
being, or are preserved from a miserable being.

Fourthly, They who think they can save themselves by their own hand, put
themselves into the place of God, and take upon themselves to be God. The King
of Israel said well (2 King. 5.7.) when the King of Syria sent Naaman his
servant to heal him of his Leprosy, Am I God; to kill and to make alive, that
this man does send to me to recover a man of his Leprosy? Whosoever thinks he
can heal, or save by his own power, takes upon himself, as if he were God.
Faciunt vim suam, Deum suum.
Many make their force their God. That Heathen King ( Hab. 1.11.) ascribed his
power to his god. So we render the words; yet some expound them, as if
Nebuchadnezzar, in the pride of his heart, refusing at that time to acknowledge
any God but himself, ascribed his power to himself. But supposing according to
the supplement of our translation, and the exposition of many more, that he
ascribed his power not to himself, but to his Idol-god; how great a rebuke will
that acknowledgement of his be to any, who worshipping the true God, shall yet
ascribe their power to themselves, and so take upon themselves to be God? Jacob
said to Rachel, when she was so impatient for children, Am I in the place of
God? To give effect, is the work of God; and therefore, for us to think we can
give effect to what we do, is to take upon us to be God. The King of Tyrus is
therefore said, To set his heart as the heart of God (Ezekiel. 28.6.) because he
thought he could defend and secure himself by a self-power and strength, or by
a self-wisdom and policy. Let us renounce our own arm, and power, and strength,
and right hand, in all things; let us look upon our own right hand as weak and
withered, unable to bring any thing to pass, but as the Lord shall be pleased
to put forth his right hand to strengthen ours. And when we are thus sensible
of our own weakness, as also humbled under a sense of it, then the Lord gives
out most strength to us; yea, makes us able to do all things (which are our
duty, and we have a call to do) through Christ strengthening us (Phil. 4.13.)
And as we shall find Christ strengthening us to do, so to suffer all things when
we are weak in our selves. The Apostles experience taught him to say so (2 Cor.
12.10.) I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake; for where I am weak (that is, in
my self) there I am strong; that is, in the Lord.

Thus the Lord has been dealing with Job to humble him, by putting him upon
those things which he himself alone can do; by which he taught Job, and
teaches us and all men, that no man can save himself by his own right hand.
There is no salvation in any name, in any hand, but in Jesus Christ's; much less
spiritual or eternal salvation.

JOB, Chap. 40. Verse. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 15. Behold now
Behemoth, which I made with thee, he eats grass as an Ox.

16. Lo now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the navel of his
belly.

17. He moves his tail like a Cedar: the sinews of his stones are wrapped
together.

18. His bones are as strong pieces of brass: his bones are like bars of iron.

19. He is the chief of the ways of God: he that made him, can make his sword
to approach unto him.

20. Surely the mountains bring him forth food: where all the beasts of the
field play.

21. He lies under the shady trees, in the covert of the reeds and fens.

22. The shady trees cover him with their shadow: the willows of the brook
compass him about.

23. Behold, he drinks up a river, and hastes not: he trusts that he can
draw up Jordan into his mouth.

24. He takes it with his eyes; his nose pierces through snares.


THe Lord having spoken (in the former context) concerning proud men, whom he
alone is able to abase, to lay low, to tread down, as it is there expressed; he
presently subjoyns, not only the mention, but a very large and accurate
description of two huge vast and (as to bigness) monstrous creatures; the one
belonging to the Land, the other to the water. In the making and governing of
both which, his mighty power and wonderful providence are clearly seen, and
ought to be religiously, both acknowledged and adored, these being such as man
could not subdue, nor make any use of, unless God had ordered and overruled
them for the service and benefit of man; one of them he has subdued to the
service of man, Behemoth, and the other to the benefit of man, even the great
Leviathan.

Many of the Ancients draw this whole discourse about Behemoth and Leviathan,
into an Allegory, understanding by them, First, The devil; Secondly,
Antichrist, together with all the oppressive and afflictive powers of this
world. But though we may make some use and improvement of the Allegory, yet
doubtless these two creatures are here intended primarily in a proper and
literal sense; Nec illud nos fugit in diabolum haec dicta esse nonnullos
existimasse; ver^m primo historiae danda est opera deinde utilitati
succurrendum auditoris, nec contemnenda Anagogia. Chrysostom.
even as the Lord before in a proper and literal sense discoursed with Job
concerning the Lion, the wild Goat, the wild Ass, the Unicorn, the Horse, and
several other creatures, mentioned in the 39th Chapter of this Book. And
therefore it was well said by an ancient Writer upon this place, We are not
ignorant that many have expounded this Scripture in an allegorical way of the
devil; but we must first attend the History, and then make some use, for the
profit of the hearer, out of the Allegory.

The Lord in presenting this and that other vast creature to Job, seems thus to
bespeak him, That thou, (O Job) may know the better how to take measure of
thy self, and how to keep thy due distance in speaking to me (of which Job had
not been so observant as he should) I set before thee two stupendous
creatures, both the work of my hands, both at my disp^se and command; and by
thy inability to deal with them, thou may learn how unable thou art to strive
or contend with me. Or thus, If thou (O Job) do not yet understand what a
poor creature thou art, and how uncomely a thing it is for thee to murmur at,
and find fault about my proceedings with, and providence toward thee, in
laying those sore afflictions upon thee; or if thou do not yet understand how
uncomely thou have carried it toward me, in calling me to account for my
actions with thee, yet learn it, at least, at the sight; or upon consideration
of these beasts. Can thou match either the Elepha^t or the Leviathan? Can
thou find any error in their frame or constitution, when thou have viewed all
their parts which I will particularly set out before thee? Art thou strong as
Behemoth, and mighty as Leviathan? Can thou withstand their strength or
might? dare thou contend with them, or stand before them? If not, how dare
thou contend with me? how dare thou speak words which may bear so much as the
shadow of any contention with me, or dissatisfaction with what I have done?

Thus the Lord who had exemplified his power and wisdom to Job in diverse
creatures of a lesser size and port, now gives instance in two of the greatest,
the Elephant and Leviathan, which may well be called The chief patterns or
pieces of divine power and skill, that so, Job might be further convinced, and
more deeply humbled by these visible things, of the invisible power of God, or
might learn how mighty that God is that made them, how mighty that God is who
rules and overrules them. The one would trouble all at Land, and the other all
at Sea, if God did not bind and bridle them. This doubtless, or somewhat like
this, is the general scope of the Lords long discourse about these two famous
creatures, even to show how much man is below God, seeing he is so much (in
many things) below these beasts; or, that man who in many things is no match
for these creatures, cannot possibly be a match for God, who made them. Thus
much in general.

Verse. 15. Behold now Behemoth. We have a description of Behemoth six ways in
this context.

First, He is described by his procreating or efficient cause, God himself;
Behold now Behemoth which I made: He is my work, my workmanship.

Secondly, He is described by his conserving cause, or that which is the matter
of his nourishment and preservation, in the close of the 15th verse, He eats
grass like an Ox. And ( ver. 20.) Surely the mountains bring him forth food.

Thirdly, He is described by his mighty strength; by the strength of his loins
and belly ( ver. 16.) by the strength of his tail and genitals ( ver. 17.) and
by the strength of his bones ( ver. 18.) from all which, the Lord concludes in
the 19th verse (which are the words I shall chiefly insist upon) his excellency
above all other beasts, He is the chief of the ways of God; and yet, how great
and vast soever he is, his strength is weakness in comparison of God; for as
it is said, God is able to tame him, and subdue him; in the latter end of the
19th verse, He that made him, can make his sword to approach unto him. The
former part of this 19th verse heightens all that has been spoken before
concerning the power of Behemoth, which is the third thing whereby he is
described.

Fourthly, He is described by his harmlessness toward other beasts ( ver. 20.)
Surely the mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts of the field
play. As if God had said, this is no ravenous beast, though a great beast, for
all the beasts of the field, little or great, one and the other, play about
him, they do not run away, they are not frighted at the sight of him, as if
they saw a Lion or a Tiger.

Fifthly, He is described by the place of his repose and shelter, where he
delights to rest himself, and take his ease ( ver. 21, 22.) He lies under the
shady trees, under the covert of the reeds and fens; the shady trees cover him
with their shadow, the willows of the brook compass him about.

Sixthly, He is described by his deep and ^readless drinking, in the two last
verses of the Chapter; Behold he drinks up a River, and hastes not (for
fear) he trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth (not an ordinary
River, but Jordan) a high expression, to show the extreme thirst of this
creature (according to our reading) and how large a cask he has to hold his
liquor; He trusts that he can draw up Jordan with his mouth) he takes it
with his eyes (he thrusts his head into the water up to the eyes) and his nose
pierces through snares. By these six particulars this creature is described;
upon all which, I shall add somewhat distinctly and briefly.

Behold now Behemoth, which I have made with thee. God calls Job to a very
attentive consideration, being to enter upon a discourse about the creature.
Behold, is a usual word of attention, it also is a word which carries
admiration in it; it gives us warning, that the matter following is of no
ordinary importance; and surely, that which follows here is not. Behold now
Behemoth.

Hence note; The works of God, especially his great works, are very attentively
to be considered.

Let Us not think it a matter of indifferency, whether we consider these works
of God, yea, or no. Here is a Behold prefixed, lest we should say, what should
we stay our minds upon beasts, upon Behemoth or Leviathan, we have other more
spiritual objects to think upon? It Is true, we have; but we must take heed of
slighting these objects, especially when God does, as it were, travel by his
Spirit, to set them forth before the eye of our mind, in their utmost grandeur
and excellency. We should not pass the least work of God lightly by, much less
should we so pass by the great works of God. We should not lightly pass by the
least mercy of God, but think much of little mercies; little mercies are great
mercies to us, seeing we are less than the least of them (as Jacob spoke, Genesis
32.10.) but we must especially consider great mercies, great deliverances,
great salvations; upon them our minds must stay or make a stand, and our
meditations dwell. We are also to consider, and well to view all our sins, our
little sins, our least failings, seeing they have a greatness in them, as being
committed against the great God, and as being able to do us great hurt, and to
draw down great wrath upon us, if not repented of, and turned from; but our
great sins must much more be viewed and considered: And every godly man does
so, he holds the eye of his soul upon the ugly face of great sins, especially,
to discover the deformity and iniquity of them to the utmost, that he may be
greatly humbled for them. Now, as we should not lightly pass by our least
mercies and sins, but very deeply consider our great mercies and sins, so we
should not neglect the least creature, the least work of God (the great wisdom
and power of God are visible in the least) but we should seriously consider the
more noble creatures, and the greater works of God, whether they be works of
creation, or works of providence. I may say as Christ ( Mat. 23.23.) about
tything, mint, annise and cummin; these things ought ye to have done, and not
to leave the other undone. Christ used a piece of rheto^ick; when he said, You
should not leave them undone, his meaning was, you should do those greater
things of the Law, judgment, righteousness and faith, with greatest exactness.
So I say in this case, you are not to leave the least pieces of Gods work in
creation or providence, unviewed, unconsidered, unmeditated; but his great
works, his Behemoths, you should behold, study and admire, or behold and study
with admiration. When I consider (says David, Psalm. 8.3.) the Heavens, the
work of thy hands, the Sun and the Moon, etc. This implies, that David did
often consider the Heavens, those great pieces of Gods work, as also the great
Luminaries there placed and moving with admired swiftness and evenness
continually. Though we are chiefly to behold spiritual things, yet we must not
think our time lost in beholding natural things; though we should specially
behold Gods gracious works, the works of grace, the workmanship of God in
framing the new creature, yet we must also behold the old creation, and view
every piece of it, especially the great pieces of it. Again, though we should
behold and be looking to the Author and fi^isher of our faith; though we
should, as the Baptist called some to do in his time, and all to do in all
times ( John 1.29.) Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
world (our eyes and our hearts, the eye of our faith should be upon Christ the
Lamb of God, more, ten thousand times more, than upon Leviathan or Behemoth)
yet it is our duty to behold Behemoth and Leviathan. Jesus Christ says ( Isa.
65.1.) Behold me, behold me; It Is the word here in Job. Jesus Christ speaks
there as if he would call off our eyes and hearts from all things in the world,
to behold himself; and in comparison, so we should. He is the most amiable
sight or spectacle in the world, and therefore ought to be the desire of our
eyes: yet in their places, there are other worthy spectacles for us to behold,
especially as they hold forth, and as in them we may behold, the power, wisdom
and goodness of God. Let no man say we lose our time in a due meditation upon
any of the creatures which God has made; for he has made them, that we should
behold and meditate upon them.

Behold now Behemoth. The word Behemoth is applicable to, or may signify any
greater or great beast of the field ( Genesis 3.14.) The Lord said unto the
serpent; because thou have done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, (...)
Pecus majus.
and above every beast of the field. And again, Every beast of the forest is
mine (says the Lord, Psalm. 50.10.) and the cattle upon a thousand hills. Hence
some conceive that we are here to understand beasts in general, the word
Behemoth being in the plural number. Behold now the beasts; as if the Lord
pointed at all the beasts of the field in this Behold. And '^is a truth, we are
to consider them all; but it is very improbable that in this place God calls
Job to behold the beasts of the field in general, and not rather some one in
special: And I may give four reasons for it.

First, Because in the former Chapter God had spoken of diverse particular
beasts of the earth; and therefore doubtless here also he speaks of some
particular beast.

Secondly, That creature which is joined with Behemoth in this discourse, is by
most taken for a particular kind of fish in the Sea; and therefore it is most
congruous, that Behemoth should denote some particular kind of beast at land.

Thirdly and chiefly, The description given here of Behemoth will not fit all
sorts of beasts in the field, it will not fit a sheep, nor a bullock. What is
said of Behemoth exceeds the proportion and constitution of all such and many
other beasts.

Fourthly, Behemoth is said to feed, where all the beasts of the field do play
(ver. 20.) and therefore we cannot understand all the beasts of the field by
him; no, nor (which some of the Jewish writers insist much upon) all the
greater beasts of the field. And therefore we may conclude, that this word
Behemoth (though in it self a plural word) is here intended of a singular
beast; and, because there is no greater beast upon the earth than the Elephant,
therefore most interpreters (both ancient and modern) determine it upon the
Elephant, to whom (among all the beasts of the earth) those six particulars
(mentioned in the following description of Behemoth) are supposed most fitly to
agree.

Behemoth forma plurali nuncupatur Elephantus more Hebraeorum, qui pluralibus
nonnunquam pro superlativis uti solent. Latini quoque historici saepe cum de
Elephanto loquuntur, Belluam absolute nominant. Drus.
And whereas it is objected, the word Behemoth is of the plural number, that is
easily answered, and wiped off; for nothing is more usual in the Hebrew
language, than to express great things by a plural word; and so the Elephant
may be called the beasts, Either, First, with respect to the vastness of his
body, as if he did comprize, or were a comprehension of all other beasts. Or,
Secondly, with respect to some extraordinary qualification or eminency found in
him, in which respect, it is said at the 19th verse, He is the chief of the
ways of God. As the Hebrew sets out excellent things by words of the
superlative degree, so likewise by words of the plural number, or it uses the
plural number to signify the superlative degree. The Elephant is the Beast,
the Beast of Beasts, a beast above all beasts. Thus ( Prove. 1.20.) Christ is
called in the plural number wisdoms, because of the excellency of his wisdom.
Again ( Prove. 9.1.) Wisdom (so we translate, but the word is wisdoms) has
built her house, that is, Jesus Christ has. And he is expressed by a plural
word, to note that all sorts and degrees of wisdom meet in him; according to
that of the Apostle ( Col. 2.3.) In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. As David when he would show how very foolish and beastly he had been,
in mis-judging the dispensations of God; First, in afflicting the godly;
Secondly, in prospering evil men: When (I say) he considered, how foolishly he
had done in envying at, or in being troubled about their prosperity; he
concludes ( ver. 22.) So foolish was I and ignorant, even as a beast before
thee. The Hebrew uses the word in the Text, Behemoth, even as beasts before
thee. As if he had said, the beastliness of all beasts centred in me, and all
their ignorance, while my spirit was so troubled in this matter concerning the
providence of God, toward my self who serve him, and those who serve him not.
Thus David, that he might fully acknowledge, how very a beast he was, in so
speaking and so thinking, calls himself Behemoth, Beasts. This may suffice to
satisfy the Reader why we expound the Text of a particular beast, and why most
pitch it upon the Elephant among all beasts in special, though the word be of
the plural number. There being no proper or peculiar name in Scripture for the
Elephant, it is most probable that he is here named by this Appellative word
plural.

Yet (before I step further into that large description which the Lord gives of
Behemoth) I cannot forbear to take notice, that the same industrious and
learned Author, Bochartus part poster. lib. 5, c. 15.
who varyeth in opinion (as was there showed) about the Reem, by us rendered the
Unicorn, varyeth here as much in his Opinion about Behemoth, intimated by our
translators in the Margin, and affirmed (as himself confesses) by the most
general voice of modern interpreters, to be the Elephant.

I suppose it will not be unacceptable to the Reader, if I here offer a brief
account of those reasons which prevailed with him to turn off from the common
opinion concerning this Animal, which he gives as follows.

In the fortieth and forty-first Chapters of the book of Job (says he)
Behemoth and Leviathan are so described, that it is apparent they are beasts of
a huge bulk: Whence it comes to pass, that most of the later Writers have
thought Behemoth to be the Elephant, and Leviathan the Whale; this being
without controversy the greatest Animal that lives in the waters, and that the
greatest that lives upon the Land. To whose Judgment I should have willingly
assented, but that considering the matter more narrowly, I saw many things
spoken of them, even in approved versions, which no way agree with the nature
of the Elephant and the Whale. I shall not say that Interpreters prepossessed
with this opinion, have wrested some things another way, which if they were
rightly unfolded according to the Hebrew, it would appear as clear as the
light, that under these names Behemoth and Leviathan, two animals are
uncharacterized extremely different from the Elephant and the Whale; but which
they are, is not easy to determine. Yet it does not a little please me, that
Beza and Diodate, men of a most clear judgment, and of no ordinary learning,
do conclude Leviathan to be the Crocodile of Nilus. Whence I have a strong
conjecture, that Behemoth is an animal of the same neighborhood, even an
Inhabitant of Nilus, called Hippopotamus (or the River-horse.) I would have
none troubled with the newness of this opinion, but first weigh my reasons;
whereof let this be the first: That, as upon the former stage, in the close of
the 38th, and throughout the 39th Chapter, only terrestrial animals were
presented; so it seems most congruous, that upon this only aquatical or
water-animals should be presented, lest the course of proceeding should be
disordered. So that, Leviathan (as all agree) being a creature that lives in
the water, it is probable Behemoth does so too, both being described in the same
series of discourse. That the ancient Jews were of this opinion, may be
collected out of the second Book of Esdras, Chap. 6. verse. 47, 48, 49. where
Behemoth is placed among the aquatical Animals, created the fifth day. Further,
the Hippopotame and the Crocodile, are fitly joined together, because there is
a great likeness of nature between these two, for both are very big and fierce,
and amphibious, and four-footed, and both have one common habitation, the River
Nilus; which Pliny also takes notice of ( lib. 28. cap. 8.) and therefore most
Writers handle them together. Nor does the name Behemoth unfit the Hippopotame,
seeing the Hebrew word Behema is appliable to all four-footed beasts, to those
especially which are of greater bulk, as is the Hippopotame; of which the
Ancients speak variously, because the stature of beasts of the same kind is
also various. None make him less than Aristotle, who gives him the bigness of
an Ass. But Herodotus says, he is as big as the biggest Ox. In Diodorus he is
described no less than five cubits. Achilles Statius says, he is in appearance
and composure of his parts, like a horse, but three times as big. Moreover, the
same Author calls him, The Egyptian Elephant, because he is judged next him in
strength. Hence it is that barbarous Writers (who the Author means by them, I
do not well understand) compare the Hippopotame with, or prefer him before the
Elephant in strength and stature; of which the Author gives other proofs; and
adds, I know Mercer and others define the Hebrew word Behema, a four-foo^ed
beast of the earth, as if it were applicable to terrestrial animals only; but
the Arabians teach otherwise, that Bahima (which in their Idiom is the same
with the Hebrew Behema) signifies four-footed beasts living in the water, as
well as those that live upon the Land. Nevertheless, if it were true, that the
word Behema is applicable to terrestrial beasts only, yet the Hippopotame may
be reckoned among them, because he is an Amphibion, or an Animal that lives
partly on the Land, and partly in the water. Secondly, Because he is in shape
like those beasts which live only upon the Land. Surely there is no
water-Animal that is so like Land ones as he is. Whence it is, as I conceive,
that among all water-Animals, he alone may be called, by way of excellency,
Behema or Behemoth, which according to the Egyptian dialect, is a word of the
singular, not of the plural number; of which he gives many parallel instances
in other words of the same language.

The Learned Author having laid down these general reasons, or grounds of his
opinion, goes on with an elaborate exposition of the Text in Job, in pursuance
of, and conformity thereunto. And though I shall not depart from the common
opinion, that by Behemoth the Elephant is meant here, and afterward the Whale
by Leviathan (having indeed cast my meditations so, long before this noble work
of Bochartus came to my hand) yet I owe so much reverence and respect to the
name and labors of so worthy a person, as to give hints in passage,
concerning, at least some of those particulars in the Text, which he conceives
most fitly agreeing to the Hippopotame in the Lords description of Behemoth,
and to the Crocodile, in his description of Leviathan, leaving the Reader at
liberty to pitch his judgment, as he finds light and reason leading him.

For, though to hit the right meaning of every word in Scripture, is not only
most desirable and aimable, but that which we should make conscience of (in
which regard we are much endebted to their labors who contribute any further
help toward that attainment) yet in this matter an unwilling mistake is not
very dangerous, there being so great a likeness between some creatures, in
their nature, stature, qualities and parts, that where the Spirit of God in
Scripture intends one by such a name, another may easily be taken as intended
by it.

Further, take which you will of these Animals, whether the Elephant or
Hippopotame for Behemoth, or the Whale or Crocodile for Leviathan, there are
some things in the textual description of them by God himself, which cannot
without difficult objections be applied, either to the one or to the other. All
which arise, not from the darkness of the Scriptures, but, from the darkness of
our understanding, both as to the Scriptures themselves, and the creatures
treated of in them.

All that I shall say in this controversy about the two creatures here, and in
the next Chapter spoken of, is,

First, That the most common and received opinion, among very learned men, is,
that by Behemoth is meant the Elephant; not the Egyptian Elephant, as the
Hippopotame has been called, but the proper Elephant. As also, that by
Leviathan we are to understand the Whale, or some mighty fish of the Cetacean
breed. Now as it is never good to follow the practice or example of the rude and
ignorant multitude, so we should not easily recede from the opinion and
judgment of a grave and knowing multitude.

Secondly, I suppose it will not be denied, that the Elephant is an Animal much
more known, and of a more honorable report than the Hippopotame; and that the
Whale for greatness much exceeds, and is in that respect, at least, more famous
than the Crocodile. Therefore the Lord speaking of the chief works of his
hands, among visible irrational creatures, in this latter part of his speech to
Job, may be conceived to intend the former under both titles, rather than the
latter.

Thirdly, I must confess, I have a little prejudice against expounding Behemoth
by the Hippopotame, and Leviathan by the Crocodile, even for this reason,
because they are Amphibions; for, First, as all creatures of that sort have an
uncouthness, and a kind of monstrosity in their naturals; so they have no
commendable signification in our morals, they bearing the resemblance of
indifferent and middle men, who are (as we speak proverbially) neither flesh
nor fish, who abide neither at Land nor in the water, neither in this nor that,
but to serve their own turns and reach their own ends, can be here and there,
or any where, or any thing. Now the Lord describing here (as was said before)
such animals as are the chief of his ways and works, Amphibions (to me) seem
not so competent for, nor deserving of such high Elogiums. Secondly (with the
favor of that learned Author) it appears to me more probably, that God
intended to conclude his speech to Job about the creatures, by setting those
two before him which are most eminent, the one upon the Land, the other in the
Sea, rather than by setting two before him, either of which are challenged in
part by both. Nor is it to me very probable, that God having described several
perfect fowls of the air, and beasts of the earth, should not instance in any
one perfect fish of the Sea, which he has not done, unless Leviathan be, not
an Amphibion, but, a perfect fish. Somewhat further may be offered toward a
proof, that Leviathan is so, when I come to the 41. Chapter; I shall now
proceed with Behemoth. Behold now Behemoth, which I made with thee.

Here Behemoth is described by his Author and maker. I made him (says the
Lord) he is my workmanship; and I made him With thee.

God spoke thus, as it may be conceived,

First, To humble Job by this consideration, that the Elephant or Behemoth was
of his making as well as himself; as if, when the Lord said, I made him with
thee, his meaning were, He is thy fellow creature.

Secondly, I made him with thee; that is, though he be a great beast, the
greatest that lives and moves on the earth, yet I made him as well as I made
thee, or the least worm of the earth.

Thirdly, These woe ds, I made him with thee, may be referred to the time of
Behemoths making, I made him the same day with thee; for all the beasts of the
earth were made upon the sixth day, the same day in which man was made.

Fourthly, Which I made with thee, that is, I made him to be with thee; I did
not make Behemoth as I made Leviathan, to play in the Sea, but I made him to be
with thee on the Land, that thou should behold him, and take notice of him,
or that he should be under thy hand; yea, not only so, but (contrary to the
nature of wild beasts) to love thy company, and to desire converse with thee,
to be guided by thee, and in many things to act with a kind of reason and
understanding like thee, or as thy self and other men do.

Fifthly, Which I made with thee, that is, for thee; I made him for thy use, I
made him to serve thee, Though he be thus great and vast, yet he will be thy
humble servant. There will be occasion afterward to show further, how
serviceable and useful Elephants are to man.

Sixthly, I made him with thee, that is, I made him as nigh to thee as any of
the unreasonable creatures; yea, nigher to thee than any of the unreasonable
creatures, for I have made him excel them all as thou excellest him, he is
above other irrational creatures, as thou art above all irrationals: He (next
to Angels and men) is the chief of my ways. The word, made, may import this
also, and so it is used (1 Samuel 12.6.) The Lord advanced (the Heb^ew is, Made)
Moses and Aaron. The Lord has so made the Elephant, that he has also advanced
him above all the beasts of the field. I have set him as near the seat of
reason as might be, and not be rational.

In all these respects we may understand the Lord saying to Job, concerning
Behemoth, I made him with thee. He is thy fellow creature; and how great soever
he is, he is my creature. I made him the same day that I made thee, and I made
him to abide in the same place with thee, or where thy abode is; I made him
also for thy service, and that he might be a meet servant for thee; I have made
him almost a partaker of reason with thee, so far at least a partaker of
reason, that he will very obsequiously submit to, and follow the conduct of
thine; and though he be the strongest beast on earth, yet thou may find him
acting more according to thy reason than his own force or strength.

There is yet another interpretation of these words given by Bochartus, which
favors his opinion, that Behemoth is the Hippopotame or River Horse. Whom I
have made with thee, Tecum, vel potius juxta te.
or rather near thee, or hard by thee; that is, in thy neighborhood, in a
Country which borders upon thine. As if (says he) God had said to Job, I need
not fetch arguments from far to prove how powerful I am, seeing I have them at
hand: For among the beasts which I made in Nilus, which is near thy Country
Arabia, how admirable is the Hippopotame? And that the Hebrew word [(...)]
signifies by or near, as well as with, he gives many examples; Josh. 7.2. Judge.
9.6. Judge. 18.3. Judge. 19.11. 2 Samuel 6.7. 2 Samuel 20.8. which the Reader may
peruse and consider.

Thus the Elephant was made with man. But how lives he? how feeds he? Not like
man.

He eats grass as an Ox. From these words also the Author last mentioned
collects an argument for the strengthening of his interpretation. The Ox and
Elephant (says he) are alike laboring beasts, and therefore no wonder if they
feed alike, or live upon the same kind of food; but that the Hippopotame, which
is an aquatical Animal, and abides for the most part in the bottom of Nilus,
should eat grass like an Ox, this is strange, and matter of wonderment. Nor
is it for nothing, that he is compared to the Ox, whom he resembles not only
in his food, but in the bigness of his body, and in the shape of his head and
feet; whence the Italians call him Bomarin, that is, the Sea-Oxe.

Yet these words may very well be applied to the Elephant, It being not only
true, that his food is grass, but a merciful wonder that it is so; For ^^d
this vast creature live upon prey or the spoil of other beasts, what havoc,
yea devastation, would he make to satisfy his hunger! So that these words, He
eats grass as an Ox, may carry this sense: As if the Lord had said, Though
I have made this beast so great and strong, yet he is no dangerous, no ravenous
beast; he does not live by preying upon other beasts, by tearing and worrying
sheep and Lambs, as Lions, and Bears, and Wolves do; this great and mighty
creature eats grass l^ke an Ox. Thus God would have Job take notice what way
he has provided for the subsistence of the Elephant, He eats grass as an
Ox; yet not altogether as the Ox. His food is as the food of an Ox for the
matter, both eat grass, but he does not eat in the same manner as an Ox. Why,
how does an Ox eat? by licking up the grass with his tongue into his mouth,
as he is described ( Numb. 22.4.) but the Elephant gathers up the grass with
his trunk, and then puts it into his mouth. Naturalists give these two reasons
why the Elephant cannot eat like the Ox.

Ne ore pascatur adminuculo linguae ut boves, impedit colli brevitas and
linguae quoque quae illi animali perexigua est, and interius posita, ita ut eam
vix videre possis. Decerptam proboscideherbam, dentibus quos utrinque quatuor
habet commolit. Arist. l. 2. de Hist^r. Animal. c. 5, 6. (...) a (...). Pasco.
First, Because of the shortness of his Neck.

Secondly, The littleness of his Tongue, which lies so far within his Mouth,
that it cannot easily be seen; and therefore he crops the grass with his
trunk, and putting it into his mouth, grindes it with his teeth.

He eats grass like an Ox. He is like the Ox, as to what he feeds upon,
not as to the way of his feeding. So then, though the Elephant be so bulky and
big-bodied, yet, by the Lords Ordina^ion, he is as harmless as a laboring
Ox, he will not hurt any beast of the field. This phrase, Eating like an Ox,
is used to set forth the peaceablenesse of his Nature. Thus those blessed times
are described, when the power of the Gospel shall overcome the wrath and enmity
which is in the Serpents seed against the seed of the Woman ( Isa. 11.7.) The
Cow and the Bear shall feed their young ones, and the Lion shall eat straw like
the Ox. Lions will be quiet; that is, the spirits of those men, who have been
like Lions and Bears, even they shall eat straw like the Ox, they shall not
hurt the Lambs and Sheep of Christ's flock and fold. Quoties de feris bestiis
dicitur quod faenum comesturae sint sicut bos, metaphorice innuitur eos
mansuefieri and cicurari.
The same Prophet shadows the peaceablenesse of those Gospel times under a like
Allegory ( Chap. 65.25.) where having showed ( Verse 24.) the goodness and
tenderness of God in hearing the prayers of his people, It shall come to pass
that before they call, I will answer, and while ^hey are yet praying, I will
hear; he presently shows how good and kind God (who has the spirits and
passions of all men in his hand) will make the most ruffe-spirited and
passionate men, to his people. The wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and
the Lion shall eat straw like the Bull^ck: That is, they who were sometimes as
fierce as evening Wolves, shall quietly and sweetly converse with the Lambs of
Christ, etc.

Thus here the Lord speaks of the Elephant eating grass like an Ox, to show,
that though he be exceeding strong, yet he is of an exceeding quiet and
harmless disposition. Non aliter quam perparvuli catelli ex hominis manu gaudet
cibum sumere Aelian. cap. 9. and 30.
And Naturalists tell us, he is so gentle and harmless, that he will take meat
out of a man's hand, like a Dog or Spaniel.

Thirdly, The Elephant is described by his strength.

Verse 16. Lo, Now (or Behold, it is the same word.) As in the former Verse God
awakened the attention of Job, to consider this Beast in general, with a
Behold, so here coming to particulars, he reassumeth the same note of
admiration and serious meditation, Lo now, or Behold, His strength is in his
loins.

He has strength proportionable to his greatness. And as Sampsons strength was
symbolically in his locks, so the Elephants strength is naturally in his loins;
there is the seat of strength in most creatures. His strength is in his loins;
that is, he has very strong loins, and is therefore very strong: the loins
being, as was said, the natural seat of strength. To gird up the loins to do a
thing, is to do it strongly. A weak man, a man of little strength, is said to
have no loins, Elumbus sive elumbis, quasi sine lumbis, i. e. viribus. Drus.
or to be (if I may so speak) a loinlesse man. And hence the failing or shaking
of the loins, notes the failing of strength, and want of spirits, to atchieve
any great thing. David speaking of the woeful condition of the rejected Jews,
and the curse of God upon them, gives it thus ( Psalm. 69.23.) Let their eyes be
darkened, that they see not, and make their loins continually to shake; that
is, let them always be in a weak and low condition, let them not gather
strength nor courage: The effect of which curse is evident upon that people at
this day, their loins shake, they gather no considerable strength, they do no
considerable thing, nor shall, till they return to the Lord. It is said of the
virtuous woman ( Prove. 31.17.) She girdeth her loins with strength, that is,
she is ready and able for any work or action within her sphere, or becoming her
sex. Non recte nostri quod de lumbis dicitur adlibidinema, commodant, cum
Eliphas tradatur esse animal maxim pudicum. Merc.
And when the Lord called the Prophet to lay to heart the grievous evils of
those times, he says ( Ezekiel. 21.6.) Sigh to the breaking of thy loins; that
is, sigh, mourn, and lament, till thou have sighed away all thy strength, till
thou art become feeble with mourning, lamenting, and sighing. The Elephant is
mighty and strong, His strength is in his loins.

And his force in the Navel of his Belly. As much as to say he is strong
everywhere; he is strong in back, and strong in belly. The Navel is the
strength of the lower parts of the body, as the loin of the upper. The Navel is
as the center of the body, there is a colligation or knitting of several veins
and arteries, which pass from thence into several parts of the body, as
Anatomists observe. There is so much force in the Navel, that it may well be
called the second seat of strength. When the Lord would encourage us to fear
him, and depart from evil, he makes this a motive ( Prove. 3.8.) It shall be
health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones; that is, thou shall have much
health and strength, much comfort and sweetness in thy life.

His force is in the Navel of his Belly. His strength is not in his horns to do
hurt, as the Bulls and Unicorns; nor in his claws, to tear, as the Lions and
Bears; but in his Loins and Navel. As if the Lord had said, I have placed the
strength of Behemoth, where it may be most useful or serviceable, and least
hurtful: I have endowed and furnished him with wonderful strength; but how, and
where? Not in any offensive part, his head has no horns, his feet no claws, to
do mischief with; but to the end he might be more serviceable to man in bearing
burdens, I have placed it chiefly in his Loins and Belly.

Yet says the learned Bochartus, This latter part of the verse does not agree
with the Elephant, seeing both Pliny and Solinus teach us, that the Elephant
has indeed a very hard skin upon his back, but a soft one under his belly;
whence it is (says he) that the Rhinoceros fighting with the Elephant, aims
chiefly at his belly, which he knows is his tenderest part. He gives many other
proofs of this, as also that the Hippopotame has a skin so extremely thick and
hard, that it is even impenitrable.

To this I may answer, That though it be granted that the Hippop tame has a
very hard skin all over his body, and not at all denied that the skin of the
Elephant is softer by much under his belly, than upon his back; yet it cannot
(in my understanding) be hence concluded that he has not a great force in the
Navel of his Belly. For though he has not a hardness there to resist the
point either of a natural or artificial weapon, yet he may have a force there
enabling him to do mighty things. It Is rather from the compactness, or well
knitting of the Navel, that he or any other like creature has his force, than
from the hardness of it; nor does the Hebrew word [(...)] here rendered force,
signify any force depending upon the hardness of any part; but that force
which arises from the good constitution of the body ( Genesis 49.3.) or from the
plentifulnesse of a man's outward estate or substance ( Job 18.7. Hos. 12.8.)

What the Elephants strength and force is, appears yet further in that which
follows.

Verse 17. He moves his tail like a Cedar. Some take the tail properly.
Secondly, E^si caudam habeat quae magnitudine cedrum aequare videatur, tamen
eam f^cile movet. Insignis hyperbole. Merc. Sunt qui caudam hic putant
appellari promuscidem Elephantis; plane aliene. Merc. Rigor caudae, i. e.
Genitalium. (...) De libidine accipio; libidinatur caudam instar cedri, i. e.
libidin^ndo facit instar cedri. Coc. Penem (...). Jun. Membrum Genitale. Pisc.
Scult.
Others say it cannot be so understood; for though the Elephant be a vast
creature in all other parts, yet his tail is but small, and smaller than seems
to answer the vast proportion of so great a beast, and therefore cannot
resemble a Cedar.

Secondly, Others expound the Original word, of his snout or trunk, which is of
great force and strength; and they conceive it may well be understood of his
trunk or snout, both because that is great and long like a Cedar; as also,
because the trunk being so principal a part of this beast, it is not probable
the mention of it should be wholly omitted in this description, and so small
and inconsiderable a one as the tail taken notice of. Thus Mr. Beza renders, He
moves his prominent part or trunk, which is as the Cedar. And the latter part
of the verse he renders to the same sense, The sinews of the terriblenesse
thereof, are wrapped together; that is, though his trunk be very great, yet he
easily turns it as he lists, or at pleasure, it being wholly compact of
sinews strongly twisted together; and is of such force, that it may well amaze
and terrify a man of greatest courage. The word which we translate stones,
properly signifies fears, and is so rendered in all other places of Scripture
where it is used; and hence that reading of Mr. Beza, The sinews of the
terriblenesse thereof. This opinion is altogether disliked by Mercer. I leave
it to the Readers judgment.

Thirdly, Many expound it of his genitals, and connect the sense with that
which follows; The sinews of his stones are wrapped together.

Or (as Mr. Broughton) platted in and out as branches. As if it had been said,
Nervi quos medici cremasteras vocant a testibus ad penem deducentes ramis
arborum conseruntur.
in the heat of his lust he erecteth or moves his generative part like a
strong Cedar-tree, being corroborated from natures conduit pipes, the sinews of
his stones, which are complicated or wrapped together; like the roots of a great
grown tree in the earth, or like its branches in the air.

Verse. 18. His bones are as strong pieces of brass. Bones are the strength and
stability of the body, and they keep the body strait. Bones are to the body as
posts to a house, the stays and supporters of it. Bones also are as an armor
or corselet on the body, to defend and preserve the more noble parts, the heart
liver and lungs, from danger and annoyance; and therefore it was necessary the
Lord should speak of Behemoths bones, when he spoke of his strength. His bones
Are as strong pieces of brass.

As bars of steel, says Mr. Broughton, or as conduit pipes of brass; so the
words may be read, and then they refer to those bones that are hollow. Some
conceive, his bones are said to be as strong pieces of brass, because the
Elephant cannot bow (that is an old opinion) as if he were all bone, and had no
joints; which opinion is at large confuted by a learned Physician, Dr. Brown of
vulgar errors lib. 3. c. 1.
in his book of vulgar Errors, who proves, and experience teaches, that the
Elephant has Joints with his bones, as other living creatures have, though not
so apparent. His bones being great and strong, he must needs be very strong. It
is said ( Genesis 49.14.) Issachar is a strong ass: Asinus Osseus, i. e. robustus.
The Hebrew is, Issachar is a bony ass; which we well render a strong ass,
able to bear great burdens, strength lying so much in the bones. And to show
that the bones of the Elephant are more than ordinarily strong, they are
compared to brass. Job says, in his complaint at the sixth Chapter, Is my
flesh brass? Am I strong like brass? The bones of the Eleare so, and not only
so, but His bones are like bars of iron.

The word here rendered bones, is not the same as in the former part of the
verse. Mr. Broughton translates by a general word, his hard parts are like
staves of iron. But we may well keep to the word bones, yet understand them of
a different sort of bones; as in the former part, hollow bones, so in this
latter, solid bones; or in that, lesser, in this, greater bones; or in that,
upper bones, which are as rafters, in his lower bones, those in the thighs and
legs, which are as posts.

His bones are like bars of iron. Iron is the strongest of all metals, as we
read in the vision of the four Monarchies ( Dan. 2.1.) The image had a head of
gold (signifying the Babylonian Monarchy) breasts of silver (signifying the
Persian) belly of brass, signifying the Grecian, but it had legs of iron,
signifying the Roman Monarchy; of which it is said in the 40th verse, The
fourth Kingdom shall be strong as iron, forasmuch as iron breaks in pieces
and subdueth all things. So then, when the Lord says, His bones are like bars
of iron, this imports that the bones of Behemoth are exceeding strong, as
strong as if made of iron. We call a very strong man, iron-sides. The Elephant
has iron-sides, His bones are as bars of iron. Bochartus denies not, that the
bones of the Elephant are very hard and strong, yet affirms from some
Authorities, that the bones of the Hippopotame are harder. If it be so, yet the
Elephants bones are hard and strong enough to answer the comparisons in this
part of the description of Behemoth. Now hear the Epiphonema, the triumphant
conclusion which the Spirit makes of all this.

Verse. 19. He is the chief of the ways of God. The word is, He is the head of
the ways of God: Or, he is the beginning of the ways of God, as the word is
used ( Genesis 1.1.) In the beginning God created the Heavens and the earth. There
is a twofold beginning or head (as we may say) First, there is a beginning as
to time; so the word is taken in Genesis: There in the beginning, is, in the
first of time, God created the Heavens and the earth, so Genesis 10.10. The
beginning of his Kingdom was Babel, or, there he began his Kingdom, the
beginning in time, as well as place, was there. Secondly, There is a beginning
which notes priority in dignity, though not in time; beginning imports
excellency, and is as much as chief. It Is usual in several languages, to call
that which is chief, the first or head of any thing ( Exodus 30.23.) It shall be
of pure myrrh (the Hebrew is) head of myrrh, that is, chief or prime myrrh,
purest myrrh. Thus said David, (Psalm. 119.160.) Thy word is true from the
beginning. The Hebrew strictly taken, is, The beginning or head of thy word is
true, or truth. As if David had said, That which is most eminent and chief in
the word of God, is the truth of it; that which rules and reigns, and holds (as
it were) the headship in and throughout the word of God, is the truth of it, or
Gods trueness and faithfulness in making it good: and therefore the first thing
which faith does, is to set to its seal that God is true; true of his word, or
that his word is true ( John 3.33.) The Greeks call honey the first of
sweetnesses, because it is the sweetest of all natural things. Mel dicitur
(...), quod dulcedine praestat rebus omnibus.
Now here, when the Text says, he is the chief, or beginning of the ways of
God, we are not to take it of a beginning in time, several creatures were
seniors to Behemoth, being made before him, but in excellency, which we render
clearly, He is the chief of the ways of God.

But you will say, how is the Elephant the chief of the ways of God. Are not
Angels and men (at least) above him?

I answer, There is a twofold chief; First, Absolute; Secondly, in its kind.
Behemoth is the chief of the ways of God, not absolutely, not as if God had
made nothing more excellent than the Elephant, but in his kind, that is, among
the beasts of the earth he is the chief, and as we say, bears away the bell
from all the rest. Behemoth is not only of the first three, but (like Adino the
Tachmonite among David's worthies) he is the first of the first three, among all
the irrational creatures which move upon the face of the earth. And though in
some one thing many excel him, yet taking him altogether, he excels them all,
He is the chief of the ways of God, that is, of the works of God.

The works of God are called his ways, because he appears and stands forth in
his works, as man does in his way. God did not appear at all til he did create,
and then he appeared gloriously in all his divine perfections of power, wisdom
and goodness. And as he appeared in the works of creation, so he daily
appears in his works of providence as in his way, for in them also it is seen
how powerful, how wise, how good he is. Behemoth, both as to creation and
providence, is the chief of the ways or works of God in his kind: Angels and
Men are indeed above him, but as for other creatures, Behemoth is the chief.
Thus the Lord having spoken of many particular excellencies in this creature,
recapitulates or sums up all that he had said (like an eloquent Orator,) in
these crowning words, He is the chief of the ways of God.

Hence note, First; There is a difference as to excellency, or there are
degrees of excellency in the works of God.

God has bestowed more upon some creatures, than he has upon others. God
bestowed most upon man in the first creation; for how excellent soever he made
any visible creature, yet it is said of no creature he made him in his image,
after his likeness, till he came to man: and the new creature which comes in by
redemption, is far more excellent than man in his first creation. Now, I say,
as man is far more excellent than all earthly creatures, he is next to Angels;
man is placed in the uppermost form of the visible world. So among the
creatures, there are some that very much excel others; here is one called the
chief of the ways of God himself. This is not an Orators flattery: the Spirit
of God gives Behemoth this encomium, this commendation, he has precedence by a
divine right. All creatures are not alike, they cannot all be chief, and there
are none like this, he is the chief of all. Among the inanimate creatures there
is a gradual difference (1 Cor. 15.40.) There are celestial bodies, and bodies
terrestial; but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the
terrestial is another: and all celestial bodies are not alike, for, There is
one glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, and another of the Stars, and
one Star differs from another in glory. There are also various excellencies,
both as to kind and degree, among vegetatives or plants. What is a Nettle in
the Ditch, to Hysope in the Garden? and what is the Thistle in Lebanon, to the
Cedar in Lebanon? that is one of the lowest and most ignoble plants, this one of
the highest and most honorable. Consider animals. What variety among the fish
of the sea! what is a Sprat to a Whale? What variety among the fowls of the
air! what is a Sparrow to the Eagle? What variety among the beasts of the
earth! what is a Bullock to an Elephant, or an Ass to a Lion? Consider
^ationals. Men are not all alike: some men do almost as much excel other men,
as all men excel beasts; yea, there is a difference in the same man, his soul
is more excellent than his body; some parts of the body are more excellent than
others, some powers and faculties of the soul are more excellent than the rest.
The Apostle (1 Cor. 12.28, 29.) speaking of the Church, shows how God has put
the guides of it into several ranks: He has set some in the Church; First,
Apostles; Secondly, Prophets; Thirdly, Teachers; after that miracles, then
gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. Are all Apostles?
are all Prophets? are all Teachers? do all speak with tongues? are all workers
of miracles? are all chief? are all in the first rank? no, some are in one
condition, some in another. And thus it is in the world, God has set some
Kings, all others Subjects; and among them, some are Lords, some Judges and
Magistrates, etc. Are all Kings? are all Lords? are all Judges and Magistrates?
surely not. To have all men of one order, would put all men, and all things
too, out of order. There is a chief among beasts; And those men are worse than
beasts, who acknowledge not a chief among men. God is not the author of
confusion, as in all the Churches of the Saints (says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
14.33.) so, I may say, in all the Kingdoms of the world.

And if so, I would only infer, then let none be troubled that they are not
chief, no, nor that they are not of equal rank with other men; let us be
content with our station, though it be a low one. It Is best for us to be where
God has placed us, and to be thankful for what God has given us, though in
gifts and parts we are much inferior to many. God does not bestow a like
measure of gifts, no, nor of grace upon all. And though it may be a favor and
a mercy to have outward preheminency above others, yet to love or affect
preheminency, as the Apostle John taxed Diotrophes, is very sinful. The Apostle
would have us covet earnestly the best gifts (1. Cor. 12.31.) and he there
minds us of a better thing to be coveted than the best gifts, that is, grace,
Faith, hope, charity; to covet these is a blessed covetousness: Yet neither are
these to be coveted merely for self ends, but as by them we may be fitted and
furnished to do good, to honor God, and serve our generation according to his
will. To affect chiefdome in any thing but in grace and goodness is not good;
and our affecting of them must be without affectation, though it ought to be
with strength of affection. And if we are chief, or have the pre-eminence above
others in the things of this world, it will be well with us (as to that matter)
if we are, where the hand of God, not any ambitious desires or practices of our
own, has set us. It was the Lord who made and called Behemoth, The chief of
his ways.

Bochartus conceives this high commendation well becoming the Hippopotame. For
though (says he) he be a pernicious animal, yet there are many things in him,
which may move admiration; the vast bulk of his body, his huge strength, his
impenetrable hide, the stupendous wideness of hi^ mouth, his prodigious
voracity, the whiteness and hardness of his teeth, his living in common in the
sea, land, and river, and together with so great a hardness of his skin, a
sagacious ingenie, exceeding all irrational animals, as he is reported by
Ammianus in his 22d book, of which he there gives two proofs, not omitted by
Pliny and Solinus.

Yet if what is written of the Elephant may obtain credit, I much believe that
he bears away the bell from the Hippopotame for natural sagacity and ingenuity,
as also for quantity, and largeness of his limbs, and so of his whole body. And
there are many things wherein the Elephant is reported to excel all other
beasts: Alii ad duodecimum, alii ad decimum tertium dodrantem
ex^elsitateprocedunt, alii ad decimum quartum. Aelian. l. 1 c. 2 A Dodrans is
nine inches; which being reduced to our measure, 14. of them make 10. foot and
a half. Plinius l. 8. c. 10. Coesar Scal. Exercit. 204.
I shall give instance in Twelve, and leave the matter of difference between
him and the Hippopotame, which shall carry the day for chief of the ways of God
(which God himself affirms of Behemoth) to the Readers vote.

First, He is said to excel all beasts in the bulk of his body, or in bigness.
He has huge limbs, huge bones, and a height commensurable. Natural Historians
give us these dimensions and proportions of him. His height (I mean, if fully
grown) is reckoned (according to our measure) ten foot and a half. Others
report, that in India there are Elephants of thirteen foot and a half in
height: and what the bulk of his whole body is, we may collect by his teeth.
The Elephant has two teeth growing upward out of his lower mandible or jaw, of
a vast bigness, and eight foot in length. Coesar Scaliger says (from the
report of some Indian Historians) that two of those teeth have weighed three
hundred twenty and five pounds. So big they are, that the Indians use them for
posts to their houses. The Scripture tells us, that Solomon's throne was made of
Elephants teeth or Ivory, as we translate (1 Kings 10.18, 22.) And if any
desire further information concerning the greatness of his body, and his
admirable qualities, let him read Pliny, in his eighth Book, the twelve first
Chapters.

Aedificia evertunt magnos dentes admovendo. Arist. de Hist. Animal. l. 9.
The second thing, wherein the Elephant seems chief, and to excel all the beasts
of the earth, is his strength; which is so great, that with his trunck he will
overthrow a great tree or a house. Elephants have such strength of body, that
in war they carry upon their backs great towers made of timber. We read (1
Match. 6.37.) that Antiochus had thirty Elephants in one battle which bare
towers, in every one of which were thirty and two fighting men with their
weapons. What a vast strength has this creature, which can bear a tower with
thirty and two men, and their instruments of war: And from this we may gather,
nor only the mighty strength of his back or loins, but also of his belly or
navel (mentioned ver. 16.) for those huge towers upon his back, must of
necessity be fastened by huge bands under his belly.

Maximum inter animalia est Elephas, and proximum humanis sensibus. Plin. l. 8.
c. 1. Ad rationale animal proxima accedit. Strabo. Juxta sensum humanum
intellectum habet. Solinus. Elephanto belluarum nulla prudentior. Cic. de Not.
Deorum.
Thirdly, The Elephant may be called chief of the ways of God among beasts, as
to his understanding. He has a kind of natural rationality, and is therefore
said to be next man, or to come nearest man of any creature. There is no beast
more prudent than the Elephant, said the Roman Orator.

Fourthly, The Elephant excels all beasts in the strength of his memory; and he
is memoriz'd for his memory of three things especially. First, For his memory
of commands and instructions given him. Secondly, Of courtesies done him.
Thirdly, Of unkindnesses and injuries offered him.

Fifthly, He is the chief of the ways of God, in that which must needs follow
the former two, his understanding (such as it is) and memory, that is, his
teachableness, or aptness to learn what is taught him. Though he be a wild
beast, yet he is easily tamed or brought to hand; and when he is tamed, he is
as easily taught. The highest excellency of man, is when (as the Apostle speaks
of a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.) he is apt to teach; and the next excellency of man is,
when he is apt to be taught. It is the misery of many, that they have none to
teach them; and it is the wickedness of not a few, that they will not be
taught, nor receive instruction. The Elephant is in nothing more eminent, than
in his aptness to be taught, Regem adorant, genua submittunt, coronas
porrigunt. Plin l. 8. c 1. Funambulos se vidisse, and qui Graecas literas
pedibus exararent; testatur Plin. l. 8. Elephanto admorum facilitatem erudito
nihil mitius, nihil ad id quod volumus obtemperatius. Aelian. lib. 4. Arist. l.
9. c. 46. Vbi semel hominis imperio subjectus est, omnia ei obsequia praebet,
et ab eo capit morum similitudinem, gaudetque non minus quam parvi canes ex
manu ejus cibum capere, venientem sua promuscide comple^titur, quinctiamcapus
intra suas fauces immittero hominem patitur. Philostr. l. 2. c. 5. Plin. l. 8.
c. 7. Plin. l. 8. c. 5.
or in his readiness to receive the impression of any thing spoken to him, and
fitting for him to learn or do. The Elephant is an apt scholar, he soon grows
perfect in any piece of art or activity taught him. Some tell us, Elephants
have learnt the art of dancing, and that they have learnt to draw the letters
of the Greek Alphabet with their feet, and that they learn to make legs (as we
say) or do obeisance to Kings, and to present them with crowns.

Sixthly, Besides their teachableness, their tractableness and gentleness is
wonderful. Some are apt to learn, yet will not be governed, will not be brought
to good manners. Elephants are highly commended, not only because they are apt
to be taught, but ready to be commanded. Whatever you bid them they presently
obey. There Is no creature so quiet, so meek, so submitting as the Elephant; he
hurts none, unless provoked, and will gently help the weak. They who write the
nature of the Elephant assure us, that when once he is broken or tamed by man,
he is ever after obedient to him, and gives him all manner of observance; that
he even forms himself to the disposition of his Master or Owner, will take meat
out of his hand like a little dog, that he will (as it were) hugg and embrace
his Master when he comes near, and will suffer him (without hurt) to put his
head within his mouth.

Seventhly, He exceeds other beasts in usefulness. He is not tractable only for
a show or for sport, but he is for real service. In times of peace he will do
all manner of work, till the ground, carry burdens, and he is of great use and
service in time of war.

Eighthly, This is admirable in the Elephant, that being so vast a creature, he
has such agility of body, as was touched before; he will express those
gestures and motions, which require greatest activity.

Ninthly, The Elephant is highly commended for his modesty and chastity.

Tenthly, For his faithfulness in any thing that he is charged with or ordered
to do. The faithfulness of the Elephant exceeds belief. There are not only
marveils, but miracles reported by Historians worthy of credit, concerning
their fidelity to their masters or owners, and their kindness and gratitude to
those who have showed them kindness.

Eleventhly, The Elephant is famous for compassionateness to any that are in
distress; what use they can be of, they will be to such. Quintus Curtius
reports, how the Elephant of Porus, an Indian King, when the King being wounded
fell down, took him up tenderly with his trunck, and set him again upon his
back.

Twelfthy and lastly, Elephants excel in longevity or length of life.
Diutissime vivit. Arist. l. 4. c. 10. de Hist. Animal. Strabo. l. 15.
They live not only long, but very long; the God of Nature having given them an
excellent constitution or temperament of body. Good Authors tell us, they live
commonly two hundred years, some three hundred years; and it is reported some
have lived five hundred years.

In all these respects, we may conclude Behemoth, the chief of the ways of God.
In many things he comes near to man, and in others he much exceeds him. From
all that has been said of this mighty beast, take these inferences.

First, See the goodness of God unto man, who has made this vast strong
creature man's servant, and so ready to obey man's command, to bear man's burdens,
and to till the earth for man, which it is said ( Chap. 39.9.) the Unicorn will
never do. Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee? Can thou bind the
Unicorn in the furrows? will he harrow the valleys after thee? But the Elephant
will do these services, he is willing to serve man in peace, and to assist him
in his wars. Though man be of little stature and strength compared to an
Elephant, yet God has subdued the Elephant to the will, and under the power of
man. Is not this a great argument of Gods great goodness to man? And is it not
a strong obligation upon man to be obedient and serviceable to God, who has
made such a creature serviceable and obedient to him?

Secondly, This shows us, as the goodness of God to man, so the overruling
power of God; who can make the greatest strength of his creatures, which left
to themselves might do abundance of mischief and be hurtful, yet useful and
helpful to us. What a world of harm might the Elephant do, yet (as was said) he
never hurts any, unless provoked. Let us adore the power of God, who overrules
the mighty streng^h of this creature, causing him to lay it out in a way of
helpfulness and advantage to mankind. As we should take notice of the goodness
of God, when he overrules men who have power to hurt, from doing hurt, as he
did Laban, who told Jacob (Genesis 31.29.) It is in the power of my hand to do you
hurt, but the God of your Father spoke to me yesternight, etc. Many may have
power in their hands to crush us in a moment, yet God stops them from such a
use of their power: this is a great argument of the goodness of God. Some men
would be like Lions or Bears, if God did not check them, as David was confident
he would ( Psalm. 76.10.) The wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder of
wrath thou will restrain. Many have great power, and great wrath with it, and
what would they not do in their powerful wrath, if God did not restrain all the
overplus and remainder of it, which serves not to advance his praise. Some
have much wrath, but no power; these would do hurt if they could, but they
cannot do much hurt. Others have much power, but no wrath; these will do no
hurt, yet they could. A third sort have both, they are full of power, and full
of wrath; these both can and would do much hurt, did not God bind or bound
them, stop them or restrain them. Now, I say, as we should reverence that
powerful goodness of God, which meekens mighty beasts, and keeps them from
doing hurt, so we should reverence and adore, that power and goodness, or good
power of God, which bridles evil men from doing hurt with their power.

Thirdly, We may infer this by way of instruction from the premises.

Men, who as to the matter and original of their bodies, are but like to
beasts, are also exceeded by beasts in many bodily powers and abilities. What
is the strength of a man to the strength of an Elephant? and what is man's age,
or the length of his life to an Elephants? And whereas men have five bodily
senses, there are creatures that exceed them in all. One creature has a
quicker ear, Nos aper auditu, nos vincit aranea tactu, Vultur odoratu, linx
visu, simia gustu.
another a more curious feeling, a third has a more piercing eye, a fourth
excels in smelling, and a fifth in tasting. Man is excelled in his natural
powers, even by meanest animals: This should humble us; And if it should humble
us, that we are exceeded by them, as to sensitive or bodily powers, how should
it shame us to be exceeded by them, as to inward indowments, as to
understanding and virtue, as to our morality and good behavior. Be not (^aith
David, Psalm. 32.9.) as the horse and mule which have no understanding. Yet
(Psalm. 49.20.) man that is in honor and understands not, is like the beasts
that perish. How sad is it to see men who have understanding, yea, who are (as
to worldly concerns) men of great understanding, like horses and mules, who
have no understanding! They who have not a right understanding, an
understanding to know and do the will of God ( a good understanding have all
they (and none but they) that do his commandments, Psalm. 111.10.) are (in
Scripture sense) men of no understanding. What a reproach is it to any man,
what a blot in the Eschucheon of a man in honor, that it should be said of
him, and he not able with truth to gainsay it, that he has not so much
understanding as an Elephant! that he is not so docile and teachable as an
Elephant! that he is not so gentle and tractable as an Elephant! What, not so
obedient to due commands, not so submissive as an Elephant! what, not so
serviceable and useful as an Elephant! what, not so modest and chaste as an
Elephant! what, not so compassionate, not so faithful as an Elephant! O how
should it shame us! The Scripture often shames us with our coming behind beasts
( Isa. 1.3.) The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib; but Israel
does not know, my people do not consider: They have not so much knowledge nor
consideration as the Ox and the Ass. So again ( Jerem. 8.7.) The Stork in the
heavens knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the
swallow observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment
of their God. Nor was this a reproof to the profane world, but to the
professing people of God, the Jews, that they were not so knowing, nor skilled
in the judgments of God, that is, to know and do what the judgments of God
called them to do, and be, as the Crane and Swallow were observant of, and knew
what to do, and where to be, in all changes of times and seasons. And thus the
slothful man is reproved ( Prove. 6.6.) Go to the Ant thou sluggard, consider
her ways and be wise; thou have not so much wit as an Ant. This were a shameful
rebuke upon Heathens: let it not fall upon any who profess themselves
Christians.

Fourthly, If beasts exceed man in some things, then how much does God exceed
man in all things. The reason why God presented this Behemoth to Job, was to
let him see how much himself exceeds man, seeing Behemoth is not so much to
him, as the least fly to man. All creatures put together are but as the dust of
the balance, and as the drop of the bucket to God. Thus we should raise our
selves, and wind up our hearts into a consideration of the greatness and
Almightiness of God, when we behold great and mighty creatures. The greatness
of the creatures should be as a ladder to lift us up to God, and thereby to
take measure (as we are able, or as well as we can, for indeed we cannot) of
his immensurable greatness; that is the right use of their greatness. And if by
the sight and consideration of these creatures, we do not fall down and humble
our selves, if we lie not at the foot of God, who is infinitely above these
creatures, and our selves too, we neglect the scope of this Scripture, and of
all Scriptures of like import. God is known (via eminentiae) by way of
eminency, in every creature, mostly in the most eminent creatures, such as
this, whose description has been thus far opened.

Now having had this high encomium of Behemoth from the Lords own mouth, he is
the chief of the ways of God; what follows, even this, that how great soever
this creature is, God knows how to deal with him; and God would have Job
understand that also, that how great soever he had made him, he was able to
match him, yea, to over-match him. Behemoth is no match for God; For as it
follows in the close of this 19th verse, He that made him, can make his Sword
to approach unto him.

He that made him.



These words are a periphrasis, or a circumlocution of God. The Text does not
say, God can make his Sword to approach unto him; but He that made him can, etc.

Hence Note; God must and will, and he loves to be owned as a Maker.

God has often revealed himself under this Title, The Maker of heaven and of
earth, and of all things both in heaven and in earth. God is the Maker of all
in a threefold sense, and he loves to be acknowledged as such in them all.
First, he is the Maker of all things and persons in their natural being.
Secondly, he is the Maker of all persons in their civil being: He makes the
rich, and he makes the poor; he makes the high, and he makes the low, that is,
he makes one man rich and another poor, one high and another low in this world.
Thirdly, he is the Maker of all persons in their spiritual or holy being; he
makes a man good, who was bad; he makes him humble, who was proud; he makes him
heavenly, that was earthly; he makes him spiritual, who was carnal, and not
only fleshly, but in the flesh (Romans 8.8.) The making of the new-man, is that
for which the Lord is specially to be owned and honored. We are to honor God
as he is the Maker of all creatures; but we are especially to honor him as he
is the Maker of the New Creature. To be the Maker of the creatures, great or
small, is the sole privilege of God. And let us remember, that as God himself
has made all things, so he has made all things for himself, that is, All
beings ought to live unto him, and act for him, who is the first being; to him
who has given us life and breath and all things, and in whom we live, and
move, and have our being, unto him we should dedicate our life and breath and
all things. And did we truly know (which every one presumes he knows) God to
be our Maker, or as our Maker, it would have a mighty influence upon our hearts
and lives, and even make us live to God. What should not we do for him that
made us? and what cannot he do with us that made us? as the Text here speaks of
the great Behemoth, He that made him Can make his Sword approach unto him.

There are two readings of these words.

First, thus, He that made him, made his Sword to be near him; That is, as God
made Behemoth, so God made a Sword for him, that is (according to this reading)
for his use, or for him to use. God has made him a weapon: But what is the
Sword which God has made him? They who insist upon this reading, taking also
Behemoth to be the Elephant, say, it is that natural member commonly called his
Trunk; that is to the Elephant as a Sword, both to defend himself, and to
offend and wound those that molest him. Thus Mr. Beza glosseth it; God who made
him, has furnished him with convenient weapons, or with a weapon fit for his
turn. And the same says another learned interpreter, Armavit illum Deus manu,
seu proboscide, quasi gladio validi simo. Jun. Pisc.
following this Translation, God has armed him with a Trunk, as with a strong
and a mighty sword. There is a truth in this Translation and interpretation,
and it has the suffrage of many worthy men for it, as the principal, if not
the sole meaning of these words. God who made Behemoth, has also made him a
Sword to defend himself with, that his vast body should not be liable to every
danger and affront. Take one Note from this reading.

As God has given the Creatures a being, so means to protect and preserve
themselves in their Being. He that made him has given him a Sword, he has not
left him naked or unarmed. Many creatures, I mean of the irrational creatures,
have natural weapons, horns, hoofs, teeth, and claws, to defend themselves
with, and offend those with, that trouble them. Others have only defensive
Arms, as it were, for safety against annoyance, shells, and thick skins. Many
have neither offensive, nor defensive arms, who yet by their natural
swiftness shift for themselves by flight, and out-^un their dangers. There for
is no creature, but has some way or other for its defense. As man (the chief
creature) God has given him Reason to provide all sorts of lawful means for
his preservation and defense. Take it also spiritually; God having made any man
a New creature, gives him a Sword, and means of defense, to preserve himself in
his spiritual being. Every godly man has spiritual weapons, the whole armor
of God, for his defense against the Devil, his spiritual enemy. The Apostle
leads us into Gods Armory, and shows us what weapons God has made for the
spiritual man, or for the preservation of man in his spiritual state and being
( Ephesians. 6.13, 14, etc.) The Girdle of Truth, the Breast Plate of righteousness,
Feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, The Shield of Faith, to
quench the fiery darts of the Devil, The Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of
the Spirit, which is the Word of God. Thus God has armed the New Creature with
a Sword; he that made him, has made him weapons of defense and offense, to
save his soul from the wounds of temptation, and to resist, yea, overcome the
Tempter. Thus, as the Lord who made Behemoth, has made him a Sword, so he has
provided weapons, or means of defense for all other creatures, for man
especially, and most specially for man in his spiritual condition, that his
immortal soul may be safe, whatever becomes of his frail flesh, or mortal body.
So much of and from that first Translation, He that made him, made his Sword to
be near him.

Yet before I come to explain our own Translation, I shall here again mind the
Reader, what learned Bochartus understands by the Hebrew word rendered Sword, in
reference to the Hippopotame. He that made him (says he) has given him
(Harpen) a sickle, or crooked Sword. Our Dictionaries render the word Harp, a
Wood-knife, as also a Sithe. This crooked Sword or Sickle, denotes, says he,
the long, sharp, and somewhat bowed teeth of the Hippopotame, with which he does
as it were reap, or cut down co^n and grass, when he comes on Land to feed; as
several Greek Poets, by him named, describe the manner of the Hippotame's
feeding; which must be granted, complyeth well with the words in the next
verse, where it is said of Behemoth, The Mountains bring him forth food. Yet I
see no reason, but that those great teeth of the Elephant (which surely are no
hurtlesse weapons) as also his Promuscis or Trunk (though commonly called his
hand) may be compared to, and expressed by a Sword, if that be true which good
Authors say he does with them.

The Second reading of the Text, which Bochartus says, a very learned
Interpreter perceiving the inconvenience of the former, as to the Elephant,
took up, is, also, ours, He that made him, can make his Sword to approach unto
him.

His Sword, That is, his own Sword, Gods Sword. God has a Sword, and he can
make his Sword approach Behemoth; that is, As strong as Behemoth is, God that
made him, and gave him his strength, can subdue him, can pierce his skin,
though very hard, and wound him to the very heart; he can break his bones,
though they are like strong pieces of brass, and bars of iron.

Quasi a Solo Deo sit occidendus. Drus.
So then, the meaning of the words (according to our translation) is plainly
this. As if the Lord had said, Though Behemoth be very vast and big, strong and
torrible, yet I can quickly bring him down, Hanc expositionem respuere videtur
verbum (...) accedere faciet applicabit, quo nulla notatur hostilitas, sed
potius amica conjunctio. Pisc
and vanquish him.

Some oppose this translation and exposition, because the Hebrew word which we
render to approach, is not applicable (say they) to an hostile approach, but
rather to an amicable and friendly approach: Now to come upon one with a Sword,
is an hostile approach, it is to come as an enemy, which (say they) that word
will not well bear.

But I conceive this to be a mistake; for in Scripture, once, if not oftener,
the word is used to denote an hostile approach, or an assault (1 Samuel 17.40.)
where David encountering Goliath, it is said, He took his staff in his hand, and
chose five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them in a shepherds bag,
which he had even in a scrip, and his sling was in his hand, and he drew near
(or approached) to the Philistim. Now how did David approach the Philistim?
Surely, not to salute him as a friend, but to destroy him as an enemy, as in
the issue he did. Though the word commonly signifies a friendly approach, yet
the Scripture applies it also to an enemy-like or violent approach; and
therefore that objection is of no force to invalidate our Translation, or the
Interpretation given of it: He that made him, can make his Sword approach unto
him.

But what is this Sword, that God makes to approach unto Behemoth?

I answer, This Sword is any thing whereby God is pleased to subdue or destroy
Behemoth, or the Elephant; whatever instrument God will use, that is his Sword;
or whether God will use any other creature to kill the Elephant, that creature
is his Sword. It Is said, that the Rhinoceros (his sworn enemy, if I may so
speak) gets his sharpened horn, under his belly, and paunches him. It Is said
also, that the Dragon, loving to suck or drink his blood, kills him. Now
whether the Elephant fall by these beasts and serpents, or be slain in battle
and war by men, he may be said to fall by the sword of God, or that God makes
his sword approach unto him. The sword of God is the power of God put forth by
this, or that, or any means, for the subduing or destroying of this mighty
creature. He that made him, can make his sword approach unto him.

From this rendering, and the interpretation given of it, which is very plain
and obvious,

Observe; There is no creature so great, so strong, but God is able to subdue
and conquer him.

He that made the creature, can make his sword approach unto him. God can
master whatsoever he has made. Behemoth, the Elephant is a creature of a vast
bigness, a creature of admirable strength, yet down he comes, down he falls, as
soon as ever God draws near with his sword. The inanimate creatures, the Sun,
the Moon, the Stars, the Seas, the Earth, are strong and powerful; yet God can
shake the Earth, and calm the Sea, he can seal up the Stars, and stop both Sun
and Moon in their course, and make them stand still as a stone. God who made
the fire hot and burning, can take away the burning heat of it, which is so
connatural to it. And as he subdueth inanimate or liveless creatures, so (as
here in the Text) the animate or living creatures. The Lord, who has made the
Elephant, the Lion, the Bear, the Tiger, can quickly put a stop to the power
and rage of any of them. We may exemplify it also in man, a rational creature.
Some men, in comparison of others, are like Behemoths, like Elephants, great,
powerful and strong, Nimrods of the earth, mighty hunters: The Lord can make
his sword approach to any of them. The Lord has infinitely more strength and
power in himself, than he has placed or planted in any creature. For, what is
the st^eam to the fountain? what is the light in the air, to the light in the
Sun? The strength of the creature, is but a stream or a beam issuing from God.
The strength of the Elephant is no more to God, than the strength of a silly
Mouse; the strength of an Eagle no more to God, than the strength of a Fly; the
strength of a Leviathan in the sea (of whom in the next Chapter) is no more to
God, then the strength of a Shrimp or Sprat. God can soon destroy the roaring
Lions, the raging Bears, the fierce Tigers, the ravening Wolves of this world.
Nothing is strong before the strength of God, or before the strong God.

Now, if the Lord has a power whereby he can quickly overpower the most
powerful creatures; then this teaches us,

First, Not to trust in the power of any creature. Though you have an Elephant,
a Behemoth for your help, do not trust in him. The Lord that made him, can
quickly make his sword approach unto him; the Lord can make him as weak as
water, and of as little use to you as a little child. The strong shall be as
tow, and the maker of it as a spark (that is, the work or idol which he has
made shall be as a spark to tow) and they shall both burn together, and none
shall quench them (Isa. 1.31.) How often are we called off from trust in any
creature, from trust in horses, from trust in man! There Is no help in the
strongest creatures, unless, First, God g^ves them strength, and works with
their strength. Secondly, There is no help in any creature, if God sets his
strength against him. Therefore trust not in any creature.

Secondly, This teaches us, Not to fear the power of any creature while God is
with us. If an Elephant, a Behemoth be against us, we need not fear him. Thus
the Apostle concludes, while he puts that supposition ( Romans 8.28.) If God be
with us, who can be against us? that is, to hurt us. His meaning is, none can.
There are none in the world against whom so many are, as against those with
whom God is, that is, whom he owns, loves and favors. Christ told his
Disciples of this ( Joh. 15.19.) I have chosen you out of the world, therefore
the world hates you. But though they with whom God is, are hated of the world,
or have the world against them, yet the world cannot be so against them, as to
harm or hurt them; for he that made them can make his sword approach to those
that would, that is, they are fully in and under his power. The Prophet uses
this argument ( Isa. 54.16, 17.) Behold, I have created the Smith that blows
the coals in the fire, and that brings forth an instrument for his work, and
I have created the waster to destroy: Even the wasters of the world, they that
make spoil of all, all they are of my creation; I have made them, and seeing I
have made them, surely, I can hinder them in any of their wasting and
destroying purposes; and therefore the Lord in the next words gives a full and
most comfortable assurance to the Church, notwithstanding the skill of the
Smith in making instruments, and the strength of the Waster to destroy with
them, No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every thing that
shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn; this is the heritage
of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord.
The very ground upon which the Lord assured them, that no weapon formed against
them should prosper, was, because the Smith, and the Waster too, were both of
them his creatures or of his making, as the Text speaks of Behemoth. God can
make his sword approach beasts in the likeness of men, as well as beasts in
their own likeness. And hence it is, that the Holy Ghost expresses all those
powers of the world, which should afflict the Church in several ages, by the
name of beasts, all of Gods making. Daniel in his 7th Chapter had a vision of
four great beasts that came up from the sea; whereof the first, was like a
Lion; the second, like a Bear; another, like a Leopard; and a fourth, dreadful,
and terrible, and strong; so exceedingly dreadful, terrible and strong, that
(as if no beast could be found like it) it is not expressed by the likeness of
any beast. But what were these beasts? it is answered ( ver. 17.) These great
beasts which are four, are four great Kings, which shall arise out of the
earth, that is, four successions of Kings. The Babilonian, the Persian, the
Grecian, the Roman powers were those great beasts. Now the Lord who made them,
made his sword approach unto every one of them, as the histories, both of the
Church and of the world, hold clearly out. The Lord who made that great
Behemoth the Babilonian power, and that great Behemoth the Persian power, that
great Behemoth the Grecian power, as also that great Behemoth the Roman power,
has made his sword, in several ages, and by several steps or degrees, approach
unto them. So in the Revelation of Saint John, the great beasts there
mentioned, what were they, but the powers of the earth set against the true
Church of God? We read ( Revel. 12.3.) of a great red dragon; this red dragon
was the heathenish Roman power persecuting the Church. Again ( Revel. 13.1.)
John stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea,
having seven heads and ten horns. What was this beast? Master Mead says, that
by this beast, and his seven heads, and ten horns, we are to understand the
Pope, with the companies or associations of all those Princes that put
themselves under his power; all these were figured (says he) by that beast
rising up out of the sea. At the 11th verse of the same Chapter, Saint John
says, I beheld another beast coming out of the earth, and he had two horns
like a lamb, and he spoke like a dragon. Apocalyptical Interpreters have
various op^nions about this second beast, but whoever, or whatever this or the
former beast is (to be sure they are some body) the spirit of God represents
them as terrible Behemoths; and the Church has no help nor comfort against
them, but that in the Text, He that made them, can make his sword approach unto
them. The Prophet Isaiah (Chap. 27.1.) speaks of the Lords sword, and of the
use he will put it to; In that day the Lord with his sore, and great, and
strong sword shall punish Leviathan, the piercing Serpent, even Leviathan the
crooked Serpent, and he shall slay the Dragon that is in the Sea; that is,
overcome the devil and all his instruments, who oppose and would destroy his
Vineyard of Red wine, that is, his Church. Thus we see how the Lord in all ages
past has, and how we are assured concerning the Ages to come, that he will
make that good concerning mystical Behemoths, which here he speaks concerning
the natural Behemoth; He that made him, can make his sword approach unto him.

The Lord having thus far described Behemoth by several parts of his body, and
by his great strength or power, proceeds to describe him further, by the manner
of his life, or by his meat, drink and lodging, in the latter part of this
context, to the end of the Chapter.

Verse. 20. Surely the Mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts of
the field do play. In these words we have the provision which God has
appointed for Behemoth, and where. Though he be a very great beast, and
therefore needs much food, (...) pro (...) quicquid terra prosert, ut sunt
herbae and arbores.
yet the Lord has store enough for him, and has set him where he may feed his
fill. The Mountains bring him forth grass; that is, all sorts of herbage and
green things.

And though this part of the description of Behemoth may serve the Hippopotame,
who as Bochartus says, feeds upon the Hills and Mountains (such as they are)
which lie near the River Nilus, as other Amphibions do (the Morse especially)
in other parts of the world; yet no man can deny, but it does as well (that I
say not, much better) agree to the Elephant, that the Mountains bring him forth
food. The words are plain, and need no explication.

Note two things from them; First, God provideth food for all creatures, even
for Behemoth.

He provides them food, from the greatest to the least; they are all at Gods
finding. And does God take care for Behemoths, for Elephants, or, as some
determine it, Hippopotames, River-Horses, and Sea Monsters? Surely then (as
David spoke, Psalm. 111.4.) He will give meat to them that fear him, he will
ever be mindful of his Covenant. This Inference has been made from other
passages in the former Chapter; I only remind the Reader of it here. The Lord,
who provideth mountains of grass, or grass upon the mountains, for Behemoth,
has mountains of provision for all his faithful servants.

Secondly, Note; God provides proportionable food for all hi^ creatures.

Behemoth is a vast creature; therefore God has whole mountains for him to
graze upon, he is not shut up in a little pytle or narrow field, he has large
mountains for his store^; and will not the Lord give proportionable supplies to
his people according to all their needs? If our needs be great, his store is
greater, The world is mine (says God, Psalm. 50.12.) and the fullness of it. He
that is the fullness of all things, and has in his power, and at his dispose,
the fullness of all the world, will not let them, of whom the world is not
worthy, want any thing that is good and expedient for them: The mountains and
valleys too, yea, deserts and hard rocks, shall bring them forth food God will
turn stones into bread, and rocks into water, rather than they shall want. As
David said ( Psalm. 34.10,) The young Lions (so I may say, the Elephants) do
lack and suffer hunger; but they that seek the Lord, shall not want any good
thing; that is, Lions and Elephants shall rather want than they. Surely the
mountains bring him forth food, Where all the beasts of the field play.

This argues the mild nature and gentleness of Behemoth, the Elephant, as was
showed at the 15th verse; he lives upon grass, not upon flesh, as Lions and
Bears; he lives upon grass, and therefore all the beasts of the field play
where the Elephant feeds, for they know he will not eat nor feed upon them, he
eats only grass. Natural Historians tell us, that the beasts seem to rejoice
when they see the Elephant, because, they know he will not hurt them; not only
do they feed with him to satisfy hunger, but play and sport for delight.

Hence Note, First; God can restrain the strongest and most dangerous creatures
from hurting the weakest. Mitissimus est Elephas, neque illius congressum
exhorrent caetera animalia, sed laeta in iisdem pascuis versantur. Plin. l. 69.
c. 9.


The beasts would have little heart to play where the Elephant feeds, were he
as fierce and cruel as he is great and strong. Thus the Lord orders the spirits
of powerful men, or of men in great power, into such meekness and gentleness,
that even the meanest live quietly and peaceably by them without fear of hurt,
as was touched before. The Church is set forth playing, as it were, not only
where the Elephant, a gentle beast feeds, but where wild and ravenous beasts
feed ( Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9.) The wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard
shall lie down with the Kid, the Calf and the young Lion and the Fatling shall
lie down together, and a little child shall lead them; that is, the Wolf shall
not hurt the Lamb, the Leopard shall not trouble the Kid: yea, says that
illustrious Prophecy (verse. 8.) The sucking child shall play on the hole of the
Asp, the weaned child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den, they shall not
hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. The care of God over his
Church and servants appears two ways;

First, In hiding them from such as would do them hurt. As it is said ( Jer.
36.26.) when Baruch and Jeremiah had done that service commanded them by the
Lord, Jehoiakim was angry, and sent to take them; but says the Text, The Lord
hid them. So the Lord moved Obadiah to hide his Prophets by fifty in a cave,
from the wrath of Ahab and Jezebel (1 King. 18.) Now as the Lord keeps his
servants, by hiding them from those who are enraged against them, so

Secondly, By meekning their spirits, as he does the Elephants toward the
beasts of the field, showing them much kindness, and suffering them in a sort
to play before them, that is, to enjoy great tranquillity. The Psalmist says,
it was the Lord who turned the heart of the Egyptians to hate his people, and
to deal subtly with his servants (Psalm. 105.25.) And it is doubtless of the
Lord, that any show them favor, and deal kindly with them.

Again, from these words, Where all the beasts of the field play,

Note, Secondly; A playing life, is the life of a beast.

All beasts would live so; wild beasts do live so. As it is said of the
Leviathan in the Sea ( Psalm. 104.26.) There go the Ships, there is that
Leviathan whom thou have made to play therein. A life of play, is a beastial
life. It is said ( Zach. 8.5.) in a way of promise, That boys and girls
should play in the streets, but men and women must work; it were a shame to
describe them playing. The life of man is not a playing life, but a laboring
life. How beast-like do they live, who (as it is said of the people of Israel
(Exodus 38.6.) Eat, and drink, and rise up to play; that is just like a beast,
feed on the mountains, and then play upon the mountains. Let us follow Solomon's
council ( Eccles. 9.10.) Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy
might. We have seen Behemoth feeding, let us now see him lodging and reposing
himself.

Verse. 21, 22. He lies under the shady trees, in the covert of the reed and
fens: the shady trees cover him with their shadow, the willows of the brook
compass him about. These two verses hold forth the manner of Behemoths repose,
how and where he takes his ease, He lies under the shady trees, etc.

(...) Et cubo and dormio; saepius cubo, nam dormio potius (...) dicitur. Drus.
Some of the Jewish Rabbis read these two verses with an interrogation
Negative, thus; Does he lie under the shady trees, in the covert of the reeds?
do the shady trees cover him with their shadows? or the willows compass him
about? Implying, that Behemoth is so vast a creature, that he can hardly find
trees to shadow him, or willows of the brook to compass him about. But though
Behemoth be a great and tall beast, yet I nothing doubt but there are trees in
and about the places which he frequents, great and tall enough to shadow him
from the Sun when he stands upright, yea, and reeds of a sufficient height to
be a covert to him when he lies down. And therefore as it was an over boldness
in those Rabbis to put an interrogation where they found none, so there is no
need that an interrogation should either be found or put there. Indeed
Bochartus, who judges reeds much too low to make a covert for the Elephant,
tells us out of Aelian, That Elephants go by very great trees, as we by
standing corn, and that some of them they are taller than trees. Which I
conceive, Aelian. l. 7. c. 6.
can be understood no other way than by a high strain of Rhetoric: But suppose
it true in plain and proper sense, yet this gives the learned Bochartus no
advantage (to which end he alleges that of Aelian) for the accommodating of
this part of the description of Behemoth to the Hippopotame rather than the
Elephant, because he tells us from several Authors, first, Bochartus part.
poster. l. 5. c. 15. p. 755.
that the Hippopotame is not only three times bigger than the horse, but
secondly, that he is of equal ability with the Elephant, and for the most part
greater. Whence it is (says he) that some Writers compare the Hippopotame with
the Elephant, both in strength and stature, or prefer him before the Elephant;
which reports (says he) although they be a little stretched, yet it is manifest,
that the Hippopotame comes behind few animals, either in bigness or stature
(that is, tallness) of body. And if so, then the Reeds of the Fen fit him as
ill for a covert as the Elephant; yet I am enough satisfied, that they may very
well fit either of them. And though the Elephant usually sleeps standing, and
rarely lies down to sleep, yet (which is not denied) he if sometimes or at any
time lies down to sleep, it is sufficient to answer the purpose of this Text;
which says (verse. 21.) He lies under the shady trees, in the covert of the
Reeds and Fens. And Verse. 22. The shady trees cover him with their shadow, the
willows of the brook compass him about.

It Is usual with, and even natural to cattle of all sorts, Sicut aquas odere
cupressi, Juglandes castoneae, ita non nisi in aquot sis proveniunt salices,
alni, popali. Plin. l. 16. c. 18. Elephas amat amnes and quamvis fluviatile non
sit tamen riparium dici potest. Arist. l. 9. c. 46.
to seek shelter under shady trees, when the fiery heat of the Sun offends
them; and as Behemoth seeks out any sort of shady trees, so it seems he has a
peculiar delight in, and possibly a fancy to The willows of the brook.

Willows are so called, because they mostly grow near to brooks, and always
prosper best in marish or moorish-grounds. Some trees will not grow in watery
places, such are the Cypress and Chest-nut-trees; others will not grow well any
where else, such are the Aldar and the Poplar trees, Willows especially:
Willows love brooks, and Elephants love both brooks and Willows, if those
ancient Natural Historians, mentioned in the Margen mis-report them not.
Elephantes gaudent amnibus manime and circa fluvios vagantur, cum alioquin nare
propter magnitudinem corporis non p^ssunt. Plin. l. 8. c. 10.
The Elephant (says one of them) loves rivers, and though he be not a river
Animal, yet he may be called a riverside or river-bank Animal; and (says the
other) Elephants are greatly pleased with rivers, and wander much about streams
of water, though they cannot swim, by reason of the greatness of their bodies.

That is (I confess) a rare notion, and singularly subservient to his opinion,
that Behemoth is the Hippopotame, which the learned Author, so often already
mentioned, gives us; namely, that by the word rendered brook, we are here to
understand the river Nilus in Egypt. And therefore he translates the Text, not
as we, The Willows of the Brook, but The Willows of Nilus compass him about.
And that the Hebrew word (Nahal) signifies Nilus, he puts beyond
contradiction, by quoting many express places of Scripture, where it is so used
( Number. 34.5. Josh. 15.4.47. 1 Kings 8.65. 2 Kings 24.7. Isa. 27.12.) which he
also confirms by the Authority of some Ancient Latin Poets, who call Nilus a
Torrent or a Brook. Now though this has very great weight with me, and may
with any ingenoius Reader, to persuade him, that the Hippopotame is intended by
Behemoth rather than the Elephant,

Yet with the favor, and good leave of this worthy Author, and with submission
to more able judgments, I would offer these two things to the Readers
consideration.

First, That though the word Nilus may draw its original (as he shows) from the
word Nahal, according to its ancient pronunciation Neel; yet in no one of those
Scriptures by him quoted, and lately noted, is the word Nahal used alone (as it
stands in this Text of Job) to signify Nilus; for in all those places the word
Egypt is added. Now when the words are put together, The river of Egypt, no man
can doubt but N^lus must be understood by it. But when the word Nahal,
signifying a Brook, Torrent or river, is found single and alone, there is no
necessity that it should signify Nilus, the word indifferen^ly and in common,
being applicable to any brook or river in any part of the whole world, as well
as to Nilus in Egypt.

Secondly, In one place of the holy Scripture, where this whole expression in
Job The willows of the brook is found, nor Nilus, but some other brook or river
is without all controversy intended. The children of Israel for the
celebration of the feast of Tabernacles were commanded ( Levit. 23.40.) to cut
down the boughs of thick trees, and the willows of the brook, etc. which surely
could not be meant of the willows growing about the river Nilus in Egypt; for
they were come out of Egypt, and this was an ordinance which the children of
Israel were commanded to observe in the Land of Canaan. And as in this place of
Moses we have the willows of the brook, so ( Isa. 15.7.) we have, the brook of
the willows, whither the substance of the Moabites should be carried, by
themselves (say some) for safety, by their enemies, say others, as spoil. I do
not find any who follow this translation, interpreting the brook of the willows
by Nilus in Egypt, but several of Euphrates by Babylon in Chaldea, to which
that speech of the Captive Jews there ( Psalm. 137.1, 2.) may give some light.

These two things considered, the words of the text in Job concerning Behemoth
may, at least, with a fair probability, be applied to the Elephant. The shady
trees cover him with their shadow, the willows of the brook compass him about.

Hence Note, First; God provides not only for the being of his creatures, but
for for their comfortable being.

As the Elephant has food upon the mountains to keep him alive, so shady trees
to keep him cool. And thus the Lord takes care for man, he has not only given
him bread to eat, but conveniences for his delight and comfort. God makes
provision, even for our delight, while we are in the flesh; let us take heed we
make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. The Elephant has
not only grass, but shadows.

Secondly, Note; The inconveniences and annoyances which come to us by one
creature are helped by some other.

God has so provided, that look in what one creature does annoy us, another
relieves us. The Elephants are much annoyd by the heat of the Sun, but they
find relief under shady trees. The heat of the Sun is cured by shades and
gentle winds, in those parts of the world that are under or near the Line; the
Lord has provided cool breizes, which blowing there fan the air, and make it
very pleasant by attempering the heat. If there be poison in one creature to
annoy, there is an antidote in some other to help. And in this the goodness of
God shines most clearly, that all the inconveniences and annoyances, which come
to us by men, yea, which come to us by our sins, are all remedied by Jesus
Christ, or we have relief by Jesus Christ against them all. When the heat of
any affliction molests us, we may sit down (as the Church speaks, Cant. 2.3.)
under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit will be sweet unto us. Jesus
Christ is to all believers, not only as the shadow of a tree, but as the shadow
of a great rock in a weary land (Isa. 32.2.) The Lord has provided us shady
trees, and the willows of the brook (blessed and precious promises) to compass
us about in all our troubles.

Thus God has given Behemoth help against immoderate heat; But he is subject
to much thrist also: for that he has help at hand too, store of water.

Verse. 23, 24. Behold he drinks up a river and hastes not; he trusts that
he can draw up Jordan into his mouth; he takes it with his eyes, his nose
pierces through snares. We have had Behemoth feeding upon the mountains, and
reposing in the shadows; here we have him drinking in or at the river. Ecce
premat (eum) fluvius, non trepidabit, securus erit quamvis Jordanes erumpat in
os ejus. Bochar.
These two verses, as they stand in our translation, may in a fairer sense be
applied to the Elephant: but before I come to that, I shall give a brief
account of that translation given by the learned Author before named; according
to which, the 23d verse is not only best, but only applicable to the
Hippopotame. Behold, let a river press (or come upon) him, he will not fear; he
is safe, though Jordan issue forth upon his mouth.

Now it is easily granted, that the tallest and strongest Elephant, would have
cause enough to fear, if a whole river, such a great and deep one as Jordan
especially, should press upon him and over-whelm him, for as the Elephant is no
swimmer, so he must have a liberty of breathing, nor can he hold his breath
very long; and therefore (as it is said) ventures to go no further into the
water, than he can hold and keep his snout above water, to draw in air and
maintain respiration. So that in this the Hippopotame has the advantage of the
Elephant, as being able to hold his breath much longer. For though (says he,
alleging Aristotle for it) as the Sea-calf, the Crocodile and Sea-shell-fish,
Ltb. 8. de Historia Animal. cap. 2.
so also the Hippopotame will be suffocated in the water at last, unless he
take some breathing times; yet it is certain, he can hold his breath a long
time, abiding (not being able to swim) whole days at the bottom of Nilus,
creeping or lying upon the ouze, till, night approaching, he goes out to feed.

The nature of this animal being such as has been described, the translation
in hand answers it clearly.

Yet, seeing there are other translations of this 23d verse, left us by very
learned men, and skilful in the Hebrew tongue, which may well comply with the
nature of the Elephant, it cannot savor of pertinacy, to give them so much
respect as to lay them before the Reader, and leave him to his own choice in
this matter. And,

First, Let us consider that in which Bochartus joins those four Worthies,
Pagnine, Arias, Mercer and Junius, Premit fluviu^ ita ut non festinet, confidit
quod Jordanem educet in os suum.
whose translation runs thus; He checks a River, so that it hastneth not; he is
confident that he can draw out Jordan into his mouth. Here indeed are great
Hyperbolies. It Is high language, to say, an Elephant by interposing his body
like a bank, can stay the course of a River, or swallow it down at a draught;
yet it would be no hard labor to show that the Scripture has many expressions
in it of as high a strain as this. We read of Cities walled and fenced up to
heaven ( Deuteronomy. 9.1.) And the Evangelist John supposes ( Chap. 21.25.) that if
all things which Jesus Christ did in the days of his flesh, here on earth,
should be written, that even the world it self could not contain the books
which should be written. But I shall not stay upon this, nor does the learned
Bochartus insist upon it: he could admit the Hyperbolies in that translation,
if the translation it self were consistent with the Hebrew Text, in reference
to which he takes five exceptions against that translation; to every one of
which I shall only give my apprehension, and so pass on.

The first is, That the Authors of this translation, suppose the Hebrew word
for River, and that for Jordan, to be of the accusative Case (as Grammarians
speak) whereas in the Original, they have no note of the accusative Case
prefixed. I may say to that, The note of the accusative Case is not always
prefixed, where the word is so taken, especially where the word can be no
otherwise taken, as in the sense of these Translators it cannot be in this
place; for they taking Behemoth to be the agent in both parts of the verse, as
also the River in the former part, and Jordan in the latter, to be patients,
could not suppose any otherwise of those words, than that they are of the
accusative Case; whereas Bochartus taking Behemoth to be the patient, and the
River in the former part, as also Jordan in the latter part of the verse, to
sustain the place of Agents, must needs suppose the contrary.

Secondly, says he, Those words (ita ut) so that, are not in the Hebrew. I
answer, such is the conciseness of the Hebrew tongue, that all Translators make
use of some fitting words (which they distinguish from the pure Text, by a
different character in printing and writing) to clear up the sense of the Text
in the notion of their translation.

(...)
Thirdly, he says, The word rendered to Hasten, signifies not to hasten simply,
but to hasten for fear. That Is yielded on all hands; and in that sense I shall
make use of it, in opening our own translation. All that I shall say to this
exception, is, that the learned Authors of this translation, who well understand
the full signification of that word, might conceive that the same word is not
always used by the holy Ghost in the same latitude of signification, and
therefore render this word, which signifies to hasten for fear, barely to
hasten. Further, I may add, that this word which signifies to hasten for fear,
is rendered also barely to fear; and why not then barely to hasten? The one
translation leaving out the former part of the full sense, as the other does
the latter part of it.

The fourth exception respects only the phrase or manner of speech used in that
translation, as not yielding a commodious sense. I shall say no more but this
to it; that when either man or beast drinks, he does both draw out and draw in,
he draws the liquor out of the vessel, and into his mouth.

(...)
Fifthly, It Is said, the word used by Job, signifies neither to educe or draw
out, nor to induce or draw in, but to break forth, as appears ( Job 38.8. Judge.
20.33. Dan. 7.2.) It does so in those three places now mentioned; yet all the
Lexicographers which I have seen, render the Verb ( educere as well as
erumpere) by a word signifying the force of another, drawing out a thing, as
well as the breaking out of a thing by its own force. And so a Nowne
substantive derived from this Verb is used ( Psalm. 22.9.) which place we render
thus, Thou art he that took (or drewest) me out of the womb. And though it be
true, that Infants may be said to break out of the womb, yet it is not by any
power of their own, but by the power of God; and therefore it may much rather
be said, that God takes or draws them out of the womb, than that they break or
make their way out.

Thus far of this translation, as also of the grounds of that learned Authors
dissatisfaction with it. All which objections ri^e up also against our English
translation, both being nea^ the same in words, and fully the general scope and
sense. And I would add this for the honor of our Translators, that I am much
persuaded they did not render the Text thus, as persons prepossessed with an
opinion, that the Elephant must needs be intended here under the title
Behemoth, but because they then saw good ground for it in the Grammatical
construction and meaning of the Hebrew Text. What they would do now (were they
living) upon the discovery which this worthy person has lately made, I dare
not say, but shall proceed to the explication of this verse, as they have left
it.

Behold he drinks up a River. The word which we translate to drink up,
signifies to rob, Verbum (...) significat ad se rapere per vim vel per fraudem.
to oppress; so some render it here, He robs a River, he steals away all the
water: that is a high strain of Rhetoric to express Behemoths great drought; he
drinks, as if at a draught he meant to drink a River dry.

And [hasteth not.] There is a twofold rendering of that: First, thus; He
drinks a River that it hastes not, referring this not hasting to the River,
and then the meaning is, He drinks so deep, that he even stops the current or
course of the River. A River whose waters are either drawn away, or near dried,
cannot run with wonted swiftness. This is another hyperbolical strain, as if an
Elephant were able to exhaust a River. Great Armies have stopped the course of
Rivers with drinking, they have drunk Rivers dry; in allusion to which, it may
be said of the Elephant, He drinks a River, that it hastes not. So M^.
Broughton reads it, Lo, he robs a River that it hastes not. We translate, He
drinks a River, And hastes not.

That is, the Elephant does not have. This may have a twofold reference.

First, To his patience in thirst. Though he drinks much when he comes to it,
Aelian. l. 14. c. 44. Clarae aquae potio Elephanto inimicissima, turbulentam
and sordidam suavissime bibit. Aelian. l. 14. c. 44. (...) Festinavit pavorem
connotat. Tanquam canis ad Nilum. Non festinat nec tripidat bibere ut canis
quam aquam sumit e Nilo motuit sibi a Crocodilo, etc. Drus.
yet he can bear thirst very patiently a long time. An ancient Writer affirms,
the Elephant will live eight days without drinking; if so, he hastes not to
drink: though he drinks very much when he comes to it, yet he is not hasty to
drink, he can forbear for eight days together.

Secondly, This may have reference (which I conceive most congruous) to his
courage: He hastes not; that is, he does not drink in fear, he takes his
leisure. Historians say of the dog drinking at Nilus, he does but take a lap
and away, he is afraid the Crocodile will come and catch him: And hence we
speak proverbially of those who do but touch at a matter and leave it, They do
like the dog at Nilus. This is a truth too, He drinks up a River, and hastes
not. The Elephant is a stout, strong creature, he fears no hurt, and therefore
drinks as much as he will, and in as much time as he will.

Once more, some say, he hastes not to drink, because he spends some time to
trouble and mud the water with his feet before he drinks; for he cannot abide
(says an ancient Author) to drink clear water: yea, some say, he therefore
troubles the water before he drinks, because he cannot endure to see his own
shape in the water; for which reason, it is also affirmed, that the Indians will
not lead their Elephants by the waters at full Moon, but at new Moon only, when
the air being darker, the water is to us less pellucid.

He trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth. This is another high
expression, to show the Elephants vast drinking. Jordan was a great River. The
Elephant does not only think that he can drink up a small Brook or Rivulet, but
a great River, that he can draw up the River Jordan into his mouth. In the
greatness of his thirst, he does so much slight any small Brook or Pond, that
he is confident, were he at the banks of Jordan, he could drink it dry. Thus,
as before of his eating, he had whole mountains to feed on; so here of his
drinking, he draws a whole River, Jordan, into his mouth.

Hence note, First; That which is too much for many of some one kind, may be
but enough for one of another kind.

A little drink will serve a Dove. We say of a man who drinks sparingly, He
drinks like a Sparrow; and we may say of a great drinker, he drinks not only
like a Fish, or like a horse (which are common sayings) but like an Elephant.
Mane quatuor december amphores sive metrotas Macedonicas bibit, vespere octo.
Aristot.
The Elephant drinks deep. Natural Historians report the measure of his
drinking; he takes in the quantity of fourteen Macedonian Pitchers or Tankards
(how much they contain of our measure, I cannot say, but questionless they
contain very much) for his mornings draught, and eight for his evenings
draught. Hence the Proverb, An Elephant could not drink so much.

Secondly, Note; If bruit creatures eat or drink much, it is from their
constitution, not from their lust.

The Elephant drinks much, yet only what his nature and necessity, or the
necessity of his nature, requires; he does not drink thus in wantonness, or to
satisfy a lust; he drinks much, but he is no drunkard. There are three things
in the Elephant which clear him, that his great drinking is not from his lust,
but need; First, his natural constitution is very hot; that requires the more
drink. Secondly, the climate wherein he is bred is very hot: the Elephant
cannot well endure cold, and the heat of the Country makes him drink much.
Thirdly, The greatness of his body; he has a vast body, and that must needs
require a great quantity of drink to fill it. The Elephants great drinking will
not excuse the drunkard, who drinks to excess; what he drinks, is but
commensurate to the greatness of his body, and the necessities of nature; it is
not to serve a lust, or to please his appetite. That which follows, is the
prosecution of the same thing.

Verse. 24. He takes it with his eyes, his nose pierces through snares. There
are various Translations of this verse: I shall name but one besides our own,
and that presents it interrogatively, or as an interrogation Negative; Will any
take him in his sight? (or in his eyes?) or bore his nose with a snare? Thus
several understand this verse, as importing an utter impossibility to take the
Elephant (as we speak) by fair play. Possibly, by cunning and subtilty, coming
behind him, or at unawares, you may entrap him; but, Can men take him before
his eyes, to pierce his nose with many snares? So Mr. Broughton renders. An in
oculis capiet cum quisquam, tendiculis perforabit nasum; i. e. apperta, and non
infidiis structis Jun. Non nisi ex insidiis capi potest Elephas. Plin. l. 8. c.
8, 9.
They cannot do it. Solomon says ( Prove. 1.17.) In vain is the net spread in
the sight of any bird. You cannot take a little bird if he sees you, much less
Behemoth; no, you must do it by slight if you do it at all. Nor will the
Hippopotame be taken (as we speak) by fine force, but only by finenesses, or
devices made by art to surprise him, as Bochartus shows out of several ancient
Authors. So that as in many other things, so in this, the manner of their
taking, the Elephant and he are much alike; and therefore the less wonder if
one be taken, or mistaken for the other.

Our Translation says, He takes it with his eyes. What does he take? What is
the thing taken? Surely, according to this reading, he takes the River Jordan
it self with his eyes; that is, he is exceedingly taken with beholding the
River: And this is a further heightning o^ his thirst. As if it had been said,
He is so thirsty, that when he sees the River, he takes it with his eyes, or is
exceedingly pleased to see the River; the very sight of the water makes him
glad.

Nasum usque in profundum fluvii oculis tenus immergit, ut aquam abunde capiat.
Aben Ezra.
Yet Further, some of the Rabbis expound it thus; He takes it with his eyes;
that is, when he comes to a River, he is so thirsty, that he thrusts his head
in up to his very eyes, as if he were to drink with his eyes. This also
signifies his greediness in drinking.

Hence note; Nature is much pleased with the sight of that which it much
desires and wants.

As soon as the Elephant can but get a sight of the River, how does it please
him? We have a saying, It is better to fill a man's belly than his eye; and it
is a truth. He that has a great desire to meat or drink, is much pleased to
see either. And it is a truth in every thing, the sight of that is very pleasing
to us, which we greatly want, and much desire. Therefore Solomon gives council
( Prove. 23.31.) Look not upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his
color in the cup. They that are given to drink, are pleased when they see the
cup, they take it with their eyes, or, their eyes are taken with it. It Is so in
spiritual things also; that which we greatly desire and want in spirituals, O
how pleasant is the sight of it! how glad are we when we can take it with our
eyes! Thus spoke David (Psalm. 63.1, 2.) O my God, thou art my God, early will I
seek thee; my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and
thirsty Land where no water is, to see thy power and thy glory (O that I could
but see them, I would take them with my eyes) as I have seen thee in the
Sanctuary. As if he had said, there I have seen the flowings forth of thy
goodness, of thy power and glory; but now I am in a dry Land, O how I long to
see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in thy sanctuary! He ^peaks
to the same purpose ( Psalm. 27.4.) One thing have I desired of the Lord, that
will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord. The spiritual sight of God is most
sweet in his Ordinances. The very outward enjoyment of those who mininister
spi^i^ual things is pleasant: Hence that promise ( Isa. 30.20.) Thine eyes
shall see thy Teachers; there is something in that: how much more sweet is it
to have a spiritual sight of spiritual things! The sense of seeing is
delightful; what then is the grace of seeing! The Elephant takes it with his
eyes, His nose pierces through snares.

That is, he thrusts his nose, his trunk into the River; and if there be any
snares there, set and prepared on purpose to entangle him, or if any thing be
there accidentally, which may annoy him, he breaks through them all; he is so
thirsty that a small matter does not hinder him in drinking, he makes way
through all impediments, that he may take his fill of drink; his thirst being
urgent, drink he will whatever comes of it.

Hence note; That which any creature has a great desire to, he will make his
way to it through difficulties and dangers, he will break through snares to
attain it.

David had a great desire to the water of Bethlem, but there lay an Army
between him and the Well, yet three men would venture through an Host of
enemies, to fetch him water. If any have a vehement thirst after Gods Word, the
water of Life, they will break through snares for it; though Armies lie in the
way, yet there are three strong men in them (an enlightened understanding, a
rectified will, and good affection) that will venture to get the water of
Bethlem for their instruction and consolation. Natural creatures will not stand
upon dangerous difficulties, to come at that which is much desired by them; how
much less they who are spiritual?

So much of this greatest terrestial animal Behemoth, and of the Lords power in
making and ordering him. In the next Chapter the Lord proceeds to humble Job
yet more, by setting before him the greatest animal in the waters, the mighty
Leviathan.

JOB, Chap. 41. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 1. Can thou draw out
Leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord which thou let down?

2. Can thou put a hook into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a thorn?

3. Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft words unto
thee?

4. Will he make a covenant with thee? will thou take him for a servant for
ever?

5. Will thou play with him as with a bird? will thou bind him for thy maidens?

6. Shall the companions make a banquet of him? shall they part him among the
merchants?

7. Can thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish-spears?

8. Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle: do no more.

9. Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not one be cast down even at the
sight of him?

10. None is so fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand before
me?

11. Who has prevented me, that I should repay him? whatsoever is under the
whole heaven, is mine.


THis whole Chapter gives us a large discourse, concerning the greatest, the
largest living creature that God made in this visible world, the Leviathan. The
whole Chapter may be divided into two general parts;

First, A Narration.

Secondly, A Conclusion.

In the Narrative part, Leviathan is described four ways.

First, By the bigness and vastness of his body, which is employed in the first
and second verses; he is a creature so big and bulky, that there is no holding
him with a cord or line; he is too big, too boisterous for an Angler to deal
with. Can thou draw out Leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord
which thou let down? etc. ( verse. 1, 2.)

Secondly, This Leviathan is described by the stoutness and untractableness of
his spirit; there is no bringing him to any submission, to any service or
compliance. Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft words
unto thee? will he make a covenant with thee? etc. ( verse. 3, 4, 5.)

Thirdly, He is described by the difficulty and danger, if not impossibility of
taking or catching him; he will hardly be taken any way, no, not by the most
forcible ways, to make either meat or merchandise of him. Shall the companions
make a banquet of him? shall they part him among the merchants? Can thou fill
his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish-spears? etc. ( verse. 6, 7, 8,
9. and in the former part of the 10th verse.) Thus far Leviathan is described
in his greatness, in his stoutness, in the difficulty and danger of catching
him, if he can be catched at all.

Now, the Lord having proceeded thus far in the description of, or doctrine
about Leviathan, he makes Use and Application of all that he had said, before
he comes to the fourth particular; and this Application or Use which the Holy
Ghost makes of his description thus far given, consists in two things.

First, Hence the Lord infers his own irresistibleness, and the utter inability
of any creature to contend with him (in the close of the 10th verse) Who then
is able to stand before me? If none can stand before this creature, can any
stand before the Creator! That Is the first Inference.

Secondly, The Lord makes a further Inference from it concerning his own
self-sufficiency, or absolute independency upon any creature, either for
council what to do, or for assistance in doing it. Thus much is clearly
affirmed in that question, at the beginning of the 11th verse, Who has
prevented me, that I should repay him. As if the Lord had said, Let the man
come forth that has contributed any thing to me, in any of my works, or that
has given any help in the doing them, and he shall be well rewarded for his
pains. Both these Inferences or Uses, the Lord confirms by a grand Assertion or
Maxim, in the close of the 11th verse; Whatsoever is under the whole Heaven,
is mine. If all be mine, then who can stand before me? If all be mine, then who
has prevented me, that I should repay him? This is the Application, these the
Uses, which the Lord himself makes of the doctrine laid down about this
creature, the Leviathan: These Uses close the third part of the description of
Leviathan. The fourth part of his description, contains many particulars
concerning his parts, power, and proportion, as also the wonderful effects of
his power, all which are set down in highest strains of divine rhetoric, from
the 11th verse to the end of the 32.

The second part of the Chapter I call the conclusion, and it flows naturally
from the whole foregoing discourse, in the two last verses of it; Upon earth
there is not his like (the Lord said concerning Behemoth, He is the chief of
the ways of God, that is, upon earth; and here he says of Leviathan, Upon
earth there is not his like, no, not Behemoth himself) he is made without fear,
he beholds all high things, he is a King over all the children of pride. Thus
far concerning the state and parts of the whole Chapter, in which the Lord has
this general scope, even to humble Job yet more. As if he had said, That thou,
O Job, may see and be convinced of thy presumption in pleading with me; look
upon Leviathan, consider whether thou art able to deal with him; if not, how
can thou deal with me who made him, and can both master and destroy him when
I will? Thus the Lord makes his triumph over creatures mightier in outward
force than man, to the intent all men may know, they shall certainly fall, and
be utterly confounded, if they lift up themselves against God. All which will
appear further, in opening the description of this Leviathan.

Verse. 1. Can thou draw out Leviathan with an hook? For the clearing of these
words, and toward the clearing of all that follows, I shall show, First, the
signification of this word Leviathan, or what it imports. Secondly, what kind
of creature this Leviathan is, or is conceived to be.

(...) Additus, adjunctus.
The word Leviathan is derived from an Hebrew root, which signifies added to, or
joined together. When Leah had brought forth a third son to Jacob, she called
his name (from this word) Levi, and said, Now my Husband will be joined to me,
because I have born him three sons (Genesis 29.34.) And it is supposed, that this
creature is so called upon a double respect.

First, Because of the fast-joyning or closure of his scales ( verse. 15, 16,
17.)

Secondly, Because he is so great of body, that he appears as if many bodies
were joined and knit together in his.

And because the Hebrew word for a Dragon is Thannin, some have conceived, that
the last syllable in Leviathan is a contract of that, and added to Levijath, as
implying, that in one Leviathan many Dragons were conjoined. But I rather
adhere to that learned Author, who takes Leviathan to be a simple, not a
compound word, and says, That the last syllable than, belongs to the form of
the Nown, Leviathan sinuosum est animal and in pluros spiras volubile. Bochart.
as in Nehushtan, etc. And he finds the root of the word Leviathan, neither in
the Hebrew, nor in the Syriack, but in the Arabic language, where it
signifies, to wind, plight or fold together, fitly intimating the crooked
winding postures and motions of that animal called Leviathan.

But, what is this Leviathan?

First, Most of the Ancients, both Greek and Latin, turn this Scripture wholly
into an Allegory, expounding, as Behemoth before, so here Leviathan, wholly of
the old enemy of mankind, the Devil. It Is true, that many things here spoken of
Leviathan, are applicable to the Devil; but to bring all to that sense, is
doubtless a forcing or straining of the Text. Others, who prosecute the
Allegory, apply it to bad Princes, who having great power, use it for the
oppression and vexation of those that are under their dominion. Nor can it be
denied, that the King of Babylon was intended by the Prophet, under the word
Leviathan (Isa. 27.1, 2.) as Pharaoh King of Egypt is expressly called Tannin,
or) a Sea-Dragon, Ezekiel. 29.3. and Chap. 32.2.

Hebraei grandiores omnes pisces, sc. cetacei generis hac voce significari
putant. Merl.
Secondly, Several of the Jewish Writers expound Leviathan, not of any
particular species, or sort of fishes; but in general, of all great fishes.

Thirdly, The most general, and hitherto most received opinion, concludes
Leviathan to be among all fishes, the Whale in particular.

Fourthly, Beza of the former age, and in this, Bochartus, confidently assert,
that Leviathan is the Crocodile. The general reason given for it by them, is,
because what is here spoken of Leviathan, is not every way suitable nor
agreeable to the Whale; and they who expound Leviathan by the Whale, are as
confident that several things here affirmed of Leviathan, are not agreeable to
the Crocodile.

What my own apprehensions are in this matter of difference, whether the Whale
or the Crocodile be intended by Leviathan, I have already declared, at the
fifteenth verse. of the fortieth Chapter, where the Lord begins to present
Behemoth, purposing also in the same continued speech to present Leviathan to
the consideration of Job, in the liveliest colors, and highest expressions of
divine eloquence, for his yet fuller conviction and humiliation. There (I say)
the Reader may find my thoughts about this matter; yet in opening the Text, I
shall touch at most of those particulars which the learned Bochartus takes
notice of, either as more clearly, or as only applicable to the Crocodile;
leaving the Reader (as was there said) at his liberty to dete^mine his own
thoughts, where he sees most reason and fairest probability. For it must be
confessed, that there are no small difficulties in making out the common and
hitherto most received opinion, that Leviathan is the Whale, as will appear in
our passage through this Chapter; and therefore I dare not be very positive,
much less tenacious in it. For though it be an unquestionable truth, and to be
received, and to be as the matter of an historical faith, because God has said
it, that there is a living creature in the compass of nature, exactly answering
every particular in the following description of the Leviathan, yet it is
questionable what that creature is; and to say, the Crocodile is meant by
Leviathan, or the Whale is meant by Leviathan, is only matter of opinion, and
the judgment of man.

Verse. 1. Can thou draw out Leviathan? Our Translators say in the Margin, a
Whale, or a Whirle-pool. (...) Sept.
The Septuagint render, Can thou draw out the Dragon? As if by way of
eminence, Leviathan were the chiefest and greatest among all that are or may be
called Dragons. And say some, the word Leviathan is the same with Thannin,
which in the Hebrew signifies a Dragon. Insomuch that these two words, Thannin
and Laviathan, are taken in Scripture promiscuously ( Psalm. 74.13, 14.) Thou
breakest the heads (Thanninim) of the Dragons in the waters (we put Whales in
the Margin, Arias renders the Text so) then follows in the next verse, Thou
breakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, etc. meaning in both verses Pharaoh
and his Captains, who pursued Israel, not only to, but into the Red Sea, and
were drowned. Thus also these two words are used ( Isa. 27.1.) where,
Leviathan, the piercing (or crossing the sea like a bar) Serpent, even
Leviathan the crooked Serpent, whom the Lord will punish with his sore, and
great, and long sword, as it is said in the former part of the verse, is the
same with the dragon that is in the sea, whom he will slay, as it is said in the
latter part of the verse. Some of the Jewish Writers distinguish these two only
in growth or greatness, defining Leviathan to be a great Thannin or Dragon. But
as the word Thannin does so signify a Dragon, that yet it is often applied to
signify Whales and Sea-beasts, because they in some sort resemble the form and
flectuation of Dragons; thus it is said ( Genesis 1.21.) that on the fifth day God
created great (Thanninim) Whales. Now (I say) as in Scripture the word Thannin
is rendered Whale, so Whales and such like great fishes are in Scripture
expressed by the word Leviathan. And in one place (possibly in more) nothing
else can be understood by the word Leviathan, but the Whale or fishes of the
Cetacean or Whale kind. The Psalmist being wrapped into an admiration of the
works of God, or rather of God in his works, speaks thus ( Psalm. 104.24, 25,
26.) O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them them
all: The earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide sea, wherein
are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts: There go the
ships, there is that Leviathan, whom thou have made to play therein. Now though
it be granted, that in some places of Scripture, other animals, and for
instance, the Crocodile of Nilus, may be understood by Leviathan, yet in this
place of the Psalm the Crocodile cannot be understood: For the Leviathan there
spoken of, abides in the great and wide sea, where the ships generally go. Now
though Nilus may be called a Sea, as Lakes and great Rivers sometimes are in
Scripture, yet it cannot be called the great and wide sea; it is at most but a
small and a narrow sea, and therefore we find the river of Egypt, that is,
Nilus and the great sea, distinctly and distinguishingly mentioned ( Josh.
15.47.) So then it appears that the Whale is somewhere meant by Leviathan. And
forasmuch as there is an Emphasis put upon the Leviathan spoken of in the
Psalm, he being there called That Leviathan; as if it had been said, though
there are other Leviathans, such as are Dragons, Crocodiles, in other great
waters, yet the chief and great Leviathan of all, is an inhabitant of the great
and wide sea: Now seeing the Leviathan, described in Job, has such characters
given of him, as plainly show that he is the chief Leviathan, it may, with fair
probability, be supposed, that he is the Leviathan spoken of in the Psalm; and
if so, then the Leviathan in Job cannot be the Croco^ile, for the Crocodile is
not an inhabitant of the great and wide sea. Facetae and ironicae sunt
interregationes, quae habentur quinque primis versibus. (...) pro (...)
interrogativum recte suppletur ex collatione proxime sequentium. Pisc.
Let that be considered as to the negative: and what the whole Text in Job
holds out for the affirmative, I shall leave it to consideration, as I pass
through the several parts of i^.

Can thou draw out Leviathan with a hook? The first thing considerable in
Leviathan, is the greatness and vastness of his body, which (as was said) is
plainly intended in these words, Can thou draw out Leviathan with a hook? or
his tongue with a cord which thou let down? As if the Lord had said, Thou
can draw up some great fishes with a hook and line; and if it should be told
thee, there is a fish so big that no man with hook and line is able to draw him
out of the water, thou would say, that must needs be a huge fish; now such a
one at least, is Leviathan. This the Lord would convince Job of, in putting
this question, Can thou draw out Leviathan with a hook? Thou can not;
Leviathan is too heavy for thy draught. The interrogation is a negation; Can
thou? thou can not draw out Leviathan with all thy strength; if thou had
the strength often men, thou could not draw him out? Little fishes, yea, very
great fishes may be drawn out, but Leviathan cannot, he will break all thy
tackling.

Further, Can than draw out Leviathan with a hook and line? No, nor with a
cart-rope. As if we should say to a man, can thou knock down an Ox with a
fillip of thy finger? No, nor with the force of thy fist.

And as this question, Can thou? etc. implies that man cannot, so it seems to
intimate, that God can as easily take up this huge Leviathan, as any man can
draw up a small, even the smallest fish with hook and line, or play with it in
the water. As he that made Behemoth, can make his sword approach unto him (
Chap. 40.19.) so he that made Leviathan, has a hook to draw him out with.
Can thou draw out Leviathan with an hook?

Or his tongue with a cord which thou let down? If the fish bite, the hook
takes him by the tongue or jaws. The Hebrew word is, Can thou take him with a
cord which thou drownest? That which is let down deep or far into the water,
may be said to be drowned in the water. Unless the line or cord of the angle,
sink deep into, or be drowned in the water, the hook is useless; and therefore
the Angler has a lead fastened upon his line to make it sink deep, as well as a
cork or quil to keep it from sinking too deep. Can thou draw out his tongue
with a cord, which thou drownest or let down?

Vnum hoc animal terrestre linguae usu caret. Plin. l. 8. c. 25.
The mention of the tongue in this latter part of the verse is made use of by
some, as an argument to prove that Leviathan cannot be the Crocodile, who, as
Naturalists write of him, has no tongue: his mouth is wide, but tongue-less.
To this objection, Beza gives one, and Bochartus adds a second answer. The
former says, it is not strictly affirmed in the Text, that Leviathan has a
tongue; it is only denied, that he has a tongue in which a hook or cord may be
fastened. The latter says, that the Crocodile is not altogether tongue-less,
but only (as we speak in another sense) tongue-tied: He has a tongue, but it is
an immovable one, cleaving fast to his lower jaw. And this Bochartus confirms
by so many unquestionable authorities, as may easily remove this objection from
weakening his assertion. Can thou draw out his tongue with a cord?

Verse. 2. Can thou put an hook into his nose, or bore his jaw through with a
thorn? Constringesne inserto junco, ut piscator minutos pisces? Jun.
Some expound this verse only as a further illustration of the former, in
reference to the taking of this fish. But, rather, it is an allusion to the
custom of fishermen, who when they have taken fish, put a thorn through
their nose, and hang them up to be seen, or for sale. The word translated an
hook, signifies properly a pond or standing water (Psalm. 114.8.) and then a
bull-rush, because bull-rushes grow in standing waters or by pond-banks. We
take it metaphoricaly for a hook, because a hook is like a bull-rush with its
head hanging down ( Isa. 58.5.) Is this a fast that I have chosen? a day for a
man to bow down his head as a bull-rush?

Further, to put a hook into the nose, signifies these two things in Scripture.
First, To repress the rage or wrath of man. And Secondly, to divert or turn him
aside from his purpose (2 Kings 19.28. Ezekiel. 19.4.) And so in this place, the
significancy of the phrase may be thus conceived, Can thou, O Job, abate the
fury, or stop the course of Leviathan? Can thou put a hook into his nose?

Or bore his jaw through with a thorn? And so carry him away with thee. Some
understand it as an allusion to the ringing of a Bear or Swine. Can thou
overpower him, and boring his nose, put a ring into it, as into the snout of a
Swine or Bear, and so lead or carry him whither thou please, as a beast which
thou have tamed and brought to hand?

These two verses have the same tendency, both setting forth the greatness of
Leviathan, as to the weight and bulk of his body. Can thou draw out
Leviathan? can thou put an hook into his nose? etc.

Hence, Note; The Lord is to be admired and magnified in, and for the greatness
and vastness of any Creature.

There are two things about which the Lord is to be magnified in his creatures.

First, In their qualities. There are some little, very little creatures, in
whose qualities the Lord is greatly to be magnified. The Pismire, a poor little
thing, little bigger than a pins-head, has an admirable wit and forecast. The
Crane, the Turtle, the Swallow, are but small creatures; yet they observe or
understand their times, much better than many men, and are not only to be
imitated by men in that quality, but to be admired for it.

Secondly, Other creatures are to be admired for their quantity or bigness, and
of this sort Leviathan is chief. The reports of the Ancients concerning the
bigness of Leviathan, C^t^s 600. pedum longitudinis, and 360. latitudinis in
flumen Arabiae intrasse tradit Plinius l. 32 c. 1. Musculus piscis dux c^torum
oculorum vice fungitur. Plin. l. 8. c. 2.
are almost beyond belief. One reports their bodies as big as four acres of
ground; that they appear like mountains or small islands in the sea; that some
being measured, have been found six hundred foot in length, and three hundred
and sixty in breadth: And that, least they should come in shallow waters, or be
soundred by coming too near any shore, they have always a little fish, called
Musculus, for their guide or leader, which is to them instead of eyes. Late
Navigators, and they who make it their business to follow the Whale-fishing,
have seen Whales of very vast dimensions, and that sometimes they endanger the
overthrow of considerable ships; which argues their extraordinary strength and
greatness.

Heathens have said, that though it cannot be denied, but there are many
wonderful creatures to be seen upon the land, yet the sea is the great
storehouse of wonders: And we may give it in these three things.

First, It is wonderful, that in the sea there are such various kinds of
fishes. It is not imaginable how many sorts of fish the sea affords. I once
heard a very learned Gentleman, and a great Traveller, say, that being abroad
upon public service, and entertaining the Ambassador of another State at his
table, the feast was wholly of fish, and the fish were only shellfish
variously cookt, every dish having the shells laid about the verg of it, the
fish being taken out; yet the Ambassador could not give a name to any one of
them, having never seen their like in any part of the world where he had been.
Now if a wise knowing man, also great a feast, could not give a name to any one
shellfish before him, what variety of kinds is there in the sea, take all
together!

Secondly, It Is wonderful to consider, the huge multitude which is of every
kind of fish in the sea. The kinds are exceeding many, and there are
innumerable of every kind.

Thirdly, That is wonderful, which I am now upon, the vastness, the greatness
of some kinds. Not only is Leviathan, but several other fishes of the Sea,
bigger than any beast upon the land. Let us consider the greatness of the
creatures, to lead us into the consideration of the greatness of God. How
great, how mighty is that God, who has made such great, such mighty creatures!

Secondly, From these words, Can thou draw up Leviathan with a hook?

Note; Great things cannot be done ordinarily with small means.

A hook and a line may serve the turn, to draw up any small and some great
fishes, but they will not serve turn to draw up a Leviathan. There must be a
proportion between the instrument and the work, else nothing can be done in a
natural way. As we need not call for a beetle to kill a fly; we may do that
with a touch of the finger: in which sense David spoke (1 Samuel 24.14.) Against
whom is the King of Israel come forth? against a dead dog or a flea* As if he
had said, I wonder thou should raise an army against me, who have so little
strength, and intend thee no hurt, had I strength (as I have had opportunity)
to do it. Now (I say) as we need not use great means to effect little things,
so we must use great means to do great things, and we should use means
proportionable for the doing of every thing. You cannot batter down a stone
wall, or a strong tower with paper-shot, nor with a pot-gun, no, you must plant
cannon for that service.

Again, when this Scripture says, Can thou draw out Leviathan? The emphasis
(as was showed before in opening the words) lies in the word thou. As if the
Lord had said, thou can not, but I can.

Hence, note; The Lord is able to do the greatest things by smallest means.

Leviathan to God is but as any little fish to us, which is taken with a hook
and line. To take up Leviathan, to do the greatest thing, is as easy to God,
as the least to man. As the power of God supplyeth all the weakness of the
creature to do any thing, so it surpasses all that strength and greatness of
the creature, which may seem to hinder him from doing any thing with it or upon
it. He (says the Apostle, Phil. 3.21.) shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body* (how shall he do this?) according to
the working of his mighty power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to
himself. The Lord can, doubtless, subdue Leviathan to himself by the working of
that mighty power, which subdueth all things to himself. And it is much more
easy for Christ to subdue any Leviathan, than to change our vile body into the
likeness of his own glorious body. For, as Jesus Christ was (once) declared to
be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the
resurrection (that is, his own resurrection) from the dead; so he will again
declare himself to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of
power, by our resurrection from the dead. He that can draw our dust out of the
grave with a word, can soon draw Leviathan out of the deepest gulf in the Sea
by his hook and cord.

This may comfort those, and strengthen their faith, who at any time see
Leviathans ready to swallow them up, as the Whale did Jonah. As the Lord
prepared that great fish to swallow up Jonah (Jonah 1.17.) so he commanded that
great fish to deliver him back safe again; or, as that Scripture says, (Chap.
2.10.) He spoke to the fish, and he vomited out Jonah upon the dry land. Both
were acts of great power, and teach us, that the Lord has a sovereign
commanding power over all, even the greatest creatures.

The Lord has a hook for Leviathan. He had hooks for Pharaoh, The great Dragon
in the midst of his Rivers (Ezekiel. 29.3, 4.) And of him the Lord commanded the
same Prophet to speak in a like notion ( Ezekiel. 32.2.) Son of man, take up a
lamentation for Pharaoh, and say to him, thou art like a young Lion of the
Nations, and thou art as a Whale in the Seas, and thou came forth with thy
Rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their Rivers;
therefore I will spread out my net over thee, and they shall bring thee up in
my net. I have a net for thee, says this Chapter; I have hooks for thee, says
that other. The Prophet Isaiah, to engage the Lord to do some great thing for
his Church, minded him of what he had formerly and anciently done for Israel
(Isa. 51.9.) Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord, awake as in the
ancient days, as in the generations of old; art thou not it that has cut
Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? This Rahab was Egypt, and the Dragon was
Pharaoh, as Interpreters generally agree. The Psalmist reports the dealings of
God with Pharaoh and Egypt, in language nearer that of the Text ( Psalm. 74.13,
14.) Thou breakest the heads of the Dragons in the waters, thou breakest the
heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to the people
inhabiting the wilderness; that is, the remembrance of that mercy, and of the
mighty power of God in destroying Pharaoh and his Egyptian Host, who pursued
them after their departure from Egypt, to the red Sea, was to be food for their
faith in all the dangers and hardships which they were like to meet with in their
travels, through the howling wilderness to the Land of promise. Take one
Scripture-instance more (2 Kin. 19.28.) Sennacherib was a Leviathan, he came up
against Hezekiah to destroy him and his people, which provoked the Lord to
speak thus of him, Because thy rage against me is come into my ears, therefore
I will put my hook into thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and turn thee back
by the way thou came. Thus far of the first thing in the description of
Leviathan, his greatness.

The second part of his description, shows the stoutness and stubbornness of
his spirit, he will not comply, he will not yield, he will not any way submit.
This is laid down in the 3d, 4th, and 5th verses.

Verse. 3. Will he make many supplications to thee? The word in the Hebrew,
properly signifies deprecation, Precamur bona deprecamur tantum mala.
which is prayer for the turning away of evil; when evil is near, then we
deprecate it. Will he do this? not he: He will not petition thee, he scorns to
petition thee, or to cry for quarter.

But, it may be said, can fishes pray or make supplications? to do so, is at
least the work of rational creatures. I answer, Per Prosopopoeian tribuit ei
orationem.
these words are to be understood by that figure Prosopopoeia, frequently used
in Scripture, when acts of Reason are attributed to irrational, yea, to
senseless and lifeless creatures. The very hills and valleys, the Seas and
waters praise God by a figure; and here by a like figure, Leviathan will not
make supplications unto man; which shows the stoutness of his spirit. As some
prisoners taken in war, scorn to ask their lives; so if Leviathan were taken
with a hook, he would make no supplications, nor beg your favor, so stout is
he; his heart is too great, his stomach too big for any kind of submission.
Will he make many supplications unto thee? no, he will make none at all. This
is further expressed in the latter part of the verse.

Will he speak soft words to thee? (...) pro (...) sc. (...) mollibus vel
blandis v^rbis aut sermonibus. Pisc.
Mr. Broughton renders, or Will he speak to thee tenderly? Will he flatter or
humor thee, that he may get loose or be freed from thee. When the Gibeonites
(Josh. 9.9.) were afraid they should be taken and destroyed, they came and
begged peace, they spoke soft words. There are words of two sorts.

Some are very hard words; and hard words wound like hard blows. And (though no
blows are given) The Lord will come to execute judgment upon the ungodly, for
all their hard speeches, (Jude, verse. 15.) Many speak words as hard as stones,
they throw hard words at the heads and about the ears of others, hard words of
threatening, and hard words of reviling; for these the Lord will judge the
ungodly, as well as for their ungodly deeds.

Now, as there are hard words, so soft words. What are they? Soft words are
words of entreaty, words of meekness, words of love, words of submission; these
are soft words. Will Leviathan make supplications? or, Will he speak soft
words? Again, soft words are often flattering words, which are therefore
compared by the Prophet ( Ezekiel. 13.18.) To pillows sowed under the arm-holes.
Will Leviathan flatter himself into thy favor? will he lie down like a
Spaniel, and fawn upon thee? no, he is too high-spirited to bow, too stiff to
stoop, he will speak no soft words. A soft answer (says Solomon, Prove. 15.1.)
turns away strife. It Is good when a question is put to us, to give a soft
answe^: And if when we have hard words spoken to us, we return hard answers,
they will quickly stir up strife. Solomon has a strange expression ( Prove.
15.15.) A soft tongue breaks the bones. The tongue naturally, is a soft,
fleshy, spungy member of the body; yet there is nothing has more hardness, I
may say more bones in it than the tongue; but it is the soft tongue which
breaks the bones, not the bones of the body, but of the mind: and the meaning
is this, If the spirit of a man be as stiff as the bones of his body against
you, yet if you speak soft words, you may break him, and bring him to your
desire; whereas, if you be high and stiff, if you give hard for hard, it turns
to an exasperation. It were no great loss, if they could speak no more than
Leviathan, who like Leviathan, know not how to speak soft words. And usually,
they who are freest to speak soft words of flattery, are furthest from speaking
soft words of love or charity, of gentleness and true ingenuity. It Is good, and
our wisdom in two cases, to speak soft words in truth, even to those who are
none of the best.

First, To avoid hard dealing, from those who have us in their power: and they
who are afraid of hard dealing, will sure enough speak soft words; whereas a
man that cares not how hardly others deal with him, cares not to speak soft
words.

Secondly, It Is wisdom to speak soft words, when we are in expectation or under
hope of receiving benefit or good from any, Loqui mollia inferioris est.
in the power of whose hand it is to do us good. They have reason to give good
words, who would receive any good. Thus some speak soft words to divert evil,
others speak soft words that they may obtain good. As for Leviathan, he is here
represented in the pride of his heart, as neither fearing any hurt you can do
him, nor desiring you should do him any good; and therefore, Will he speak soft
words to thee? no, not he.

Hence observe; The strong and mighty will not make supplications, nor use
entreaties.

They who think they have enough in themselves, will not make supplication to
God himself, they will not entreat his favor, nor speak soft words to him.
There are many such proud stout-hearted Leviathans in the likeness of men (
Jer. 10.25.) Pour out thy wrath upon the families that call not upon thy name.
There are whole families that will not make supplications to God. What are
these? a company of Leviathans, that think they have enough of their own, and
live in a self-strength, or in a self-sufficiency, as if they were not
beholding to God for any thing they have, nor desired to have any thing of him.
The Lord speaks of a generation of men, who shame the counsel of the poor,
because the Lord is his refuge (Psalm. 14.6.) that is, because they in all their
wants, dangers and distresses, had recourse to God by prayer, as their only
refuge. Of what spirit those men were, who shamed or were ashamed of this
counsel and course of the poor, he tells us at the 4th verse of that Psalm;
They eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon God. We (thought
they) have enough of our own, strength enough of our own, we are Leviathans, we
need not be beholding to God. It is an argument of a wicked, stout, high mind,
not to make supplications ( Prove. 18.23.) The poor uses entreaties, or, the
poor speaks supplications. They that are poor in outward things, will speak
very humbly to those above them; and if we know our own spiritual poverty, that
we are weak, empty creatures, even nothing-creatures, if we are poor in spirit,
we will be using many entreaties to get in with God, and to move him to have
mercy upon us. None but humble ones, and such as see their wants and dangers,
that they are hardly bestead in this world, or are convinced that all the good
and great things they have, yea, that the greatest things they can have in this
world, can stand them in no stead without God, will speak soft words of
supplication unto God. Leviathan never thinks himself in danger or in want, and
therefore he scorns all the world; and in this he is an emblem of all carnal
worldly men. And as Leviathan will make no supplications, nor speak soft words,
so Verse. 4. Will he make a Covenant with thee?

Some who think themselves too high to make supplications to others, may yet
possibly make a covenant with them. But, Will Leviathan make a covenant with
thee? he will not. The word which we translate a Covenant, signifies two
things. First, to choose, because a Covenant is to be made by choice persons,
and upon choice terms. An scindet vel secabit? Heb. foedus factum erat,
adhibita sectione vituli.
Secondly, it signifies to eat, because they were wont to feast when covenants
were made. The Hebrew is, Will he strike or cut a covenant with thee. The
reason of that, was, because they were wont to divide a beast, and pass between
the parts of it at the making of a Covenant ( Jer. 34.18.) They did cut the
calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof. Will Leviathan cut a
Covenant with thee? As he will not speak thee fair, nor endeavor to soften thy
heart toward him, by speaking soft words to thee, were he in thy power, so he
will never enter covenant with thee, to become thy sure friend, much less thy
faithful servant; as it follows in the Text.

Will thou take him for thy servant for ever? Many are Covenant-servants for a
time, some for ever. These four things follow in order. First, Some for fear
make supplications. Secondly, They speak soft words. Thirdly, They makes
covenant or promise. Fourthly, They offer their service to those in whose hand
they are. But Leviathan will do none of these, from first to last. Will thou
take him for thy servant for ever? If thou will, he will not. Suppose thou
had taken Leviathan with a hook, and had him fast in thy power with a cord,
will he be thy servant as long as he lives? King Benhadad being taken in war,
sent to King Ahab, and submitted to him as a servant, that he might have his
life (1 Kings 20.32.) Qui jure belli occidi potuit, non duram subit
conditionem, si paratam mortem cum longa servitute commutat. Sanct.
Thy servant Benhadad says, I pray thee let me live. But this Leviathan is so
stout, that he will not ask his life of any man, nor will he serve any for an
hour, much less for ever.

Will he make a covenant with thee? will thou take him for thy servant for
ever? That is, will he become thy servant by covenant, or thy covenant-servant?
Covenants bind servants to duty. There are two things in a servants covenant.
First, it obliges him to work. Secondly, it assures him of a reward. Gods
covenant with us assures us of mercy, I will be to you a God, I will pardon
your sins, I will do you good; and then it requires duty, You shall be to me a
people, you shall walk humbly and uprightly before me, you shall serve me for
ever. Will thou take Leviathan to serve thee For ever?

But are any servants, or shall any (except God himself) be served, for ever?
why then says the Lord, Will thou take him for thy servant for ever? Some are
taken servants only for a year, some for seven years, others for life. They who
are servants for life, are and may be called our servants for ever: so that
when the Lord says, Will thou take him for thy servant for ever? the meaning
is, will he be thy servant as long as he lives? And indeed the life of a beast
may well be called his for ever; forasmuch as he has no life after this life,
nor being after death. The word rendered for ever, comes from a root in the
Hebrew, which signifies to hide, or to be hidden, because Eternity, which is
for ever in strict sense, is altogether hidden and without end: and if for ever
be taken only for a long time, indefinitely, that is a hidden thing too; who
knows when a long time will end, if no end be assigned to it? The life of man
is his for ever in this world; for how short soever it is, no man knows the end
of it, and so to him it is a hidden thing. In this sense also the life of a
beast is a hidden thing as to the natural end of it, and so his for ever. Will thou take him to be thy servant for ever? or, Will he be thy everlasting
servant?

Hence note; All the creatures were made for man's service, and were once his
servants.

And therefore when creatures will not serve us, especially when they rise
against us, we should remember, as our fall in Adam, so our own failings in the
service of God. The unserviceableness of the creature to us, is a fruit and an
effect of our unserviceableness and disobedience to God. That word of God (
Genesis 1.28.) which I may call the charter of man's Lordship over the creature,
reached Leviathan himself; And God blessed them, and God said, be fruitful, and
multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the
fish of the Sea, etc. that includes dominion over the Leviathan. The Apostle
James also (Chap. 3.7.) speaks of man's dominion over the fish of the Sea, Every
kind of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and of things in the Sea, is
tamed, and has been tamed of mankind. Man was originally invested with a
power, to tame, not only things on earth, but things in the Sea, even the
mighty Leviathan. And when the Lord after the flood restored the world, and
renewed man's charter, he put in this among the rest of his grants, the
subjection of the fish of the Sea ( Genesis 9.1, 2.) And God blessed Noah and his
sons, and said, be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth; and the fear
of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon
every fowl of the air, and upon all that moves upon the earth, and upon all
the fishes of the Sea; into your hand they are delivered: The very fish of the
Sea shall fear and reverence you. But as we quite forfeited the privilege of
the first charter by the first general fall, so our after personal falls have
doubtless much abated the privileges of this renewed charter. When we break
commandments, we weaken our interest in, and lose the benefit of promises and
privileges. Man by falling from the commands of God, lost his command of the
creatures; 1. Imperium sui. 2. Imperium suum.
or, man by sin, lost, First, the command of himself, and then his command over
the creatures. Sin hinders our present enjoyments, and will, unless repented of
by us, and pardoned by God, cut us off from our future hopes. We should behold
and bewail it, as a part of that great curse fallen upon us by the sin of Adam,
and our own personal sins, that many creatures refuse to serve us. Will
Leviathan (says God to Job) make a covenant with thee? will he be thy servant
for ever? That Is the fourth particular mentioned in the third and fourth
verses, wherein the unsubmissiveness and stiffness of this Leviathan is set
forth; he will not make supplications, he will not speak soft words, neither
will he be thy covenant-servant for ever. And as he is not for man's work, so
not for his sport.

Verse. 5. Will thou play with him as with a bird? will thou bind him for thy
maidens? Or, as Mr. Broughton renders this latter clause, Will thou tie him for
thy young girls? This verse holds out a further evidence of the stoutness of
Leviathan. Some creatures, though they will not work, yet they will play and
make you sport; but Leviathan is so stout, that he will neither do you any
work, nor make you any sport.

Will thou play with him as with a bird? The word signifies any small bird,
especially a Sparrow, with which children use to play. Leviathan will not play
with man; nor is he to be made a play, or to be sported with. When the
Philistines had put out Sampsons eyes (who was once as terrible to them as a
Leviathan) they called for him to make them sport; and the Text says ( Judge.
16.25.) He made them sport, though they quickly found he was not a man to be
sported with. We say proverbially, It Is ill jesting with edge-tools; I may say,
It Is ill sporting with Leviathan. The vulgar Latin translation says, Numquid
illudes ei ficut avi. Vulg.
Will thou cozen or ensnare him as a bird? Can thou entangle him as a little
bird with lime-twigs? or entice him into thy net, and then make sport with him?
Leviathan is a great player, and very game-some; but he will not play at any
game with us, nor can we play at any game with him, but Hazard. That he is
very gamesom when and where he pleases, the Psalmist tells us, speaking of the
great and wide Sea ( Psalm. 104.26.) There go the Ships, there is that
Leviathan, whom thou have made to play therein. He is made for play, not for
work; but where does he play? Leviathan will play in the Sea, but he will not
play at Land. Will thou play with him as with a bird?

Will thou bind him for thy maidens? Or for thy maidservants? or for thy little
maiden daughters? Young maidens or girls delight in birds, and if they get one
tied by a string, they play with it. Thus we see Leviathan will have no dealing
with us, neither in earnest nor in jest, neither at work nor play, he will
neither serve us, nor sport with us. Will thou play with him? etc. Some
creatures are made for play, for sport, others for work and service; yet here
is one (and there are more of that temper) so fierce, so stout, that he will be
brought to neither; he will not serve you, as it is said in the former verse; he
will not play with you, nor dare you play with him. In this latter verse,
Leviathan is somewhat like that untoward and froward generation, of whom Christ
spoke ( Mat. 11.16.) To whom shall I liken this generation? they are like to
children fitting in the marketplace, and calling unto their fellows, and
saying, we have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto
you, and ye have not lamented. So we may say of this Leviathan, if you mourn to
him, he will not lament; if you pipe to him, he will not dance. A proud
untractable spirit will not comply nor bow either way; he will neither weep nor
rejoice with you, fast nor feast with you, work nor play with you.

Thus we have had the description of Leviathan; First, by the greatness of his
body ( verse. 1, 2.) Secondly, by the stoutness of his spirit ( verse. 3, 4, 5.)
The five verses following, show the great difficulty or extreme danger of
taking, or of catching him, which is the third part of his description.

Verse. 6. Shall the companions make a banquet of him? shall they part him among
the merchants? etc. Fishermen use to go out in companies; and having sped well
in fishing, they first eat part themselves, and make merry as at a banquet; the
remainder they send to market, or sell to Merchants for profit: They shall do
neither with Leviathan, for they cannot take him. It Is a vain thing to talk of
dividing the Bears skin, before we have taken the Bear.

Shall the companions make a banquet of him? That is, either, First, Shall they
eat him, shall he be the matter of the banquet, the chief dish at the feast?
Or, Secondly, Shall they rejoice and make merry, because they have caught
Leviathan, and gotten such a prize. Understanding the words in this latter
sense, Leviathan being caught, is the occasion, not the matter of the banquet.
As if it had been said, Fishermen, or their societies, shall never have cause
to rejoice and triumph at the captivity of Leviathan, nor say they, have gotten
him into their hands or custody, to lade their vessels, and fill their
warehouses, to vend him out again, and fill their purses, as it follows in
this verse.

Shall they part him among the Merchants? The word rendered Merchants,
Causnaeorum nomen in Scriptura passion pro Mercatoribus usurpatur; quod ea gens
negatiationi and mercimoniis addicta fuerit, ob maris viciniam. Merc.
is according to the Hebrew Canaanites. Merchants were so called, because there
was much Merchandise used by and among the Canaanites, their country lying near
the Sea. Shall thy companions make a banquet of him? etc.

Hence note, First; That which is got by hard and perilous labor, makes the
laborers merry when they have got it.

The Text seems to say; If they could but get Leviathan into their hands, what
feasting would there be, or there would be great feasting! He that by diligent
search finds that blessed treasure in the field, of which Christ spoke in the
Parable ( Mat. 13.44.) he (I say) for joy of it, sells all that he has and
buyeth that field. And as they, who have found Christ, that treasure, have
cause to rejoice with great joy: So when any good is found, or gained by hard
labor, it is matter of joy.

But is banqueting and feasting all that Fishermen aim at, when they labor
and venture so hard to catch Leviathan? surely no, they aim at profit more
than at pleasure, it is to sell off what they get to the Merchants.

Hence note; Profit puts men upon hard and perilous labors.

What almost will not men do? whither will they not venture for profit? gain
sweetens labor; and the hope of a market the hardness of the undertaking.

Shall they part him among the Merchants? Hence we may note; Merchandise is of
very ancient use.

Merchants have been of old buying and selling, conveighing by Land,
transporting by sea, the commodities of one country to another; as it turns to
the riches, so to the honor, and manifold advantages of mankind. Only let
Merchants be wise to trade heavenward, as well as earth-ward; and be careful
they make not shipwreck of a good conscience, while their ships and goods
escape it. Let them often remember the Apostles admonition (1 Cor. 7.29, 30.)
The time is short; let them that buy, be as if they possessed not; and they
that use this world, as not abusing it; for the fashion of this world passes
away. Be not unwise Merchants, such as mind not the true treasure, the right
pearl of price.

The Lord having in this sixth verse intimated, how hard a task, and how
hazardous it is to take Leviathan, speaks it expressly in the next.

Verse. 7. Can thou fill his skin with barbed Irons, or his head with
fish-spears? Barbed irons and fish-spears are instruments in use at this day
for the taking of Whales, and such like Sea Monsters. Now, says the Lord,
though thou can not draw up Leviathan with hook and line, yet possibly thou
think, he may be conquered with barbed Irons and spears. The word here
rendered barbed Irons signifies thorns, because such irons are sharp like
thorns. The skin of a well-grown Whale is extreme tough, and not easily
penetrated; so that the Lord might well say, Can thou fill his skin with
barbed Irons? or his head with fish-spears? Yet, I conceive, these questions do
not import an utter impossibility, but the extreme difficulty of taking the
Leviathan, what animal soever it is. The learned Bochartus takes these words,
as much favoring his opinion for the Crocodile; For (says he) they who write
about the manner of catching the Whale, testify that he is overcome with
showers of barbed Irons, cast or poured upon him by the Seamen that compass
him about; but as for the Crocodile, his skin is altogether impenitrable. But I
shall defer any further discourse about this point, which is the chief proof
against the Whale, till I come to the 15th verse, and those which follow, in a
description of the scales of Leviathan. And from the present words, Can thou
fill his skin with barbed Irons? etc. I shall only

Note; That which is very hardly done, may be spoken of as if it could not be
done at all.

As because it is a hard thing for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven, Christ says, it is easier for a Camel to pass through a needles eye: At
which word, his Disciples being amazed, cried out, Who then can be saved? Thus
the Prophet spoke, to show the extreme difficulty of reclaiming an accustomed
sinner ( Jer. 13.23.) Can the Ethiopian change his skin? then may he that is
accustomed to do evil, learn to do good. It is not altogether impossible for
one that is accustomed to do evil to learn to do good (through the grace of God
he may repent) but, because it is a very difficult thing, therefore the
Scripture speaks of it as if it were an impossible thing, even as impossible as
for an Ethiopian to change his hue, or the blackness of his skin, which no
labor, nothing but a miracle can do.

The difficulty of dealing with this Leviathan, is yet more plainly expressed
in the next words.

Verse. 8. Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle: do no more. Those
words, lay thy hand upon him, may be taken three ways. Demulce eum and experire
utrum ea potiti poteris. Jun.


First, Lay thy hand upon him gently, or to stroke him. As if it had been said
said. When thou can not take him by force with barbed Irons and fish-spears,
then lay thy hand upon him tenderly and friendly, try thy utmost skill (as
before thy utmost strength) whether thou can take him by fair means, by
soothing or tickling him (as some fishes are taken) about the gills.

Secondly, (To which interpretation I rather adhere, than to the former. (This
concession, lay thine hand on him, carries a sense of hostility; as if it had
been said, as we often say in such cases, Touch him if thou dare; thou had
as good have let him alone, thou had as good eat thy nails as meddle with
him; use the least violence to him at thy peril be it, he will quickly make
thee repent thy rashness, and thou will have little mind to fight it out with
him.

Thirdly, Lay thine hand upon him, may be taken in this general sense; improve
the utmost of thy skill and strength, of thy force and fraud, do thy best every
way, yet thou shall not be able to take him.

Remember the battle, or (as Mr. Broughton renders) look for war. Si tam audax
furis ut ferire ipsum sustinueris, cogita illum pugnaturum, and si potes fuge,
neque iteres ictum. Coc.
Consider what will come of it, if thou layest thy hand upon hm; for doubtless,
he will be upon thy back presently. Therefore, Do no more.

Some render it as a threat, If thou shall do more, he will quickly dispatch
thee, or thou will have little mind to meddle any more with him. We read it, as
an admonition, do no more; that is, Non erit tibi posthac de praelio
cogitandum. ^^tum enim erit de te simul ac manum immiseris. Merc. Ictus
piscator s^pit. Adag.
forbear. Some put both these latter branches of the verse together, thus, Thou
shall no more remember the battle; that is, there will be an end of thee, thou will have done fighting with him or any other, if thou beginnest to fight with
Leviathan. The clear sense of the whole, to me, is this: If thou put thine hand
upon him, if thou meddlest to take him either by force or craft, if thou do
engage any way with him, thou will be forced to remember the battle, thou will
find thou have cause to remember it as long as thou live; if thou layest, or
shall lay thy hand upon him, thou will think of the battle, that thou have made
a rash adventure, nor will thou venture so again, thy own harms will make thee
wiser, and thy sad experience (the Mistress of fools) will teach thee to take
heed. Now according to this reading, and the sense given of it, the Imperative
is put for the Future, which (as the Learned tell us) is usual in Scripture,
and the conditional term If is understood and placed at the beginning of the
sentence, which is familiar in the Hebrew tongue: And so instead of, lay thy
hand on him, etc. (as we render) the words run thus, If thou shall lay thy hand
on him, thou will remember the battle, and do no more. This is a clear sense,
and so likewise is that other, which bids him do it at his peril; lay thine
hand upon him if thou will, adventure to take him if thou dare; but remember
the battle, consider what will come of it, and do no more I advise thee. Thus
it seems to be such a concession as Solomon gives the young man ( Eccles.
11.9.) Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy own heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes; but (what follows?) know, for all these things God will bring thee
to judgment. So here the Lord seems to say, Go, lay thy hand on him, go, take
Leviathan if thou can; but remember the battle, remember Leviathan is a
terrible creature, and therefore I advise thee to do no more, or to have no
more to do with him, venture no further, he is a perilous beast.

Thus the Lord might say to Job; Thou have been very busy to call for an
account from me, and to be dealing with me; but art thou able to deal with
Leviathan? consider then how thou can deal with me; therefore sit down
quietly, take heed of the least thought that my ways toward thee want the
least grain of justice, or that they are wanting of mercy and loving kindness;
contend no longer, strive no more with me, who have more strength than ten
thousand Leviathans; and with whom to contend, it is ten thousand times more
dangerous, than with Leviathan. Remember the battle, do no more.

Hence note;

First, It is good to remember the issues of actions before we act.

Lay thy hand upon him; but consider what will come of it, what it may cost
thee: As in that great business of our receiving Christ in the Gospel, put your
hand to the plow, put your hand to the profession of the Gospel; but pray
remember the battle: you may come to a great battle, you may have to deal with
proud Leviathans, before you have made good your good profession. This was
Christ's council ( Luke 14.28, 33.) to all his Disciples, Which of you intending
to build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts the cost? etc. Or what
King going to make war with another King, sits not down first, and
consulteth? etc. whether he can maintain the war, he remembers the battle; so,
etc. The believing Jews ( Heb. 10.34.) endured a groat fight of affliction
after they were illuminated, and had received the Lord Jesus Christ. There are
two things which we should be very much in remembering. First, Our duty (
Eccles. 12.1.) Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Secondly, Our
danger; or, take both together, what danger duty may engage us in; else when
danger comes we shall soon forsake our duty. Many take up a profession of
Christ, who never thought of the danger, of the trials, afflictions and
temptations, which might befall them for his sake; they remembered not the
battle, and so have either presently been overcome and fallen in it, or have
unworthily forsaken their colors, and run from it.

Secondly, Note; It is best not to do, or forbear to do that which we cannot
but see (if we have our eyes in our heads) will be dangerous to us in the doing.

We are not always to forbear the doing of those things that will be dangerous
to our outward man (for so the best things may be) but those things that will
be dangerous to our bodies and souls too, we must always for bear to do; in all
such cases it is our duty to remember the battle, and do no more. Will any wise
man engage in danger which can produce no profit? There are some things which
we are to do, and do again, though our danger be never so great, yea, though we
lose our lives in doing them: But there are many things we may not do if we
foresee danger. The Apostle Paul (Acts 27.9, 10.) being at sea, said I
perceive that this voyage will be with hurt and much damage, not only to the
lading of the ship, but to our lives also; therefore he tells them ( ver. 21.)
Sirs, ye should have harkened to me, and not have loosed from Crete, and to
have gained this harm and loss; that had been their wisdom, when they were
warned of the danger, not to have gone on. When there is danger to our bodies
only, and we see no benefit that may countervail the danger, it is folly to
proceed. I may urge this point specially in case of sin: Take heed of doing any
thing that is evil; remember the battle that sin will bring you to. Sin will
bring you to a terrible battle, to such a battle as no man can stand in or
escape. Sin brings to a battle infinitely more dangerous than that with
Leviathan. Sin provokes God to battle; and when God is angry, we may more
safely contend with ten thousand Leviathans, than with him. When you are
tempted to put your hand to sin, O remember the battle, remember the battle.
Thou (possibly) wilt have a sore battle in thy own conscience, and that is a
dreadful Leviathan; but that is not all, remember the battle with God, who is
greater than conscience; you must come to judgment, remember the battle of that
day, or that day of Battle, with impenitent and hardened sinners, and sin no
more; give it over, as you love your lives, as you love your precious souls,
and the everlasting peace or welfare of them. You cannot sin without a great
deal of danger, even the danger of eternal wrath and death.

Thus I have touched at some things from this third part of the description of
Leviathan. He has hitherto been set before us: First, In the huge bulk and
bigness of his body. Secondly, In the stoutness of his spirit; he will neither
make supplications, nor enter covenant; he will neither serve you, nor sport
with you; both which, Behemoth, the Elephant, will do. Thirdly, In the
difficulty and danger of taking him; So much danger is in it, that if you lay
your hand on him, it were best to remember the battle, and do no more. Yet the
Lord speaks more concerning the danger of meddling with Leviathan, in the ninth
verse throughout, and in the former part of the tenth.

Verse. 9. Behold, the hope of him is in vain. As if the Lord had said, if none
of these means can take Leviathan, then the hope of him that goes about to take
him is lost and frustrate; if by these means he cannot be taken, then there is
no means to take him, for he cannot be taken by any means. The hope Of him.

That is, of him that goes about to catch Leviathan. In order of speech it
should have been said, thy hope will b^ in vain, Dicendum sucrat spes tua, sed
in genere dicere voli erit, etc. Merc.
for God was speaking before to Job; yet he does not say thy hope, but the hope
of him, that is, the hope of any man will be in vain: as if he had said, not
only shall thou labor in vain, to graple with this sea monster Leviathan, but
all men else, whosoever they are, that attempt or go about to take him. The
hope of him is In vain.

(...) Mantitas reipsa vel verbis.
The Hebrew is, the hope of him lies. It is usual both in the Hebrew and Latin
tongue, when our hopes and endeavors fail, or are frustrate, to say, they lie,
or deceive us; and the reason is, because such a man promised himself great
things, and had confident expectations, without success. Thus it is said. ( Hab.
3.17.) Although the labor of the Olive shall fail, we put in the Margin, lie.
The Husbandman having bestowed much labor upon the Olive, and looking for
much fruit, may be deceived, and so all that labor bestowed in dressing and
looking to the Olive Tree failing and being lost, the labor of the Olive (or
the pains taken about the Olive Tree) is said to lie. The hope of him shall be
in vain, or lie.

Our hope is said to be in vain three ways.

First, When we hope for much, and get but little, according ^o that of the
Prophet, convincing the Jews of their neglect in building the Temple ( Hag.
1.9.) Ye looked for much, and behold it came to little; ye hoped for a
plentiful harvest, ye thought to have had a great crop, but it went very close
together; ye looked for cart-loads, but had scarcely handfuls: So some expound,
or give the meaning of that Prophecy ( Isa. 49. 4th and 6th compared) It is a
Prophecy of Christ; at the 4th verse Christ says, I have labored in vain, I
have spent my strength for naught, and in vain. Why did Christ say he had
labored in vain? He tells us the reason at the 6th verse; And he said, that
is, the Lord said to him, It is a light thing that thou should be my servant
to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel; I will
also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation
unto the end of the earth. Christ looked upon his labor as labor in vain, if
he had died to redeem the Jews only, and therefore, says God, I will give thee
for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the end of the
earth; and then, I hope, thou will not think thy labor in vain. Now when the
Lord had granted Jesus Christ, that he should not only be salvation to the
Jews, but also to the ends of the earth, or to the Gentiles; he no longer said,
I have labored in vain, but thought himself well rewarded for all his cost and
pains, for all that he did or suffered, to bring about and effect the salvation
of man. Hope is in vain when we have, and get but little, expecting much.

Secondly, Hope it much more in vain, when we hope for much, and get nothing at
all. As Peter said to Christ ( Luke 5.5.) We have toyled all night, and have
taken nothing. That Is like fishing for Leviathan; such hope is utterly in vain.
Such a vain hope the Church spoke of ( Jerem. 8.15.) We looked for peace
(looking is an act of hope) and no good came, no good at all; that hope is
vain, when we look for peace, and no good, no benefit comes. And thus the Lord
spoke of his smiting in vain, ( Jerem. 2.30.) In vain have I smitten your
Children. Why in vain? they have received no correction, that is, they were
never a whit the better for it, they were not amended by it. When God spends
his rods upon us, and we neither cease to do evil, nor learn to do good, then
he corrects us in vain. And when he sends his word, and we receive no good by
it, no instruction by it, then his word is in vain. To wash an Ethiopian, is
the embleam of labor in vain, because, how much soever you wash him, he is not
at all the whiter, nor is any change wrought in his complexion.

Thirdly, Hope is yet more in vain, when we look for good, and get hurt instead
of good. The Prophet complained ( Jerem. 8.15.) not only thus, We look for
peace, and no good came; but (as it follows) for a time of health, and behold,
trouble. But what was the time of health which they looked for, or what was the
health which they looked for at that time? There is a twofold health, a health
of the body natural, and a health of the body politic, which consists in
prosperity and peace; for this health they looked, but behold trouble. So (
Jer. 14.19.) We looked for peace; and there was no good; and for a time of
healing, and behold trouble. Thus the Lords Vineyard, that is, the Church of
the Jews disappointed the Lords expectation ( Isa. 5.5.) when, while he looked
for grapes, it brought forth wild grapes, that is, as it is explained ( ver. 7.)
Oppression instead of judgment, and instead of righteousness a cry. This was
the quite contrary; and this is the worst way of having our hope in vain. It is
said ( Job 27.8.) What is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained,
when God takes away his soul? Suppose a hypocrite has gained much in this
world, yea, suppose he has got or gained all the world, yet what is his hope
when God takes away his soul? then he will not only find no God, but much
trouble, pain, and anguish, and wrath, and hell for evermore upon him. When
Christ says ( Mat. 16.26.) What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? His meaning is not only this, that he shall have
no profit at all, but he shall be utterly undone and broke for ever. How vain
then is the hope of that man, yea, how vain a man is that, who hopes for profit
or gain, in doing that which endangers the loss of his soul, much more that by
which his soul is absolutely and for ever lost.

Thus hope is in vain; First, when we hope for much, and get little; Secondly,
when we hope for much, and get nothing; Thirdly, when we hope for good, and get
hurt. Now, in these two latter senses we are to take the meaning of God here. A
man may hope by use of means to catch Leviathan, yet he gets nothing, yea,
probably loses much, or gets much hurt. Behold, the h^pe of him is in vain.

Hence note, First; It is hope of gain that usually puts men upon action.

The Lord supposes that they who undertake the taking of Leviathan, hope to
gain much by taking him. It Is hope of attaining, that encourages to doing. No
man would be stirring, much less bestir himself about any business, were it not
for hope of getting. And as it is hope of attaining that puts upon doing, so it
is hope of attaining that puts us upon suffering. Who would suffer for Jesus
Christ, if he had not a hope of attaining somewhat better than he can lose by
his sufferings? therefore Jesus Christ has set that hope before us. To suffer
rightly for Jesus Christ, is so honorable, that we should suffer willingly,
though we get nothing by it: yet he has set a reward before us, a crown, by
his Cross; he has assured us all our losses, even our loss of life for his
sake, shall turn to our gain and profit. Hope of attaining is the motive to
every undertaking. No wise man will meddle with doing that, which is either
impossible to be done, or altogether unprofitable when it is done. Were it not
for hope, the heart would faint. First, in laboring. Secondly, in suffering.
Thirdly, in waiting. Hope is like a Helmet upon the head, when we are in danger
of blows (2 These. 5.8.) and like an Anchor, both sure and steadfast, when we are
in storms ( Heb. 6.19.)

Secondly, The Lord having said before, Remember the battle, and do no more,
adds, The hope of him is in vain.

Hence note; It is a vain thing to go about that, which we see no ground of
hope to have success in, to do good upon, or to get any good by.

As the Apostle exhorts us, To be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, forasmuch as we know (true believers do know, and all men
should know) that our labor is not in vain in the Lord; so we have ground
enough to dehort all men from those works, which we know, or may know, will be
in vain. And if so,

Then, First, How vain a thing is it for any man to sin? Is there any thing to
be gotten by sin? I may well say to sinners, as the Lord says to Job, in the
latter end of the 8th verse, Do no more, sin no more; your hope is in vain that
think to gain by sin, that hope to make your selves rich, great or happy, by
sin; Do no more, your hope is in vain. The Apostle puts the question ( Romans
6.21.) What fruit had you then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed?
Have you got any benefit by them? have you got any thing worth the getting? All
that is gained by sin, will turn to loss at last. Samuel charged the Israelites
upon this account (1 Samuel 12.21.) Turn ye not aside (that is, do not sin, do
not turn from the Law of the Lord, do not depart from God, why?) for then
should you go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver, for they are
vain. If you turn aside from the ways of God, to by-ways; from the truths of
God, to error; from the true worship of God, to idolatry; and from communion
with God, to creature comforts and contentments; you go after vain things which
cannot profit. To be vain, and to be unprofitable, are the same thing. Take
heed of sin, for you cannot make any profit of it, you cannot raise any true
revenue out of it, you will one time or other be ashamed (as the Prophet
speaks) of all those revenues; your hope that way is vain.

Secondly, Then how vain a thing is it to oppose the Church of God! Why?
because there is no ground of hope for success in that attempt. The world has
been upon it all along, but they could never effect nor accomplish what they
have imagined; they have done all, but prosper in it; they never had their end,
which is the end or total destruction of the Church. Pharaoh would oppose and
vex Israel, the Church of God, and keep them low; but he could not attain his
end, for the more he oppressed them, the more they multiplied; therefore all
such are said to imagine a vain thing ( Psalm. 2.1, 2.) Why do the Heathen rage,
and the people imagine a vain thing? the Kings of the earth set themselves, and
the Rulers take counsel together, against the Lord and against his anointed,
but all in vain. Nothing less came of it, than what they imagined, or their
imaginations came to nothing, yea, brought them to nothing. I (says the Lord,
Zach. 12.3.) will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people; all that
burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces. If any meddle with
Jerusalem, they will find they lift at a very heavy stone, and that they meddle
not with their match; they shall surely be not only overmatcht, but overthrown
at length, who do so. The Church is founded upon a rock, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it (Mat. 16.18.) that is, neither the counsels nor
confederacies, neither the power nor the policy of men or devils, shall be able
to prevail against it. The History of the Church, says of Dioclesian a cruel
persecuter, that for very vexation he gave up the Government of the Empire,
because he saw he could not suppress Christianity by all his machinations
against the Christians. And doubtless they in the Gospel ( John 12.19.) were
not a little troub^ed, when they said among themselves, Perceive ye how we
prevail nothing? Behold, the world is gone after him.

Thirdly, Note; The loss of hope, or hope lost, is the greatest loss.

When God would show man's worst condition, he says, His hope is in vain; he
does not say, his labor is in vain, but, his hope is in vain; that pincheth
most of all, and that is it which will pinch Hypocrites most at last, who were
in hope of enjoying God; but not only their labor, but their hope shall be in
vain: when they come big with expectation, and say, Lord, Lord, we have done
thus and thus; when, as the foolish Virgins, they shall knock boldly, and cry
earnestly, Lord, Lord, open to us, the answer given them will be only this, I
know you not; that is, I know you not for mine, as you presumed your selves to
be, even while you walked (not as mine, in wisdom, but) in your own folly. This
loss of hope will grieve more than the loss of Heaven. As Christ told the
Pharisees, You shall weep, and gnash your teeth, when you see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out. You thought that you should be saved above all men; but
says Christ, you shall be thrust out, and lose your hopes. This the Lord
speaks, to show the worst of their condition, who attempt to take Leviathan,
Their hope shall be in vain.

In the latter part of the verse, the Lord gives us a farther account, why
their hope is in vain.

Shall not a man be cast down at the sight of him? Is there any hope of taking
him, at whose very sight a man shall certainly be cast down? There is a twofold
casting down.

First, a casting down by outward violence, when a man is thrust down (as we
speak) by head and shoulders. Thus David cast down Goliath, by a sling and a
stone.

Secondly, There is a casting down by inward trouble; as we usually say, such a
man is mightily cast down. Trouble of spirit, heart-vexation, and fear, cast
down many before any hand touches them. Christ speaking of Capernaum, says (
Luke 10.15.) And thou Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shall be thrust
down to hell. As if he had said, thou have been high in thy expectations, and
highly privileged in thy enjoyments, having had the Gospel preached to thee;
but thou shall not only fall down, but thou shall be thrust down into hell,
with a kind of violence. When the Lord in the Text says, Shall not one be cast
down? we are to understand it of a casting down by the strong impression of
astonishment and fear, of dread and trouble, seizing upon the man's spirit who
comes near Leviathan, and therefore it follows, Shall not one be cast down At
the sight of him?

A man shall no sooner see him, but he shall sink; and if so, then how little
hope has any one to grapple with him, and to take him? There is small hope of
overcoming this Leviathan, when a man at his sight, or as far off as he can see
him, is so afraid of him as to be cast down with fear. The very sight of a
Whale is a terror to Mariners and Seamen, they are afraid their Ship may be
overturned and spoiled by him.

Some read the words thus; Will he be cast down even at the sight of him? and
they give this meaning of it. Will the Leviathan be cast down at the sight of a
man, when he comes prepared to take him? Thou think Leviathan a poor
spirited fish; or that he will be afraid of thy looks, or to see thee, as other
fishes are, who when they see or apprehend a man near, scuttle away, as we say;
but thou will find Leviathan is a fish that will not be afraid at the sight of
thee. This is a good sense, but I conceive that before given more suitable; that
the sight of Leviathan, or a Leviathan, as soon as seen, is so terrible, that a
man will be stricken with fear as soon as he sees him, Shall not one be cast
down at the sight of him?

Hence note, First; The sight of the eye works much upon the heart.

The Lord says not, Shall not one be cast down by the force of him, but, at
the very sight of him. The eye has a mighty operation upon the inward man,
yea, upon the whole man; the eye has a mighty force upon the heart as to three
things.

First, It has a mighty force upon the heart as to joy. If we see a person
that we have a great deal of love for, how do we rejoice presently at the sight
of him! It Is true also of things. It is said of Jacob (Genesis 45.27.) When he saw
the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, his spirit revived; it put a new
life into him, to see that which gave him much assurance, that he should see a
person that was the desire of his eyes, his beloved son Joseph; it revived the
old man, and made him even young again. And as a pleasing sight made old Jacob,
as it were, begin to live again; so old Simeon rejoiced so much at the sight of
Christ, that he had done with living, or had enough of it, and therefore said,
Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation; that is, he had seen Christ with the eye of his body, and he had a
sight of Christ by the eye of his faith; this sight lifted him above all things
seen. A sensitive sight of good, does very much cheer, refresh, and rejoice the
heart, much more an intellectual sight; how much does the sight of faith
refresh the soul, and cause us to rejoice! It is said of believers, They
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, at the sight which they have of
Christ by faith ((...). 1.8.) Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though
now you see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
glory. Whom having not seen, that is, with bodily eyes; and, in whom, though
you see him not, that is, sensitively, yet believing: What is believing? it is
the sight of the soul. Faith gives the soul a view of Christ in all his
excellency and glory, in his love and in his loveliness, in his righteousness
and holiness: faith gets a view of Christ in all his beauty; and beholding him,
we rejoice with joy unspeakable. If the sight of the bodily eye causes the
soul to rejoice, how much more the sight of the eye of faith! the eye of either
fixed upon desirable objects, affects the heart with joy.

Secondly, The sight of the eye fixed upon sorrowful objects, affects the heart
with sorrow ( Lam. 3.51.) Mine eye affects my heart, said lamenting Jeremiah;
that is, seeing the calamities that are upon my people, I cannot but weep and
mourn. Christ says of the yet blinded and hardened Jews, They shall look on me
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn (Zach. 12.10.) They shall shed
tears of true repentance, when they shall see him with an eye of sense, joined
with an eye of faith, whose blood they shed. Some of them saw him once with an
eye of sense, without an eye of faith, and then they shed his blood; but when
they shall see him with both, or only with an eye of faith, they shall mourn
for shedding it. When good Nehemiah heard in what a ruinous condition the City
Jerusalem was, he sat down, and wept, and imourned certain days (Neh. 1.4.)
his ear affected his heart, how much more would his eye, had he been a
spectator (as afterward he was) of those ruins!

Thirdly, The sight of the eye affects the heart with fear. There are some
sights very dreadful; so says the Text and Point, Shall not one be cast down
at the sight of him? This leads to a second Note, which is this: The Lord has
put a terribleness upon some creatures, with respect to man.

Man is a terror to some creatures; yet others are a terror, or very terrible
to man. Let us consider, and usefully remember this, for it is a fruit of sin.
What is the reason we are cast down at the sight of any creature? we may thank
our sins for it; all our troublesome passions came in a^ that door. Why is man
afraid or seized with a kind of horror, at the sight of a Toad or Serpent? of a
Bear or Lion loose? How comes it to pass, that man, whom God made Lord over all
the creatures, does fear any, especially so many of them? Is not this a
consequent, yea, an effect of sin? When God made the Covenant with Noah (Genesis
9.2.) God blessed him and his sons, and said unto them, be fruitful and
multiply, and replenish the earth: and the fear of you, and the dread of you,
shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon
all that moves upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the Sea; the fear
and dread of you shall be upon them. It Is of the Lord that any of the creatures
are afraid and stand in awe of us; we have deserved, that the very Sheep and
Dove should be a terror to us. It Is of the Lord that the fear and dread of us
is upon any creature, and it is from our sin that any creature is a fear and
dread to us: It is a mercy that so many creatures are afraid of us; that any of
the creatures stand in fear of us, is a fruit of the goodness of God; and that
we are afraid of any creature, is a fruit of our sin. Let us make a good use of
this word, Shall not one be afraid at the sight of him?

And hence we may infer; If the sight of some creatures astonish us, how will
the sight of God, of an angry God astonish us!

All the dread and terribleness that is in a Lion, or Bear, or Dragon, what is
it to what is in God? With God is terrible Majesty. The terribleness of the
most terrible deadly creature, yea, of death, the King of terrors, is but a
scarecrow to the terribleness of God; and it is God who has planted terror in
any creature, in man especially. What is the reason why Kings and inferior
Magistrates are so terrible to evil men? is it not because God has planted
such a terribleness in them, or has clothed them (with his own garment)
terrible majesty toward evil doers? ( Romans 13.3, 4.) Now I say, if some
creatures are so terrible, that a man is cast down at the sight of them, then
how terrible is God! The Apostle John (Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.) represents a world
of wicked ones, or all the wicked of the world, cast down at the sight of Jesus
Christ; The Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every freeman, hid
themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains, and said to the
mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath
is come, and who shall be able to stand? Some are cast down at the sight of
Leviathan, but all the unbelieving world shall be cast down at the sight of
Christ; all the unbelieving Kings, Princes, and Potentates of the world shall
be cast down before Christ; O how dreadful will he be to them! and therefore (I
would conclude with that) let us be cast down at the sight of sin, which has
caused the sight of the creature, and of God also, to be so dreadful to us. God
had never been terrible to us, had it not been for sin; nor had the sight of
any creature been terrible to us, had we not sinned. When Adam had sinned, then
God was terrible to him, then presently he hid himself. O therefore be cast
down at the sight of sin, which has made both God and many creatures a terror,
a casting down to us. How terrible this creature Leviathan is to man, appears
further, by what the Lord says next.

Verse. 10. None is so fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand
before me? The former part of this verse, carries on the matter of the whole
former verse, None is so fierce that dare stir him up; that is, Leviathan is a
creature so fierce, so cruel, that none, how fierce soever, dare provoke him,
no, nor awaken him. The words may be taken two ways.

First, None dare stir him up when he is asleep. (...) crudelis, saevus, fevox,
immisericors.


Secondly, No man dares challenge or provoke him when he is awake. The word
rendered fierce, properly signifies cruel, because cruelty makes men fierce, or
because fierce men are usually very cruel. None is so fierce as to stir him up.

Hence note, First; There is no wisdom in provoking an enemy that is too strong
for us.

Wise men, though bold, and possibly cruel too, yet when attempts are exceeding
dangerous, will not venture. Physicians will not stir some humors in the body,
for it would be like stirring of a fierce Lion that is asleep; they dare not
provoke them, but do all they can to attemper and allay them; to stir such a
humor were to stir Leviathan. He has more rashness than courage, who meddles
with more than his match, or (as some say) conjures up a spirit, that he cannot
lay again.

Secondly, Says the Lord, none is so fierce or cruel that dare stir him up. He
means not cruel to Leviathan, but to himself; none is so cruel to himself, as
to go about to stir up Leviathan, because there is so much danger in that
attempt.

Whence, Observe; They who run themselves upon great dangers unadvisedly are
cruel to themselves.

They are their own enemies, and the greatest enemies to themselves. How cruel
then are sinners to their own souls, who are so fierce as daily to stir up
Leviathan! ( Prove. 6.32.) Whosoever commits adultery with a woman has no
understanding; he that does it destroys his own soul; surely then he is cruel
to his own soul: he seems to be very kind to his harlot, but he is very unkind,
yea, cruel to himself ( Pro. 8.36.) He that sins against me (says Wisdom)
wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me, love death. It Is Christ that
speaks thus, he that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul, he is cruel to
himself. Many, when they sin, do it to please themselves: O what a good turn do
they hope to do themselves, when they venture upon unlawful pleasures or
profits; But he that does so, hates me (says Christ) and he that hates me,
loves death. How cruel is that man to his own life, that is in love with death;
yet so in truth are they who love any sin, by sining. You may (as was touched
before) stir up and awaken a sleeppy conscience, and conscience may be more
terrible than Leviathan; yea, by sin, you may awaken and stir up the sleeping
vengeance of God, who is more than a thousand Leviathans, and consciences. Once
more remember, that possibly, by not stirring up your selves to take hold of
God, you may stir up God to be angry with you, as it is said ( Isa. 64.6, 7.)
Our iniquities like the wind have taken us away. What follows? And (or for)
there is none that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold
of thee. Which words, as I apprehend, may be taken two ways. First, As showing
their sluggishness, that though their iniquities, that is, the punishment of
their iniquities, carried them away, or they were carried ^way as a punishment
of their iniquities, yet they did not stir up themselves to call upon the name
of God, nor to take hold of him. Secondly, As showing the reason, why their
iniquities carried them away, even, because they did not stir up themselves to
take hold of God. Their not stirring up themselves to take hold of God, stirred
up God against them. If we do not stir up our selves, especially, when at any
time we are compassed about with sins and dangers, or with dangers procured and
brought upon us by our sins, as with Leviathans, we may stir up God against us
as a Leviathan. And therefore let us take heed, lest we be found fierce and
cruel against our own souls, by sinning against God, or by not stirring up our
selves to take hold of God; such neglects are full of provocations.

Hitherto we have had instruction concerning this Leviathan, how great, how
stout, how fierce and cruel he is: now the Lord makes application. He has been
di^coursing about a huge tremendous Sea Monster; but what is all this for?
Surely, for very great use: And the Lord makes use of it two ways.

First, In this verse, to show his own irresistibleness. If none can stand
before Leviathan, then who can stand before me?

Secondly, In the (11th verse) to show his own independency, that he has no
need of any creature: Who has prevented me that I should repay him? And all
this the Lord makes good by that great assertion, for whatsoever is under the
whole heaven is mine; this great Leviathan is mine to do what I will with him.
This is the sum of that twofold Application, which the Lord makes from the
hitherto description of L^viathan; the first part whereof is expressed in the
latter part of the 10th verse.

Who then is able to stand before me? As is the Lord had said, no man is able
to stand before me. If this creature, Leviathan, be so terrible, that no man is
able to stand before him? then, who can stand before me? for all the strength
and courage that Leviathan has, I have given him, and it is nothing to what I
have; it is not so much to me as a drop of the bucket, or a dust of the
balance, to the whole world. Can none stand before Leviathan? Who then can
stand before me?

One Translation says, Can you resist before my look? Quis rasistere potent
vultu meo? Scult.
As God had said before, one shall be cast down at the sight of him, namely, of
Leviathan; so here, Can any man stand before me, or at the sight of me? Is any
man able to abide my look, the majesty of my eye? Surely no. The sense is much
the same with that of our reading, Who then is able to stand before me?

Hence, Observe; Our inability to stand before mighty creatures, should mind us
of our utter inability to stand before the Almighty God.

This is the most proper use that ever was made of a doctrine. The Lord made a
promise (and it was a very wonderful promise which the Lord made) to Joshua
(Josh. 1.5.) There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days
of thy life. What a promise was here to a man! Joshua was indeed one of the
worthiest warriers that ever was upon the earth, and may well be reckoned, not
only one of, but the chief or most worthy, among the nine Worthies of the
world, seeing no man could stand before him, nor should, in way of opposition,
all the days of his life. Now if the Lord promised such a power unto Joshua,
and made it good, that none should be able to stand before him all the days of
his life; then who among the children of men shall be able to stand before God?
The Prophet Malachy speaking of Christ's coming ( Chap. 3.1.) says, Behold he
shall suddenly come into his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant. But
what follows? ( ver. 2.) Who may abide the day of his coming? If there was such
a terribleness in Christ's coming in the flesh, as to the spiritual power and
effects of it, that the Prophet says, Who may abide the day of his coming? O
then, who shall be able to stand before Christ, when he shall come in glory to
judge the earth? If they could not abide the day of his coming, when he came
with refiners fire, and fullers soap, how will they be able to stand before
him, when he comes with consuming fire! No man can stand before God, in any of
these four ways.

First, In his own wisdom, to plead it out with God. If we plead with God, our
wisdom will be found foolishness, and we our selves shall be confounded as
fools. The Lord (says Job, Chap. 12.17.) makes the Judges fools. Judges are
usually full of wisdom, yet God makes even them fools. God in strict sense
makes none, nor would he have any made Judges, but the wise; yet he himself
can make the wisest of them fools. And if so, then there is no standing before
God in our own wisdom.

Secondly, There is no standing before God in our own strength or power. Our
strength is but weakness, yea, rottenn^ss to his, as the Prophet speaks ( Isa.
5.24.) Their root shall be rottenness, and there blossom shall go up as the
dust. Thus it is with all flesh; if they stand in their own strength, their
root (which is their strength) shall be as rottenness, and their blossom
(which is their beauty) shall go up as the dust.

Thirdly, There is no standing before God in our own righteousness, to be
acquitted, accepted, and justified. There are many deficiencies and flaw^ in
our righteousness, therefore we cannot stand before God in it; there is much
unrighteousness in our righteousness, therefore we cannot stand before God in
it; and how righteous (if I may so speak) soever our righteousness is, or may
be, yet we cannot stand before God in it, because he has appointed another
righteousness, or the righteousness of another, even the righteousness of Jesus
Christ, for us, to stand before him in.

So then, if we would stand before God, all these must be laid down; we must
lay down our own wisdom, we must become fools, that we may be wise; we must lay
down our own strength, we must become weak, that we may be strong; and we must
lay down our own righteousness, and look upon our selves as guilty creatures,
as condemned persons, as cast and lost, in our selves: we must have nothing,
but the wisdom, and strength, and righteousness of God to stand before God in,
that is, we must stand before God by faith: God is not terrible to such, they
may stand before God; the poorest sinner may stand before God in the wisdom,
and strength, and righteousness of Jesus Christ. Thus we may answer the
question; Who can stand before me? says God: I can stand before thee, says a
believer; I can stand before thee with boldness, being quit of self-wisdom,
strength and righteousness, and looking to Christ Jesus for all.

How sweet, how gracious, and how delightful is the presence of God to an
humble believing soul, to a brokenhearted sinner! The Lord says, I will dwell
with such a one; he shall not only come and stand before me, but I will come
and sit down with him, I will take up my abode in an humble soul, in an empty
soul. Who is able to stand before me? (says God) None can in their own wisdom,
strength or righteousness, but in Christ we may. From hence we may more than
conclude,

Fourthly, That there is no standing before God in our sins. God is terrible to
sinners, that is, to those who continue in the love and practice of their sins:
God is of purer eyes, than to behold and approve evil. David having spoken of
those ( Psalm. 1.1.) that stand in the way of sinners, says (at the 5th ver.)
there is a standing for them in the Judgment. They that stand in the way of
sinners, cannot stand at the Judgment Seat of God. Job said ( Chap. 13.16.) A
hypocrite shall not come before him, that is, he shall not come with acceptance
before God. Though hypocrites will thrust themselves into the presence of God,
yet they shall not come before him; though now an hypocrite may come before God
in any outward performance, yet not with any acceptance: and to be sure he
shall not come before God in glory; and if he shall not come before him, how
can he stand before him? The Lord will even blow him away. Only they that fall
down before God are able to stand before him. We must fall down before God, in
a sense of our own vileness and wretchedness, and then we shall be able to
stand before him, and to behold his pleased face by an eye of faith: A stout
sinner shall never stand before him. It is said ( Zech. 3.1.) Joshua stood
before the Angel of the Lord. He had much ado to keep his standing; why?
because the Devil stood there to resist him, and pointed to his filthy
garments: but the Angel pleaded with the Lord, to take away his filthy
garments; and when they were taken away, then he was able to stand before God.
It is said ( Zech. 4.14.) which is conceived to be meant of Joshua and
Zerubbabel) These are the two anointed ones, which stand before the Lord of the
whole earth. And as they in the type, so all that are Olive-branches, that have
the pure oil of the Spirit, may and shall stand before God. We become
Olive-branches in Christ, having the oil, or the graces of the Spirit, sent
down into our hearts, according to the promise. Holy and humble souls,
Olive-branches, they that are full of the grace and Spirit of our Lord Jesus,
shall stand before God; but as for man himself, that is, man in himself, in his
own wisdom, strength or righteousness, above all, in his sins and
unrighteousness, can never stand before God. If he cannot stand before
Leviathan? how can he stand before the Lord? This is a great Gospel truth given
in by himself, while he is treating of this sea monster. There is no standing
before God in our selves; there is no standing before God without a Mediator;
and there is no Mediator but Jesus Christ, who is both God and Man, or God-man,
for man to stand before God in.

Thus much of the first use or inference, which the Lord makes from all that he
had said of Leviathan. The second inference follows in the next verse.

Verse. 11. Who has prevented me that I should repay him? As in the former
verse the Lord gave us instruction concerning his own all sufficiency and
irresistible power, Who can stand before me? So in this, he instructs us
concerning his own absolute independency, Who has prevented me that I should
repay him? Both which parts of the Application, the Lords shuts up with an
Assertion of his universal sovereignty and lordship over all creatures, in the
close of this 11th verse, Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine.

Who has prevented me that I should repay him? Master Broughton renders, Who
gave me any thing first, (...) quis precessit me?
that I may pay him again. These words the Apostle Paul plainly alludes to
(some conceive he quotes them) in the 35th verse of the 11th Chapter of his
Epistle to the Romans, Who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been
his counselor? or who has first given to him? and it shall be recompensed
unto him again. So says Saint Paul; and here the Lord himself says, Who has
prevented me that I should repay him? as much as to say, Who has first given
to me? and it shall be recompensed unto him again.

Who has prevented me? The Lord seems in these words, Quis ostendit mihi viam
in cretione totius mundi? Vatebl.
to make proclamation all the world over, to enquire among Angels and Men, who
it is, or whether there be any one that can come forth and say, he has
prevented him.

To prevent, is to be aforehand with another in courtesy or kindness, in help
or assistance. God prevents man in all these, but no man has prevented God in
any one of them. We may give a threefold interpretation of this divine
challenge.

First, Who has prevented me, or who was aforehand with me in the work of
Creation? who helped me to make Leviathan? you see what a piece of work he is,
how vast, how dreadful a creature he is: who helped me? or who gave me any help
in the forming, or creating of him? Several expound this question of the Lords
independency in the work of creation; none began to him, none directed him how
to create, none counseled him what to create. The Apostle uses that word, Who
has been his counselor? No man has been the Lords counselor, nor did he
need any counsel, in or about any of his works. And as none were his
counselors to give him advice, so none were, his helpers to give him any
assistance, to bring the work about; no hand has been put to it, but his own;
no hand was at it, nor in it, but his own. I am he (says the Lord, Isa.
54.24.) that makes all things, that stretches forth the heavens alone, that
spreads abroad the earth by my self; I have done all alone, all by my self,
the Angels did not help me. As God made the Angels without help, so he used not
the help of Angels in making any thing else.

Secondly, Who has prevented me, in governing and disposing the affairs of the
world? I have had no counsel hitherto for that: And shall any now take upon
them to teach me the art of government.

Thirdly, In general, Who has prevented me? that is, who has done me any good
office? who contributed the least benefit to me? to whom am I beholding for the
least mite?

That I should repay him. (...) a verbo (...)
That is, that I should be engaged to repay him. The word which we render to
repay, signifies properly to make peace; because when debts are paid, and what
is due discharged, then all is quiet, there is no matter of difference
remaining. As if the Lord had said, If any one can produce any bill, or bond,
or make proof, that I stand indebted to him, I am ready to satisfy him, and to
discharge all my obligations. Who has prevented me that I should repay him?

Hence note, First; God will not be in any man's debt.

If any can make it good, that they have prevented him, that they have given
him counsel or assistance in his works of creation and providence, or that they
have done him the least courtesy, they shall receive to the full worth and
value of it. What we do in way of duty to the Lord, he is ready to reward us
for it; we shall not lose our labor, though God be no gainer by it: And though
it be through his grace, strength and assistance, that we do any good, yet we
shall be rewarded as if we had done it alone. Surely, then God would not be in
our debt, if we could do any thing alone, or that did in it self oblige him.

Secondly, Note; God is aforehand with us, not we with him.

The Lord prevents us, we do not prevent him: That Is it which the Lord would
then have Job, and now us to understand, by this question, Who has prevented
me? even that himself has prevented us all, and in all, by his grace and
goodness, in any good we have received or done. David waited for this
preventing grace ( Psalm. 59.10.) The God of my mercy shall prevent me, he shall
let me see my desire upon mine enemies; he shall prevent, not only my
endeavors, but even my desires and wishes. Yet what in this Psalm he professed
an assurance of, in another Psalm (to show that our assurance of mercy must not
give a stop to duty) he puts into a prayer ( Psalm. 79.8.) O remember not
against us former iniquities, let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for
we are brought very low. The Lord has preventing mercies for his people, in
their low estate. Though we do not prevent the Lord, though we are not
beforehand with him by our preparations and prayers, by our repentings and
reformings in our low estate, yet he has mercies ready and prepared for us;
yea, though we come forth to meet the Lord (as we are advised, Amos 4.12.)
humbling our selves before him, in prayers and tears, yet this does not prevent
the Lord, but he prevents us by his grace and favor, helping us to mourn and
pray. And as the Lord always prevents us by helping us to pray, so he
sometimes prevents us with an answer to our prayers, before he helps us to pray
( Isa. 65.24.) It shall come to pass, that before they call I will answer, and
while they are yet speaking, I will hear; that is, they shall have an answer to
their prayers, before they have made their prayers: so that, when we have made
many prayers, and have been long in prayer, much fasting and humbling our
selves, yet mercy prevents us. Mercy comes usually, before we are well fitted
for mercy, always before we have merited or deserved it.

But says not David (Psalm. 88.13.) Unto thee have I cried, O Lord, and in the
morning shall my prayer prevent thee. Here David seemed to be aforehand with
God. Who has prevented me? says God; yet David said, My prayer shall prevent
thee. The meaning is only this, That David would pray very early and very
earnestly, or that David would watch unto prayer, and so, if possible, even
prevent God; not that his prayers did indeed prevent God, but he was resolved
to set so hard to, and sit so close at the duty of prayer, that if such a thing
could be, he would even prevent him, he would, as we may say, take God before
he was awake, as the Psalmist spoke elsewhere, Arise, O God, why sleep thou?
Their prayer may be said to prevent God, who pray early and earnestly,
according to that of David (Psalm. 5.3.) My voice shall thou hear in the
morning, O Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will
look up. And again ( Psalm. 119.140.) Mine eyes prevent the night watches. He
was at it very early, he sought the Lord very diligently. That Is all we are to
understand by such expressions; for the Lord is then aforehand with us in
mercies, when we are most early and most instant in our duties. The Lord, who
is the beginning and the end, and who knows the end of all things from the
beginning, often gives us our end, or what we aimed at in prayer, before we
begin.

Thirdly, Note; God is self-sufficient, he can do his whole work alone.

Take it in the instance of the Text, he needs no help to create Leviathan, nor
needs he the help of any creature to destroy Leviathan; what he made without
help, he can (as I may say) unmake make without help. The Lord, who is
all-sufficient to do any work, or bring what he pleases to pass for us, is
also self-sufficient, or able to do any work, or what he pleases, for himself,
that is, to please himself. It is a great honor to God that he can command
what he will, and whom he will, to help him in any of his works; but it is a
far greater honor to the great God, that he needs not any help to do or bring
about any of his works. When the Apostle had said, Who has given to him? and
it shall be recompensed unto him again? (Romans 11.35.) He presently gives this
reason (which is the point in hand) ver. 36.) For of him are all things; that
is, he is the sole efficient of all things, all things are from him, as from
the first principle or mover; and he orders all things (as it follows in the
same verse) through him are all things. Deus est omne modo omnium rerum causa.
1. Causa efficiens (...) 2. Causa administrans (...). 3. Causa finalis (...),
ad quem omnia quasi in circulum redeunt.
As of him are all things in their constitution, so through him are all things
in their dispensation. We have the work of creation in the first part of the
verse, Of him are all things, and the work of providence in the latter, Through
him are all things; that is, he dispenceth and disposes all things. And thus
spoke the same Apostle to the great Philosophers at Athens (Acts 17.28.) In him
we live, and move, and have our being. As if it had been said, Of him are all
things, and through him are all things; and therefore, to him are all things.
All creatures turn about, as in a circle, to their Creator; all things end in
him, or he is the end of all, as all things began in him, and by him.

This truth is a spring of comfort and consolation to all the faithful; or,
from this general head many streams flow, which may both instruct and comfort
the City of God. From hence we may learn, or be instructed,

First, Creatures, one or other, men or Angels, cannot merit any thing at the
hand of God. Man gives God nothing, but what he first receives from him; for,
who has prevented him? therefore there is no merit, preventing-mercy excludes
and shuts it out of doors.

Secondly, which follows upon that, God is debtor to no creature; he owes us
nothing, we owe him all. Deus factus est debtor non aliquid a nobis
accipiendo, sed quod ei placuit promitiendo. Aug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 16. (...),
Nihil aliud est quam (...), Deus enim proprie non retribuit sed tribuit.
Who has prevented me? says God. If we have any thing, we have it from him,
but he has nothing from us; therefore we are in his books, he is not at all in
ours. All that God is indebted to us, is by his promises, which proceed freely
from himself; we receive no good upon the worthiness of what we have done, but
because he has assured us we shall receive good if we do good, so and so, or
are such and such. God gives us much, but retributes us nothing; all his
rewards are free gifts, or pure alms.

Thirdly, God can do no creature any wrong. Man has no right to any thing he
has inherent in, or, arising from himself; nor has man obliged God at all to
give him any thing: therefore he can do man no wrong, how little soever he
gives him, or how much soever he takes from him. So that, if any man shall say,
he will not contend with me by right, but by might, and shall complain that
something is taken from him which he would not, or not given him which he
would; what right has any man to plead with God upon, who has no right to any
thing, but by the gift of God?

Fourthly, Then the grace of God to man, is altogether free. Many expound this
Scripture, as denying the foresight of man's works, or worthiness of his faith,
or perseverance in grace, as to the grace of Election. God did not elect us,
because he foresaw any worthiness in us, Nemo ut divina illum subsequatur
gratia prius aliquid contulit Deo; si ergo and electi praeveniente se gratia
sequuntur and reprobi juxta quod merentur accipiunt, and de miserecordia
inveniunt electi quod laudent, and de justitia non habent reprobi quod
accusent. Been igitur dicitur quis ante dedit. Greg.
nor will he save us upon the desert of any thing done by us. The
foundation-stone of Election, and the topstone of Salvation, are laid in free
grace.

Fifthly, We have no reason to be discouraged, what deficiency soever we see in
the creature, as to any thing we desire God should do for us, forasmuch as none
have prevented God, either with counsel or assistance in any of those great
things which he has already done, either for our selves or others. What cannot
he do for us alone, who made Heaven and Earth alone! The Lord can begin and
finish, how and when he pleases: He is a rock, and his work is perfect. As in
spirituals, he is the Author and finisher of our faith, (Heb. 12.2.) so in
temporals, he is the Author and finisher of all our comforts, deliverances and
salvations. When we have no help at all in our selves, nor in any creature,
there is enough to be had in God ( Hosea 14.3.) With thee the fatherless find
mercy; that is, they find mercy with thee (and if mercy, then help) who are as
helpless as a fatherless child, they especially who look upon themselves as
fatherless, what help and strength, what fathers or friends soever they have in
this world, if God be not their help and strength, their friend and father.
When we are convinced that only God can help us, when we have other helps, then
God alone will help us, though we have no other helpers; as he promised Judah
(Hosea 1.7.) I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them by
the Lord their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle,
by horses nor by horsemen. As if the Lord had said, I will do all for Judah my
self alone, though I could have others to do it by. It is seldom that God has
(as Schoolmen speak) an immediate attingence upon any effect (he commonly
uses instruments) yet he sometimes has, and has as often as himself
pleases. As our mercies are always of grace only, so sometimes they are
wrought out by the power of God only: And what power soever is seen working at
them, it is his power that does the work; his wheel is in every wheel.

Sixthly, What cause have we to magnify the free grace and mighty power of
God. He is able to do for us, though all oppose him; and he is willing to do
for us, though none, nor we our selves prevent him. Such is the power of God,
that he can overcome all opposition in others, against what he has a mind to
do for us; and such is the freeness of his grace, that it over-passeth, or
rather passes by all those indispositions in us, which might cause him to
forbear doing, or have no mind to do, any thing for us.

Seventhly, If none have prevented the Lord, if all the good we have, and all
that we shall have, flows freely to us, then we should be very thankful to
God for every good we have received, and very full of purposes to praise him
for whatever we shall further receive. This Inference the Apostle makes in the
last words of ( Romans 11.) Of him, and through him, and to him, are all things,
to whom be glory for ever, Amen. Let us never be found sacrificing to our own
net, nor burning incense to our own drag, as if by them our portion (in
spirituals or temporals) were fat, and our meat plenteous. Let us put praise
far from our selves, and say with the Psalmist, Not unto us, not unto us, but
to thy name, O Lord, be praise and glory.

Lastly, Let us be very humble. The Lord puts this question to Job to humble
him; and it was showed in the beginning of the Chapter, that the design of God
in presenting this vast creature Leviathan to the view or consideration of Job,
was to humble him: for seeing the Lord has made all things, and can do all
things of himself, and does them for himself, let us lie in the dust before
him, let us take heed of pride, high thoughts, and boasting words, in any thing
we have, and are; let us say (as the Apostle, Romans 3.27.) Where is boasting?
where is pride? he answers, It is excluded. But by what Law? why cannot
boasting come in? is it kept out by the Law of works, by any thing that we have
done? No, boasting would never be shut out, if we could do any thing of our
selves; therefore, says he, this comes to pass by the Law of faith, by casting
our selves wholly upon God, both as to our justification and salvation. That
God does all things of himself, should render us nothing in our selves. Who
has prevented me that I should repay him?

The Lord having made these uses of what he had said concerning Leviathan,
proceeds to a general assertion (as was said) in the close of this 11th verse.

Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine. Possum illi amplam mercedem si
velim reddereddere, cum omnia quae sub coelo uspi^^ gentium sunt, mea sint,
meum est aurum.
These words are interpreted by several of the Jewish writers, in connection with
what went before, thus: Who has prevented me, and I will repay him? As if the
Lord had said, Do not think that I have not enough by me to repay you, for your
counsel and assistance, if you dare say, I have had any from you; for,
Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine. That Is a good sense, showing the
Lords sufficiency to make good his offer. Some make great promises of what they
will do, when they have not wherewithal to do it. Yet rather,

Secondly, We may expound this assertion, as carrying on the former Argument,
or further to prove that no man can prevent the Lord, seeing all is his
already. Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine (says he) The creatures
are all mine, I challenge all, I lay claim to all; whether therefore I give to
one, or take from another, no man has reason to question me, or to ask of me a
reason, why I did or do so; for, all is my own. And when the Lord says,
Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine, his mean-is, not only that all
under heaven, but that heaven it self, and all that is in heaven, is his also.
The Lords Estate or Right, is not confined to the things which are under the
heaven. So that, when he says, Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine,
he says in effect, all is mine. Thus Moses expounds this assertion ( Deuteronomy.
10.14.) Behold, the heaven, and the heaven of heavens is the Lords thy God, the
earth also, with all that therein is. The reason why the Lord speaks here only
of this estate under heaven, is because he was discoursing with Job of this
inferior world, and the furniture of it; and it was enough for him to
understand, as to the present debate, that all under heaven was the Lords: but
in truth, not only is the Earth, the Sea, the Air, with all their fullness and
furniture, the Lords, but the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens, is the Lords,
with all their beauty and glory.

Hence note; The Lord is the great proprietour of all things in this world.

Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is the Lords, or all is the Lords. First,
by creation, he has given all things their being. Secondly, all is the Lords
by preservation, he keeps all things in their being; Jesus Christ upholds all
things by the word of his power (Heb. 1.3.) that is, by his powerful word. The
same commanding word which gave all things their being in the beginning, has
hitherto preserved their being, and will to the end. And not only so, but,
Thirdly, all things are his in possession, the Lord has all in his hand: In
whose hand soever the things of the world are, they are all in the Lords hand.
As Abraham said, in his Treaty with the King of Sodom (Genesis 14.22.) I have lift
up my hands to the most high God, the possessor of heaven and of earth (Psalm.
24.1.) The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, the world, and they
that dwell therein; that is, they are all at his dispose. And again, The world
is mine, and the fullness thereof, says the Lord himself ( Psalm. 50.12.) and
therefore, if I were hungry, that is, if I needed any thing, I would not tell
thee, that is, complain to thee, or go a begging to thee, who art but a beggar;
I can help my self, and take what and where I will. There is a fourth title, by
which all things under heaven are the Lords, even by Redemption. The Lord has
restored the whole world to a kind of new life, by the death of his Son; Jesus
Christ is the Savior of all men, especially of them which believe (1 Timothy
4.10.) All have some benefit by redemption; and so, whatsoever is under the
whole heaven, the whole Systome of heaven and earth, is the Lords by
redemption; though the specialty of redemption be theirs only, and intended to
them only who believe; who as they have a peculiar portion (a Benjamins Mess)
in the grace of redemption, so the Lord calls them his peculiars ( Exodus
19.5.) Ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me, above all people, for all the
earth is mine. And they are called the Lords portion ( Deuteronomy. 32.9.) The Lords
portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.

Thus, as all under the whole heaven is the Lords, so all is his by a fourfold
title, by the titles of creation and sustentation, and possession and
redemption. All things visible and invisible have been created, are sustained
and possessed by him as their great Lord; and all things visible have been
redeemed by him from present perishing, and a world of them in this world, that
they should never perish, but have everlasting life, John 3.16.

From this general Assertion, That whatsoever is under the whole heaven is the
Lords, take these following Inferences.

First, Then the Devil is a liar, a great liar; for ( Mat. 4.) in his last
assault against Christ, he boasted that he would give him all the Kingdoms of
the earth, and the glory of them, whereas the truth is, he has not a shoe
latchet at his dispose: While the Devil says, all is mine, the truth is,
nothing is his but a lie, of that he is the father. As he has not given a
being to the least worm; so he cannot dispose of the least worm, he is not
worth a straw, for all is the Lords.

Secondly, Hence we learn, That there is a lying spirit in most of the children
of men, even in all them who look upon any thing they have as their own. There
is a sense in which we have a right to, and a propriety in what we have, and
may call it ours; but that spirit which moves in most of the children of men,
is a lying spirit, when they say, this and that is their own. David (Psalm.
12.4.) brings in the wicked, saying, With our tongue will we prevail, our lips
are our own, who is Lord over us? What, have not we, who have so many
Lordships, the Lordship of our selves, the Lordship of that little piece of our
selves, our lips? But were not their lips their own? not, in the sense they
spoke it, as if they were accountable to none for them; for their next word
was, Who is Lord over us? Thus most do, they look upon their lips, and all the
members of their body as their own; but what says the Apostle (1 Cor. 6.20.)
Glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. And ( verse. 19.)
Ye are not your own. Your body is not your own, but it is the Lords; then much
less are the things that you have your own; your Land is not your own, nor your
cattle your own; the beasts of the earth are not your own, nor the fishes of
the Sea your own; nor is a hair of your head your own, nor a pin upon your
sleeve: they are all the Lords. Is it not then a lying spirit which possesses
very many among the children of men, who look upon themselves, and what they
have, as their own? Their houses and lands are their own, their gold and silver
are their own; who is Lord over them or theirs? O let such remember, that
themselves, their houses and lands, their gold and silver are the Lords, and
that the Lord says expressly, The silver is mine, and the gold is mine (Hag.
2.8.)

Thirdly, If all be the Lords, then the Lord is able to supply the wants of all
who wait upon him, and to supply them plentifully. The Lord supplieth the wants
of all creatures. The Lord keeps a great house he feeds all that he has
made, he provideth food for Leviathan, he satisfies every living thing (Psalm.
145, 16.) and ( Psalm. 115.16.) The heaven, even the heavens are the Lords, but
the earth has he given to the children of men; that is, whatsoever of the
earth the children of men, that is, men in common, or mankind, have, the Lord
has given it to them; and seeing his own children have need of it, surely he
will not deny it them. The Lord (I say) has given the earth to the children of
men; and if the Lord has bestowed the earth on men, as men, then much more
has he the earth to bestow upon his own children. Christ in his Sermon upon
the mount ( Mat. 6.32.) assures them of it, Your heavenly father knows that
ye have need of these things. Food and clothing is in your fathers hand, your
father is rich, he is rich indeed, and therefore he can supply your wants. If
children do but remember, that their father has such and such lands and
houses, they think they shall be well provided for; how much more may a godly
man say, my father has a great deal of land, the whole earth is his, and
therefore I shall be provided for? The Apostle improves this position twice (1
Cor. 10.) First, to mak^ use of our liberty, in eating whatsoever is fold in
the shambles, asking no question for conscience sake; for (says he) the earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof (verse. 26.) He makes use of it,
Secondly, to persuade us not to abuse our liberty ( ver. 28.) But if any man
say unto you, this is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not for his sake
that showed it (do not offend him) and for conscience sake (do not offend thy
self) The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. As if he had said, why
should thou trouble thy self or others, by eating such meat? seeing there is
enough to be had without running such a hazard, and thou may take thy choice
all the world over, for the earth is the Lords.

Fourthly, This grand Assertion carries in it great encouragement, to be much
in the Lords work: Why? because he is able to give us a good reward. We shall
not need to fear any loss of labor in doing what we do for him, he can
recompense us fully, for all is his under the whole heaven; he is able to pay
us well for any service we do him. Saul wondered why the Benjamites followed
David (what is the matter? said he, 1 Samuel 22.7.) Hear ye Benjamites, will the
Son of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you Captains
of thousands, and Captains of hundreds? Can the Son of Jess do these things for
you? It is a wonder that any should serve him, that has nothing to bestow upon
them; but who can wonder that the people of God should serve him, and stick
close to his service, while they do but remember that he has fields and
vineyards, the silver and the gold, together with all the great offices and
preferments, that he has in his hand. This was the Motive which the Apostle
used to edge his Exhortation (1 Cor. 15.5, 8.) Be ye steadfast and immovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know, that your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. He says as much (1 Timothy 4.8.)
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come. Godliness has the promise of a
comfortable portion in this life, as well as of a full one in the life to come.

Fifthly, Fear not to lose for Christ. Do not fear to lose any thing under
heaven for Christ, for whatsoever is under the whole heaven is Christ's; he is
able to make up all again. We need not wonder at that promise which is made by
Christ, He that suffers loss of any thing for my name sake, shall receive a
hundredfold, now in this time (Mark. 10.36.) Not only dot^ the Lord promise a
hundred fold, in sweet inward contentments in this time, to them who lose for
him; but he is able to supply a hundred fold, even in this life, of the things
of this life: and as he is able, so he will surely fulfill it, according to
that promise, when he sees it fit to give, or us fit to receive such
enjoyments. O, says one, I may lose my lands, and I my trade, says another,
and I my liberty says a third. As many fear and fly from suffering, because of
the punishment of sense, so not a few, because of the punishment of loss; they
are in danger of losing all, and they are not willing to lose any thing for
Christ. Now, I may answer all, who upon that account, fear of loss, refuse to
suffer for Christ, as the Prophet did that King of Judah (2 Chronicles. 25.9.) who,
when he had word brought him from the Lord, that he must let go the Army of
Israel, that he had hired against the Edomites, presently objected, But what
shall I do for the hundred talents of silver, that I have given to the Army?
The man of God answered, The Lord is able to give thee much more than this: Do
thou obey the Lords command, and do not trouble thy self about the hundred
talents, the Lord is able to give thee more than this. This has been the
question of many, when called to suffer, What shall we do for the hundred
talents? what shall we do for our worldly substance, and subsistence? what
shall we do for a livelihood? I may say as the Prophet then did, the Lord is
able to give you abundantly more than what you lose for him.

Sixthly, As we should not fear to lose for the Lord's sake, so let us not
forbear to give for the Lords sake. Some are afraid to give for the Lords sake,
to supply the necessities of their brethren; but remember, what you give to the
poor, you lend to the Lord, and to such a Lord as has all things under the
whole heaven for his. If we give, the Lord is able to repay us. The Apostle
makes use of this very argument ( Phil. 4.18.19.) I have all, and abound, I am
full, having received of Epaphroditus, the things which were sent from you, an
odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God. What
follows? But my God shall supply all your needs, according to his riches in
glory by Christ Jesus. Do not think you shall want, because of the supply you
give to my wants; no, my God shall supply your wants or needs, according to his
riches in glory, that is, according to his rich and glorious grace. There is no
need to be supplied in the glory of the next life; but there is a glory in rich
grace which readily and plentifully supplieth all our needs in this life.

Seventhly, If all under the whole heaven be the Lords? then all places are the
Lords. This is comfort to those, who are at any time Gods outcasts; he can say
to any place, as he did to Moab (Isa. 16.4.) Let mine outcasts dwell with
thee, etc. All countries are the Lords, he can make room for his in any part of
the world, for all the world is his. The Lord provided a place for the Church (
Rev. 12.6, 14.) when she was cast out, The Church fled into the wilderness,
where she had a place prepared of God. The wilderness was her troublesome
condition, but the Lord provided a place for her then and there. The Lord can
command a place for his any where; if not in one country, yet in another,
because all the countries and kingdoms under heaven are his demean; he is Lord
over all, blessed for evermore. Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is his,
both in his possession, and at his disposition.

Eighthly, If all that is under the whole heaven be the Lords? then go to God
for all (Phil. 4.5.) Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at
hand; he is at hand as a Judge to right you, and he is at hand as a Father to
provide for you; therefore be careful in nothing, but let your request be made
known unto God by prayer and supplication. If you would have any thing of the
earth, you must go to God for it, as well as for heaven it self.

Ninthly, If all things under the whole heaven be the Lords? then whatever good
things you have under the whole heaven, acknowledge the Lord as the Donor and
Giver of them all (1 Chronicles. 29.14.) When David, together with the Princes and
People of Israel, had offered so freely toward the building of the Temple, he
said, Lord, who am I, and what is my people? that we should be able to offer so
willingly after this sort, for all things come of thee, and of thine own have
we given thee. He acknowledged the Lord as the giver of all, that himself and
his people had given to the Lord.

Tenthly, Is all the Lords? then, use all as the Lords, and not as your own.
Remember you are but Stewards; God has a title paramount to all you have: do
not use what is yours as your own, but as the Lords; you are but Stewards of
the things you have in this world. The Lord rebuked Israel (Hos. 2.8, 9.) for
useing their riches, their corn and wine, otherwise than he had appointed; they
did not use them as Stewards, they used all as Lords, not as the Lords: They
thought it was their gold, and their silver, and their wine, and their oil,
their wool, their flax, and they bestowed all upon an idol, and prepared all
for Baal. See what the Lord says in the next verse, Therefore will I return
and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof,
and will recover my wool and my flax. All these are mine, and you use them as
your own, and bestow them upon Baal. Thus men bestow their gold and silver upon
their lusts, upon their pride and intemperance, upon their revenge and
uncleanness, yea, to adorn their idols; take heed of applying your possessions
to wrong uses. God is the Lord of all, and he will have an account of Lords, as
they have of their Stewards, what they have done with all, for they are but
Stewards.

In the Eleventh place, Then the Lord may give and take of all that is under
heaven, when he pleases, and how he pleases, to whom he pleases, and from
whom he pleases. May not he do what he will with his own? ( Mat. 20.15.) If he
gives to one, he gives but his own; and if he takes from another, he takes
but his own; if he gives another much, and you but a little, you must be quiet
and submit, he gives but his own. If he give much of this worlds good to evil
men? if he adorn and beautify them with all outward blessings, who has any
thing to say against it? what though men, measuring things by their own reason,
see no reason, yet let them know what he bestows, is of his own, not of any
man's possession; and if he bestow great things upon the unworthy, he does no
wrong to those that are worthy, much less to those who are as unworthy as they:
The benefits he bestows upon any are no wrong to others. Upon this ground the
Lord commanded the Nations quietly to submit to Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon
(Jer. 27.4, 5, 6.) Thus shall ye say to your Masters (The Word was given by
Jeremiah from the Lord to the Messengers of several Princes) I have made the
earth, the man, and the beast that are upon the ground, by my outstretched
arm, and by my great power, and have given it unto whomsoever it seems meet
unto me. And now I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar,
etc. And the beasts of the field have I also given to serve him: and all
Nations shall serve him, etc. Thus if the Lord gives, he gives his own, and if
he takes all away from any, it is but his own; thus Job quieted his spirit at
first, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the
Lord.

In the Twelfth place, If all be the Lords under the whole heaven, then, be
sure you pay your Landlord your rent. Shall we live in the Lords house, and
use the Lords land, and not pay him his rent? let us pay the Lord his rent, for
we are all Tennants and Tennants at Will. Pay him his rent; you will say, what
is that? It is the rent of praise and obedience; the Lord has a service due to
him for all.

In the Thirteenth place, Let all the godly rejoice. All that is under the
whole heaven is Gods, it is in the hand of their friend and father; all their
enemies are in the hand of the Lord, their tongues are the Lords, and their
power is the Lords, and all they have is in the hand of the Lord; and therefore
no wonder if David concluded ( Psalm. 144.15.) Happy are the people that are in
such a case, yea, happy is that people whose God is the Lord, for they have
him, who is Lord of all, of all under the whole heaven.

Lastly, If all be the Lords under the whole heaven, then, let us above all
things labor to assure an interest in the Lord. To be able to say the Lord is
our God, is the surest way to a worldly estate; if we have him who has all, we
have all; as one said, If God be mine, then all is mine. It Is the happiness of
all the people of God, that God is theirs; This God is our God, we have waited
for him. The Lord, who is our God, is the God of salvation. Believers
appropriate God to themselves; they do not stand talking of gold and of silver,
of houses and lands, but, say they, God is our God. Keep close to God in
Christ, and he will keep you. You cannot but have enough, when you have God,
who has all things under heaven, yea, and all things in heaven.

JOB, Chap. 41. Verse. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. 12. I will not conceal his parts,
nor his power, nor his comely proportion.

13. Who can discover the face of his garment? or who can come to him with his
double bridle?

14. Who can open the doors of his face? his teeth are terrible round about.

15. His scales are his pride, shut up together ^s with a close seal.

16. One is so near to another, that no air can come between them.

17. They are joined one to another, they stick together that they cannot be
sundred.


THe Lord having spoken both of the quantity or greatness, and of the quality
or stoutness of Leviathan; having also, made application of both, in the former
part of the Chapter, he now proceeds to a more particular description of him.

Verse. 22. I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely
proportion. We have here God speaking, I (says the Lord) will not conceal his
parts. There is a twofold opinion about the connection or dependence of this
verse.

Some join it with the former, the eleventh verse; Who has prevented me, that
I should repay him? whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine. Now, in case
any one should stand forth with that boldness as to tell the Lord, he had
prevented him, he had been a fore-hand with God; Well, says the Lord, Si quis
me ante vertere, aut superior me esse posset, ejus lauds utique celebrarem.
Merc.
if any will undertake this, if any man dares affirm, that he has prevented
me, I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion, I
will do him no wrong, I will not shadow, nor obscure his worth; I will set him
forth in his fairest colors, or paint him to the life, in all that he is, in
all that he can say, or do, or show himself to be in such a contest with me, or
in his undertaking me about this matter. And when that is done, I shall easily,
and quickly convince him, or make him both see and confess, that he is a poor
weakling, that he is nothing, or, if any thing, vile, compared with me: For if
I do but oppose to him the parts, powers, and comeliness of Leviathan, he will
find himself over-matched. Thus, I say, some conceive the Lord refers to the
former words, as promising to him right, that should accept the challenge there
made, and say, that he had prevented God, or had been aforehand with him.

Alii, non tacerem mendacia; ita sumitur, ejus (...) enim cap. 11.3. Merc.
Others give it thus, if any man shall venture to answer my challenge, I will
not conceal his lies (so the word, by us translated parts, is rendered, Chap.
11.3.) nor his boasting words, not the rhetorical ornaments, nor the comely
proportion of his speech, in pleading and arguing with me; all which will be
found upon trial, to be but lies, vain flourishes, and mear sophistical
fallacies.

But I rather take this verse as a general Preface to that which the Lord
intended further to say, in the description of this mighty creature, Leviathan.
As if he had said; O Job, that thou may be yet more fully convinced, how
unable thou art to deal with this mighty fish; and may therein see, yet more
clearly, how unable thou art to stand before my power, who have given both
being and power to this creature, I shall go on, to give thee a more lively
picture, a more particular narrative, a fuller character of him; and, as it
were, anatomize this sea monster, in all his parts, powers, and proportions.

So then, in this context, and forward to the end of the 32d verse, we have the
fourth part of the description of Leviathan, even, by the distinct parts of his
body, together with the wonderful powers, effects, and operations that appear
in them; as acted by that courage, stoutness, and greatness of spirit, with
which God have clothed him.

I will not conceal his parts. The Hebrew is, I will not be silent about his
parts. And when the Lord says, I will not conceal, nor be silent, his meaning
is, I will fully, Meiosis, celebrarem ejus membra. Drus.
largely, and evidently declare the parts, the power, and the comely proportion
of Leviathan; I will view, as it were, all that is most observable in, and
about him; I will do it exactly, not slightly, or perfunctorily, but like an
Orator declare all his excellencies; I will not let slip, nor omit any thing
that is material or conducible to his commendation. So that, when the Lord
says, I will not conceal, he intends much more than he expresses; As the
Prophet also did ( Isa. 62.1.) when he said, For Zions sake will I not hold my
peace; meaning, that he would pour out his heart, and make a loud cry, in
prayers and supplications for Zions sake. That Is the import of his words, I
will not hold my peace: As also, of those ( verse. 6.) Ye that make mention of
the Lord, or, ye that are the Lords remembrancers (in the concerns of Zion)
keep not silence. The meaning is, speak much for Zion. A man does not keep
silence, nor hold his peace, who speaks only a word or two. But the Lords
remembrancers must speak to the full, much and often; they must urge him with
many arguments, and plead hard, till he bring forth salvation in Zion. I urge
this Scripture, as parallel to the Text in hand, where the Lord says, I will
not conceal, when his purpose was to speak copiously and largely.

And here the Lord sets down three things concerning Leviathan, which he
will not conceal;

First, His parts.

Secondly, His power.

Thirdly, His comely proportion. To these three heads, all that can be said of
Leviathan is reducible.

I will not conceal his parts or members. (...)
This creature is made up of several heterogeneal parts or members. The word
rendered parts properly signifies the bar or bolt of a door, as also the boughs
of a tree: There is a great elegancy in that metaphor, because the members of
the body in any creature, are as so many boughs shot out from the stock of a
tree. I will not conceal his parts.

But, what are the parts which the Lord mentions, or would not conceal?

I answer, The word parts, in our language and common speech, signifies the
inward abilities, and faculties of any man. We say, such a one is a man of
excellent parts, or he has good parts, that is, he is a wise man, an
understanding man, a well-spoken man. But here in this place, the word parts
notes only the limbs, members, and organs of the body, or the several pieces of
the whole compages or frame of the body. Of these parts the Lord speaks in
the following part of the Chapter. And he speaks,

First, Of his skin (ver. 13.)

Secondly, Of his jaws and teeth (ver. 14.)

Thirdly, Of his scales (ver. 1^, 16, 17.)

Fourthly, Of his nostrils, eyes, and mouth (ver. 18, 19, 20, 21.)

Fifthly, Of his neck (ver. 22.)

Sixthly, Of his flesh all over (ver. 23.)

Seventhly, Of his heart (ver. 24.)

All these, if not more particular parts, the Lord mentions in this Chapter;
and therefore he might well say, I will not conceal his parts.

Nor his power. Parts are one thing, and power is another. There may be great
bodily parts, where there is but little power. That which makes parts
excellent, is when they are full of power, or when outward parts are
accompanied with inward parts, which are the accomplishments of them. I will
not conceal his power.

Notum ut (...) prore sumatur. Drus.
The Hebrew is, The word or matter of his power. Master Broughton renders, I
will not conceal the speech of strength, that is, the matter of his strength.
The Hebrew word signifies, not only a word, but matter, or thing; I will not
conceal the things of his power. These powers are expressed afterward.

First, In his nostrils; By his neefings a light does shine, in the former part
of the 18th verse.

Secondly, In his eyes; They are like the eyelids of the morning, in the
latter part of the 18th verse.

Thirdly, In his mouth; Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire
leap out (ver. 19.) Heat rises out of the vital power of any creature:
Leviathans heat is so great, that it is called fire; and from thence, smoke
goes out of his nostrils, as out of a seething-pot, or cauldron (ver. 20.)
yea, his breath kindles coals, and a flame goes out of his mouth (ver. 21.)
All these expressions show the mighty heat within him.

Fourthly, In his neck (ver. 22.) In his neck remains strength. He has not
only a neck, but a strong neck.

Fifthly, In his heart (ver. 24.) His heart is as firm as a stone, yea, as hard
as a piece of the nether millstone.

Sixthly, Such is his power, that he is terrible to others (v. 25.) When he
raises up himself, the mighty are afraid. Yea,

Seventhly, Such is his power, That nothing can annoy him, the sword of him
that lays at him cannot hold, the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon (ver.
26.)

And Lastly, Such is his power, That he makes the deep to boil like a pot, he
makes the sea like a pot of ointment: He makes a path to shine after him: one
would think the deep to be hoary (ver. 31, 32.) Thus the Lord describes, not
only the parts, but the power of Leviathan. And in the Hebrew, the word is
plural, powers, which intimates the greatness of his power, or that he is
powerful in every part, each part being full of power.

There is a twofold power. First, of strength. Secondly, of authority.
Leviathan has no power of authority, though he be called a King over all the
children of pride. But he has a mighty power of strength; That Is here
intended, I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, Nor his comely
proportion.

Or the grace of his disposition. Non tacebo gratiam dispositionis ejus, i. e.
dicam, quam concinne membra ejus composita sunt.
That Is the emphasis of the Hebrew. There is a twofold disposition;

First, Of the mind, which we commonly call a man's disposition.

Secondly, Of the body, which consists in the right placing of the parts, their
symetry order and proportion. Hence we translate fully, His comely proportion.
Master Broughton renders it, The grace of his frame, that is, the due
composition and feature of all the members of his body.

Some expound these words Ironically; Ironice dictum; cum enim horrifica sit
immanissimi monstri dispositio, and conformatio totius corporis, nihil in illo
gratiae, and venustatis esse potest. Cajetan.
As if when the Lord says, I will not conceal his comely proportion, his
meaning were his monstrous uncomliness. But by their leave; how great, or vast
soever any creature is, there may be a comeliness, and proportion, or a due
disposition of the members of his body, as well as of a lesser, or little one.
There are three things which make up the complete natural comeliness of a
creature. First, Distinction of members; there must be parts. Secondly,
Strength, for the exercise of the parts. Thirdly, A due proportion of the parts
one toward another; that is it which we properly call feature. There may be
beauty, but no comeliness, without a due disposition or proportion of parts;
and where there is a due proportion of parts, there is comeliness, how great
soever any creature is. All these concur in Leviathan; First, parts; Secondly,
power; Thirdly, proportion; and therefore he is, though a Monster for bigness,
yet a comely creature. I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his
comely proportion.

Hence observe, First; God has bestowed excellent parts, power, and
proportion, upon all his creatures, eminently upon some of them.

Whatsoever the Lord made, he made it (as it is said) in number, weight and
measure, that is, exactly. The fowls of the Air, the beasts and creeping things
of the Earth, the fishes of the Sea; all of them according to their kind, have
excellent parts, power, and comeliness of proportion. David speaking this in
general, brings it down to the particular under hand ( Psalm. 104.24.) O Lord,
how manifold are thy works (that is, the works of Creation) in wisdom have thou
made them all (all of them, even to the very Fly, are wisely made, in wisdom
have thou made them all) the earth is full of thy riches, verse. 15. So is this
great and wide Sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and
great beasts; there go the Ships, there is that Leviathan, whom thou have made
to play therein. Leviathan is made in wisdom, or wisely made; the wisdom, as
well as the power of the great God is visible, in the making and composure of
him.

Secondly, Observe; God is pleased to set forth, and in setting forth, the
particular excellencies of natural creatures.

I will not (says the Lord) conceal his parts, etc. God (who is without parts)
is seen in the parts of every creature, and therefore he has not concealed
their parts. Men do not light a candle (says Christ, Mat. 5.15.) and put it
under a bushel, but on a candlestick. God has lighted a candle for us to see
himself by, in making the parts of every creature, and he has put that light
on as many candlesticks, as he has made discourses or discoveries of them in
any part of the Scriptures; and that he has done eminently in the latter part
of this Book of Job.

Now if God be thus pleased in declaring the parts of natural creatures, How
much more is he pleased in declaring the parts and excellencies, or those most
excellent and amiable parts of the new creature! That is, the excellencies of
man in his inner man. David says ( Psalm. 147.10, 11.) He delights not in the
strength of the horse, he takes not pleasure in the legs of a man. The Lord
takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy; and
with them he is much taken: He is infinitely more pleased in speaking of their
parts, and powers, and comely proportion, than in those of Leviathan, or of any
the most comely and beautiful creature in the world. Jesus Christ could not
conceal the parts, the power, not the comely proportion of his Spouse, that is,
of his Church ( Cant. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.) Behold, thou art fair my love, behold,
thou art fair, thou have doves eyes within thy locks; thy hair is as a flock of
goats that appear from mount Gilead; thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, that
are even shorn, etc. Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet; thy speech is
comely; thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks; thy
neck is like the tower of David; thy breasts are like two young roes, that are
twins, which feed among the Lillies. Thus Jesus Christ, you see, was so far
from concealing, that he gave his divine rhetoric full scope to depaint all
the lineaments, parts, powers, and comely proportion of his Spouse, the Church.
Jesus Christ was so ravished with the beauty which himself had put upon the
Church, that like an amorous wooer, he could not (if I may so speak) contain
himself from crying up her comely proportion. The rarest bodily beauty takes
the heart, and affects the eye of Christ, no more than the ghastly appearance of
a rotting carcass, unless he see spiritual beauty there too; and where he sees
that, he is highly pleased, though the body, where such a soul lodges, has an
appearance as little attractive or desirable, as that of a rotting carcass.

Thirdly, Consider the reason why the Lord insists so much in declaring the
parts and powers of Leviathan; the reason was, that God might declare his own
power: it was not for Leviathans sake that God declared his parts, etc. but
that he might declare himself in Leviathan.

Hence note; The parts, powers, and comely proportions of the creature, clearly
evidence the excellencies of God.

The Lord chiefly proclaimed his own name, when he proclaimed the name of
Leviathan ( Romans 1.20.) The invisible things of him from the creation of the
world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead. The unseen God has made all things, that he may be
seen in them. When he makes a Comment upon his own works, why is it? but that
he may make a Comment upon himself, and expound his own glory in them. And as
the excellencies of the Lord are seen in the works of creation, so in the works
of providence; and he has therefore made so many declarations of them to us,
that his power, wisdom, and justice may shine through them to us ( Psalm. 75.1.)
That thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare. And he said to Pharaoh
(Exodus 9.16.) For this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in thee my
power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth. All that the
Lord does to, or in the creature, is to get himself a name, and a glory;
therefore let us give God the glory of his power, wisdom and goodness in all
his works. Negare Pagaganus Christum potest; negare Deum omnipotentem non
potest. August. ser. 139. de Temp.
It was the saying of one of the Ancients, A Pagan may deny that there is a
Christ, but a Pagan cannot deny Almighty God. A Pagan may deny Christ, for
that is merely matter of faith; but sense will lead a Pagan to believe there is
a God, or some omnipotent power that has wrought all these things. If we see a
stream, that assures us there is a Spring or Fountain; if we see a goodly
Palace built, that assures us it had a builder, a maker. And if the stream be
full, what is the fountain? If the Palace built be great and magnificent, how
great, how magnificent was the builder! Every house (as the Author to the
Hebrews said upon another occasion, Chap. 3.4.) is builded by some man, but he
that built all things is God.

Fourthly, Seeing the Lord is pleased to read such a natural Philosophy Lecture
upon this creature, we may take this Observation from it.

God would have man know the parts and powers of the creatures. Why does the
Lord in this book, speak at large of them, and of their powers, but that we may
take notice of them, and understand them? or that we should search and study
them? What the Psalmist speaks concerning the works of providence, is true of
the Lords works in nature ( Psalm. 111.2.) The works of the Lord are great. And
( verse. 4.) He has made his wonderful works to be remembered; that is, that
they should be spoken of and memoriz'd. And therefore having said at the
beginning of the second verse, The works of the Lord are great, he adds in the
close of it, Sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. His work is
honorable and glorious, etc. The works of God are to be searched to the bottom
(though their bottom cannot be found) by all those that have pleasure, and
delight either in God, or in his works; and they therefore search them out
also, because they increase and better their knowledge of God the Creator, by
increasing and bettering their knowledge about the creature.

From the whole verse we may infer,

First, If God will not conceal the parts, the power, and comeliness of his
creatures, then let not us conceal the power, the glory, and the excellency of
God: Yea, let us with heart and tongue declare the glorious perfections of God,
how holy, how just, how wise, how merciful, how patient and long-suffering a
God he is. When God makes the creature known to us, he would much more have us
know himself, and make him known. David's heart was set upon this duty ( Psalm.
9.14.) Thou have lifted me up from the gates of death, that I may show forth
all thy praise, in the gates of the daughter of Sion. As if he had said, This,
O Lord, was thy design in lifting me up from the gates of death, that is, from
deadly dangers, or killing diseases, that I might declare thy praise in Sions
gates, or, that I might declare how praiseworthy thou art to all who come into
the gates of Sion. And again ( Psalm. 118.17.) I shall not die, but live, and
declare the works of the Lord. In the 40th Psalm, which is a Prophecy of
Christ, he speaks in the words of the Text ( verse. 10.) I have not hid thy
righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy faithfulness and thy
salvation, I have not concealed thy loving kindness and thy truth from the
great congregation. As the Lord says here concerning Leviathan, I will not
conceal his parts, so says the Prophet, I will not conceal his loving kindness
and truth, etc. Which, as it is most true of Christ, whose work it was to do
so, as also the end of all his works, so it shows what we ought to do, and
what should be the end of all our works, not to conceal the righteousness and
goodness of God, but declare them in the great congregation. And as Christ
declared the glory of the Father, so should we the glory of Christ. We read the
Church engaged in this. As I showed before, Christ could not conceal the parts
of the Church, so the Church could not conceal the parts of Christ ( Cant.
5.9.) There the question is put to the Church; What is thy beloved more than
another beloved, that thou do thus charge us? The Church being asked this
question, will not conceal the parts, nor the power, nor the comely proportion
of Christ her Beloved, but gives a copious Narrative of his gracious
excellencies ( verse. 10.) My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten
thousand; his head is as most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black as a
Raven; his eyes are as the eyes of Doves by the rivers of waters, washed with
milk, and fitly set; his cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers; his
lips like Lillies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh; his hands are as gold rings,
set with Beryle; his belly is as bright Ivory, overlaid with Sapphires; his legs
are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold; his countenance is as
Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars; his mouth is sweet, yea, he is altogether
lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.
Thus, as Christ concealed not the parts of the Church, so the Church concealed
not the parts, the power, and comely proportion of Christ. And did we more
consider who Christ is, and what he is, both in himself, and unto us, we should
be more, both in admiring within our selves, and in reporting to others, his
parts, his power, and comely proportion.

Secondly, If God has not concealed the knowledge of his creatures from us, if
he has not concealed the parts, etc. of Leviathan from us, Then certainly he
will not conceal the knowledge of himself, and of his Son, from us. We may get
to heaven, or be saved, though we know not the creatures thus distinctly; but
without the knowledge of God in Christ, we know no salvation ( Acts 4.12.) If
therefore the Lord has acquainted us thus particularly with the knowledge of
the creatures, which is an inferior and not so necessary a knowledge, doubtless
he has acquainted us with the knowledge of himself, which is altogether
necessary. This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, Deus non
deficit in necessariis.
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent (John 17.3.) It is an useful knowledge to
know the creature, to know the Leviathan; but it is of absolute necessity to
know God the Father, Son and Spirit. God has not concealed himself from us,
nor his will from us, neither what he would have us do and believe, nor what he
will do for us. The Apostle Paul could say to the Church at Ephesus, I have not
shunned to declare to you the whole counsel of God (Acts 20.27.) The Lord has
not shunned to declare his counsel for our direction, for our instruction, for
our caution, and for our consolation; he will not conceal the knowledge of
himself from us, in what is needful for us to know unto salvation.

The Lord having thus prefaced his purpose to declare the parts, etc. of
Leviathan, comes in the next words to declare his parts.

Verse. 13. Who can discover ( or uncover, as some) the face of his garment.
That is, his garment. The word rendered face is redundant. As to fly from the
face of a man, is to fly from a man; and to fly from the face of the sword,
is no more than to fly from the sword. The face of any thing strictly taken,
is the superficies of a thing, or that which is uppermost. The face of the
earth is the upper part of the earth, not the whole earth. But here the face of
Leviathans garment, is his whole garment.

But then the question is, what is this garment? Quis potest illam e mari in
siceum adducere, and nudam fistere coram hominibus? Jun. Pisc. Indumentum ceti
vocat cutem, qua tanquam indumento tegitur. q. d. quis detraxit ei cutem? quis
ex^ori^vit cum? Drus. Merc.
I may give you a fourfold answer.

First, Some learned Interpreters are of opinion, that the Sea it self is here
intended by this garment, because the Whale does, as it were, wrap himself in
the waters, as we do in a garment. The Sea is his garment, says Mr. Broughton;
who can take that from him, and bring him to Land?

Secondly, Others conceive, that by this garment, we are to understand, the
skin of the Leviathan. The natural garment of every creature is his skin. At
first man's, not only natural, but only garment, was his skin, and afterward his
artificial garment was made of skins. Who can discover the skin of the
Leviathan? that is, who can fley off his skin, and so strip him of his garment?

De balena scribitur quod oculi ejus gravi supercil^orum pondere operiuntur and
prominentia illa quasi vestiuntur; nemoque audat corium illud, quod facies
indumenti appellatur attollere, confestim a belluo vorandus. Paraph.
Paraemialis locutio esse videtur, q. d. quis audet vel cuticulae ejus
particulam detrahere: ut de homine superbo and iracundo dicimus; ne pilum
quidem barbae audes ei extrahere. Bold.
Thirdly, Others who interpret this garment, the skin, yet conceive it spoken,
not of the skin of his whole body, but the skin about his face, and which
hangs over his eyes, which no man is so hardy (unless he be foolhardy) as to
open and take away.

Fourthly, Some take these words as a proverbial speech, who can take away a
piece of his skin, or touch his skin? As we commonly say of a proud and
wrathful man, who dares touch him, or pull off so much as a single hair from
his beard?

I shall pitch upon the second interpretation, that by the garment of Leviathan
is meant his skin, which is his natural garment. There are many remarkable
things spoken afterward in this Chapter, about the skin of Leviathan; Here
it is called his garment.

Whence note; God has given every creature some kind of garment or covering.

The Whale has his garment; he could not abide the water without it. All trees
and plants have a garment, the rind or bark; they could not abide the air
without it. Every beast and bird has a garment; they could not abide either
heat or cold without it. It Is said of man in the state of innocence, that he
was naked ( Genesis 2.18.) And the man and the woman were both naked, and were not
ashamed: yet they were not quite naked, they had a natural garment, though not
an artificial one, their skin; yea, they had a better natural garment than
their skin, their innocence, and that was the reason, why they were not
ashamed. Since the Fall, man's natural garment is not enough to keep him from
either cold or shame, he must have an artificial garment over that; nor is any
artificial garment, how thick, or rich, or costly, or fashionable soever,
enough to keep him from shame, he must have a spiritual one; he must (as the
Apostle exhorts, Romans 13.14.) Put on the Lord Jesus Christ; he must put on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness (Ephesians.
4.24.) else he has reason to be ashamed. All are naked, till they put on this
garment, Christ and his Graces. And they that have put on this garment, shall
be clothed with the garment of joy and glory. Being clothed thus, we shall
not be found naked, as the Apostles word is (2 Cor. 5.3.) The Lord has
bestowed a garment upon every creature, and upon man, garments of beauty and
glory. Who can discover the face of his garment?

Or who can come to him with his double bridle? There is much contending about
the meaning of these words, or what is meant by this double bridle; but I shall
not make any stay about it.

The text may be read thus: Who can come within his double bridle. The Geneva
translation is near ours; Who can come to him with a double bridle? But what is
this double bridle?

First, Some understand this double bridle as a part of Leviathan. Intelligit
o^ aut labia, quae diducta fraene duplicati sp^ciem habent. Drus.
Who can come to his double bridle? or into the doubling of his bridle? As the
verdure or greenness of grass is put for green grass, so (say some) the
duplicature or doubling of his bridle, is nothing else but his double bridle,
that is, his jaws or mouth, which have some resemblance to a bridle when they
are opened, or at their end. Now according to this reading, the meaning is, who
dares come within his lips or jaws, which look like a double bridle? Surely no
man dares make such an adventure, seeing his jaws are so vast, or wide, and
terrible, that it may even strike a man of courage with terror, or into a fit
of trembling to look into them.

Secondly, Others (because the jaws are spoken of afterward) understand this
double bridle, of any thing which man may attempt to put into his jaws to
subdue him with; as if it had been said, who can coerce or bridle him, though
he have never so strong a bridle, though he have a double bridle? The word
rendered bridle, properly signifies the reine of a bridle. Fraena nominantur eae
parts quae utrinque ad maxillat desinunt. Quis cum fraeno duplicato audeat
accedere ad eum, ut ejus rictui inserat, sicut fit equo. Sed malo parabolice
intelligere pro labiis. Merc.
There are two words by which a bridle is expressed, the one signifying the
bit, which is put into the mouth of a horse, the other the nead-stall and
reins, which a horseman holds in his hands. Here we may take it for the whole
bridle, and that the strongest bridle, as we render, a double bridle: As if it
had been said, who dares come near Leviathan, as we commonly do to a horse, to
put a bridle into his mouth? who will undertake to halter or bridle him, with
all his skill and strength? Thus the Relative His does not respect Leviathan,
but the man who comes to bridle him: And this is most probable, because, if by
the double bridle we understand the jaws of Leviathan, this would be the same
with what is spoken plainly in the next words.

Verse. 14. Who can open the doors of his face? The Lord compares the gaping
jaws of Leviathan to doors, to which also the lips are compared in Scripture (
Psalm. 141.3.) Keep the door of my lips. As by a Metaphor our lips are called
doors, so Leviathans jaws bear the similitude of a two-leav'd door; which, who
can open? This seems to carry on the allusion to a horse, whose mouth must be
opened before he can be bridled. Who can force Leviathan to gape, that he may
put a bridle into his mouth? That which is said of him in the latter part of
the verse, may make any one afraid to do so, for His teeth are terrible round
about, or terror is round about his teeth.

His teeth are not to be meddled with, they are so terrible. As the holy
Prophet said to Pashur, that false Prophet, Thy name shall be called Magor
Missabib, terror round about (Jer. 20.2.) So the teeth of the Leviathan are
terror round about. Per gyrum deutium ejus formido. Hieron.
If any one come near him, he will see reason enough to be afraid. His teeth
are terrible. Dread dwells round about his teeth; and why so? why are his teeth
so terrible? Surely, because they are so hurtful, he being able to tear any man
to pieces with, or to break a man's bones with his teeth.

Hence note; That is terrible to us, which we perceive hurtful to us.

The teeth of Leviathan are terrible round about, because he can soon crush
those that come near him with his teeth. Now, if that be terrible, which we see
can hurt us? let us remember how terrible the unseen God is! His teeth (as I
may say) are terrible round about. The Apostle tells us so, while he says (2
Cor. 5.11.) Knowing the terror of the Lord (that is, knowing how terrible the
Lord is) we persuade men. God loves to save, but he can destroy us, sooner than
Leviathan can crush us, were we between his teeth. The consideration of the
terribleness that is in any creature, should lead us to consider how terrible
the Lord is to those who provoke him. Are the teeth of a Leviathan, or the
teeth and paws of a Lion te^rible? is the sting of a Serpent, or the poison of
Aspes terrible? how terrible then is the wrath of God! As what is sweet, and
comfortable to us in the creature, should lead us to consider how surpassing
sweet and comfortable God is; so that which is dreadful, and terrible in the
creature, should lead us to consider how dreadful and terrible God is. And as
it is good for us, often to say unto our selves, O how good is God! so to say,
O how terrible is God! Yea, David would have us say so unto God ( Psalm. 66.3.)
Say unto God (that is, acknowledge with admiration) how terrible art thou in
thy works! And ( ver. 5.) Come and see the works of God; he is terrible in his
doings toward the children of men. Yea, God is terrible to his own people (
Psalm. 68.35.) O God! thou art terrible out of thy holy places, that is, out of
the Church and Church assemblies: the Lord many times declares himself very
terribly in those sacred assemblies. How terrible was God in his Church, when
he devoured Nadab and Abihu with fire, for offering strange fire before him,
which he commanded not! ( Levit. 10.1, 2.) How terrible was the Lord out of his
Church, when he struck Ananias and Saphira dead! ( Acts 5.5, 10.) how terrible
was the Lord out of his holy place, the Church, to the Corinthians! concerning
whom the Apostle says (1 Cor. 11.30.) For this cause (that is, their unworthy
partaking of the Lords Supper) many are weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep. God deals terribly with those who are not regardful of him, who prepare
not themselves with due and reverential respect to his holiness, for holy
duties. He is a jealous God, and he will not hold them guiltless (that is, he
will hold them very guilty, or deal with them as with guilty persons) who take
his Name in vain (Exodus 20.7.) When the Law was given, so terrible was the
sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake (Heb. 12.21.) The Lord
appeared thus terrible at the giving of the Law, to show how terrible he will
be to sinners, who transgress the Law, and repent not of, nor turn from their
sins and transgressions; yea, the Lord (for their trial) shows himself very
terrible to good men, to brokenhearted and repenting sinners. Heman had long
and sad experience of this ( Psalm. 88.15.) I am afflicted, and ready to dye
from my youth up: while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. And for this
Job made that grievous complaint ( Chap. 6.4.) The arrows of the Almighty are
within me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God do set
themselves in array against me. Now if the Lord make such a terrible war upon
Saints, if he terrify them, even till he has distracted them; how will he
draw up his terrors as an army, or his army of terrors, in battle array
against the wicked and ungodly! How often does the Lord express himself by
terrible things against such? As he sometimes destroys sinners secretly, or
without any appearare: of terror ( Hosea 5.12.) I will be unto Ephraim as a
moth. So often openly, he comes upon them as a Lion, or as a Bear, ( Lament.
3.10.) He was unto me as a Bear lying in wait, and as a Lion in secret places.
The Lion and Bear often lie close, and in secret places, to wait for their
prey; but they no sooner get them within their reach or danger, but they rise
up and devour them openly.

Again, if we are afraid to meddle with terrible things? how should we fear to
meddle with sin! Sin has terrible teeth, it will bite like a Serpent ( Prove.
23.32.) and tear like a Lion. It Is sin that makes all things terrible to us.
God himself is not terrible, but as we are sinners: sin has made all things
terrible, and troublesome to us that are so. The teeth of Leviathan had not
been terrible to man, if man had not sinned against God. His teeth are terrible
round about.

Beza seems to object from this part of the description of Leviathan, that the
Whale cannot be meant by Leviathan, because the Whale has no teeth.

I answer, First, Though Whales, caught by our Seamen, have no teeth properly
taken, yet they have somewhat which is Analogical to teeth, they have that in
their mouths, which is as terrible as teeth.

Physeterem and Oream praecipue dentatos dicunt.
And secondly, Naturalists tell us, and Beza himself confesses, that there are
many fishes of the Whaley kind, which have very terrible teeth. And though
Bochartus insisteth much upon the teeth of the Crocodile, which for number are
threescore, and for their nature terrible enough; yet he does not at all
improve this part of Leviathans description against the Whale, which, I
suppose, he would have done, had he found it unapplicable to the Whale.

Now as Leviathan is armed with teeth, as offensive weapons, to hurt others,
and to be a terror to them, so with desensive arms to secure himself from
hurt, as it follows, Verse. 15, 16, 17. His scales are his pride, shut up
together as with a close seal. One is so near to another, that no air can come
between them. They are joined one to another, they stick together, that they
cannot be sundred.

In these three verses Leviathan is described. First, By the confidence which
he has in his scales; they are his pride, being like bucklers of brass.
Secondly, By the natural closeness of his scales; so close they are, as if
sealed, that no air can come between them. Thirdly, By the indissolubleness of
his scales; they are joined so fast one to another, that they cannot be sundred.

His scales are his pride. The strong sheilds have pride, says Master
Broughton; that is, his scales, which are as so many sheilds for his defense,
are his pride. The word is not elsewhere rendered scales, but strong pieces
(Chap. 40.18.) and here it may be rendered, strong pieces of sheilds, scales
resembling shields, both in their fashion and use.

His scales are his pride, that is, he is proud of his scales. Whatsoever any
man is proud of, may be called his pride. If a man be proud of his riches, then
his riches are his pride; if of his parts, then his parts are his pride; if of
his strength and beauty, then strength and beauty are his pride. Leviathan's
scales are his pride, that is, he is proud of his scales.

Here again it is objected, as before about teeth, The Whale has no scales,
therefore Leviathan cannot be the Whale. The learned Bochartus insists much
upon this argument against the Whale, proving also by many authorities (which
is clear to sight in those carcasses of Crocodiles which are among us) that the
Crocodile has great and strong scales, and those very closely laid, or joined
together. The objection has much weight in it, Balenarum, and Elephantorum
cutes sum durae sunt, and propomodum insensibiles. Galenus l. 3. do usu
partium.
yet these two answers are given to it.

First, Though Whales taken in these parts of the world have no scales,
properly so called, yet they have a very thick and hard skin, resembling
scales. The skin of the Elephant, and of the Whale, is extreme hard, and almost
insensible, said the Oracle among Physicians.

Quot ei squamae tot clypei quibus adversus omnem vim togitur. Arianus memorat
ex Nearcho visum cetum in littus ejectum cubitorum quinquaginta corio squamoso
tam crasso, ut cubitum aquaret.
Secondly, It is reported, that some Whales, or Whales in some parts of the
world, have huge scales. There was seen cast up upon the seashore (says one)
a monstrous fish, of fifty cubits long, which had scales all over of a cubit
thick. These were strong scales indeed: and though we have not known or heard
of any such in these parts of the world, yet who can say knowingly there are
none such in any part of the world, as literally answer the description of
Leviathans scales. I grant, that the three exceptions, which Bochartus takes
against the testimony of Nearchus are very considerable. First, That he stands
alone, and is but a single witness. Secondly. That he does not say he saw such
a whale, but only heard it of certain Mariners, who said they saw such a one;
which sort of men are not always to be credited. And he adds, Thirdly, That
though Nearchus should have said, that himself had seen such a Whale, yet
little credit were to be given him, he being an Author of no good credit. These
considerations, I confess, may somewhat weaken the testimony of Nearchus; yet I
see no reason, why they should utterly infringe and disable it. For, first, one
man may speak truth in it self, as well as two or three, though the testimony
of one be not so authentic to others, as the testimony of two or three.
Secondly, though some Mariners overreach in their repo^ts, yet it does not
follow that they did so from whom that report came. And, Thirdly, Though
Nearchus be justly charged with failing, and falseness in some things, yet none
can say, his whole book is nothing else but a bundle of lies. And if there be
any truths in his writings, as, I suppose, no man will deny, but there are
many; then why this report of a Whale, or mighty fish, of that kind, with great
scales, may not be reckoned among the truths contained in his writings, rather
than among the lies, let the Reader judge.

Now though it be questioned, what animal this Leviathan is? yet it is out of
question, that he has scales upon him, or that which amounts to scales; For
(says the Lord) His scales are his pride.

Geneva Translation. (...) superbia, magnificentia, verbum medium.
Some render the words thus; The majesty of his scales is like strong shields.
He is like a Curassier or an Horseman, armed Cap-a-Pe, or all over. But I
shall abide in our own reading, His scales are his pride, or his hight; his
spirit is heightened by them.

Hence note, First; There is a kind of pride in brutes and irrational creatures.

Pride strictly taken, is proper to man; yet there is more than a shadow of
pride in brutes. Even as a man is proud of fine new clothes, so is a horse of
his trappings; or as a man is proud of a strong glistering shield, so is
Leviathan of his scales. And I may safely say, that as some beasts are
proudish, so all proud men, so far as they are proud, are brutish. It is not
for want of grace only, but for want of a due exercise of reason, that any man
is proud.

Secondly, Note; Extraordinary seize or enjoyments, are occasions of
pride.

Why are Leviathans scales his pride? It Is because they are so strong and
close, that he thinks himself safe from all injuries under their shelter. The
word properly signifies a buckler of molten brass. They who are armed with
such a defensive weapon, fear neither sword nor spear. Any great enjoyments or
seize, are occasions of pride. The Peacock is proud of his feathers, and
the horse of his strength; and men are proud of their riches and worldly
abundance (1 Timothy 6.17.) Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be
not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches. Some good men, no sooner get a
few golden scales, or their scales a little gilded, but they begin to be proud;
therefore the Apostle gave Timothy that charge, to warn such rich men as
professed the true faith of the Gospel, to take heed of high-mindedness. And as
men are apt to be proud of their riches, so are women of their beauty, and the
learned of their knowledge, and the wise of their understanding, and great men
of their power, and godly men (if they have but gifts beyond their brethren)
are apt to be proud of them: And as some are proud of the gifts given them by
God, so many are proud of the gifts given by them to men, I mean, of their good
deeds or works of charity. Salvation (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.9.) is not of
works, least any man should boast. If salvation were by working (either by
works of grace, or gracious works, toward God, or works of charity toward
men) men would be boasting, which is properly the work of pride. Again, men are
very apt to be proud of their privileges. The Nation of the Jews, how proud
were they of that privilege, that they were Abraham's children, that they had
the Law and Temple: Whence the Apostle left that serious admonition to the
Gentiles ( Romans 11.20.) Because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou
stand by faith; be not high minded, but fear. Do not pride your selves in
your privileges as they did, lest you also be broken off as they are. Lastly,
some have been proud, even of their graces; that of the Apostle argues it (1
Cor. 4.6, 7.) Who has made thee to differ? (thou have grace, and another has
none; who has made this difference between thee and him? has not God?) what
have thou, that thou have not received? why then do thou boast as if thou
had not received it? Even they that have received grace, are in danger of
boasting, as if they had not received it. I may say, as of all proud men, so of
all men, who are but touched with pride, as here it is said of Leviathan, Their
scales (some seize or other) are their pride. And hence we may infer, If
great seize are an occasion of pride; then

Let us pray for an humble heart in high enjoyments and seize. If you
have strong scales, much strength about you, or in you, beg hard for humility;
be not like Leviathan, let not your scales be your pride. His scales are his
pride, Shut up together as with a close or strait seal.

Things straightly sealed up, can hardly be parted. How close the scales of
Leviathan are, is further showed, Ne spiraculum quidom incedit per eas. Hieron.
Verse. 16. One is so near to another, that no air can come between.

The Lord does not say, you cannot put a straw, or a hair between, but no air
can come between. The air is the most subtle thing in nature; the air passes
through not only little cranies, but imperceptible pores; yet the juncture of
Leviathans scales is so close, that the subtle air cannot pass between. The
next verse is only an hightning of the same thing.

Verse. 17. They are joined one to another, they stick together that they cannot
be sundred. Scales are lap't one over another, like the tiles of an house, they
stick like boards glued. The Hebrew is, they are joined a man to his brother.
Vir fratri adhaerit.
It Is common in that language to call two things joined together a man and his
brother, or a woman and her sister. Thus ( Exodus 25.20.) And the cherubims
shall stretch-forth their wings on high, covering the Mercy-seat with their
wings, and their faces shall look one to another; The Hebrew is, shall look a
man to his brother. Again ( Exodus 26.5.) Moses giving direction about the
loops, for the curtains of the Tabernacle, says, Fifty loops shall thou make
in the one curtain, and fifty loops shall thou make in the edge of the curtain,
that is, in the coupling of the second, that the loops may take hold one of
another; The Text is, a woman of her sister. Thus union is expressed, because
it is supposed a man and his brother, a woman and her sister, keep near together
in love. Leviathans scales are joined as close together as a man and his
brother, or as a woman and her sister, that is, they are most closely joined,
or as some take the allusion, they stick together as prisoners, that are linked
and chained one to another. This union or closeness of Leviathans scales, shows
both his strength and his safety.

Hence note; Unity is a great means to keep any strong and safe.

How comes Leviathan to be so safe? his scales are close together. If he had
never so strong scales, were they not joined together, they could be no safety
to him; union makes every thing stronger and safer. A company of arrows, bound
up together, how strong are they? by which Sylurus invited his Sons to unity.
Ahab, no doubt, had very strong armor, armor of proof, but it had joints in
it (1 Kings 22.34.) And so, A certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote
the King of Israel between the joints of his harness. Death, the deadly arrow,
made its entrance at the joints of his Armor. Weak things closely joined
together become strong, and strong things wanting union prove weak. Satan is
the strong man Armed, and the Scriptures of truth tell us, that Satan's kingdom
is not divided, there is no casting out devils by Beelzebub. Satan and his
agents stick together, as the scales of Leviathan, in opposing the kingdom of
Jesus Christ ( Psalm. 83.5, 6, 7.) They have consulted together with one
consent, they are confederate against thee. Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck, the
Philistines, with the Inhabitants of Tire, Assure also is joined with them.
These were all cleaving together, as close as the scales of Leviathan, in
opposition to Israel. Herod and Pilate, once no good friends, laid down all
their animosities, and cleaved close together, like the scales of Leviathan, to
crucify Christ; and so have evil men, in all ages, to hinder the progress of
his kingdom. It is said ( Revel. 17.12, 13.) of the ten horns (which are there
expounded to be ten Kings) these have one mind. They who seldom agree in their
own affairs, agree all in assisting the beast, as it is there said, These have
one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the beast. The Scripture
takes notice of this their union, not as a good thing, but as a strange thing;
that ten Kings, of different nations, of different interests and dispositions,
should agree in giving their power and strength, that is, their civil power,
the power of their kingdoms to the beast; that is, to uphold his kingdom, which
is, doubtless, the kingdom of Antichrist. How may this shame those, who profess
a love to, and themselves subjects of the kingdom of Christ, for their
divisions! Godly men should cleave together, as the scales of the Leviathan
which cannot be sundred, in that which is good. And are not their differences
and divisions, their distances and breaches to be lamented? which are so very
great and wide, that not only the thin circumambient air, but gross
circumventing bodies, may come between them. So far are they oftentimes from
cleaving together, in duty to God and man, like the scales of Leviathan, that
they hang together (as we say) like ropes of sand. The Evangelist Luke speaks
of a time ( Acts 4.32.) When all believers were like the scales of Leviathan,
Then the multitude of them that believed (that is, all they that believed) were
of one heart, and of one soul. Here they were not only joined, like the scales
of the Leviathan, but they were joined, as if they were all but one scale.
Godly men should carry it toward one another, as members of the same body, and
acted by the same spirit. They who have relation to those seven ones mentioned
( Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 9.) should labor to be one, should be found endeavoring (as
it is there said, ver. 3.) To keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace.

Further, by way of allusion. The lusts of carnal men in general, are like the
scales of Leviathan, sticking so close to them, and one to another, that the
Spirit of God, in the Ministry of his word finds no passage between, till he
makes one; yea, hardness of heart, obstinacy and impenitency are expressed by
this word ( Lam. 3.65.) Give them, O Lord (says he) hardness of heart, thy
curse unto them. Give them sorrow of heart; so our translation renders it. The
Hebrew is, Give them a shield upon their heart. The word is the very same,
which is here translated scales, the scales of Leviathan being as so many
shields, so strong and thick, that nothing can enter. It is sad, when we have
scales on our eyes. It was said of Saul, when in that vision he was stricken
blind, that before he received his sight, scales fell from his eyes. Ananias
being sent to him, said ( Acts 9.17.) Brother Saul, the Lord (even Jesus that
appeared unto thee in the way as thou came) has sent me, that thou might
receive thy sight, and be filled with the holy Ghost; and immediately there
fell from his eyes, as it had been scales, etc. All men naturally have scales
on their eyes. It is sad to have a scale on the eye, any thing that does hinder
the sight of spiritual things; but how sad is it to have scales on the heart
also! To all impenitent persons, their lusts are as so many scales and shields
upon their hearts; and they have so many scales upon their hearts, and those
such hard ones, that nothing but an Almighty power can make entrance or
impression. None are in so much danger, as they that are fenced and armed with
these scales. It is best for man to open a naked breast, to receive every
stroke which the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, makes upon him.

JOB, Chap. 41. Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. 18. By his neesings a
light does shine, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.

19. Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out.

20. Out of his nostrils goes smoke, as out of a seething pot, or caldron.

21. His breath kindles coals, and a flame goes out of his mouth.

22. In his neck remains strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before him.

23. The flakes of his flesh are joined together, they are firm in themselves,
they cannot be moved.

24. His heart is as firm as a stone, yea as hard as a piece of the nether
millstone.

25. When he raises up himself, the mighty are afraid; by reason of breakings
they purify themselves.


IN the former context, the Lord spoke of the covering or skin, of the jaws and
teeth, of the face and scales of this Leviathan. In this he proceeds yet
further, to draw out the description of this vast creature.

First, By his strong neesings, verse. 18.

Secondly, By his shining eyes, in the latter part of that 18th verse.

Thirdly, By his flaming mouth ( verse. 19.)

Fourthly, By his smoking nostrils ( verse. 20.)

Fifthly, By his fiery breath ( verse. 21.)

Sixthly, By his stiff neck ( verse. 22.)

Seventhly, By the firmnness of his flesh ( verse. 23.)

Eighthly, By the firmness and hardness of his heart ( verse. 24.)

Ninthly, By a twofold effect of all these, even upon the mightiest of the sons
of men, when he appears to them, or when they behold him in his motions.

First, He makes them afraid (verse. 25.)

Secondly, He causes them to purify themselves, in the close of that verse.
In these particulars we have a prospect of the whole context. I shall but
lightly touch at the most of them, and a little insist upon the last, which we
shall find most useful for instruction and admonition.

The four first verses hold out, upon the matter, the same thing, Est frementis
irascentisque oeti descriptio. Bold.
namely, the fierce and furious spirit of Leviathan, discovered in his
neesings, eyes, mouth, nostrils, breath, all which are expressed by elegant
metaphors, alluding to, or by comparisons made with light and fire, with lamps
and sparks, with smoke and flame.

Verse. 18. By his neesings a light does shine. The first thing described in the
former context, Sternutatio efficitur ex subtili vapore incluso in ventriculis
cerebri, conante natura vehementius expelre and expurgare. Galen. l. 2. de
sympt. causis, c. 2, 3. Inter orandum bonum est signum sternutare.
Sernutamentum bonum est signum aegroto. Dicta Rabbinorum. Merc.
was Leviathans terrible head; the first in this, is the power of his brain.
Naturalists teach us, that neesing is caused by the thin and subtle vapors
included in the ventricles of the brain, which nature striving to expel and put
forth, causes that which we call neesing; So then, neesing is an effect of the
expulsive faculty in the brain. The Jewish Rabbis have two observations about
neesing.

First, They say, neesing is a good sign in prayer; and the reason of it, as I
conceive, is this, because it shows there is warmth and heat in the brain, and
some fervency of spirit in the duty. That Is the reason (I suppose) why they say
neesing is a good sign in prayer.

Secondly, Both they and others say, Neesing is a good sign in a sick man. We
say commonly, Neesing is a sign of health, it shows a vigor and quickness in
the natural spirits, residing in the brain.

His neesings. But what are these neesings of Leviathan? They who hold
Leviathan to be the Crocodile, say, Si ronchos edit sternutanti similis, emicat
flamma. Bez.
when he is sunning himself, or lies open with his face to the Sun, this
causes him to neese or sneese, and then his breath breaking out forcibly at
his nostrils, is like a shining light. It Is said also, that the Whale neesing,
Baloens ex (...) ab emittendo and fundendo aquas. Isid. Ora Balenae habent in
frontibus, ideoque summa aqua natantes in sublime nimbos efflant. Plin. Nature.
Hist. l. 9. c. 6. Sternutationes ejus faciunt spl^ndorem, dum aqua albescens in
aero dispergitur. Pisc. Aquae qua per duas fistulas quam longissime sursum
ejaculatur, Balona, splendores dicuntur, quia lucant and candidant. Sanct.
spouts out water, at those pipes or holes which he has placed or made
naturally upon his head or forehead (he has a mouth (as it were) on the top of
his head, not to eat with, but to spout out water with) as when a man neeseth,
there comes out a vapor at his nostrils; so the Whale is supposed to neese,
when he blows out showers of water through those pipes, up into the Air. The
word by which the Whale is expressed in Latin, signifies this action, or, his
spouting out water; and by these spoutings or neesings, we may say (as it
follows in the Text) A light does shine.

Because the water which he spouts up into the Air, with a great and vehement
force, meeting, and as it were, mingling with the light there, looks like
light, and has a great brightness in it; so that this action of Leviathan, and
the effect or concomitant of it, is as applicable to the Whale as to the
Crocodile.

And his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning, or, like the dawning of the
day. So we translate these words ( Job 3.9.) Let it not (that is, let not the
night in which I was conceived) see the dawning of the day, or (as the Margin
has it) the eyelids of the morning. Leviathans eyes are said to be like the
eyelids of the morning, because of the lightsomeness of them. Christ says (
Mat. 6.22.) The light of the body is the eye. We may call it so in a double
respect. First, because the eye is the most lightsom part of the body, or has
most light in it. Secondly, because the eye gives or lets in light to the whole
body. They that want eyes, or their eyesight, dwell in darkness. The eyes of
Leviathan are not only light in themselves, Palpebrae pro oculis, metonymice
sumuntur.
but are like the eyelids (that is, eyes) of the morning. But wherein does
this likeness consist? I answer, in two things.

First, His eyes are very great, in proportion to his head and body.

Secondly, His eyes are very clear. And so Leviathans eyes may be said to be
like the eyelids of the morning; First, in their greatness; Secondly, in their
brightness or clearness. It is usual in Scripture to mention the morning light,
when it would express the clearest light. The Prophet ( Isa. 58.8.) assuring
the Jews of the greatest outward prosperity, in case they kept a true Fast,
says, Then shall thy light break forth as the morning. And when the Prophet
Amos describes God, making the morning darkness (Chap. 4.13.) As also, turning
the shadow of death into the morning (Chap. 5.8.) his meaning is, that the Lord
can easily, and at pleasure, change a state of greatest prosperity, into
adversity; and a state of deepest adversity, into clearest or highest
prosperity.

But some may say, if the Lord intended to set forth the exceeding clearness of
Leviathans eyes, it might seem more proper to have compared them to the light
at noonday, than to the morning light.

I answer, Though the light at noonday is clearer than that in the morning,
considered in it self; yet considering the morning light, with respect to its
neerness or neighborhood to the foregoing darkness, so we are more sensible of
that than of the light at noonday. Contraries placed near together, illustrate
each other. For, as soon as the morning appears, light conveys it self all over
the Hemisphear, and makes a wonderful change in the Air. The morning light
coming suddenly, and immediately after dismal darkness, affects us more than
the light at noonday, Ardentos oculos suffectos sanguine and igne. Virg. l. 2.
Aeniad. Exilit in siccum flammantia lumina torquet. Virg. l. 3. Georg.
though greater and clearer. Leviathans eyes shine bright, even like the
eyelids or eyes, that is, the light of the morning. The Ancients give report,
that Dragons and Serpents have flaming eyes.

This (says Bochartus) is very true of the Crocodile, whose eyes are so
bright, that the Egyptians used to paint a Crocodiles eye, when they would
signify the morning light; whereas great Authors write, that the eyes of the
Whale are even covered with the weight of their eyebrows, or with fat, and are
little bigger than the eyes of some sort of bullocks; whence it comes to pass,
that the Whale losing his guide, Oculi noctu coruscant, ingentium flammarum
modo; Procul enim visi a piscatoribus, ignes esse grandes putantur. Olaus lib.
21. c. 5.
dasheth against rocks and Sea-shallows. Thus he. To which I shall only oppose
the testimony of no inconsiderable Writer, who affirms of the Whales in the
Seas of Norway, that their eyes in the nightime shine like a huge flame, so
that the fishermen, who are abroad at Sea, judge them to be great fires. And
to what Bochartus says of the Whale, that he is so dim-sighted when deep in
the Sea, that he cannot find his way without a guide, I may reply from his own
showing out of several Authors, that the Crocodile is no better at seeing when
much under water, they teaching, that the Crocodiles eyes are dull while in the
water, but out of the water very quick or sharp-sighted, as if then at last he
recovered his eyesight; and if so, he has no advantage of the Whale in that
particular.

Verse. 19. Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out. That
is, somewhat goes out of his mou^h like burning lamps and sparks of fire. This
is a demonstration of the extreme natural heat of Leviathan: There Is a
continual fire in his mouth; then what is in the kitchen of his stomach, for
the digestion and concoction of his meat? If sparks of fire leap out of his
mouth, as out of the mouth of a furnace, then we may conclude, there is a great
fire kept within.

Verse. 20. Out of his nostrils goes smoke. We had fire before, and now comes
smoke. We usually say, Where there is smoke there is some fire; and surely where
there is so great a heat, there must be or has been some smoke; Out of his
nostrils goes a smoke. Fumus est der adustus ex multitudine caloris. Aquin.
What is smoke? It Is air adust (say Philosophers) Much heat draws out the airy
part of the fuel, and turns it into smoke. Leviathan having such a fire in his
bowels, needs must smoke go out of his nostrils, which are as a double chimney
to vent it; or to keep the metaphor in the Text, Smoke goes out of his
nostrils As out of a seething pot or caldron.

The Hebrew is, a blown pot, because blowing makes a pot sees quickly and
fiercely. A Caldron is a great vessel, wherein much may be sodden or boiled at
once, and boiling sends out a great fume or smoke. The Hebrew word rendered
Caldron, properly signifies a copper or brazen Kettle, in which dying stuff is
boiled for the coloring of cloth. It signifies also a pond, and so a great
vessel like a pond; as that in the Temple was called a Sea, for its greatness.

Verse. 21. His breath kindles coals, and a flame goes out of his mouth. This
verse, with the former three, tend all to one purpose. (...) Ahenum reddidimus
ex conjectura, proprie ahenum magnum instar stagni, quod (...) dicitur. Drus.
Leviathans heat is so vehement, that his breath kindles coals. The Hebrew is,
His soul or life kindles coals. The soul and life of irrational creatures is
the same, and both are but breath, His breath kindles coals; that is, his
breath is so hot, that it will even kindle dead or unkindled coals. Mr.
Broughton renders, His breath would set coals on fire. The breath of the Whale
is not only compared to a great wind, issuing out of a pair of bellows, which
soon kindles a spark into a great fire, but is it self here compared to a fire
by a strong Hyperbole, like that which concludes this matter.

And a flame goes out of his mouth. That is, a heat as from a flame, or such a
heat as a flame gives.

These four verses may be improved for our use, in two things.

First, to inform us how terrible some creatures are. There is nothing which is
not terrible in this; His mouth sends out a burning lamp, and sparks of fire;
smoke goes out of his nostrils, coals are kindled by his breath, and a flame
goes out of his mouth. What Is the meaning and import of all this? not that
Leviathan has these, or does these things indeed; but in his wrath (for this
is the description of an enraged Leviathan) he appears as if he were nothing
but heat, and would set the very element of water on fire, and turn the very
billows of the Sea into burning flames.

Secondly, If the Lord has put such a fierceness into this creature when he is
angry, what is there in the Lord himself when he is angry! The Lord in his
anger, is described like this Leviathan ( Psalm. 18.7, 8.) Then the earth shook
and trembled, the foundation also of the hills moved, and were shaken, because
he was wroth (what follows?) There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and
fire out of his mouth devoured; coals were kindled by it. The words are almost
word for word, the same with those in the Text. The Lord is set forth, as
ushered by fire ( Psalm. 50.2, 3.) Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God
has shined. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence, a fire shall
devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him. Again (
Psalm. 97.2.) Clouds and darkness are round about him (verse. 3.) A fire goes
before him, and burns up his enemies round about; that is, he destroys his
enemies in his anger, as if he consumed them by fire. Once more ( Isa. 33.14.)
The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites; who
among us shall dwell in the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? Thus the Scripture speaks of the Lord in his wrath. And
doubtless the flaming anger of Leviathan, when provoked, is but like a warm
Sunshine, compared with the provoked anger, and hot displeasure of God against
presumptuous sinners. Who is able to abide his wrath? who (in sin) can dwell
with those everlasting burnings? who (unpardoned) can stand before the
devouring fire, and flames of the Lords displeasure? Thus we have the discovery
of Leviathans furious heat; he is all in a flame.

Now the Lord having showed what work Leviathan makes with his mouth and
nostrils, which belong to his head, he comes next to his neck.

Verse. 22. In his neck remains strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before
him. Leviathans head is strongly joined to the rest of his body, by his strong
neck; yet some question whether the Whale has any neck or no, because no
distinction (which in other creatures is visible) appears between his head and
his body. The learned Bochartus makes this another argument against the Whale,
and a little reflects upon Diodate, who joining fully with him in opinion, that
Leviathan is the Crocodile, yet lets go this hold, yielding that the Crocodile
has no more neck than the Whale, as the neck is taken strictly for that
discernable distance between head and shoulders; and though he himself grants
that several other Authors, by him alleged, say the Crocodile has no neck,
yet he answers, it is safer to credit Aristotle, who says the Crocodile has a
neck, and gives this reason for it, because those animals which have no neck at
all, cannot move their heads, whereas the Crocodile (by the testimony of Pliny
and others) can turn his head upwards, or hold it up backwards to bite his prey.

To this some answer, and I conceive their answer may satisfy in this Point,
That how little, or how undiscernable soever the space is between the head and
the body of any animal, the very joining or coupling of them together, may be
called his neck; and in that sense the Whale has a neck as well as the
Crocodile. To this I may add, that the shorter the neck of any animal is, the
stronger it is; and that complies fully with what is here said of the neck of
Leviathan, In his neck remains strength.

The Hebrew is, Lodges. And so Mr. Broughton renders, In his neck always
lodges strength; that is, he is always strong, very strong neckt; his neck is
so stiff and strong, that strength it self may seem to have taken up its
residence there: That Is the elegancy of the Hebrew. So then, these words show
the great strength of Leviathan. A stiff or thick neck, signifies both strength
of body, and stoutness of spirit. Naturalists say, Qui collum habent grossum
fortes sunt, imbecilles autem qui illud habent gracile. Aristot. in
Physiognomicis.
those creatures are very strong, that are thick neckt, as Bulls, etc. and they
are weak that have thin slender necks. The Scripture intimates the stiffness
and unyieldingness of man's will to the commands of God, by the stiffness of his
neck ( Psalm. 75.5.) Lift not up your horn on high, speak not with a stiff
neck; that is, with a neck that will not bow to the Lords yoke, nor obey his
commands. Humble ones bow their heads to worship God, and yield their necks to
his will. For though to bow down the head like a bull rush for a day, be not
the Fast which God has chosen ( Isa. 58.5.) for that is but an outside
repentance, and they who do so, may still remain stiff-spirited and
pertinacious in their sins; yet the bowing of the head has in it the
appearance of a bowed or humbled heart, and a stiff neck is the badge of a
proud impenitent one. To speak with a stiff neck, is to speak arrogantly.
Hannah in her Song (1 Samuel 2.3.) uses this language to the stiff ones of the
world, Talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogance come out of your
mouth: we put in the margin, let not hardness come out of your mouth; that is,
let it not appear at your mouths, that your hearts are hard, that your spirits
are high and stiff; speak no more as if you were Leviathans, as if you could
not bow your necks. It Is good to have a neck strong to bear, but there is
nothing worse than a strong neck that will not bow; yet the strength of
Leviathans neck seems rather to imply his courage than his pertinacy, as it
follows, In his neck remains strength, And sorrow is turned into joy before
him.

There are three other readings of these words, which I shall name, and come to
our own,

Ante cum exilit moeror. Jun. i. e. moerore afficit omnes obvios; ac si de
illis triumphans exultaret moeror effectus ab ea humonitus dictum. Jun.
First, Some thus, In his neck remains strength, and before him danceth fear.
Several of the learned insist much upon this translation, and their meaning is
this; all that come near Leviathan, or within sight of him, are afraid; all the
fish in the sea, and all the mariners upon the sea that see him, dance or have
away for fear, as if fear caused by him, triumphing over them, danced before
them. He makes such a combustion by stirring the waters, and rolling in them,
that be frights every living thing he meets with, none dare stand him.

Secondly, Master Broughton renders it thus, Before him danceth carefulness,
that is, (as himself glosseth) he takes or has no care, meeting with any fish
to feed upon, that his taking thought is a gladness. He is so strong, that he
knows he can master all the fish that comes near him, and can have prey enough
for the taking, to satisfy his vast stomach, and fill his belly; therefore he
takes no care for tomorrow, before him danceth carefulness. Christ says to his
disciples, take no thought for the morrow: It were well if such carefulness
danced before us, as Leviathans cares dance before him. We say of some men,
they sing care away; and all carking, heart-cutting, and dividing cares, should
even dance away before all men. The Apostles counsel is (1 Cor. 7.32.) I would
have you without carefulness, as much as to say, let carefulness dance before
you, or put it from you; use the means, and be not solicitous about successes
or issues. The mo^e we live by faith, the less we live in care, or the more our
cares dye; and they whose hearts are full of faith, cannot but have their heads
emptied of cares. Some say, we have a great family, many bellies to fill, and
backs to cloth, how can we be without carefulness? Consider one Leviathan needs
more food than many families, yet he takes no care; God provides for him though
he know it not, and will he not provide for those that know him? therefore let
carefulness dance before you; That Is a good reading for our use and comfort.

Thirdly, Others translate thus, before him passes pennury. Faciem ejus
praecedit egestas. Vulg.
The meaning of that reading is; wheresoever Leviathan comes, he leaves nothing
but pennury behind him, he devours all before him, and all little enough,
scarce enough for him; all the fish he meets with all in the sea, he eats them
up: the sea hardly affords enough to fill his huge belly, and satisfy his
hungry appetite. As it is said of Behemoth, he thinks he can draw up Jordan,
that is, all the waters of Jordan; so Leviathan thinks he can draw up the sea,
that is, all the fish in the sea; so that, how much soever he meets with, he
looks upon it as pennury, at most, as but enough for him. So that this
translation, Before him passes pennury, may have or bear these two
interpretations: Either, First, That he makes all pennury where he comes; as
its said of the Turkish wars, where the Grand Signiors horse treads, the grass
will not grow, he treads down and spoils all; Or, as it is said in Scripture of
those enemies, The land was before them like the garden of Eden, and behind
them as a desolate wilderness. Or, Secondly, That he thinks all to be but
pennury and scarcity (how plentiful soever it is) that is before him. That
which may suffice many, is scarce a morsel, or a mouthful for him; as if all
the fish in the sea could not serve him for a breakfast. As it is said of
Alexander the Great, when he had conquered the known world, he was as hungry
and sharp-set as ever, he looked upon all as pennury, and wished there were
another world for him to conquer. Thus plenty is pennury to Leviathan, he is an
unsatiable gulf: that is a third reading; our own says,

Sorrow is turned into joy before him. The meaning, I conceive, (...)
exultavit. Mont. vertetur in laetitiam. Pagn. Quicquid solicitudinem aliis
parit excitat, and exhilerat ipsius animum. Bez.
is this, Leviathan is so strong and powerful, such strength remains in his
neck, that nothing can daunt him, or bring down his spirit, nothing can trouble
him, much less terrify him, he fears nothing, he fears none; and if any object
of sorrow present it self to him, it is presently his joy. That which has
greatest matter of sorrow in it, is to him matter of sport, or he makes a sport
of it, he even rejoices in the midst of those things that makes others sad; he
either makes nothing of them, or no such thing of them as they appear to
others: Sorrow is turned into joy before him. It is said of that Land-leviathan
Alexander the Great before mentioned, that he even leaped for joy, when he was
engaged in great dangers and hazardous attempts; then he would say exultingly,
Now I see danger suitable to the greatnss of my spirit. Jam video animo meo par
periculum.
In such a sense it may be said here of Leviathan, sorrow is turned into joy
before him. But whence was this? surely from his strength, and the confidence
he had in it.

Hence note; They who have great strength, think themselves above sorrow and
danger.

Leviathan is so strong that sorrow is turned into joy before him; how full of
joy, or how joyful then is he! as Christ says ( Mat. 6 23.) If the light that
is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? so if our sorrow be turned
into joy to us, how great is our joy? Some good men have found it so according
to their faith, and most st^ong men hope it shall be so to them, according to
their pre umption. A st ong man rejoices to run a race, whereas a weak man is
afraid of it; going is grievous to him, much more running. Whatsoever we have
strength to do, if we have hearts also to do it, we rejoice to do it; yea, we
are so apt to rejoice in our carnal strength of any kind, that the Lord by his
Prophet ( Jer. 9.23.) forbids it in every kind of strength, in strength of
understanding, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom; he forbids it also in
strength of estate, Let not the rich man glory in his riches; and lastly, he
forbids it in this particular strength of body, Let not the mighty man glory in
his might. And there is great reason we should take heed of being found
Leviathans in this, seeing none have been more oppressed and weakened with sorrow
than they, who upon confidence in self-strength have thought themselves above
it, or that it should certainly be turned into joy before them.

Further, It will not be unuseful to consider, That, as here it is said,
Leviathans sorrow is turned into joy before him, so it is promised to, and the
privilege of, all true believers, to have their sorrows, or that their sorrows
shall be turned into joy before them ( John 16.20.) Verily, I say unto you
(said Christ himself) that ye shall weep, and lament, and the world shall
rejoice (here is the case of Christ's Disciples in this world, they shall weep
and lament, that is, they shall have cause to weep, and many times shall
actually weep and lament) but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. As ye shall
rejoice in spirit under those dispensations which have the greatest occasion
and matter of sorrow in them, or as Eliphaz said ( Job 5.22.) At destruction
and famine ye shall laugh, ye shall laugh at destruction it self; so at last
all the very matter of your sorrow shall be turned into joy. The most sorrowful
things shall not now be able to swallow you up with sorrow, and at last you
shall not know by any then present experience any sorrowful thing. All your
tears shall be, not only wiped off from, but out of your eyes; Christ will then
renew that miracle, in a metaphorical sense, which be once wrought in a
natural, of which we read ( John 2.) he will turn water into wine; the waters
of sorrow and tribulation, into the wine of joy and consolation. Which blessed
privilege is also clearly prophesied ( Isa. 65.13, 14.)

Lastly, If by reason of Leviathans strength, his sorrow is turned into joy,
surely the faithful, who have the Lord for their strength, may turn their
sorrow into joy, into such joys, as none shall take from them, or turn back, or
again into sorrows.

Thus far concerning the strength of Leviathans neck, and the effect of it, his
joyful or merry life. The next words show him strong all over, or in all the
parts of his body.

Verse. 23. The flakes of his flesh are joined together, they are firm in
themselves, they cannot be moved. This compactness of Leviathans flesh argues
an universal strength. His flesh is so compact, as if it were a molten thing,
or (as the word rendered firm in the latter part of the verse signifies) like
brass, or bell-mettal moulton in a furnace, and cast into a body. Such is the
force of the Hebrew.

The flakes of his flesh are joined. Though Leviathan be a fish, an inhabitant
of the waters, yet the Scripture calls the bulk of his body flesh. So ( Levit.
11.10, 11.) All that have not sins, nor scales in the seas, and in the rivers,
of all that move in the waters, they shall be even an abomination unto you, ye
shall not eat of their flesh. In Scripture sense fish is flesh, the Apostle
uses the same language (1 Cor. 15.39.) All flesh is not the same flesh (that
is, it is not of the same kind) but there is one kind of flesh of men, and
another flesh of beasts, another of fishes. The fish of the sea have flesh, as
well as the beasts of the earth: And that which Job denied of his flesh ( Chap:
6.12.) we may affirm of Leviathans flesh, His strength is as the strength of
stones, and his flesh as of brass. As the scales of Leviathan without, so now
his whole flesh within, is spoken of, as if it were made of solid brass. The
very refuge, the vilest parts of his flesh (as the word which we translate
flakes is rendered Amos 8.6.) are firm and strong, being joined or glued fast
together, as the Septuagint express the significancy of the word, by us rendered
joined. And as it follows, They are firm in themselves, they cannot be moved.

That is, one part of his flesh cannot be taken from the other, or he cannot be
moved; that is, Leviathan is so strong, that nothing can stir him, or cause him
to give ground, unless himself pleases. And as his flesh covering his bones is
thus firm, so is his heart, covered and defended by both.

Verse. 24. His heart is as firm as a stone, yea, as hard as a piece of the
nether millstone. Corin omnibus animantibus spissum, nervosum, and bend
compactum est. Arist. l. 3. do part. c. 4. Superior molo (...) dicebatur ab
inequitando.
The heart is the principal internal part of any creature; and the flesh of the
heart in every creature, is harder than the flesh of any other part of his
body; the heart is a very compact and hard piece of flesh. And the Lord would
have us know, that the heart of Leviathan is so hard, that the heart of any
other creature, in comparison of his, may be called soft and tender. His heart
Is as firm as a stone.

That is, it is extraordinary hard; which is further intended by the last words
of this verse, Yea, as hard as a piece of the nether millstone.

Mills have two stones, an upper (which in Hebrew is expressed by a word, which
signifies to ride, because it seems to ride (moving or turning round) upon the
nether stone, which, because it bears the weight of the work in grinding, is
the harder of the two, though both are very hard; as if it had been said, if
any stone be harder than another, that is most like the heart of Leviathan.

Now though this may have respect to the litteral or proper hardness of the
flesh of Leviathans heart, yet we are not to stay in that sense; for there is a
moral or metaphorical hardness, as well as a natural or proper hardness. The
heart of one man is said to be hard, and the heart of another soft and tender,
not because the natural flesh of one man's heart is hard, and another soft, but
because of a moral hardness or tenderness in the heart of the one or other.
There is no difference between them, in the body of a good and bad man, as to
tenderness and hardness; but the soul-heart (if I may so speak) of the one, and
of the other, differ exceedingly as to hardness and tenderness. The heart of
every good man (as to the spiritual constitution of it) is soft and tender; but
the heart of every evil man is hard and stony. Again, a fearful man is said to
have a soft heart, every little danger pierces it, or makes an impression upon
it; but a man of courage and boldness is said to have a hard heart, or a heart
of brass, nothing can daunt him: In this sense Leviathan has a hard or firm
heart, a heart of brass. The hardness of Leviathans heart, Fortis and intrepida
est. Jun.

Est forti and infracto cord, seu animo nihil timet. Merc.


notes his courage, boldness, and stoutness; he is not timorous, like many
other creatures; his heart is as incapable of fear as a stone, and as
impenetrable by any passion, as the nether millstone. So that, to say his
heart is as hard as a stone, is all one as to say, He is fearless, or he is
courageous. So then,

There is a threefold moral hardness of heart spoken of in Scripture.

First, Impenitency for sin, is often called hardness of heart. They who go on
knowingly to sin against God, are bold daring men, they have hard hearts
indeed: Such hearts have all men by nature, and therefore God makes that
promise to sinners, I will take away the heart of stone, and give a heart of
flesh (Ezekiel. 36.26.)

Secondly, Unmercifulness or cruelty toward men, is called hardness of heart.
We commonly say of such a man, Crudeles and inclementes aut e saxo geniti, aut
cor habere saxeum dicuntur.
he is a hard-hearted man; that is, he is a cruel and unmerciful man.

Thirdly, Couragiousness and stoutness in appearance of danger, may be called
hardness of heart. A man of great courage, has a heart hardened against all
fears and dangers.

Leviathan has a hard heart, in these two latter senses; he is cruel and
unmerciful, he spares none, he swallows down all without distinction, a Jonah
and all, if he meet with him. The Whale has no mercy, and therefore may be
said to have a hard heart.

Again, Leviathan is full of courage, he fears no colors (as we say) therefore
he may well be said to have a hard heart. Cor durum signum audaciae and
fortitudinis. Plin. l. 11. c. 37.
And those creatures which have the hardest hearts in a physical sense, are
observed by Naturalists to be most daring and courageous.

Now, as Leviathan is thus fearless at the appearance of the greatest dangers,
so when he appears, all are filled with fear. As he is altogether dreadless,
according to the interpretation given of this verse, so he is altogether
dreadful, according to the express tenor of the next.

Verse. 25. When he raises up himself, the mighty are afraid; by reason of
breakings they purify themselves. We have had in the seven verses last opened,
the description of Leviathan in many things, which cannot but render him an
object of fear and terror; surely then, when he shows himself, all will be in a
fright, even the mighty, who seem best fenced against fear, as the Text speaks,
When he raises up himself, the mighty are afraid.

When he raises up himself. Whither? not out of the water, but in the water,
or to the surface of the water; sometimes the Whale swims upon the top of the
water. Now, when he raises up himself, or (as M^. Broughton translates) at his
stateliness, or (as another) both putting the word into a Noune, which we put
into a Verb, At his excellency The mighty are afraid; by reason of breakings
they purify themselves.

In these words (as was showed before) we have a double effect of Leviathans
raising himself, in sight, or to the view of others.

The first effect is, The mighty are afraid.

The second is this, By reason of breakings they purify themselves.

The mighty are afraid. The Lord does not say, When he raises up himself, the
weak, and (as we say) hen-hearted cowards, but the mighty are afraid, the
mighty of all sorts; not only mighty fishes, but mighty men: the stoutest
Seamen and Mariners, yea, Captains and Warriers at Sea, are afraid; and not
only are they afraid when he raises up himself (like a moving mountain) but
amazed with fear, (...) Fortes, proprie pii, i e. Angeli hoc nomine dicti quod
robare polleant maxim pra ceteris creaturis; hoc nomen etiam ad homines
transfertur, robore and potentia valentes. Timebunt Angeli. Vulg.
and even struck dead with astonishment, The Hebrew word rendered mighty, may be
carried beyond mighty men, even to Angels; and so the vulgar Latin reads it,
When he lifts up himself, the Angels will be afraid. The word is applied to the
Angels all the Scripture over; it properly signifies strong or mighty ones.
Angels are strong and mighty, they excel all other creatures in strength (
Psalm. 103.20.) If we take that translation, The Angels will be afraid, it is
only to show, that Leviathan is so terrible, that not only the fish in the Sea,
and men on earth, but (if such a thing could be) the Angels of Heaven would be
afraid of him. As Christ when he would set forth the efficacy of seduction,
which shall be in the latter days, says, False Prophets shall come, and
deceive, if it were possible, the very elect (Mat. 24.24.) So this Leviathan
would make the Angels afraid, if it were possible. As Ships in a storm at Sea,
are said to mount up to the Heavens (Psalm. 107.26.) though they always keep
upon the billows of the water; so by a like hyperbole, we may say, when
Leviathan raises up himself, the Angels of heaven are afraid. But as the word
often signifies an Angel, so it is commonly applied to men of might, strength,
and courage. We translate indefinitely, the mighty, without determining it upon
one or other sort of mighty ones; and so we may understand it of any among the
visible creatures that are mighty. When he raises up himself, the mighty are
afraid.

Hence Note, First; Great dangers may put the stoutest into a fear.

Natural fear is a passion or perturbation of the mind, raised by the
appearance, or our apprehension of some eminent or imminent evil, ready to take
hold of us, or fall upon us. And as some are of so fearful a nature, or are
made so fearful by a secret judgment of God upon them, that they are afraid
where no fear is (Psalm. 53.5.) and (being pursued with their own guilt) flee
when no man pursues (Prove. 28.1.) or (as another Scripture speaks) At the
sound of a shaken leaf; so it is natural to all men to fear, in case of real
and apparent danger, especially if the danger be like a Leviathan, very great,
or if a Leviathan raise himself against them: And therefore Jesus Christ
himself, being in our nature, and clothed with flesh, though sinless flesh,
began not only to be afraid, but amazed (Mark 14.33.) a little before his
passion, when he saw that greatest Leviathan, the Devil, together with many
great Leviathans, raising themselves to swallow him up.

And, if when a Leviathan raises up himself, the mighty are afraid, how shall
the mighty be afraid, when God raises up himself! that is the design of God in
this passage. The holy Prophet gave this caution to all men ( Zach. 2.13.) Be
silent, O all flesh, before the Lord; for he is raised up out of his holy
habitation. As if it had been said; the Lord now shows himself: he was before
as one asleep, or laid down upon his bed, but now the Lord is raised up. What
then? Be silent, O all flesh. The mightiest have reason then to be silent: How
silent? There Is a twofold silence; First, from speaking; Secondly, from
boasting. That charge in the Prophet is not to be understood of a silence from
speaking, but from boasting; as if it had been said, Be in fear and reverence,
for the Lord is raised up out of his holy habitation. Another Prophet tells us,
that at the Lords appearances the mighty shall tremble and be afraid ( Isa.
2.19.) having said a little before, The loftiness of man shall be bowed down,
and the haughtiness of man shall be made low, He adds, They shall go into the
holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and
for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth. When
the Lord arises to shake this world by his judgments, he will make the mighty
tremble, and run into the holes of the rocks, to hide themselves from his
dreadful presence. If a creature, a Leviathan, causes the mighty to fear when
he arises, how much more may the mightiest of the world fear, when God
arises! and therefore that prayer of David (Psalm. 68.1.) Let God arise, let
his enemies be scattered; let them that hate him, flee before him, may well be
resolved into this conditional proposition; If God arises, his enemies shall
be scattered, and all that hate him shall flee before him.

This may teach the mean and poor of the earth to fear him, who can make the
mightiest afraid. When God is angry, the mighty cannot, then much less can mean
underlings stand before him. When Leviathan raises himself, the mighty are
afraid, And by reason of breakings they purify themselves.

Mr. Broughton says, by reason of shiverings. But what are these shiverings or
breakings? Leviathan breaks the waves and waters. The waves of the Sea,
Confractiones vocat, quando Leviathan elevando se fluctus excitat, qui
propter^^ (...) appellantur, quod se invicem frangant.
are expressed in the Hebrew tongue by a word which signifies breakings,
because they break themselves one against another; as also, possibly, because
Ships are broken by the waves. And when it is here said, By reason of breakings
they purify themselves, the meaning may be this; by reason of the waves and
troubled waters, which Leviathan makes when he bestirs or raises up himself,
they purify themselves. Nor does Levithan break the waves and waters only, but
whatever comes near him he breaks and shivers to pieces; if a Ship be in his
way, he breaks it, as some have been taught, to their cost, by sad experience.
By reason of breakings They purify themselves.

The mighty are afraid when he raises himself up; and seeing him make such
work, they purify themselves. What Is that? There are various understandings
and expositions of this clause. Aliqui verbum (purgant) exponunt, aberrant; i.
e. Ita percelluntur metu ut animis toti cancidunt, nec sciunt quid agant. Merl.
Peccant, i. e. errore se obstringunt, ut nesciant, quid faciant. Nam (...) ut,
Graece (...) dicitur, qui aberrat a scopo. Drus.


First, The word rendered to purify, properly signifies to err, or to wander
out of the way; and it notes, as outward erring or wandering, that of the body,
when we know not whither to go, so inward wandering, that of the mind, when we
know not what to do. The mind or understanding wanders often, and roves up and
down, we know not whither. In this sense, several understand the words; By
reason of breakings they wander, they are struck with such a fear and
amazement, that they run about like men distracted, and out of their wits; or,
they (suppose it of Mariners) know not how to guide the Ship, nor how to handle
their sails and tacklings. Some chiefly insist upon this interpretation, By
reason of breakings they wander, or know not what to do next to help or save
themselves from perishing. A man in streights, usually says, I know not what
to do. They who are in much fear of suffering in any kind, seldom know what to
do in any way, for their own safety, and often take the unsafest way, running
themselves further into danger, while they endeavor to escape it. This is a
proper and profitable exposition; and we may note this from it.

Great fears causes great distractions. Every worldly fear has somewhat of
distraction in it; and in proportion to the fear, is the distraction: therefore
great fear must needs cause great distraction. When men in a storm mount up to
heaven, and go down again to the depths, it is said ( Psalm. 107.26, 27.) their
soul is melted because of trouble, they reel to and fro, and stagger like a
drunken man, and are at their wits end; their wit cannot go a step further with
them, nor their reason conduct them any longer. We say in the margin, All their
wisdom is swallowed up. He that fears Leviathan will swallow him up, may soon
find his wisdom swallowed up. Wise and mighty men may be mightily puzzled in
great dangers, and utterly disabled to make use, either of their wisdom or of
their might. Good Jehoshaphat (2 Chronicles. 20.12.) when a great enemy was invading
him, cried out, O our God, will thou not judge them? for we have no might
against them, neither do we know what to do; we are bereft of counsel. Great
dangers even unhinge our reason, and put it out of place. The Disciples of
Christ in a storm ( Mat. 8.25.) were not only like men at their wits end, but
almost at their faiths end too, crying out, Lord save us, we perish; if thou
help us not, we are all undone: And he said, why are ye fearful? O ye of little
faith. There is nothing but faith can keep down the prevailings of fear, in
great or prevailing dangers and breakings; and when once we are at our faiths
end in a time of extremity, we shall soon be at our wits end also, yea, even
quite out of our wits. A faithless man, is no match for little fears; and he
that has but a little faith, or is a man of little faith, may soon be
over-matcht with great ones. As perfect love, either the actings of our perfect
love to God, or the evidence and apprehensions of the perfect love of God to
us, casts out fear (1 John 4.18.) that is, all that fear which has torment
in it; so also does perfect faith in God, that is, a strong, a
well-foundation'd, and a well and high-built faith. It Is either for want of
faith, or for some want in faith, that mighty men by reason of breakings, are
not only afraid, but wander, as uncertain of their way. That Is the first
reading.

Secondly, We say, They purify themselves: What Is that? there are two
interpretations of this translation.

First, Some interpret it of a bodily distemper, Quando mare fluctibus
intumescit, nausea ^boritur, and qui sunt in navi fere vomu^^, stomachum
purguntes. Drus. Alvum solvit. Bez. Rab. Levi.
coming upon the mighty by reason of their fear. In storms at sea passengers
purge their stomachs, usually by vomiting, and sometimes by stool. Thus (I say)
some expound this Text, that through extremity of fear, they are surprised
with a suddein looseness. The Prophet speaking of a dreadful day, says ( Ezekiel.
7.17.) All knees shall be feeble, we put in the Margin, All knees shall go into
the water; the meaning is (as all interpreters give it) they shall not be able
to hold there water. And as some, upon a sudden assault of fear, cannot hold
their water, so, neither can others their ordure. The reason of it is plain in
nature, fear making a great dissipation of spirits, weakens the retentive
faculty. Some look upon this, as a sense too low and mean for the intendment of
this place, though in it self a truth. And therefore, it is enough to mention
it; nor ought it to be left unmentioned, seeing it may humble us to consider
unto what pitiful exigents mighty ones may be brought, when surprised with
dangers. But;

Secondly, I conceive (and upon that I shall insist) these words, Vox (...) in
Piet and Hiphtael expiationem a peccato importat. unde vertitur expiabunt se,
seu paenitentiam agent, and remissionem a Deo petent, praesenti mortis
discrimino teriti. Scult.
They purify themselves, are rather to be taken morally; that is, mighty men,
when they see themselves in such danger, mighty Leviathan raising himself,
breaking all before him, what do they? they purify themselves, that is, they
betake themselves to prayer and repentance; and then they will purify
themselves in all have, by confessing and vowing to put away their sins; then
they will (in all have) make their peace with God, this is a good
interpretation. And the word which we translate here to purify, is applied to
this spiritual purifying, by confessing of sin, and tu^ning to God, and
promises of amendment ( Psalm. 51.7.) Purge (or purify) me with hysop, and I
shall be clean; only there it is Gods act, here man's. But as God does purge us
by pardon, so we may be said, to purge our selves by repentance, and earnest
suing to God for pardon. And how usual is it, even with bad men, when they are
in great danger, when they see nothing but death before them, then to fall a
praying and repenting, then to confess their sins, and promise amendment, or to
become new men. Thus by reason of breakings, when all is ready to be broken,
loft, and spoiled, they purify themselves.

Hence, Observe; In great dangers; which threaten present death, or undoing at
least, even common men will confess their sins, and make great shows or
semblances of repentance.

When the mighty are afraid, when they are in trouble and misery, then they cry
to God for mercy, and cry out upon their sins, as the procuring cause of their
miseries and troubles. How good, how godly will they be for a fit (and it may
work further) in a day of evil! It is said of the Mariners in a storm ( Psalm.
107.28.) Then they cry unto the Lord in their distresses. Even such Mariners,
as seldom think of God, nor pray to him in a calm, being in a storm, fall a
praying, they purify thomselves: Now they are for repentance, now they will
cast their sins overboard, seeing themselves almost swallowed up by the raging
sea. Thus ( Jon. 1.4, 5.) When the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and
there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken:
Then the Mariners were afraid; that was the first effect which the tempest
wrought in them: and what was the next? that was a fit of devotion; They cried
every man to his God: Now they purified themselves by repentance and prayer.
Were not these Mariners grown very good, when beset with evil? Thus many pray,
repent, make lamentations over their sins, take up resolutions against their
sins in a storm; then, or thus, even carnal, ignorant, common men will purify
themselves in times of great danger. We say well, true repentances is never too
late, but late repentance is seldom true. We may say also, Repentance in a
storm is good, but repentance in a storm it not always good; real dangers may
produce but false, feniged, and forced repentance. And they who repent only
when they are in, or because they are in a storm, were never good as yet, nor
will they continue in that goodness, which then they make show of. As a godly
man purifies himself when he sees a storm, so he purifies himself in a calm
too, or when he is in greatest safety. And if we do not purify our selves in a
calm, as well as in a storm, our repentance is but the repentance of Heathen
Mariners. Be in a calm, what you are in a storm; be when you see Lambs, what
you were when you see or saw Leviathans.

Secondly, Observe; It is a duty to repent when we see great dangers, or (as
the Text speaks) great breakings.

To be sure, we ought to repent in a time of trouble: We are to repent at all
times, but then most: Be careful you leave not that work undone at any time,
but do it very carefully at such a time. It is said of those that were scorched
with great heat (Revel. 16.9.) they blasphemod the Name of God, which has
power over those plagues, and they repented not to give him glory. And of oath
s under the fifth vial (ver. 11.) They blasphemed the God of heaven, because of
their plagues, and of their sores, and repented not of their deeds. It was the
character of that bad King Ahaz, that in the time of his distress he sinned yet
more. What! sin in a storm! sin when God is scorching, plaguing, and
distressing us! This is not only greatest impenitency, but highest impudency,
or most senseless stupidity. Such are like him, of whom Solomon speaks ( Prove.
23.33, 34.) They are as he that lies down in the midst of the sea, or as he
that lies (sleeping it is meant) upon the top of a mast; where, by any strong
blast of wind, or great sway and yawing of the ship, he may be tumbled into the
deep.

There are two things we should do, when we see breakings or great dangers,
ready to break us.

First, We should hold fast all the good we have, if we have any. When we are
like to lose all outward good things, and that which is better than any or all
of them, our lives, we have reason to hold fast all our spiritual and inward
good things, the truths of God, our faith in God, our love to God, and all his
ways.

Secondly, If as yet we have not really taken hold of God, and good things,
it is high time for us do it, when we can no longer hold, but must let go all
our loved good things of this life, and even our beloved life.

Thirdly, We should in a day of evil, Let go all that is evil, that is, purify
our selves, our consciences, our lives, our hearts, our hands, from all our
sins, from all that is sinful; then, if ever, let us be found in the practice
of that Apostical counsel ( Jam. 4.8.) Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and
purify your hearts ye double minded. They surely are minded, or resolved to be
filthy still, and never to purify either heart or hand, who do not set their
minds to purify themselves from evil, in an evil day. When the Lord breaks us
by any judgment or visitation, then it is high time for us to break off our sins
by righteousness, as Daniel advised Nebuchadnezzar (chap. 4.27.)

JOB, Chap. 41. Verse. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. 26. The sword of him
that lays at him cannot hold: the spear, the dart, nor the harbergeon.

27. He esteems iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.

28. The arrow cannot make him flee: sling-stones are turned with him into
stubble.

29. Darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear.

30. Sharp stones are under him: he spreads sharppointed things upon the mire.

31. He make the deep to boil like a pot: he makes the sea like a pot of
ointment.

32 He makes a path to shine after him; one would think the deep to be hoary.

33. Upon the earth there is not his like: who is made without fear.

34. He beholds all high things: he is a king over all the children of pride.


IN the former context, we have had an accurate delineation of the several
parts of this mighty creature Leviathan, together with their wonderful
operations and effects, even to the terrifying of mighty men, and the putting
them upon speedy preparations for death, at his appearance.

In this the Lord gives proof.

First, Of the imperitrableness, or impregnableness of the scales, skin, and
flesh of this Leviathan.

Secondly, Of the greatness of his courage, stomach, and spirit, in the midst
of greatest dangers and oppositions; both which are showed in the 26, 27, 28,
and 29. verses of this context; which are all of a sense, and therefore I shall
very briefly pass through them.

Verse. 26. The sword of him that lays at him cannot hold. We have in the
compass of these four verses, as it were a whole magazine of arms, of warlike
instruments and engines. Arms are of two sorts.

First, Offensive. Secondly, Defensive.
Offensive arms are likewise of two sorts.

First, Such as we strike with, or make use of at hand; of which sort we reckon
the sword and the spear.

Secondly, Such as are used at a distance; of which sort are arrows, and darts,
and sling-stones: All these offensive weapons are here expressly mentioned. And
likewise we have here defensive arms, with which we cover and shelter the
body, in a time of battle or danger, from taking hurt; of which sort the helmet
is a piece of armor for the head, and the habergeon or breastplate, for the
forepart of the body. So that here (I say) we have all sorts of arms. And as
we have all sorts of arms brought together, so we have the unprofitableness or
unserviceableness of them all, or their utter insufficiency to hurt Leviathan,
or to save any man harmless, or from being hurt by him, as will appear, while I
run over and touch upon these words.

The sword of him that lays at him cannot hold. The sword is an offensive
weapon, with which we assault our adversary at hand. Now though a man does lay
at Leviathan with a sword, that is, uses his utmost skill and strength to make
the sword enter, yet it cannot hold, or, as the Hebrew is, Resilit duritie
tergaris repulsus gladius. Bez.
will not stand or abide; It will either be broken or dulled, and the edge of
it turned and abated, or it will rebound without leaving any impression. Master
Broughton renders, The sword of him that lays at him will not fasten. As if
God had said; if any be so bold as to come near, with a sword in his hand, to
strike Leviathan, it is to no purpose, for such is the strength of his natural
armor, such the hardness of his scales and skin, he is so protected, fenced,
and fortified with these, that the sword can do him no more hurt than a thrust
or stroke with a bull-rush. The sword cannot enter.

No, nor the spear. That Is another offensive hand-weapon, which we use at hand.

No, nor the dart. That Is another offensive weapon, which we use at a distance.
Some put these two, the spear and the dart, into one, conceiving that by these
two, (...) lauco profectionis, i. e. quam homo proficisci facit de manu sua.
Jaculum a jaciendo. Bold. Hastati spargunt hestas, fit ferreus imber. Ennius.
we are to understand not a spear and a dart distinctly, but a darting-spear,
or the spear that goes forth: For there are two sorts of spears. There are
some spears which are held fast in the hand of him that assaults. There are
another sort of spears, called Javelins, which are cast out of the hand. Thus
some (I say) conceive that we are to put these two words into one; Nor can the
darting spear, or Javelin (which is cast out of a man's hand against an enemy
with greatest force) enter to wound him.

Nor the habergeon. As if he had said; not only cannot these offensive weapons,
spear, and dart, or the darting-spear, hurt Leviathan; but those arms which a
man puts on to save himself from hurt, cannot protect him: Leviathan will be
too hard for him; though he wears a Coat of Male, an habergeon, though he be
clothed all over with iron, back and breast, Cap-a-Pe, yet Leviathan can easily
crush him, he can rend his corslet, as if it were but a rotten-ragg, and tear
it off as easily as a wisp of straw; for, as it follows, Verse. 27. He
esteems iron as straw, and brass as rotten-wood.

That is, he makes no more of iron and brass, than we do of a straw, or of a
piece of rotten-wood, which crumbles between our fingers, and is broken with
the least strain. You may as soon wound him with a straw, as with a sword, and
pierce his Buckler-scales, by throwing a rotten stick at him, as well as by
casting a dart or javelin at him; he slights all your artillery, as if he had
reason to do it, and fully understood that his skin and scales were an armor
of proof against all assaults.

Verse. 28. The arrow cannot make him flee. Arrows are notable weapons used at a
distance, which being shot from a strong bow, and drawn home by a strong arm,
wound deeply and deadly; yet Leviathan regards not whole showers of arrows
poured upon him. The Hebrew elegancy gives it thus, The sons of the bow cannot
make him flee. Master! Broughtons translation holds the metaphor untranslated,
The bows child drives him not away. Arrows are sometimes called the sons of the
bow, and sometimes they are called the sons of the quiver (Lament. 3.13.)
because arrows are first taken out of a quiver, where they are kept, and so
are, as it were, children of the quiver; and then arrows are put upon the
string of the bow, and being shot out of it, may be called also sons of the
bow. Arrows come out of the quiver and the bow, as children from parents. And
as in this Scripture, arrows are called children, so in another, children are
compared to arrows ( Psalm. 127.4.) As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man,
so are children of the youth; happy is the man that has his quiver full of
them, that is, who has many children. Here (by the way) give me leave to mind
the Reader, that it is usual in Scripture to call any thing that comes out of,
or proceeds from another, its son or child. Thus corn is called the son of the
floor (Isa. 21.10.) O my threshing, and the corn of my floor; the Hebrew is, O
my threshing, and the son of my floor. Corn is called the son of the floor,
because it comes from the floor, where it is threshed and delivered by the
force of the flail, out of the husk or chaff in which it was bred, and lay as a
child in his mothers womb. Thus also sparks which come from the coal, are
called sons of the coal (Job 5.7.) According to this frequent Hebraisme, arrows
are here called the sons of the bow. The arrow cannot make him flee. Though
arrows fly at Leviathan, he scorns to flee from arrows, he will stir no more
when you shoot a feathered arrow at him, than if you shot only a feather at
him. And as he contemns arrows, so Sling-stones are turned with him into
stubble.

Bows and slings were of great use in war, before the invention of guns. Those
Benjamites were famous, who, as the holy History reports them, could sling
stones at a hairs breadth, and not miss (Judge. 20.16.) David went out against
Goliath the Giant, weaponed only with a sling, and five stones. Slings are no
contemptible weapons, seeing with a sling-stone David overthrew Goliath the
Philistine, who made the whole host of Israel tremble. Yet sling-stones, with
this Sea-goliah, Leviathan, are turned into stubble, that is, he even blows
them away like stubble, nor cares he at all for their blows. When the Psalmist
would show how easily the Lord could subdue the enemies of Israel, he prays
against them in this manner ( Psalm. 83.13.) Make them, O my God, as a wheel,
and as the stubble before the wind, that is, render them weak, and altogether
unable to do mischief. The Prophet describes the easy overthrow of the wicked
enemy, by this metaphor ( Isa. 40.24.) The whirlwind shall take them away as
stubble. And when the Prophet would show how mighty the Lord assisted Abraham
against his enemies, he says ( Isa. 42.2.) He gave them as the dust to his
sword, and as driven stubble to his bow. Now as in all these Scriptures it
appears from this similitude, how unable the strongest are to stand before the
Lord, so, when the Lord would show how impregnable this Leviathan is, he says,
Sling-stones are no more to him than stubble; yea, and he doubles it, Verse. 29.
Darts are counted as stubble.

We had darts in the 26th verse, yet the original words differ; and it is very
probable, that as the words differ, so the weapons, intended by them, differed
also, though now unknown to us, and so we want names for them, or know not how
to name them with a difference. Tanquam stipula habentur ab ipso machinae
bellieae. Bez.
Some interpret the word in distinction from the former, not for darts cast out
of a man's hand, but for stones darted out of engines. The Ancients used
engines, which cast ponderous stones, with mighty violence against walls and
towers, to batter them down, as we do now with ordnance or great guns. Some
have queried, whether great guns were not used in that time The word may bear
it: But plainly it may signify an engine out of which stones were slung. These
Leviathan counts as stubble, yea, He laugheth at the shaking of the spear.
Cetus non timet comminationem. Aquin.


To shake a spear, is as it were, to threaten one with a spear; and so to
brandish a sword against an enemy, is to defy him, or to bid him do his worst,
or it tells him that you will do your best to overcome and conquer him.
Leviathan scorns when any threaten him with their weapons in hand. If you shake
your spear at him, he laughs at it; that is, he slights it, he regards it not.
It Is the same word which is used ( Job 39.22.) concerning the horse, at fear he
mock^th or laugheth; that is, he laughs at those things which give occasion,
yea, just cause of fear, and are indeed such as most are afraid of. So does
Leviathan, He laughs at the shaking of the spear. Eliphaz says of a godly man
( Job 5.22.) at destruction and famine he shall laugh. The godly man is so
fortified with a promise and assurance of protection and provision by God, that
neither sword nor famine can daunt his spirit, yea, he, as it were, laughs at
them, as Leviathan at the shaking of a spear.

Thus I have passed, or posted rather, through these four verses, the general
sense of them all being the same, and that to show that Leviathan is so armed
by nature, that no artificial arms can hurt him.

This part also of Leviathans description, is taken by Bochartus as a further
proof, that the Leviathan here spoken of, is the Crocodile, whose scales are
not penetrable by the force of any weapon; whereas (says he) the skin of the
Whale gives passage to the forcible stroke or thrust of any sharp-edged, or
sharp-pointed instrument.

For answer to this, I have no more to say than what has been said, at the
15th, 16th and 17th verses of this Chapter, concerning the scales of Leviathan,
to which I refer the Reader; and shall pass on, when I have given three or four
hints, by way of improvement from the whole.

First, If the Lord has made a creature that no weapon can hurt, then surely
the Lord himself is exalted above all hurt from the creature; as it is said in
another place of this Book ( Chap. 35.6.) If thou sinnest, what do thou
against him? or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him?
that is, thou can not hurt God with thy sin. Though men by sin lay at him, as
with sword and spear, though they throw their sling-stones of blasphemy at him,
they cannot hurt him. Gamaliel (Acts 5.39.) gives warning against this; take
heed what ye do, refrain from these men, lest happily ye be found, even to fight
against God. They fight against God, who set themselves to do mischief; but
what mischief soever they do to men, or among men, they can do none to God,
their weapons reach him not. As Solomon tells us ( Prove. 21.30.) There is no
wisdom nor counsel against the Lord; so there is no weapon against the Lord:
Sword, and spear, and dart, whether material or metaphorical, are but stubble
before him. And as the Lord himself is beyond the reach of weapons, and the
rage of man, so are they who are under the Lords protection; therefore it is
said of the Church ( Isa. 54.17.) No weapon formed against thee shall prosper;
that is, it shall not have the intended effect of the Smith that made it (as
that Scripture speaks) nor of the hand that weilds it. The sword of him that
lays at the Church of God, shall not hold; the spear, the dart, nor the
habergeon. As none are so much assaulted as the Church, so none are so well
armed and defended.

Secondly, As no offensive weapon can hurt the Lord, so no defensive weapon can
shelter us from hurt, if under the wrath of the Lord. Though we have got an
Habergeon, though we have scales or bucklers like Leviathan, yet the Lord has
a sword, a spear, a dart, that can strike through them, that is, through all
the defenses of the most hardened sinners in the world. There is no shelter to
be found, nor defense to be made against the weapons of divine wrath, but only
in and by Jesus Christ. God is a shield and Buckler, a Helmet and an Habergeon
for believers, against all offensive weapons of men or devils; but where shall
unbelievers find a shield or a buckler to secure themselves against the
offensive weapons of God!

Again, some in allegorizing this Scripture, say, that Leviathan is an emblem
of the Devil. Now, though it be a truth, that no outward weapon, no sword nor
dart can terrify or hurt the Devil, yet the Lord has furnished us with
weapons that can pierce the Devil, that Leviathan, and defend us from his power
( Ephesians. 6.14, 15, 16.) The sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, will wound that
old Leviathan; the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Helmet of Salvation, the
Shield of Faith, will preserve us from woundings, in the midst of all his fiery
darts. How soon would the Devil, that cunning, and cursed, and cruel Darter and
Archer, wound our souls to death, with his fiery darts and poisonous arrows, if
the Lord had not given us a shield, a breast plate, and an helmet, more
impenetrable than the scales of Leviathan!

Lastly, This description of Leviathan, carries in it a fit resemblance of a
hardened sinner, of a sinner resolved upon his evil ways. Some sinners come at
last to such a hardness, that they are like Leviathan, nothing will pierce
them; the sword of the Spirit does not enter them. Though you lay at them with
all your might in the Ministry of the Word, though you cast darts, and shoot
arrows of terrible threatenings against them, they esteem them but straw and
stubble; sin has so hardened them, that they (as we may express it) are
Sermon-proof, threatning-proof, yea, judgement-proof too, as to amendment by
them, though they are broken and perish under them. Let God say what he will in
his Word, or do what he will in his works, they regard it not; they laugh at
the shaking of these spears. As a man that has armor of proof, cares not for
sword or spears, fears not an arrow nor a bullet; so it is in a spiritual sense
with resolved sinners: God having as a just judgment for former sins, given
them a shield upon their hearts (as the word signifies, Lam 3.65.) which we
render sorrow of heart, and put in the margin obstinacy, that is, hardness of
heart, they then account reproofs, threats, admonitions, the most terrible
words in all the armoury of God, no more than a straw or rotten wood. Woe to
these Leviathans, to those who harden their hearts against the Word of God. Who
has hardened himself against the Word of the Lord, and prospered? And let all
such know, that (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 10.4.) The weapons of our
warfare are not carnal (that is, weak, dull, edgeless, pointless tools) but
mighty through God, etc. And that, though now they prevail not to conversion,
yet they will prevail to condemnation; and that while they go on to sin, they
are but going (as Solomon speaks of the young wanton, Prove. 7.22.) As an Ox
goes to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks, till a
dart strike through his liver. God will have a dart at last, which shall enter,
a dart which those Leviathans shall not count stubble, nor find to be so.

The Lord proceeds to describe Leviathan, and, as we may conceive, to give a
further demonstration of the hardness of his scales and skin.

Verse. 30. Sharp stones are under him, he spreads sharp pointed things upon
the mire. Mr. Broughton reads it, His underneath-places be as sharp-sheards.
The word rendered Sharp stones, properly signifies the sharp pieces of a
pot-s^^^rd; that is, stones or other hard things, as sharp and pricking as the
pieces of a broken pot-sheard. We may expound this verse two ways.

First, As being a proof of the hardness and firmness of Leviathans skin and
flesh; so hard they are, that he can lie down and rest himself upon hard and
sharp stones, even upon the sharp tops of rocks in the Sea, as we lie down upon
our beds. Sharp stones are under him, but he feels them not; which may be the
meaning also of the next words.

He spreads sharp pointed things upon the mire. That is, Leviathan like some
hardy man, or iron-sides, scorns to lie soft on the ouze or mire, but laying,
as it were, sharp stones upon it, shows what he can endure without hurt. And so
I conceive these words, He spreads sharp-pointed things upon the mire, may be
thus understood and read, He spreads himself upon sharp-pointed things, as if
it were upon the mire.

Secondly, We may expound this verse as to the falling off of darts cast, and
stones slung at him, or as to the breaking of swords and spears upon his
scales, when assaulted with them. As if it had been said, If you cast darts, or
sling stones at him, they do not enter, but drop down under him; or, if you
assail him with sword and spear, the sword breaks, the spears point is snapt
off, and falls under his body. Thus he spreads sharp pointed things upon the
mire, or spreads the mire all over with sharp pointed things. As after a
well-fought battle at Land, we may see the field spread over with pieces of
swords and spears, and other broken weapons; so is the bottom of the Sea (could
you see to the bottom of it) after a skirmish, or day of battle with Leviathan.
This is a probable sense, but I rather take the former, as showing the hardness
of his skin and scales, by his insensibleness of any sharp or hard thing that
he rests himself upon.

All that I shall add is this: It were well for us, if in this case we could be
like Leviathan, if we could harden our selves, or inure our selves to
hardships, to lie with sharp stones under us. Surely our flesh is much too
tender and soft, and our skin too delicate for the endurance of a lodging upon
hard stones, and sharp pointed things. The Apostle gives a suitable word of
advice to Timothy (2 Timothy 2.6.) Do thou endure hardship, as a good soldier of
Jesus Christ. We should labor to endure hardship, and to fare hard, and to lie
hard. Edmond, a Saxon King in this Land, was called Iron-sides. I fear there
are few Iron-sides among us, such I mean, as are fit and ready to endure
hardship, to suffer hard things at Christ's call, and for his Name sake: We
should be content, as the Church once was ( Psalm. 68.30.) to lie among the
pots, yea, as Leviathan, upon the pot-sheards, in that behalf. The old Martyrs
were patient, while they lodged in a coal-house, and russeled among the straw.
Though the Lord does not exercise with such hardships, yet it is the duty of
every Christian to get his heart into readiness and willingness to endure them.
Though all the followers of Christ are not honored with sufferings for him;
yet they who have nor, at least who pray not that they may have, a spirit of
suffering, are not worthy to follow him, nor to be called his Disciples, ( Mat.
10.38. Mat. 16.24. Luke 14.26.) Verse. 31. He makes the deep to boil like a
pot, he makes the Sea like a pot of ointment.

As Leviathan troubles Seamen, so he troubles the Sea; Totum oceanum turbat.
Jun.
he macerates and vexes the waters, he disturbs the whole Ocean where he is,
or wheresoever he comes. This is illustrated by a double similitude; First, of
a boiling pot, He makes the deep like a boiling pot. Secondly, He makes the
Sea like a pot of ointment: Or, as Mr. Broughton renders it, He sets the Sea as
a spicers Kettle; that is, all in a sum and foam. Spices mingled in a kettle
to make ointment, boil vehemently upon the fire; any liquor boiling is moved,
and the more it boyles, the more it moves. Thus Leviathan blustering in the
deep, causes it to look like a boiling pot, or like a pot of ointment. This
shows the force of Leviathan; he makes such a bussel, that he, as it were,
raises a storm in the Sea: a fiercely boiling pot over the fire, much
resembles the Sea when the waves foam, and the waters are enraged by the winds.
The mighty power of God is set forth in Scripture, calming the Sea when it is
stormy, and raising storms when it is calm, as might be showed in many
Scriptures. Leviathan can trouble the Sea, when God has made it quiet; but he
cannot quiet nor calm it, when God has made it stormy. Leviathan is of a
turbulent nature, and he deals only in storms; his restless spirit will not let
the Sea rest, he makes it boil like a pot, etc.

That which is said of Leviathan in his turmoiling the Sea, may well represent
the spirit of wicked men, who in this are like Leviathan; they (as the Prophet
speaks ( Isa. 57.20.) are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest; and as
themselves are like the troubled Sea, having continual tumultuations in their
own breasts, so they often make others like a troubled Sea.

I shall not here omit what the learned Bochartus takes notice of in this
verse, both for and against his Assertion, That Leviathan is the Crocodile.

First, Though it cannot be denied, that the Whale makes a greater stir in the
Sea, and troubles the waters more than the Crocodile (the Whale being much the
greater of the two) yet he conceives the latter part of the verse (where it is
said, He makes the Sea like a pot of ointment) very peculiar to the Crocodile.
For (says he) many Writers commend the fragrancy or sweet smell which the
Crocodile sends forth, much like that of musk, or the Arabian spices, insomuch
that some think Amber-greese is taken from that Animal. And hence he concludes,
it may well be said, that he (where he comes) makes the Sea like a pot of
ointment, which gives a fragrant smell, then especially when stirred, as
Leviathan is here said to stir. This is indeed a rare observation, and such as
Bochartus might well say, he could not enough admire, that the Ancients should
give no hint at all of; his testimonies for it, being from Authors of somewhat
a late date, which the Reader may peruse for his fuller observation, if he
please. I would not raise any suspicion about the truth of the thing, which
Bochartus says cannot but be true, it being asserted by the unanimous vote of
people of all Nations, Indians, Arabians, Egyptians, Assyrians and Americans.

All that I shall say to it, is only this, That the Text in Job having this
scope to describe the turbulency of Leviathan in the Sea, seems not to respect
the savor or smell of the pot of ointment, but only the troubled motion or
ebullition of it, when it is boiling over the fire: And in that respect, the
Whale makes the Sea like a pot of boiling ointment, as much as, yea, more than
the Crocodile.

The second thing which Bochartus takes notice of in this verse, is an
objection which may be raised from it, against his opinion. The Lord speaks of
Leviathan, as being in the Sea, and (which is a word of the same significancy)
in the deep. Now, the Crocodile is not a Sea-animal, but a River-animal,
therefore Leviathan is not a Crocodile. To this he answers,

First, That the River Nilus is called the Egyptian Sea (Isa. 11.15.) and
quotes a Jewish Doctor, who expounds it so. To this I may reply, That other
learned men (and among them the late Annotators upon our English Bible) deny
that exposition, and are very confident, that by the Egyptian Sea, is meant
(not Nilus, but) the Red Sea, which out of the main Ocean shoots into the Land,
in form and fashion of a tongue.

Secondly, He answers, that not only the River Nilus, and the Lakes adjoining
to it, which abound with Crocodiles, but several other great Lakes, both in
holy Writ, and by many Writers, are called Seas; and therefore he concludes,
the argument will not hold, that by the name Leviathan the Crocodile cannot be
signified, because the Sea is here assigned as the seat or habitation of
Leviathan.

I grant this is is not a concluding argument against the Crocodile, yet from
these words we may gather a probable argument for the Whale; for as the word
Sea is taken sometimes in a large sense, for great Rivers and Lakes where
Crocodiles are, so in strict and proper sense, it always signifies the Ocean,
where Crocodiles are not. And the Scripture tells us, that the proper place
appointed by God for the most proper Leviathans seat, is not the Sea, in a
large and improper sense, but in that which is most strict and proper, even
that which is called the great and wide Sea (Psalm. 104.24, 25.) as was showed
before. And that we have reason to believe, that God spoke to Job of and about
the most proper and eminent of all those animals, which by Scripture allowance
may be called Leviathan, was there also showed. And if so, then we must
necessarily understand the great and wide Sea, by that Deep in the Text, which
Leviathan makes to boil like a pot, and by that Sea also, which he (by his
boisterous motion) makes like a pot of ointment.

Thus the Lord in this verse, has told us what work Leviathan makes when he is
below in the deep, and raising himself toward the surface of the Sea; in the
next he tells us, what he does when he swims aloft.

Verse. 32. He makes a path to shine after him, etc. That is, he swims with
such force and violence near the surface of the water, that you may see a plain
path behind him; he makes a great foam or froth upon the waters, which shines
like a beaten way.

It Is good in one sense, to make a path shine after us; that is, by the
holiness and righteousness of our lives. The path of the righteous shines as
the morning light (Prove. 4.18.) A righteous man walks not in dark, black,
defiled, filthy paths; his are paths of light, and such as lead to that
blessed inheritance among the Saints in light. But the path of an unrighteous
man, shines only like Leviathans path, with an ugly foam or froth, or at best,
it is but like the shining of a pinching frost, or of an aged head, which is not
whiteness, Aestimabit abyssum quasi senescentem. Vulg. Vsitatum est ut canum
and incanescere mare dicatur. Haec inter tumidi late maris ibat imago. Aurea,
sed fluctu spumabant caerula cano. Virg. l. 8 Aeniad. describens navale bellum
Augusti atque Antonii. Totaque remigio sumis inca^uit ^^de. Catullus
but hoariness, and so it is still like Leviathans path; as it follows in the
latter part of the verse.

One would think the deep to be hoary. The word signifies the hoariness of the
head of an old man. When we grow old, our hair changes color, and the head is
hoary. Leviathan makes such a foamy path, that one would think the Sea
gray headed, or that a hoary frost covered the Sea. That metaphor was often
used by the old Poets.

All I shall say from this verse, is, to take notice of the good providence of
God, that this hurtful and dangerous creature Leviathan gives such warning
where he is. While he lies below in the Sea he can do no hurt; and as often as
he raises himself up, he makes a path to shine, he makes the Sea hoary, by
which we may the more easily discover and avoid him; whereas otherwise, he
might do mischief unawares, or easily surprise the unwary passenger. It Is
mercy, when they who, like Leviathan, are able to do much hurt, make such a
path shine after them, as gives any an opportunity to escape them, and keep out
of danger. Thus we have as it were, the picture of Leviathan, drawn by the hand
of God himself: And from all, it appears that he is a very Nonesuch, or that
his fellow is not to be found, he has no equal in the visible world, such
another is no where to be had.

Thus the Lord concludes.

Verse. 33, 34. Upon the earth is not his like, who is made without fear: he
beholds all high things: he is a King over all the children of pride. These
two verses contain the close of all; they are, as it were, the Epilogue, the
Epiphonema, or closing words, with which the Lord shuts up his whole discourse
about this creature. (As if he had said, Why should I wade further in a
description of him by particulars? I will say all, I will wind up all in a
word; he is such a one, as in the earth there is not his like. Or, as if the
Lord had said to Job, I told thee before of Behemoth, that he is the chief of
my ways; yet he comes far short of Leviathan, for upon earth there is not his
like. Leviathan is not only the chief in his own dominion, among the fishes of
the sea, but also among the beasts of the earth, the strongest and stoutest of
which are not to be compared with him.

Before I proceed with the opening of these two verses, according to our
translation, which generally holds out Leviathan to be the Whale; and before I
touch some other translations, which bear the same interpretation, I shall
propose the translation and interpretation given by the learned Bochartus,
which accommodates these two concluding verses fully to the Crocodile. His
translation runs thus, and so does his interpretation, as follows,

There is not his like upon the dust, so made, Non est ei simile super
pulverem, ita factum, ut non atteratur.
that he should not be bruised (or broken) He translates the Hebrew ((...)) not
as we, upon the earth, but, upon the dust, thereby implying that a creeping
thing is here intended by Leviathan: For (says he) the feet of the Crocodile
are so short, that he rather creeps than goes; and therefore he may well be
reckoned among creeping things: And hence Serpents (being creeping things) are
called Serpents of the dust (Deuteronomy. 32.24.) Now though the Crocodile be a
creeping thing, yet he differs from ordinary creeping things and Serpents; for
they may easily be trodden upon and bruised, as the Lord said to Adam
concerning the Serpent (the Devil) it (that is, Christ the seed of the woman)
shall bruise thy head (Genesis 3.15.) But the Crocodile is made that he should not
be bruised, that is, he is so made, by reason of his implanted strength, and
the hardness of his scales, that he cannot be bruised nor crushed. (...) ut non
timeret, velut esset fine timore.
Others (says he) render the latter part of the verse, Made that he should not
fear, or to be without fear. But I had rather keep the primary and proper
signification of the word or verb ((...)) because it is not altogether true of
the Crocodile, that he is without fear; some Authors writing of him, that he
flies from those that assault him boldly, and is very bold upon those that are
afraid of him, and fly from him. But even the same thing (says he) may be said
of Whales, who ('it is known) hasten away upon the hearing of any noise, or
crashing sound. Etiam quicquid altum est despicit: Rex est supra omnes filios
elationis.
Thus upon the 24th verse.

His translation of the 25th is near ours in the words of it. Moreover he
despises whatsoever is high, he is a King above all the sons of elation or
hight. Besides (says he) that the Crocodile has many things, upon the account
of which he is to be preferred before other creeping creatures; he also
despises whatsoever is high, even the sons of highness, that is, those animals
who have higher, or taller bodies, and longer legs than he, by the help of
which they are raised up on high, even over these he kings it, being confident
he has greater strength than they: For how high soever they lift up
themselves, yet he can easily bring down the greatest of them flat to the
ground, with one stroke of his tail, and then kill them, and tear them to
pieces. And that the Crocodile does thus conquer, (...) filii elationis.
and king it over, the stoutest and proudest beasts, the learned Author gives
many proofs, from the authority both of ancient and late Writers. So then (as
he concludes) those animals which are higher and taller in stature than the
Crocodile, are those sons of elation or pride (as Job 28.8.) and so stand
opposed to reptiles or animals creeping on the dust, spoken of in the former
verse. Thus far the learned Bochartus gives us his translation and
understanding of these two verses, completing the description of Leviathan.

I shall now consider our own translation.

Upon the earth is not his like. But in what is it, that Leviathan exceeds all
creatures on earth? so that he has not his like, or there is no comparison to
him, as some render the words.

I answer, In these two things, both which appear by what has been said
before, and one of them is expressed in that which follows.

First, There is none like him for greatness.

Secondly, There is none like him for his fearlesness or stoutness, and
therefore it is said, he is made without fear: Melius suprema inter animantia
vu ac fortitudo describi non potuit, quam tot aliis prius dictis, addendo
impavidum cor. Bold. Qui factus est, ut nullum timeret. Hierom.
As if the Lord had said, There is no creature upon earth so stout, but may be
made afraid, the very Lion may be skared. Naturalists speak of some ways,
whereby the Lion is made afraid, but nothing can make Leviathan afraid, he is
made (as one translation has it) That he should fear nothing, or no man,
neither one nor other. And as he fears none, so all are or have reason to
fear him; but when the most dreadful things appear, there is not the least
appearance of dread in him. Is not Leviathan full of courage, seeing he is
altogether fearless? Where there is no fear there is nothing but courage, or
courage at the height. It has been noted in history, concerning several great
men of the world, that notwithstanding all their greatness, they have been very
full of fear, they especially, who have been either unrighteous or cruel in the
exercise of their power: But Leviathan, though he be great, and cruel too, yet
he has no fear. Fear (as was said before) is that trouble of mind, which
seizes upon us at the apprehension of some impending, or near-hand danger.
Leviathan is, not said to be without fear, as they who are not apprehensive of
danger, but as they, who though they see and apprehend great danger near them,
yet fear it not. Upon the earth is not his like, who is made without fear. From
the former part the verse,

Observe, First; It is of God that the creatures are disposed into several
ranks and degrees, that one exceeds and excells another.

In some things there is a likeness among all creatures, and there may be
something wherein one exceeds them all, and has none like him; that it is so,
is of God. Some men are so bad, that they have not their like; it was said of
Ahab, there was none like him. There are also men so good, that there are none
like them, as the Lord said to Satan of Job (Chap. 1.8.) Have thou not
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth. There God
spoke of Job with respect to his holiness and righteousness, as here of
Leviathan, with respect to his greatness and fearlessness; Upon the earth there
is not his like. Now as it is of the Devil, that any are beyond all others in
wickedness; so it is of the Lord, that any exceed others in goodness, in
holiness, in patience, in righteousness, in faith, in faithfulness, in
fruitfulness; this is by special dispensation from the Lord. It is also of the
Lord, that any among the irrational creatures exceed their fellows, as was
further showed concerning Behemoth, from those words in the fortieth Chapter,
He is the chief of the ways of God; and as here it is said of Leviathan, There
is none like him, who is made without fear.

Hence note, Secondly; It is of God that one creature is less fearful than
another.

As the outward composure of the creature is of God, so also is the inward
disposition. Some creatures are (as I may say) nothing but fear; such is the
Hare; whence we speak proverbially, as fearful as a Hare. The Heart is a goodly
creature, yet a little dog will make a hundred of them run. But there are other
creatures, that may be said to have no fear at all; Solomon gives that
character of a Lion ( Prove. 30.30.) There are three things which go well, yea
four, that are comely in going, a Lion which is strongest among beasts, and
turns not away from any, that is, fears not any. And as among irrational
creatures, one is more fearless than another, so it is among men; one is of a
fearful spirit, and another of a courageous spirit. This also is of God, yet
there are special and particular reasons, why some men are fuller of fear than
others.

Again, when the Lord would express the perfection of this creature, he says,
He is made without fear.

Hence note, Thirdly; The less fear, the more perfection, unless it be of that
fear which is our perfection, the fear of God: then indeed the more fear the
more perfection.

We may distinguish of fear: There is godly fear, and natural fear. The less
natural fear, the more perfection; but the more godly fear: The more
perfection; the more we fear God, the more perfect we are; but the less of
natural fear, or fear of the creature we have, the more perfect we are. The
perfection of the godly is often expressed by being above, or by being delivered
from fear ( Psalm. 91.5.) Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor
for the arrow that flies by day. The Lord says to many, fear; but there are
but few of whom he says, and for whom he undertakes, that they shall not fear;
especially, in a time of such great fear, as is spoken of in that 91st Psalm, a
time of Plague, and that in the heat, when the slain of the Lord are many, and
men fall by thousands on the one hand, and on the other. Trust in God is the
special qualification of the person, who stands under the protection of that
promise in the Psalm last mentioned. And the same promise is made to a man
fearing God ( Psalm. 112.7.) No evil tidings shall make him afraid. David
professed this gracious fearlessness ( Psalm. 46.2.) Although the earth be
removed, and the hills be carried into the midst of the sea, yet will not I
fear. And again ( Psalm. 23.4.) Though I walk through the valley of the shadow
of death, I will fear no evil. It Is the perfection of a man not to fear outward
dangers; therefore Christ rebuked his Disciples ( Mat. 8.28.) Wherefore did ye
fear, O ye, of little faith? Their faith was very little, else their fear would
not have been so great. Now as it is thus in man; the less of natural fear, the
greater is his perfection: so also among other creatures, it is a note of their
perfection, to be made without fear; for it shows the greatness of their
courage, as also of their strength. And, this is absolutely the perfection of
God, whose infinite insuperable power and strength, is answered with a most
constant serenity and immutability of mind, who as he wants nothing, so he
fears nothing. Thus our translation carries the verse: I shall touch upon a
second, before I part with it.

Non est in pulvere potestas ejus. Coc. Verbum (...) significat dominatum and
potestatem, and quia quae dominatum habent super reliqua solent esse materia
comparationum and similitudinem, ideo significat comparare, vel assimilare.
His dominion is not over the dust: he is made without fear. The reason of this
variety of translation is, because the word which we render [like] signifies
power or dominion; and the reason why the same word signifies to have power, as
also to compare or be like, is, because those things which are great above
others, use to be the matter of comparison: And hence it is, that as we, and
others, render, upon earth none is like him, or to be compared to him; so
others, taking the word strictly and properly, say, his dominion or magistracy
is not upon the earth.

The text thus read, shows the Lords great goodness to men upon the earth; that
having made such a huge, vast, dreadful creature, he has not given him any
power or dominion upon the land, but by his providence has shut him up in the
sea, where he can do less hurt: for if Leviathan, or a creature of his bigness
and power, should live upon the land, there were no living by him, either for
man or beast. As it is an argument of Gods care of, and benignity to mankind,
that those land creatures, Lions, Tigers, etc. which destroy and prey upon
others, are so ordered, that in the day time, they retire to their dens ( Psalm.
104.22.) and when night comes, then they go abroad: God shuts them up in the
day time, when they might do most hurt, or hinder man from doing good, that is,
the duties of his calling abroad in the open fields. ( ver. 23.) It Is also a
great part of the wisdom and good providence of God, to shut up the Leviathan
within the bounds of the sea; his power, his dominion is not over the dust, or
upon the land. The Author of this translation glosseth it thus: How small a
matter were it, says he, to say, that Leviathan has not his like upon earth;
far another thing is here intended or handled. Here Divine providence is hinted
to us, which gives laws and limits to earth and sea, and to all things
contained in them: He has not formed, nor fitted the body of Leviathan with
members of use upon the earth; therefore the sea is his dominion, not the land.
This is a truth, and a useful consideration.

Yet, I conceive, the Lord does here rather highten the power of Leviathan, by
saying, He has not his like on earth. For it being taken for granted that he
has not his like in the sea, nothing could be said more to set forth his
greatness than this, that he has not his like at land. And some of the Hebrew
Doctors say, the Lord spoke thus, because beasts on the land are stronger than
fish in the sea; and they give a reason for it, upon a Philosophical ground,
because much moisture weakens. Therefore the wonderful, even, preternatural
strength of Leviathan appears in this; that he being a water animal, should yet
be both bigger and stronger than any best of the earth. Upon the earth there is
not his like, who is made without fear. Which, as it is here asserted, so it is
demonstrated in the following words.

Verse. 34. He beholds all high things: he is King over all the children of
pride. There is a threefold interpretation of those words, in the former part
of this verse, He beholds all high things: Understanding by the Relative [He]
Leviathan (for there is another reading which I shall touch in the close.)

First, These words may be expounded, as an argument of the mighty courage of
Leviathan. He (as it was said before) is made without fear, for he beholds
all high things; that is, let things or persons be never so high, never so
great, never so formidable, he beholds them boldly; he does not wink and
look, but with open face beholds the most high and terrible things, Omne
sublimo videt; est velut declaratio praecedentium. Factus est ut nullum
timeret. Bold.
for (as it is said before) he is made without fear.

Secondly, He beholds all high things, that is, he beholds them with
disdain, as if this were a signification of the matchless pride of Leviathan:
He looks upon high things, how high soever they are, as his underlings, or as
if they were not good enough for him, to bestow a look, or a cast of his eye
upon. He is (as one gives his character) pride throughout, or nothing else but
a piece of pride, extremely proud. Videre pro contemnare. Totus superbia est.
Nicetas.
Thus to behold is to contemn, and in that sense we find it used in many
Scriptures; so some expound that ( Cant. 1.6.) Look not upon me, because I am
black, because the sun has looked upon me, that is, do not contemn me (says
the Church) because of my blackness by persecution. So ( Job 37.24.) He (that
is, God) respects not any that are wise of heart: The Lord looks upon the
wisest men of the world, as unworthy of a look; he looks upon them as
infinitely below him; and if any are proud of their wisdom, he looks upon them
with disdain, he beholds them, and despises them and their wisdom. It is said
of Goliath (1 Samuel 18.42.) when David came to him, he beheld him and disdained
him, that is, he beheld him with disdain: When the Giant looked about, and saw
David a youth, he disdained him as no match for him. Leviathan is such a
Goliath, He beholds all high things, be they never so high, with a kind of
disdain.

Hence, Note; They who are great in any kind, are very apt to despise others,
or to look upon them with disdain, as if they were nothing to them.

Looks of disdain, despising looks, are very common in the world. With what a
disdainful eye did the Pharisee behold the Publican (Luke 18.9, 11.) I am not
as other men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican,
this pitiful fellow. Pride in self, is always accompanied with contempt of
others, and causes it. The Title of that Parable in the 16th of Luke is, He
spoke this Parable, to certain that trusted in themselves, that they were
righteous, and despised others. It Is the spirit of a Leviathan, he beholds all
high things, how much more low things with disdain. Yet,

Thirdly, Some expound these words as an argument, not of the pride, Nihil
meditatur, non magnum est peririphrasis animi res magnas consectantis. sc.
respicere ad id quod sublime est, et nunquam in re humili sensum, aut
intentionem defigere. Sanct. Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi.
but greatness and nobleness of Leviathans spirit, who as he is the highest of
elementary animals, so he beholds all high things, he will not meddle with
inferior matters, they are below him. Great men are for great matters. The
Heathens said of their Jupiter, He had no leisure to attend upon, or have to do
with small affairs. Small matters will not go down with Leviathan, he is
always looking at great. Such is the spirit of worldly men; they like
Leviathan, behold all high things; not the high things of Heaven, but the high
things of earth; they are not heavenly-minded, but high-minded. A godly man is
heavenly-minded, a carnal man is high-minded. David professed ( Psalm. 131.1.)
Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my
self in great matters, in things too high for me. What was too high for a King?
for a David? yet King David said, his heart was not haughty, nor his eyes
lofty, looking at high things; he looked at those things which concerned his
duty, to serve God, and his generation, by the will of God, or as God would
have him ( Acts 13.36.) he was heavenly-minded, and not high-minded. Solomon
speaks of a generation ( Prove. 30.13.) O how lofty are their eyes, and their
eyelids are lifted up. What generation was this? Habet hoc magnanimus, ut
mediocribus contentus, maxima negligat. Sen. Superbus vero pusillum animum
habet, ergo nunquam mediocribus contentus est, sed inhiat ad majora.
It was the generation of proud, vain, men; O how lofty are their eyes! who can
tell how lofty they are! no mean thing will content them. They have such a
hunger after high things, that nothing low is food for them. A godly man is not
satisfied with matters which are truly low and small (to him the greatest
things in the world are so) yet the lower, the lesser, the least things of this
world will serve his turn, as to contentation with them. Leviathan beholds
all high things, and therefore as it follows, He is a King over all the
children of pride.

That is, he is the chief of all proud ones.

Master Broughton renders it thus, he is a King over all wild kind. And a
Modern Interpreter abroad, Estque regina super omnes feras. Jun. Ipseque regem
agit in feroces universos. Tygur. Inter omnia superba primas tenet and est
facile princeps. Merc. Filias superbiae; i. e. superbos, juxta idioma
Hebraeorum. Filius rei alicujus nuncupatur phrasi Hebraico, qui re aliqua
insigniter excellit.
rendering the Hebrew word, by a Latin feminine, says, she is a Queen over all
the wild kind, or over all savage beasts. Thus several render it, according to
the strict words of the Hebrew, he is a King over all wild beasts. The
Septuagint translate, he is a King over all that are in, or that inhabit the
waters; others, that move upon the earth, as the learned Reader may see in the
margin. Now, because those wild ones, of one kind or another, are proud, and
prouder than tame beasts; therefore we render, He is a King over all the
children of pride: That Is an Hebraisme, children of pride, for proud children,
or for those that are extremely proud. They who excel in any thing are
ellegantly called the children of it, as if they were begotten by it, or born
of it; they bear the likeness of it, as children do of a parent. Some persons
(as Leviathan here) are so like pride, that they may well be called children of
pride, as if pride it self had begotten them, and were their father, or the
mother that brought them forth and nursed them, or brought them up.

But why is Leviathan called a King over all the children of pride?

I conceive the chief reason to be that which I shall give in this Observation,
because Leviathan has more to be proud of, than the proudest of the world.

They that have most to be proud of in nature, have not so much to be proud of
as Leviathan. What had any natural man (as to the body) to be proud of in
comparison of him? is he proud of his strength? it is weakness to the strength
of Leviathan. Is he proud of his comeliness, or the exact composure of his
body? Leviathan excels him in that. In many particulars Leviathan has that in
him, which may occasion pride, or him to be proud beyond thousands. And we may
conceive, that the reason why the Lord brings this in the close, is to humble
Job, who had carried it too proudly, In superbis narrationem terminat, ut
ostentat hoc praecipue Job fuisse timendum, ne Diabolus qui cum expetierat
adtentandum praecipue eum ad superbium inducere conaretur. Aquin.
and stoutly toward God. And therefore Job was specially to beware of this,
lest the Devil, who desired to tempt him, should prevail upon him, by
suggesting proud and high thoughts of himself, and so make him a subject of his
own kingdom; for he is that mystical Leviathan, who kings it to purpose over
the children of pride. As if the Lord had said to Job, Lay down all thoughts
and words, which have any savor or tincture of pride. Will thou be proud of
this, or that, or any thing? know that in his kind, I have given more to
Leviathan to be proud of, than to thee: And consider under whom thou art to
reckon thy self, if thou art lifted up in pride, even under Leviathan, for he
is a King over all the children of pride. And though Leviathan be exceeding
proud and haughty, yet I can quickly bring him down; surely, then I can bring
thee down, yet more than hitherto I have done. Therefore, O Job, do not contend
any more with me, be not unquiet under my hand, who am indeed thy King.

Lapsi videntur qui hoc de Leviathan, vel etiam de Satana interpretati sunt.
Coc. Tenebras offudit interpretibus, omissio relativi, etc. Coc.
This leads me to another reading of the verse, which makes the antecedent to
he, not Leviathan, not the Devil, but God himself.

He that beholds all high things, is a King over all the children of pride;
That is, God, who beholds all high things, and is higher than the highest
(Eccles. 5.8.) he is above the proudest men. So then these words, he beholds
all high things, having the Relative That supplied, are a circumlocution of
God. God indeed beholds all high things, and high persons: Let men be never so
high God beholds them. And as he beholds all things, so he is higher than the
highest things, he is a King over all the children of pride, who are the
highest among men, or high above all men in their own conceit. The Lord, as a
King, can rule and overruled the proud, he can bring down their high looks; the
Lord said to Job (which may give some light to this interpretation) when he
would stir him up, to consider himself what he was able to do, and to do his
best ( chap. 40.12.) Look on every one that is proud, and bring him low. Can
thou do it? can thou look on every one that is proud, and bring him low? Thou
can not, but I can. God beholds all high things, he has them all before
him, and is a King over them; he can make the proudest, and stoutest, and
greatest that are in the world stoop to him. That Great Monarch Nebuchadnezzar,
who lorded it over the greatest of the world in his days, was at last brought
to confess, that the Lord was a King over all the children of pride ( Dan.
4.37.) Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise, and extol, and honor the King of heaven,
all whose works are truth, and his ways are judgment, and those that walk in
pride he is able to abase. In this sense God is a King over all the children of
pride.

Now though the words, according to the sense given of this last reading, may
safely be applied to God; yet as most among late Interpreters understand them
literally of Leviathan, so many of the ancients, who have written upon this
Book, turn this whole description of Leviathan into an Allegory of the Devil
(as was touched before) and to make it out they have run into many needless
speculations. But I conceive, though it be true, that many things spoken of
Leviathan are applicable to the Devil, as also to Tyrants, to Antichrist, and
all wicked men; and some, who are very sparing in urging the Allegory, yet
grant we may, when we read what is said of Leviathan, reflect upon the Devil,
and consider what a mighty power he has to do mischief, if the goodness and
power of God did not restrain him: Yet it is safest to keep to the plain sense,
and not to busy our selves much in transforming the holy Scriptures into
Allegories, in which some have been over-bold; nor should any venture to draw
Allegories, but out of a natural meaning, as the Apostle Paul did in the 4th
Chapter of his Epistle to the Galathians.

I shall only add, that as from the nature of this Leviathan (supposed to be
the Whale) we may receive many instructions; so the Lord does sometimes Preach
or Prophecy to whole Nations by him, that is, he gives warning by him to
Nations, of some great things which shall come to pass among them. It Is the
observation of an Interpreter upon this place. God (says he) prophesies to
people and nations by the Whale or Leviathan. Deus catos quasi poenitentiae
precones facit, dum insolitis locis apparentes bella, and alias clades nuncient
ut homines poenitentiam agant. Scult.
And as other places (he was a Germane) so we, have had warnings by him; for
(says he) in the year 1620, there was a Whale cast upon the shore of a great
river far within the land, twenty and five else long and a half, immediately
before the great wars, changes, and troubles which befell Germany. Hence he
infers, when these mighty fishes come into places which are out of their way
and road, or when God casts them upon unwonted shores, it foreshews some
unwonted thing, or that God will bring guests among them, that they never
thought of.

Thus I have done with this long and large description, which the Lord makes of
Leviathan. There remains only one chapter more, which gives us the full effect
and issue of all the dealings of God with Job, and of his speakings to Job,
about Behemoth and Leviathan: All was to humble him; and we shall see him
deeply humbled, and eminently restored, in the next chapter.

JOB, Chap. 42. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1. Then Job answered the Lord and said,

2. I know that thou can do every thing, and that no thought can be
withheld from thee.

3. Who is he that hides counsel without knowledge? therefore have I uttered
that I understood not, things too wonderful for me, which I knew not.

4. Hear I beseech thee, and I will speak; I will demand of thee, and declare
thou unto me.

5. I have heard of thee, by the hearing of the ear; but now mine eye sees
thee:

6. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.


THis Chapter is the conclusion of the whole History and Book of Job; it
consists of three general parts.

First, Of Jobs deep and sincere humiliation before the Lord, in these six
verses.

Secondly, Of the reconciliation of Jobs three friends to the Lord, or of their
atonement and peace made with the Lord ( verse. 7, 8, 9.)

Thirdly, Of Jobs restitution, by the wonderful goodness, and powerful hand of
the Lord, to as good, yea, to a better estate tahn he had before; from the
tenth verse, inclusively, to the end of the Chapter.

The words under hand, contain the first part of the Chapter, and I call them
Jobs humiliation before the Lord; and in that we may consider these two general
parts.

First, Jobs Testimony concerning God.

Secondly, His Charge brought against himself.

His Testimony concerning God we have in the second verse, and that is twofold,
or he commends and exalts God in two of his most glorious attributes.

First, About his Omnipotency, That thou can do every thing.

Secondly, About his Omnisciency (as most expound the words) And that no
thought can be withheld from thee.

Jobs Charge or Accusation which he brought against himself, has these four
things in it,

First, The Confession of his own ignorance and rashness in the third verse,
Who is he that hides counsel without knowledge? I have spoken (says he)
things which I understood not, things too wonderful for me, which I knew not:
Thus he charge himself with rashness and ignorance.

Secondly, The Submission of himself to the better instruction and teaching of
God, or to what God should be pleased yet further to reveal unto him at the 4th
verse, Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak, I will demand of thee, and
declare thou unto me. He begs yet a word more with God, and he begs a word more
from God, or that God would speak a word more to him.

Thirdly, A Thankful Acknowledgment, that he had already received much more
light from God, than formerly he had attained to, at the 5th verse, I have
heard of thee, by the hearing of the ear (I had a knowledge of thee, O God,
before) but now (says he) mine eye sees thee, now I have more knowledge, and
clearer light concerning thee than ever I had before.

Fourthly, The Issue or Effect of all this, and that is his repentance,
Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Thus we have both the
general parts of the whole Chapter, and the more particular resolution of this
first part, which I call Jobs humiliation. And in this manner he humbled
himself before the Lord (as follows.

Verse. 1. Then Job answered the Lord, and said. These are the words of the
Divine Historian, connecting this Chapter with the former. And all that I shall
say upon this first first verse, shall be but to Answer this Question.

How came it to pass, that Job answered the Lord again, seeing he had professed
before (chap. 40.5.) that he would answer no more? Once have I spoken, but I
will not answer; yea, twice, but I will proceed no further. There Job seemed to
take up a resolution to answer no more; how is it then, that here this Chapter
begins with, Then Job answered the Lord and said?

I shall give a threefold answer to this doubt.

First, Thus; we may conceive, Job, in the former promise, that he would answer
no more, meant it of such a kind of answer as he had given the Lord, and his
friends before; he would answer no more in that way, or after that sort; and so
it was not an absolute resolve not to answer, but not to answer as he had done:
As if he had said, I will answer no more, justifying my self, no, nor so much
as excusing my self, or taking off the weight of any charge the Lord has
brought against me: There being such a change in his answer, he may very well
be said to answer no more; for he answered no more, as once he did. The best
and safest way of justifying and excusing our selves, is to lay our selves at
the foot of God: A confession of, or a charging our selves with our sins is the
best way of acquitting our selves before God from our sins; I mean, it is the
best that we can do to justify or acquit our selves.

Secondly, we may answer thus. It Is true, Job said he would answer no more, but
it is as true that the Lord commanded him to answer again ( chap. 40.1.) For
when Job had said there at the fifth verse, Once have I spoken, but I will not
answer, yea, twice, but I will proceed no further: The Lord says at the (7th
verse) Gird up thy loins like a man: I will demand of thee, and declare thou
unto me. God called him forth, and bad him speak, I have somewhat to say to
thee, and do thou answer me; so that the Lord took off Job, or released him
from that bond, that he had put upon himself: Thou have said, thou will answer
no more, but I will have thee answer yet more. Now though we take up a resolve
to do, or not to do such a thing, yet a word from God must overruled us. As a
word from God must overruled us, not to do what we have resolved to do; so a
word from God must overruled us, to do that which we have resolved not to do.

Thirdly, The Lord had not only given Job a command to answer, but inclined,
and moved his heart to answer. The reason why Job resolved not to answer, was
the lowness of his own spirit, and the terror of the Lord that was upon him.
The majesty and dread of the Lord put him upon a resolve for silence; but now
some favor appearing, and the Lord giving him hopes of a gracious acceptance,
he was encouraged to speak, and had a freedom of speech restored to him, and
accordingly he answered the Lord. Thus we may salve Jobs credit from lightness,
much more from a lie; though after he had said, he would answer no more, we
find him answering again, Then Job answered the Lord and said.

The Lord having set forth his own infinite power and wisdom, in that long and
accurate speech, which he made out of the whirlwind, concerning his works of
creation and providence; especially, by his discourse about that unparalled
pair, Behemoth and Leviathan, the greatest of living creatures upon the land,
and in the sea: I say, the Lord having by this discourse humbled Job, he saw,
and was convinced there was no disputing with God, nor enquiring into, much
less complaining of, or murmuring at his secret counsels and judgments; he now
saw, it was not for him to call God to an account about any of his dealings and
proceedings, as sometimes he had done, but rather to adore them: and therefore
he submits, and answers only with exalting God, and abasing himself. He begins
with the exaltation of God, Then Job answered the Lord and said.

Verse. 2. I know that thou can do every thing. That Is his first word; and it
teaches us, That, when we begin to have high and great thoughts of God, we
cannot but have low and mean thoughts of our selves. Our own humiliation begins
at the exaltation of God; and our self-emptiness and weakness, at the sight of
his fullness and Almightiness. Thus Job began his humiliation, I know that thou
can do every thing.

This verse exalts God both in his omnipotency, and in his omnisciency. Non
exigit a nobis Deus multa verba, sed multam fidem.
It Is a short, yet a full confession of his faith in this matter; and though it
were short, yet it pleased God much and fully, because Job uttered it in much
faith. A few words please God, where he sees much faith.

First, He confesses Gods Omnipotency, I know that thou can do every thing.

I know. The word notes a certain knowledge, such a knowledge as leaves no
place for doubting, nor for an uncertain opinionating. I know, is as much as, I
am assured: As Jacob said to Joseph, when he told him Manasseh was his first
born ( Genesis 48.19.) I know it, my son, I know it, etc. As if he had said, I do
not lay my right hand upon the younger by mistake, but choice; I know very well
which is the firstborn, and I know what I do, in laying my right hand upon the
younger. Thus says Job here, I know that thou can do every thing. This great
truth is fixed and fully settled upon my heart; and I urge my self with all my
might now, to give thee the glory of it, though sometimes under my grievous
pains and undue passions, I have obscured it, and spoken as if I doubted, or
were not well assured of it. I know, That thou can do every thing.

The word rendered can do notes two things; First, Might; (...) potuit,
potestatem habuit potentior fuit superavit, praevaluit. Id tantum possumus,
quod juro possumus.
Secondly, Right, to do all things. For indeed, we can do no more than we have
a right to do.

Again, It signifies not only a power of doing, but a prevailing power of
doing, or a conquering power, a power that overcomes all difficulties, and
removes all obstacles or obstructions; such a power is intended in this word.
We have it in a proper name ( Prove. 30.1.) The words of Agur, the son of Jakeh,
even the prophecy. The man spoke unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal: Under
both these names, Ithiel and Vcal, some conceive Christ is to be understood: he
is Ithiel, which signifies (as Emanuel) God with us; and he is Vcal, that is,
powerful and almighty. When the Prophet Jeremiah would show how strongly that
people were bent to sin, he speaks to them all as one man ( Jer. 3.5.) Behold,
thou have spoken, and done evil, as thou could; that is, thou have put forth
thy utmost Can, thou have done as much evil as thou can. As here, Job says
of the Lord, Thou can do all things. So said the Prophet of the people, Thou
have spoken, and done evil, as thou could. A godly man sins, but he does not
sin as he can, he does not lay his utmost strength, nor set his shoulders to
it; but an evil man does evil as he can, he serves his lust as he should serve
God, with all his might. I urge that place only to note the force of the word,
I know that thou can do Every thing.

That is, every thing which is fit for, and becoming thy Majesty to do, every
thing which is good, every thing which is just, every thing which does not
reflect dishonor upon thy name, every thing that is not a contradiction to thy
self. Thus, take things of what kind you will, God can do them; and take things
in what degree you will, God can do them: he can do, not only little things,
but great things, yea, the greatest things. Great and little make no matter of
difference with God. As if Job had said, O Lord, I know and acknowledge there
is nothing too hard for thee, yea, nothing is hard to thee; and that as thy
counsels and decrees are altogether wise and just, so thou have power enough to
execute and bring them about. Thou can do Every thing.

There is no bound to the power of God, except his own will. God will not do
every thing that he can, but he can do every thing that he wills: nothing can
stop the power of God in doing, where his will is to do. Thou can do every
thing.

Or we may take it thus, God can do every thing; that is, every thing that he
has said he will do, every thing that he has engaged himself to do by
promise, or by prophecy; he has power to do what he has said or fore-shewed
shall be done. Thus Job gives glory to God, and begins as David (Psalm. 59.16,
17.) to sing of the power of the Lord, as well as of his mercy. I will sing of
thy power; unto thee, O my strength, will I sing. Here Job sings of the power
of God, I know that thou can do every thing. The words have no difficulty in
them; only when Job says here, I know that thou can do every thing, it may
be questioned,

Did not Job know this before? yea, had not Job said as much as this before?
that God could do every thing. In several passages of the ninth and twelfth
Chapters, he said as much as this, and more cannot be said of God. We have said
every thing of God, when once we have said, he can do every thing. There Job
cries up the power of God, together with his wisdom ( verse. 4. etc.) He is wise
in heart, and mighty in strength; who has hardened himself against him and
prospered? If any ask, what can God do? Job answers, He can remove the
mountains, and overturn them in his anger, he shakes the earth out of its
place, he commands the Sun, and it rises not, and seals up the Stars, he
alone spreads out the heavens, and treads upon the waves of the Sea. All
these are speakings forth of the Almightiness of God; and he that can do these
things, surely can do all things. Now seeing Job was there so much upon this
point before, how is it that here he says, I know that thou can do every
thing? as if this were some new matter which he was not acquainted with before,
or had never uttered.

I answer, it is true, Job knew this before, but he did not know it before as
he knew it now: Though he knew the Lords power before, and spoke of it, yet the
trouble of his spirit, and the anguish of his soul under his sufferings, did
very much darken him as to this knowledge; and therefore when Job says, I know
that thou can do every thing, this knowing is not to be understood as opposed
to ignorance only, as if Job knew this now, and did not know it at all before;
but knowing here is opposed to a lesser degree of knowledge, or knowing here
imports a higher and greater degree of knowledge than ever he had before
concerning the power of God. Job spoke sometimes before, as if he knew little
of this great truth, and he much detracted from the absolute power of God over
all creatures by his complainings, especially that he and other innocent ones
were afflicted; as also, by his earnest desire of knowing why he was afflicted,
being innocent, thereby intimating, that he was not so well satisfied in the
dealing of God with him, nor had wholly resigned up himself to the sovereign
power and will of God, to be disposed of at his pleasure; so that in this short
confession Job seems to speak more largely, thus; Now at length, O Lord, I know
more fully than ever, that thou have a most just right and power to command and
dispose of all things, and that thou both do and may effect whatsoever
pleases thee; nor ought any to murmur at, much less resist thy counsels or
dealings, seeing every thing is, and cannot but be just and righteous which
thou do. We conclude then, Job knew this truth before, but not as he knew it
now.

Hence note, First; Knowledge is a growing thing.

And it were well if we were all found growing in knowledge. That Is the Apostle
Peter's charge (2 Epist. 3.18.) Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. He puts both together. There is a growth in knowledge
as well as in grace; and in proportion to our spiritual growth in knowledge, is
our growth in grace: for, though many grow much in notional and speculative
knowledge, who grow little in grace; yet they cannot but grow much in grace,
who grow much in spiritual and experimental knowledge. As a godly man grows
in knowledge, so in grace too. Knowledge is a growing thing. The rising and
increasing waters of the Sanctuary were a type of the encreasings of knowledge;
those waters were first to the ancles, and then to the knees, and then to the
loins, and then to the neck. And as knowledge increases, with respect to the
several times and states of the Church (for so that place ( Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5.)
is to be be understood) so it is a truth, that there is an increase of
knowledge, with respect to the state of every particular believer; his
knowledge is first to the ancles, and then to the knees, and then to the loins,
and then to the neck. As some points to be known are so easy or shallow, that
(according to that clear and common similitude) a Lamb may wade through them;
others so difficult and deep, that an Elephant may swim in them: so the degree
of knowledge in the same person, which at one time was very small and shallow,
at another time may be swelled into a great deep, and he called a man of deep
knowledge. We have a general promise of such an increase ( Isa. 11.9.) The
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea;
that is, there shall be a wonderful increase of knowledge. That Is also the
import of Daniels Prophecy (Chap. 12.4) Many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased. Particular persons shall improve in knowledge,
and so shall the whole Church. So then, this increase of knowledge is of two
sorts; First, it is a knowledge of more things; and, Secondly, of every thing
more.

We should labor to know more truths; we must thus add to our knowledge. For,
though it be true, that every believer has received the anointing, whereby he
knows all things that are of absolute necessity (1 John 2.20.) yet he may
come to the knowledge of more things which are exceeding useful and helpful to
him.

Secondly, We should labor to know every thing more, as in the Text. Job knew
before that God was omnipotent, and could do all things; but now he knew it
more, and so much more, that the knowledge which he had before might be called
ignorance, compared with the knowledge which he had now received. Then we
increase our knowledge fully, when we get the knowledge of more things, and of
every thing more.

Again, we should labor to increase, as in speculative, so in experimental
knowledge. Speculative knowledge alone, goes no further than the notion of what
we know; experimental knowledge finds and feels the power of what we know, it
subjects us, or makes us subject to what we know; the motions of the Will
follow the light and dictate of the Understanding. This is the best knowledge:
Knowledge which is felt and acted, is better than that which is heard and
declared. What the Apostle John said of himself, and his fellow Apostles, who
were personally present with Christ while here on earth, with respect to their
sensitive knowledge of him, is most true of the spiritual and experimental
knowledge which believers have of Christ now in heaven, and they absent from
him (1 John 1.1.) That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the word of life, that declare we unto you; we declare that unto you
which we have seen and felt. It Is a blessed thing, when we can say, that the
things which we declare to others, we have felt them, and even handled them our
selves. Many (as our usual expression is) handle Texts, and handle truths
learnedly and excellently in a discourse, who never handled, no nor so much as
touched them by any experience of their sweetness or efficacy, either in their
hearts or lives.

Further, consider in what way Job came to this proficiency in knowledge; he
had been a great while in the School of affliction, before he said, I know, and
I know to purpose, that thou can do every thing.

Hence note; Afflictions and sufferings are a special means to increase our
knowledge, and wise us in the things of God.

The godly never increase more in knowledge, than under the Cross, under
afflictions of one kind or another. David says ( Psalm. 119.71.) It is good for
me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. Did not David
know the Statutes of God before? doubtless he did; he was all-along trained up
in the statutes of God; but when God took him into the School of affliction,
then he lea^nt the Statutes of God much better. Let us consider what profiting
we find at any time under affliction, as to the knowledge of God, and of our
selves; if we do not better our knowledge by one cross, we may expect to meet
with another, and another, till matters mend with us. Solomon says, ( Prove.
27.22.) Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar, among wheat, with a
pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him; that is, an obstinate
sinner (he is the fool there spoken of) though extremely afflicted, is not
bettered: but a godly man profits by his affliction, both as to the departure
and riddance of his folly, as also to his growth in spiritual experimental
knowledge.

Once more (which will give us a third note) Job was not only in affliction,
but God taught him in his affliction; Job had not only a rod upon his back, but
a tutor by his side. His three friends had been long with him, and spoken much
to him, but he learnt little by them. When Elihu had been speaking to him, he
yielded somewhat to him, though not fully; but when once God undertook to tutor
and instruct him, Job learned amain, and profited greatly in knowledge.

Hence note; Then we profit indeed under afflictions, when God teaches us in
our afflictions.

If we have nothing but the rod, we profit not by the rod; yea, if we have
nothing but the Word, we shall never profit by the Word. It is the Spirit given
with the Word, and the Spirit given with the rod, by which we profit under
both, or either. ( Psalm. 94.12.) Blessed is the man (says David) whom thou
chastenest, and teach out of thy Law. Chastning and divine teaching must go
together, else there will be no profiting by chastning. God was Jobs teacher as
well as his chastner; Job received many lessons from God, he taught him quire
through the 38th and 39th Chapters, and he taught him quite through two
Chapters more, before he said, I know that thou can do every thing. Thus far
of Jobs knowledge. Let us a little consider the first object of it here
expressed, the omnipotence of God, I know That thou can do every thing.

Hence observe, First; God is good at any work.

That is, at any work that is good; he can do every such thing, nothing comes
amiss to him. Among men, one man can do this thing, and another can do that
thing, and a third can do more than either; but where will you find a man that
can do every thing? One man is for counsel, another for action; one man can
build a house, and another can till the ground; several men have their several
arts and mysteries, and it is well if one man can do any one thing well: But
God is for all. We have a saying (and it is a great truth) He that will be doing
of every thing, Aliquis in omnibus, nullus in singulis.
is no great doer in any thing; that is, he never excels in any. But as the
Lord can do every thing, so he is exact and perfect in every thing that he
does. The best creature is only a particular good, but God is an universal
good; there is every good in God: all the good that is scattered in the
creature, is eminently in him. Now as God is an universal good, so he is an
universal Agent; he is in working, as he is in Being; He can do every thing for
us, as well as be every thing to us. We need not fear if we bring this or that
thing to God, that he has no skill in it, as it is with men; if you bring this
thing to a man, he is excellent at it; but bring another thing, and he knows
not how to turn his hand to it: but whatsoever we have to do, if it be
according to the will of God, he has power and wisdom enough to do it. The
Lord had power enough to give a being to all creatures; and has he not power
enough to do all things in and about the creature? cannot he preserve in all
dangers, and provide in all wants? cannot he furnish with all gifts, and give
success? cannot he overthrow the high, and exalt the low? cannot be restrain
the wrathful, and subdue the obstinate? cannot he weaken the strong, and
strengthen the weak? cannot he make fools wise, and wise men foolish? surely he
can do all these things, for he can do every thing.

Secondly, from these words take that grand assertion.

God is omnipotent, his power is infinite. This is a principle, one of the
great principles of Religion, an Article of Faith; yet I shall not enlarge upon
it, having met with it in other places of this book. Only consider here, how
Job infers this principle; he infers it from the discourse which the Lord was
pleased to have with him, in the four former Chapters, wherein the Lord told
him of many things that he had done; I have done this and that in the heavens
above, and in the earth below, I have made Behemeth and Leviathan: God had told
him of his doings; Ex mirabilibus recensites scivit Job atque collegit Deum
omnia posse; non quasi per inductionem, sed per deductionem plurium ex uno
principio. Janson.
whence Job inferred, I know thou can do every thing. He does not make this
conclusion by way of induction (there is such a way of argumentation in Logic)
but by deduction. God has done this and that, and the other, therefore he can
do all things; if he can do this, what cannot he do? if he can make and subdue
Behemoth, what cannot he do? and if he can make and master Leviathan, what
cannot he do? Christ ( Luke 5.20.) argues his omnipotency or Godhead in the
same manner; for having healed a poor man, and said unto him, Man, thy sins are
forgiven thee, the Pharisees were very much offended with that word, saying,
Who is this that speaks blasphemy? who can forgive sins but God alone? Christ
knowing their thoughts, said, What reason ye in your hearts? whether is it
easier to say, thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, rise up and walk? I have
healed the man; does not that argue a divine power? why may not I then say, Thy
sins are forgiven thee? He that can by his own might do one mighty or
miraculous thing, can do all things. Such is the power of God, that, as I said
before, he has no limit to it, but his own will.

And seeing the will of God is the limit of his power, let us take heed of
desiring him who can do every thing, to do any thing for us, which is not
according to his will. Let us bound our desires; let us take heed of saying,
this is our desire, and God can do every thing, therefore this which we desire.
Consider, is your desire according to the will of God. We cannot urge God with
his Omnipotency, to do any thing that is our desire, if we are not first clear
in it, that our desire is agreeable to his will: Unless we have a rule for our
desire, or we desire by rule, we can have no well-grounded confidence, that God
will do that for us, which we desire. God is almighty, not to do what we will
or forge in our brain, but to do what himself wills. Papists say, the bread
is turned into the very body of Christ; but say we, we see, and feel, and taste
but bread: They presently fly to this, God is able to do all things, or he can
do every thing; this is, to abuse the Omnipotency of God: Has the Scripture
declared any such thing? yea, has not the Scripture declared the quite
contrary, that Sacraments are but signs of things, not the things themselves.
This is my body, said Christ; but he said not, my body is this. Christ willed
that his body should be represented by bread; he will not that bread should be
changed into his body. The power of God must not be urged beyond his will. He
have no revelation of the will of God, that he will transubstantiate the bread
at the holy supper into the body of Christ; but he has given it as a sacred
symbol of Christ's crucified and broken body, upon which we are to feed by
faith.

That God can do whatsoever he wills, has a twofold use.

First, Of comfort, to all true believers, Nostrae difficultates Deo per
faciles sunt.
who stand in the grace of the Covenant. That nothing is too hard for God, is a
marvelous Consolation to us in all our hardships. When God promised Abraham a
Son in his old age ( Genesis 18.) what a hard task was here for God? Sarah could
not believe it, she laughed; but what says the Lord? Is any thing too hard for
me? he presently urges his own power, where he had declared his will.
Whatsoever God has declared to be his will, either as to particular persons,
or the whole Church; it matters not how hard it is, if we have but his will for
it. As Christ will at last Change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able even to
subdue all things unto himself (Phil. 3.21.) so according to that working, he
is able to change and subdue all things to and according to his own will. When
the Jews were to be carried into captivity to Babylon, the Lord commanded
Jeremy to make purchase of a field in Anathoth (Jer. 32.7, 8, 9.) Now Jeremy
might object; behold, the Chaldaeans are come to the City to take it; and shall
I go and buy land? Is this a time to make purchases? is this a time to buy
land, when the City is ready to be taken, and the whole land like to be lost?
yes, says God, Buy the field for money, seal the evidences, and take
witnesses; for thus says the God of Israel (verse. 15.) houses, and fields, and
vineyards shall be possessed again in this land. Am not I able to bring you
back again? And therefore after Jeremy had confessed in prayer to the Lord (
verse. 17.) Nothing is too hard for thee (The Hebrew is, hidden from thee, or
wonderful to thee; because hard things are hidden from us, strange and
wonderful to us. The Prophet, I say, having said this to the Lord in prayer)
the Lord said to him ( verse. 27.) Is any thing too hard for me? And to the same
point, the Lord spoke again ( Zech. 8.6.) Thus says the Lord of hosts, if it
be mavelous in the eyes of the remnant of this people (namely, that Jerusalem
should be restored) should it also be mavelous in mine eyes, says the Lord
of hosts, to perform what was said ( ver. 4.) There shall yet old men, and old
women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his
hand for very age, and the streets of the City shall be full of boys and girls,
playing in the streets thereof. Who could believe this? but it was the will of
God it should be so: And therefore he said, If it be mavelous in your eyes,
should it be so in mine eyes? You think this can never be brought about. But
must it needs be mavelous in my eyes, because it is so in yours? or (as the
margin has it) must it needs be hard or difficult to me, because it is so to
you? The same word which signifies mavelous, signifies difficult, because
that which is difficult and hard we marvel at: But says the Lord, because this
thing is mavelous in your eyes, must it be so in mine, who can do every
thing? And we may conceive, that when Job spoke thus, he began to have some
hope of his restoration. He had lost all, children, and health, and strength,
and estate, all was gone, and he many times gave up all for gone, and spoke
despairingly, as to a restitution; but now God having spoken of what he had
done, Jobs faith and hope revived in these words, I know that thou can do
every thing; and among other things thou can restore all to me again, thou
can give me as much health and strength of body, as many children, as full an
estate, as ever I had.

Secondly, This truth is matter of great terror to the wicked. As God can
strengthen the weak, so he can weaken the strong; and, as he can raise up the
godly, so he can easily pull down the ungodly; as he can fill up the valleys,
so he can level the mountains. Thus the Lord spoke ( Ezekiel. 17.24.) All the
trees of the field shall know, that I the Lord have brought down the high tree,
have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry
tree to flourish; I the Lord have spoken, and have done it. It must needs be
terrible to the wicked, that God can do what he will, seeing his will is to
destroy them, except they repent and turn to him; he has power enough to do
it, and his will is to do it; what then can hinder his doing it, but their
repentance for what they have done. There are no sons of Zerviah too hard for
him, who can do every thing.

Again, from the second notion of these words, Thou can do every thing, that
is, thou have right as well as might to do every thing.

Observe, The Lord may do, he has an unquestionable right to do whatsoever he
is pleased to do.

God gives a law to all others for their actions, but he is the law to himself.
He can do every thing of right he wills, as well as he has might to do what
he will.

Then let none complain, that God has done them wrong, for every thing is
right which God does. Job had failed in this, by speeches reflecting upon the
justice of God in his dealings with him; and therefore we may conceive, that in
this confession, I know thou can do every thing, he chiefly aimed at this, to
give God the glory of his justice: As if he had said, Though thou, O Lord,
layest thy hand heavy upon an innocent person, and strippest him of all that he
has; though thou, O Lord, make a wicked man to flourish in this world, and
fillest him with outward felicity; yet all ought to rest in thy will, for this
thou can do of right, being absolute Lord over all. I (said Job) know that
thou can do every thing.

And that no thought can be withheld from thee. Master Broughton renders,
that no wisdom was withheld from thee; which he thus glosseth. Thou have
made all things in perfect wisdom, to show thy eternal power and Godhead. The
same word signifies both wisdom and thought, (...) breviavit, abrupit,
decerpsit, proprie uvas and fructus vindemiavit. Hinc Bozra metropolis Idumeae,
cum vinetis, and vini proventu fuit celebris nomen so^^ita est, Isa. 63.1.

Nihil cogitas, quod non possis si velis efficere, quid enim te prohibebit, aut
impediet. Drus.

Nec avertito posse a cogitatione, sc. perficienda Jun. Et quod non
vindemiabitur a te cogitatio. i. e. rei cogitatae atque propositae effectionem.
Pisc.


and well it may; for unless we have wise thoughts in our selves, we can never
show wisdom, either in our words or actions toward others. There is a
difference amongst Interpreters, whose thought we are here to understand, when
Job says, No thought can be withheld from thee.

First, Many very worthy and learned men, are of opinion, that by thought, we
are to understand the thought of God, Gods own thought; and so these words are
but the carrying on of the same thing, or a further explication what was said
before, I know that thou can do every thing; that is, whatsoever is in thy
thought or in thy heart to do; no power in the world can withold thee from
doing it; no thought, that is, not any one of thy thoughts, can be withheld
from thee, that is, from thy fulfilling it, or bringing it to pass: what thou
have in thy mind, thou will perform with thy hand: If thou have but a thought
to do such a thing, thou can not be hindered of thy thought, it shall be done.

The words hold out a very glorious truth concerning God, if we take thought in
this sense; and as it is a great truth in it self, so it is a very useful one
to us.

The Observation is this; Whatsoever God has a thought to do, he will do it,
he cannot be hindered in the effect of a thought.

As none of Gods thoughts are vain, so none of them are in vain or ineffectual,
they all reach their end ( Isa. 43.13.) I will work, and who shall let it? God
will work if he has but a thought to work; and if all the Powers in the world
set themselves against him, they shall not be able to disappoint any one of his
thoughts ( Prtv. 19.21.) There are many devices in a man's heart, yet the
counsel of the Lord shall stand; that is, there are many thoughts in man's heart
opposite to the counsel and thought of God. Men think this and that, they make
up many things in their thoughts, yet can make nothing of them, because against
the thoughts of God; for all the devices that are in man's heart, cannot hinder
the effect of Gods counsel, his counsel shall stand fast and firm, without any
bowing, without any bending, while their devices fall and are utterly broken.
The conclusion of wise Solomon is ( Prove. 21.30.) There is no wisdom, nor
understanding, nor counsel against the Lord. Let men take or give counsel as
long as they will against the Lord, they cannot avoid the effect of his
counsels. We have both these, the standing of the Lords counsel, and the
overthrowing of all counsels that are against him, in that one Scripture (
Psalm. 33.10, 11.) The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught, he
makes the devices of the people of none effect: The counsel of the Lord
stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations. God never lost
a thought: all come to pass. This shows the mighty efficacy of the counsel of
God; this is more than can be said of any man or men in the world; the wisest
and greatest, have had many thoughts withholden from them. They have thought to
do this and that, but could not effect it, nor bring it about ( Psalm. 146.4.)
Their thoughts perish; they have a great many plots in their heads, but they
prove not; they often live to see their own thoughts dye. Their thoughts
perish, not only when they dye, but they live to see them perish and dye. The
Prophet ( Isa. 44.25.) shows how the Lord frustrates the counsels of men, and
turns them backward; he shows also, that without him they cannot go forward (
Lamen. 3.37.) Who is he that says and it comes to pass, when the Lord
commands it not?

But some may object, the Lord speaks of the builders of Babel, as Job here
speaks of him ( Genesis 11.6.) Behold the people is one, and they have all one
language, and this they begin to do, and now nothing will be restrained from
them which they have imagined to do; as if he had said, there will be no
withholding of them from their thoughts.

It Is very true, amongst men there was nothing to stop them; they being all as
one man, and of one mind, would have accomplished any thing that they did
imagine: but though there was nothing upon earth, nothing among men, that could
restrain them, yet God could do it, and he did it; he confounded their
language, and one brought mortar, when he should have brought brick; and
another brought stones, when he should have brought timber; they thought to
build a tower that should reach as high as heaven, they would be drowned no
more; but they and their thoughts were soon scattered and blown away.

This point has in it also abundance of comfort (as the former) for take
thought for the thought of God, and it runs parallel with what I spoke before,
of the work of God; he can do every thing, every thing that is in his thought
to do; we may take fresh comfort from it. Can no thought be withheld from
God? what a comfort is this to all that he has good thoughts of, or thoughts
for good. The heart of God is full of good thoughts to his people, though he
many times speaks hard words to them, and does hard things against them, yet he
has good thoughts concerning them ( Psalm. 40.5.) Many, O Lord, my God, are thy
wonderful works which thou have done, and thy thoughts which thou have to
usward: Thoughts to usward are thoughts for us, that is, thoughts of good
intended us. Now has the Lord many good thoughts for us, and none of these
shall be withheld; is not this comfort? When the Church of the Jews was in
Babylon, the Lord dealt very hardly with them, though not so hardly as they
deserved. But what were his thoughts ( Jer. 29.11.) I know the thoughts that I
think toward you (you do not know the thoughts that I have toward you, but I
do: what are they?) thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected
end, that is, the end which you expect and wait for. What a mercy is this, that
no thought of God can be withheld, whenas he has so many thoughts of mercy
and good things to his people!

Again, I might show how dreadful this is to wicked men, for the Lord has
nothing but thoughts of revenge and evil toward them: But it is enough to hint
it.

Before I pass from this interpretation, some may object. If all the thoughts
of God shall be brought to pass, and none can withhold them, if God will do
what he has a purpose to do; then what need we trouble our selves so much in
prayer? For if God has any thoughts of good to us, it shall be done; but if
not, we cannot bring it to pass by prayer: And so some urge, what need we
repent and humble our selves, the thoughts of God shall be fulfilled. To this,
I say, in general, take heed of such reasonings; for as they are very absurd
and reasonless, so they are very dangerous, and leave us remediless. More
particularly,

I answer, thus; Though God has thoughts and purposes of good to his people,
yet whatsoever good he will do for his people, he will be sought unto to do it
for them; and therefore prayer, repentance, and humiliation, are needful to
bring forth thoughts of good from God to us. And though not man can hinder the
bringing to pass of any of his thoughts, yet we may help their birth and
bringing forth. So much of the first interpretation of these words.

And that no thought can be withheld from thee. Secondly, no thought, that
is, no thought of man can be withholden from thee; thou know the thoughts of
every one, what they are, of what kind they are. The Latin translation is
express, There is no thought secret to thee.

Some read the whole verse thus. Thou know that thou can do thing every,
and no thought is hidden to thee. As if Job had said, O Lord, as none know what
thy power is better than thy self, or as none know like thy self what thou
can do, even that thou can do all things, so none know better than thy
self, not I my self, what my thought, or opinion, or faith rather is,
concerning thy power and self-sufficiency to do all things. Which manner of
speech imports the deep submission of himself unto God, or a kind of
demission, or letting of himself down into God, while he says nothing
expressly of himself, or what his thoughts were of Gods power; but refers all
to God, as knowing him and his mind fully, and subjects himself wholly to his
testimony. So that he seems to call God to witness, or appeals to God as a
witness of the sincerity of his heart, in the acknowledgment which he made of
his All Sufficiency, as the Apostle Peter, of his love to Christ, when so often
pressed him, even a third time, with that searching question, Simon, son of
Jonas, love thou me? Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love
thee (John 21.17.) Peter would not be confident, that he loved Christ more then
those; but referred himself, in that matter, to the judgment of Christ, who
knew all things, and himself, both as to the truth and degree of his affections
to him perfectly. Thus said Job, thou know (and I acknowledge) that no
thought can be withheld from thee; therefore not mine.

Hence, note; Our very thoughts are plain to God; neither is there any way of
concealing our thoughts from him.

We cannot put our thoughts into a secret place where God cannot see them; we
cannot withold them from God, as we easily may from man, if we can but hold
our tongues, and not let our thoughts drop out of our mouths in words. ( Psalm.
139.2.) The Lord knows our thoughts afar off. He knew what thoughts there
were in the hearts of the Jews (Jer. 4.14.) O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee! These vain thoughts, were thoughts about their continuance in that
peaceable condition, that the enemy should never come to molest them, or they
should never come into the hand of the enemy; as others afterward had vain
thoughts, that they should be speedily delivered out of their hands. First,
They had vain thoughts, that they should never go into captivity. And Secondly,
They had as vain thoughts, that they should be presently delivered out of
captivity: These are your vain thoughts, and these I know, says God. Our
thoughts are as open to God, as our works; all our thoughts, good and bad, are
alike known to God: He knows our good thoughts, and the thoughts which we
have to do good. If we have a thought of good to any man, the Lord knows it;
and if we have a thought for evil to any man, the Lord knows it. The Lord
knows not only what thoughts are evil in their own nature, but what are
detrimentally evil unto others. Thus spoke distressed Jeremy, in the person of
the whole Jewish Church ( Lament. 3.60, 61, 62.) Thou have seen all their
vengeance, and all their imaginations against me. Thou have heard their
reproach, O Lord, and all their imaginations against me, and their devices
against me all the day long. The Lord knows all the good thoughts that others
have for us, and all the evil thoughts which they have against us: Now,

If no thought of ours can be withheld from God, then keep guard, and watch
over your thoughts; hold your thoughts in good order, for you cannot withold
your disorderly thoughts from God; bring every thought into captivity to the
obedience of Christ (2 Cor. 10.5.)

Secondly, If the Lord knows all our thoughts? then certainly all good
thoughts shall be rewarded, as well as good words, yea, even as well as good
deeds. As the Lord will not lose a good thought (which was showed in the former
point) so we shall not lose a good thought; God will reward them fully, for he
knows them fully. There was a good thought in David's heart, to build the Lord
a temple, and the Lord said (as Solomon his Son reports it, 1 Kings 8.18.)
Whereas it was in thy heart to build a house to my name, thou did well that
it was in thine heart, I take it as well, as if thou had done it. God takes
notice of our thoughts. And therefore this is comfort when we can do but
little, yet God knows what we would do, what work our thoughts are at; and our
thoughts are our best and choicest works, they are the firstborn of the soul.
Wicked men may do works, and speak words, good for the matter, but they cannot
properly think good thoughts.

Thirdly, if the Lord knows our thoughts, then evil thoughts shall not go
unpunished. When the Lord brought the deluge upon the old world, we find him
speaking thus ( Genesis 6.5.) God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually. God spoke not of their works, but of the imagination of their
hearts, their thoughts. The Apostle counseled Simon Magus to repent of his
wickedness, and pray God, Recognoscit so interius fuisse aliquo cogitatione
superba pulsatum, quod Deum non latuisse cognoscit. Aquin.

Latini existimant loqui Jobum de suis tumultuantibus cogitationibus, sive
superbiae de sua sanctitate, sive iniquae expostulationis cum divina
providentia. Accusat cogitationes suas. Philip.


if perhaps the thought of his heart might be forgiven him (Acts 8.22.) There
lies the danger; take heed of evil thoughts: we are in as much danger by them,
as by the worst evil actions. Take heed, First, of proud thoughts; though pride
blossom not, that is, though it appear not openly, nor hang out its flag in
words and works, yet take heed of it. Secondly, take heed of wanton and
adulterous thoughts, though you act not wantonly, nor commit adultery. Thirdly,
take heed of covetous thoughts, though you proceed not to covetous practices.
Fourthly, of envious thoughts, or of being troubled at the good of your
neighbors, though you hinder not his good. Fifthly, take heed of revengeful
thoughts, or of devising evil against your neighbor, though you hurt him not,
nor bring evil upon him. Sixthly, take heed of hard thoughts of God, whatsoever
his dealings be with you. Though you murmur not, though you speak not hard
words of his dealing with you, yet if you think hardly of him, and question his
justice or goodness in your hearts, he takes notice of it. Seventhly, take heed
of discontentful thoughts with your own condition, though sad and bitter. This
was Jobs sin, and it is conceived that he spoke thus, as acknowledging that he
lay open before God, as knowing all his thoughts of discontent. Eighthly, above
all, take heed of blasphemous thoughts of God, which the devil hoped to bring
Job too. Take heed of these and of every every evil thought, though not acted,
knowing also, that every evil act has its evil thought belonging to it, and
that no thought can be withheld from God.

Thus much for the first part of Jobs humiliation, his exalting of God in his
omnipotency, and in his omnisciency; he is omnipotent, he can do every thing,
nor can any of his thoughts be withheld from him, by any power of man; he is
omniscient, no man can withold or hide his own thoughts from God.

Job having made that great acknowledgement of the power and knowledge of God,
I know thou can do every thing, neither can any thought be withheld from
thee, comes to the confession of his own weakness and ignorance.

Verse. 3. Who is he that hides counsel without knowledge? therefore have I
uttered that I understood not.

Who is he?

That is, what manner of man is he? or what is he for a man? what a man has he
been?

That hides counsel. We had these words at the second verse of the 38th
Chapter, where the Lord said chidingly to Job, Who is this that darkneth
counsel by words without knowledge? Here Job says humbly to God, Who is this
that hides counsel? There is some change in the words; little, if any, in the
sense. There the Lord said, Who is he that darkneth? Here Job says, Who is he
that hides? etc. both may be taken as intending the same thing, darkning and
hiding being of a like signification, and things in the dark can no more be
seen, than things hidden. Yet some Jewish Writers conceive, that Job here does
somewhat abate what the Lord spoke, or did extenuate the matter, as to his own
faultiness and miscarriage; As if he indeed granted, that he had hid or
concealed the counsel of God, but would be excused in this, that he had darkened
it. This is a nice difference, and I doubt not but the spirit of Job was so low
and graciously humbled, that he spoke with the most and highest fervency, to
humble himself, when he said, Who is he that hides counsel? But how had Job
hid the counsel of God?

I answer, First; He had hid the counsel of God by not declaring it so much or
so fully as he ought, David prophesying of Christ, says ( Psalm. 40.10.) I have
not hid thy righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy faithfulness and
thy salvation. What is meant by not hiding, in the former part of the verse, is
expressed by declaring, in the latter part of it; and when he says, I have
declared, his meaning is, I have amply and clearly made known thy faithfulness.
So that, because Job had not so clearly as he should declared the
righteousness, or the righteous counsels of God concerning him, and his
dealings with him, he may be said to have hid the counsel of God. While we do
not magnify God, we lessen him; while we do not declare, to the utmost, his
power, we hide it; and therefore Job thus charge himself, Who is he that
hides?

Or we may take it thus, more distinctly; Job hid the counsel of God,

First, by being so much in setting forth his own innocence. How much he
insisted upon that argument, has been showed before from other places of this
book. While we set forth our selves, we obscure God. Job should have been less
in his own commendation, and more in the praises of God.

Secondly, Job may be said to have hid the counsel of God, because he was so
much in amplifying and aggravating his own sufferings, not well considering the
counsel of God in laying those sufferings upon him: Had he duly weighed the
counsel of God in afflicting him, he would have proceeded as he began ( Chap.
1. 21.) to bless God, both in and for his affliction.

Thirdly, He may be said to have hid the counsel of God, because he
expostulated with God, as severe toward him in his afflictions; as if Gods
counsel had been only to put him to pain. Such complainings of the living man,
Jeremiah chockt, while he said of God ( Lam. 3.33.) He does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men. As it is not in the heart or counsel
of God to afflict men with his heart (as the words there imports) so not to
break their hearts (unless with godly sorrow for their sin) by affliction.
Therefore Job speaking so much of Gods severity, hid the counsel of God, which
was only to try his graces and his goodness, and graciously to do him good in
the latter end. Who is this that hides counsel.

Without knowledge? Or, for want of knowledge. But, was Job an ignorant man?
was he without knowledge? No, but he had not a right knowledge of the counsel
of God concerning himself; which though it was some excuse to him, yet it did
not altogether excuse, nor acquit him from the fault. Who is he that hides
counsel without knowledge? I shall not stay upon observations from this verse,
because I did it at the second verse of the 38th Chapter. I shall only consider
that difference among Interpreters about this word counsel, to whom it does
refer.

Quis est enim qui celat a te consilium? Sept.
First, some refer it to Job, and conceive that he charge himself with this
error, that he had hid his own counsel from God, or that he thought his counsel
was hidden from him. The Septuagint render it plainly to this sense, Who is he
that hides counsel from thee? No man can hide the counsels, nor the most
secret intendments of his soul from God; all things, even the thoughts of the
heart, are naked and manifest before his eyes, with whom we have to do. It Is
best for us to reveal our selves to him, from whom we cannot with all our skill
and cunning conceal our selves, as was further showed from the latter
interpretation of those words in the former verse, No thought can be
withheld from thee.

But we may fully discharge Job of this, for he often professed that his most
secret ways were known to God, yea, that the way of his and every man's heart,
was known to God ( Chap. 10.19.) If I sin, then thou markest me. Read also
Chap. 16.19. Chap. 31. verse. 1. And if we look back to the 5th verse of the
first Chapter, there it is reported of Job, that he offered sacrifice for his
children after their feastings; for (says he) it may be that my sons have
sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. He knew, if it were but a sin in their
hearts, God took notice of it; and therefore doubtless he had the same
apprehension of his own heart-sins.

Secondly, others who take it for Jobs own counsel, give this sense; Who is he
that hides counsel without knowledge? As if he had said, I am the man that
have hid my counsel, or my own meaning, for want of due knowledge how to
express it. Many hide the truth of their own apprehensions and opinions, in the
darkness or confusedness of their expressions. Some have a clear notion of
things in their head, yet cannot bring it out, and so hide counsel for want of
knowledge to make it known. This interpretation carries a fair sense for Jobs
excuse, acquitting him of any wilful or purposed speaking amiss: he had better
things in his mind than he sometimes uttered, or he wanted skill rightly to
utter his own mind, and so darkened counsel without, or for want of knowledge.

But I rather adhere to those, who take counsel here, for the counsel or
purpose of God in afflicting Job so grievously, and leaving him entangled in
the briars of those troublesome and intricate disputes with his friends, who
came to comfort him.

Thus Job speaking in the third person, intends himself (which manner of
speaking is frequent in Scripture) Who is he? etc. that is, I am he that have
hid counsel without knowledge. For doubtless Job did well attend those words of
God in the 38th Chapter ( verse. 2.) Who is this that darkneth counsel by words
without knowlegde? And being struck with them, confesses here, that God had
met with him in those words. And hence read these words of Job with an
additional preface, as if they were a repetition of Gods words, Thou have said,
who is he that hides counsel without knowledge? That is, thou have said, that
some body hides counsel without knowledge, and I acknowledge it is I, I am he;
and so he falls down convinced before the Lord, as David before Nathan, telling
him in the name of the Lord, Thou art the man. Ego sum, que^ celavi, i. e.
tacui, non decantavi, non celebravi consilium tuum. Joan Paraph. Qui de Deo
ejusque providentia imperite loquitur, i^ ejus consilium abscondere dicitur
absque scientia; quippe inde gloria Dei apud homines obscuratur. Drus.
I confess it, said David, I am the man, I have sinned; so says Job, I am the
man, I have hid counsel by words without knowledge.

Some understand this his hiding, to be only his forbearing to utter and
celebrate the praise of God in his counsel, or the purpose of Gods providence
toward him. But I conceive the fault which he confesses here, is not a bare
reticency, or his not speaking of the counsel of God, but his not speaking
rightly, or becomingly, of his counsel; which agrees fully with what follows,
where Job speaks in the first person, or in his own person, and takes the
charge home to, and upon himself.

Therefore have I uttered that I understood not, etc. Mr. Broughton renders,
Therefore have I talked that I have not understood.

The Hebrew word rendered understood, imports a distinct knowledge of things (
Prove. 14.8.) The wisdom of the prudent, is to understand his way; that is, to
know what to do, and how or in what manner to do every duty in all the changes
of his life. Thus the Angel Gabriel was commanded concerning Daniel (Dan.
8.16.) Make this man to understand the vision; that is, whom it concerns, when
and in what manner it shall take effect, and be fulfilled. Such an
understanding as this Job had not of the things which he had uttered; and
therefore confesses, I have uttered that I understood not, I have spoken (as
we say) I knew not what; which may refer to such like passages as are in the
former part of this Book ( Job 19.7, 8.) Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am
not heard; I cry aloud, but there is no judgment: He has fenced up my way,
that I cannot pass, and he has set darkness in my paths. Job did not well
understand himself when he spoke thus; Non intelligebam quae dixi quum de tuis
judiciis quererer, and te dicorem ex equ^ bonos and malos affligere. Merc
and there are several other such extravagant speeches of his, up and down this
Book. And doubtless he did not barely confess that he had erred in speaking,
nor did he only acknowledge that he had not used such reverence as became him,
in speaking to God, but that he had spoken such things as were scandalous, and
gave just matter of offense, and at which several of his friends did actually
take offense. At best he might well acknowledge he had rashly uttered things
that he did not fully understand.

Thus Job, who thought he had spoken wisely enough, while man spoke to him, and
he spoke to men, now hearing God speak, and he speaking to God, does more
wisely confess that himself was not wise, and that his light was but darkness
concerning the works of God, much more concerning his counsel in those works.
As if he had said, I have spoken many things of God, and of his excellencies in
this dispute with my friends; yet I have hidden, or not hit, but slipped that
which I should have most insisted upon and studied to make manifest, even the
sovereignty of God over me, and all that I am or have; as also, the counsel,
aim and intention of God in laying his hand so sorely upon me: but now being
better informed about the reason of Gods dealings with me, I confess I have
uttered that I understood not, Things too wonderful for me, which I knew not.

Job was a man of great understanding; yet here were things too wonderful for
him. What were they? The counsel of God, the nature of God: these are past
finding out. There are wonders in God which man cannot apprehend, much less
comprehend. Job spoke of things far above his reach, even of wonderful things;
and therefore no wonder if he spoke unduly of them. I (says he) have uttered
things too wonderful for me, which I knew not. Job here confesses, that he
wanted knowledge; and we know (though he were a mirror of patience) that many
impatient speeches passed from him. Now, here we have the root of all that
impatience which this good man showed in his afflictions; he had not a clear
knowledge about the counsel or meaning of God in afflicting him.

Hence note; Impatience flows from ignorance.

Did we understand these two things; First, our own sinfulness; Secondly, the
sovereignty of God; we should never be impatient. Did we understand our own
sinfulness, that we have deserved greater evils than any the Lord has laid
upon us; and did we understand the Lords sovereignty, that he may lay upon us
what sufferings he pleases, though we had not sinned (for we are wholly his,
and he may do with his own what he will) did we (I say) understand and meditate
upon these two things, it would quiet our minds in the greatest storms of
adversity, and be a preservative against all impatience. But if with these two,
we consider a third thing; that the end which the Lord has in bringing
sufferings upon his people, is to do them good, how unreasonable a thing will
impatience appear? shall we be impatient at our profit! If we are well
instructed in this great truth, that all things work together for good to them
that love God, and are the called according to his purpose (Romans 8.28.) Where
is there any room for impatience, in those who are effectually called, and
truly love God! Impatience flows from ignorance.

Again, in that Job confesses himself to be the man that hid the counsels of
God, when he had only been speaking unadvisedly of them,

Note; He that speaks improperly and unskilfully of the counsel or things of
God, hides them.

When in discourses about divine truths, we do not advance the honor of God,
we, as it were, cast a vail upon it. Not to do what we ought, is to do what we
ought not; our omissions of good, may be censured as commissions of evil. We
should display and magnify the wisdom of God in all his dealings with us, and
dispensations toward us, else we do unwisely.

Thirdly, Job charge it upon himself as a fault, that he uttered what he knew
not.

Hence note; Our words and our understandings should go both together.

Let us take heed of venting with our tongues, what we have not in some good
degree reached with our understandings. The understanding should give light to
the tongue; nor need we any other light to speak by, but that of the
understanding. True light cannot shine out of our mouths, if there be much
darkness in our minds. How shall we utter knowledge, if we have it not? ( Psalm.
147.7.) God is the King in all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding.
In singing praises, as there is an exercise of our affections, so there should
be of our understanding also. The Apostle puts it twice in those duties of
prayer and praise (1 Cor. 14.15.) I will pray with the Spirit, and will pray
with understanding also; I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also. A word should not go out of our mouths, but such as the
understanding dictates and directs: better not to speak, than speak what we
know not. If we understand not what we speak, we seldom edify others, never
our selves. As the tongues of some utter things above their experiences and
affections, so do the tongues of others utter words beyond their judgments.

Fourthly, When Job spoke, he thought he had spoken very well, yet now he is
convinced of his weakness and mistakes in what he spoke.

Hence note, Good-meaning men may sometimes arrogate, and pretend to more
knowledge, than comes to their share.

They may think they know the truth in a better manner and measure than indeed
they do: Our opinion of our selves is often greater than our knowledge of other
matters; and we may soon imagine we know that, which indeed we know not. The
Apostle says (1 Cor. 8.2.) If any man think that he knows any thing, he
knows nothing yet as he ought to know. He that really knows any thing, as
he ought, cannot but have thoughts that he knows it; but he that thinks,
that is, is much, or proudly thinking that he knows any thing, does only
think so, for he knows nothing as he ought, that is, really, groundedly, and
effectually.

Fifthly, Observe; God will bring his servants at last to see how short they
are of that knowledge, which they sometimes presume to have.

Job thought he had more knowledge than he indeed had, and God made him see it.
It Is a work of great goodness in God, to show us how defective we are both in
knowledge and goodness. We are full of self, till God convinces us of our
self-emptiness; we are full of self-wisdom, and self-strength, and
self-righteousness, till the Lord convinces us, that our wisdom is folly, our
strength weakness, our righteousness an unclean thing, and shows us, yea
causes us to recieve and take Christ for our righteousness, strength, and
wisdom. God did not leave Job till he had brought him out of, and off from
himself, as to whatsoever he had too high an opinion of, or any confidence in
himself.

Again, Job was upon his humiliation before God; he had not any gross sin to
charge himself with (for he stood still upon his integrity, as he had done
before; nor was Job mistaken in that point, he had not lived in any gross sin)
That which he charged himself with, was want of knowledge, and his erro^, in
managing his cause toward God arising from it.

Hence note, Sixthly, Our ignorance and errors, are to be confessed and
bewailed before the Lord, and we to be deeply humbled for them.

What though we have not any open wickedness to charge our selves with? what
though the world cannot charge us, nor we our selves, with any foul and
black-fac'd enormities; yet have we not errors, have we not ignorances, have we
not weaknesses to confess? Jobs eye had none of those beams in it; but he began
to see the moates in his eye, and repented of his shortness in knowledge, and of
his rashness in language. Though great sins call loudest for repentance, yet
the least sin, even a sin of ignorance, calls us to repentance also; and woe
to those who knowingly neglect, or stop their ears against that call. When
David was only staggered at the providence of God giving prosperity to the
wicked, and so spoke unadvisedly with his lips (as Job in a parallel case did)
Psalm. 73.13, 14.) Verily, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands
in innocence: For all the day long have I been plagued and chastened every
morning. Yet as soon as he recovered out of this temptation, how deeply did he
charge himself ( ver. 22.) So foolish was I, and ignorant; I was as a beast
before thee. Why did he then call himself a fool, a beast? was it for adultery
and murder, which were once his sins? no, but for ignorance and rashness. David
called himself a beast, in judging of the dealings of God by sense, not for
living in any beastly sensuality. Let us remember, and not lightly pass it
over, that though we have not (which rarely we have not) gross sins to confess,
yet we have ignorances and errors too too many. The same David said and prayed
( Psalm. 19.12.) Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret
faults, that is, from those faults and errors which I do not understand; yea,
cleanse me from this fault, that I have not a better understanding. As he there
prayed to be kept from the dominion (and so from the guilt) of presumptuous
sins, that is, of sins committed against the light of knowledge, so to be
cleansed from the guilt of his secret sins, that is, of sins committed without
his knowledge. Thus a godly man acknowledges his weaknesses, and lies low
before God, in sense of them, when he has not great and gross sins to be
humbled for.

Seventhly, As Job was now discovering his former ignorance; so, upon an
increase of knowledge, he was growing up into a clearer light about the things
of God, than he had manifested in his former discourses.

Hence note; It is a good degree of knowledge and understanding, to be convinced
that we know and understand little.

As to be conscious of our weakness, is a great part of our strength; so, to be
sensible of our ignorance is a good degree of knowledge. Agur said of himself (
Prove. 30.2.) Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the
understanding of a man; I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the
holy. This good man was none of the ignorant ones, he had knowledge in a large
measure, and was growing into a further light, while he thus bewailed his own
darkness. David's knowledge was then clearest, when he made that confession, So
ignorant was I.

Eighthly, When was it that Job saw he knew little? It was when God was come
nearer to him, when God had been dealing with him, and speaking to him.

Hence note; No man knows what a nothing he is in knowledge, and grace, and
goodness, till the Lord is pleased to reveal himself to him.

It is upon some eminent discovery of God to us, that we see we have little
grace, righteousness, or knowledge. While we compare our selves with our selves,
or compare our selves with others below our selves, we have high thoughts of
our selves; but when we compare our selves with God, who is infinitely above
us, we are little, we are nothing, we are little or nothing in our own eyes;
when God appears in his fullness to us, we appear empty to our selves.

Lastly, From those words, Things too wonderful for me, which I knew not. These
wonderful things being the dealings of God with him, according to the counsel
of God concerning him,

Note, Ninthly, The dealings of God with men are wonderful.

Not only the decrees of God from eternity, but the works of God in time, are
full of wonder; nor can his works in time be otherwise, seeing they bear the
express image, and are the issue of those eternal decrees. Jesus Christ is
called wonderful, counselor (Isa. 9.6.) and he is wonderful in his counsels:
As the works of God in us, so his works toward us are called wonderful. ( Pal.
40.5.) Many, O Lord, my God, are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and
thy thoughts which are to usward. The works of God (as of man too) are the
birth of his thoughts, and the thoughts of God about the birth of man, have
many wonders in them. David said ( Psalm. 139, 6.) Such knowledge is too
wonderful for me, it is high, I cannot attain unto it. What knowledge was it
that he could not attain unto? The context tells us, it was the knowledge of
Gods knowledge, concerning the formation of his body, before he was born ( ver.
14, 15* 16.) I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, etc.
Again, the Prophet having described the various courses and methods which God
uses in humbling sinners, by afflictions and tribulations, which are shadowed
under those Metaphors and Allegorical expressions of Plowing and Harrowing, and
the different ways of Threshing out the Corn, by the staff, or the rod, or the
wheel. The Spirit of God does not there intend the husband-mans work alone, in
which yet there is much of God, and his teachings: The Prophet (I say) having
done this, concludes ( Isa. 28.29.) This also comes forth from the Lord of
Hosts, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working. And as there are
wonders in the works of God, which are the fulfilling of his secret and hidden
counsel; so there are wonders in the Word of God, which is his revealed and
open counsel ( Psalm. 119.18.) Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous
things out of thy Law. The Law is wonderful; but the Gospel is, as it were, a
continued wonder, and we shall be for ever wondering at, and admiring the grace
and goodness of God discovered, therein when we come to heaven; and now, as we
see further into the mystery of Christ, we do it too (1 Cor. 2.7.) We speak the
wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before
the world. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart
of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. They are
wonderful things, which man, by all his natural wisdom, cannot attain unto.
Philosophers, who pry into all the secrets of nature, cannot understand these
supernatural secrets, how long soever they stand prying upon them: And though
Job had been long considering of, and speaking about those things of God, which
the eye often sees, and the ear heard, yea, which he himself (to his grief) had
felt; yet he saw reason enough at last to say, that even those things, in the
whole compass of them, exceeded his reason; I (said he) have uttered that I
understood not, things too wonderful for me which I knew not.

Job having thus acknowledged his want of knowledge, and the weakness of his
understanding in the mysteries of providence, applies himself to God for
instruction in the next verse.

Verse. 4. Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I will demand of thee, and
declare thou unto me. This is Jobs humble petition; and it consists of two
parts.

First, That God would not reject, but give ear to a poor creature, burdened
with the sense of his infirmities, in his addresses to him; Hear, I beseech
thee, and I will speak, or as Mr. Broughton renders, Oh, hear me, when I do
speak.

Secondly, That God would admit him under his tuition, and instruct him, while
he waited for advice and counsel: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto
me; Lord, teach thou me. Job speaks submissively as became a learner; he is
not now what he was, he comes to God in another manner, than he had done
before; Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak.

As if he had said; I have formerly desired to plead my cause with thee ( Chap.
13.22.) and thou have justly checked, and chid me for it ( Chap. 38.3. Chap.
40.2.) as if I presumed I could teach thee; but now I see my error, I submit,
and earnestly desire to be taught by thee. I have spoken heretofore otherwise
than I ought, and otherwise than I purpose to speak hereafter: I spoke before
in a challenging strain ( Chap. 13.22.) Then call thou, and I will answer: or
let me speak, and answer thou me. There Job seemed to challenge God, to be
either opponent or respondent, and he would argue, or dispute it out with him.
But here, though his words are near the same in sound, yet his sense is far
different; Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I will demand of thee, and
declare thou unto me.

There is a twofold demanding; First, as a Disputant; Secondly, as a
Supplicant. Job would now demand as a Supplicant unto God, M^ interrogantem
doce benign, qui me tuae disciplinae plane submitto. Merc.
not as a Disputant with God. We may be said to demand or enquire of God, when
we consult his word, not humane reason. It an innocent person (as Job) be
afflicted; where shall he enquire the reason of it? if he only respect his
affliction, and compare that with his own innocence, he will quickly murmr
at, and complain of the dealings of God with him: But if he look to the Word of
God, which tells him that God is a Sovereign Lord, and that God has promised,
not only to be with his in trouble, but that their troubles shall work their
comforts; he will not only be patient under, but glory in his tribulations.

(...) interrogobo tc. sc. petendo, orando, pulsando. Aquin.
The Hebrew word which we translate, demand, may well be rendered petition or
crave: The common sense of the word demand seems too high for Jobs spirit and
condition. Master Broughton renders, I will make petition unto thee, or an
humble suit unto thee; as if he had said, I will pray for, and beg this favor
of thee, that thou would teach and inform me better. It is not an
authoritative demand, Qui regat, nescit. Interrogare sapientem dimidia
sapientia est. Apotheg. Arab.
which is a kind of command, but a submissive demand; this demanding is the
asking of a question, not the requiring of a right. He that asks a question,
implies that he stands in need of information, and that he is desirous to
learn; And to put questions to a wise man is half wisdom. I will demand, or put
questions unto thee: Declare thou unto me.

The Hebrew is, make me to know, make me a knowing man. As if Job had said;
Lord, if thou will teach me, I shall soon get knowledge and understanding; and
therefore I resign my self wholly to thy teachings. The true submission of man's
will to Gods will, is to hearken to the counsel or wisdom of God, and not to
sit down in our own.

But as it was questioned at the first verse, how Job could answer, seeing he
had said I will answer no more; so here it may be questioned, why the Lord
spoke no more to Job, seeing here he desired to receive further instruction
from him?

I answer, First, Job made this suit to God, upon this condition, that God
would please to enform him, if he saw need, or should think fit to do it.
Secondly, Job spoke this doctrinally to show what he and others ought to desire
and submit to, even the teachings of God. Thirdly, I answer, that the Lord
seeing his submission, saw there was no need of speaking any further to him,
but broke up the whole disputation, determining for Job, and giving him the day
against his three friends, as will appear further in the sequel of the Chapter.

From this verse,

Observe, First, The sense of our wants puts us upon prayer.

When Job was sensible that he wanted understanding and knowledge, he came to
God for it. Give me to understand, cause me to know. True and fervent prayer
flows from a sense of our wants. If we see not our selves in need, why should
we pray? And when really we shall have no need (as in heaven) there will be no
need of prayer; all will be praise, and all shall be in everlasting praises.

Secondly, The person to whom Job makes his application for teaching, being
God himself,

Note; We know nothing of God, nor of our selves aright, till God teaches us,
till he declares and makes it known to us.

Every good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down from
the father of lights, etc. ( Jam. 1.17.) As no man can either make or redeem
himself, so no man can teach or instruct himself. What we know of God, we know,
from God? It Is in his light that we see light. The light may shine round about
us, and we see it not; unless God enlighten us, as well as send us the light,
we are never the better. As in conversion, the Lord first opens the eyes, and
then turns from darkness to light (Acts 26.18.) So under every dispensation, we
are in the dark, till God opens our eyes, and give us (by his own immediate or
mediate teachings) light about it.

Thirdly, note; If we desire God should teach us, or if we would be taught of
God, we must ask it of him.

We find the godly often putting up this request to God. David was much in this
petition ( Psalm. 119.33, 34.) Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I
shall keep it unto the end: Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law. He
did not only desire God that he would teach him, but give him a faculty, to
receive his teachings ( verse. 35.) Make me to go in the path of thy
commandment. See how the Psalmist joyneth these petitions together. First,
Teach me the way of thy statutes. Secondly, Give me understanding; as if he had
said, else thy teachings will do no good. Thirdly, Make me to go in the path of
thy commandment; as if he had said, though I understand thy statutes, yet,
unless thou help me, I shall not be able to walk in them, no, nor to take one
right step in them; therefore, Make me to go in the path of thy commandment.
Again ( Psalm. 143.10.) Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God; thy spirit
is good, lead me into the land of uprightness. As the Lord teaches us our way,
and has promised to teach us always, in all things needful for us to know and
do; so he has taught us by the written practice of many, as well as by his
written precept, that we must pray for his teaching.

Fourthly, Job was humbling himself, and now he begs of God, that he would
teach him.

Hence note; Humble souls desire and give up themselves wholly to be taught by
God.

They hang upon his mouth for instruction, and renounce their own wisdom.
Eliphaz gave Job that advice ( Chap. 22.22.) Acquaint thy self now with him,
and be at peace, and good shall come unto thee: Receive, I pray thee, thee law
from his mouth, and lay up his words in thy heart.

Fifthly, In that Job prays for teaching in this form, according to the Hebrew,
make me to know,

Observe; The teachings of God are effectual, they make us know.

Men may teach others knowledge, but they cannot make them know. God can make a
very dullard quick of understanding. Men may instruct the understanding, but
they cannot give understanding; God does both. The teachings of God are
effectual to all purposes. First, to enlighten the ignorant. Secondly, to
convince gainsayers. Thirdly, to convert sinners. Fourthly, to comfort those
that are sorrowful. Fifthly, to resolve such as are doubtful. Sixthly, to
encourage the fearful. And, Seventhly, to raise up and recover those that are
fallen. Thus Job is become a petitioner to the Lord for instruction, having
confessed his own ignorance and weakness. And that he had formerly profited
under the teachings of God, and was now in a further way of profiting, is
evident by that which follows.

Verse. 5. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye
sees thee. Job had no sooner asked for teaching, but God taught him, though
not formally and explicitly as he desired, yet really and effectually, as he
needed. For, this verse seems to be a real answer to the petition he made in
the former verse; and in it Job asserts two things.

First, That he had heard of God by the hearing of the ear.

Secondly, That now his eye did see him.

There are two opinions about the general sense of this verse, and I shall
conclude in a third.

First, Some conceive these discoveries of God to Job, were only, inward to his
soul; so that when he says, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear,
but now mine eye sees thee, we are not to understand him, as if he had had any
visible appearance of God, but that these words may be taken,

First, as a comparison between a slight hearing, when the mind is not intent
upon what the ear hears; and a serious hearing, which brings the mind fully
into the ear. As if Job had formerly been a careless hearer, but now an
attentive one; and so the knowledge which Job had of God formerly, was little
compared with his present knowledge. He had a knowledge of God by hearing only
before, but his mind was not intent upon it; he heard only with the hearing of
his ear, but his eye did not see; that is, he had not a clear sight or
knowledge, which is an intellectual sight of the things which he heard. But
doubtless, Job was no slight hearer of the word in former times; he did not
hear the word in the days of his prosperity, as if he had only (as we say)
given it the hearing: for, had he not seriously hearkened to the voice of God in
those days, he had never obtained such a testimony as God gave of him, toward
the end of those days; yea, this very phrase, I have heard of thee, by the
hearing of the ear, implies serious and attentive hearing.

Secondly, Others who deny any visible manifestation of God to Job, grant that
the first part of the verse, notes serious hearing and receiving of the word,
the latter more; so that here, say they, is a comparison between that lesser
light or knowledge which Job had of the will of God before, and that fuller
light which he got upon this discourse which the Lord had with him; the former
being but as of a matter heard, this as of things seen. The Scripture sometimes
calls clear knowledge sight: So that, look how much that which we see with our
bodily eyes, is clearer to us than that whereof we have only heard the report;
by so much the knowledge which Job had now of the things of God, especially
about the whole mystery of Gods dealing with him, was clearer and fuller than
what he had before, even as if he now saw what before he only heard. As we say,
One eyewitness, is better than ten ear-witnesses; so one eying of the word of
God (the eye of the mind fully and distinctly taken in what is heard) is better
than ten earings of it; that is, when little or nothing is taken in at the ear,
but a sound of words: For then only we may be said to know divine things, by
the seeing of the eye, when we know them not only from without by the report of
others, but from experience within our selves. The Apostle says of those, who
took joyfully the spoiling of their goods for the truths sake, They knew in
themselves, that they had in heaven a better and a more enduring substance
(Heb. 10.34.) that is, they had even got a sight of that heavenly enduring
substance. Hence in Scripture, vision is applied to spiritual things heard; and
we are said to see the Word of God (Jer. 2.31.) O generation, see ye the Word
of the Lord; have I been a wilderness? etc. As if the Lord had said, Ye have
heard it before, but now see it. Seeing notes the highest knowledge; then we
see what we hear, when we fully understand what we have heard. Thus they
expound this Text, who judge there was no outward vision at all, but that Jobs
seeing was only spiritual and intellectual.

Secondly, Others affirm, that Job had an outward apparition, and that the eye
of his sense was affected. And concerning this,

First, Some are so much of this opinion, that they say Christ appeared in
humane shape to Job, as he did to many of the holy Patriarks and Prophets of
old; which apparitions are by the Ancients called preludes to his incarnation.
And some Jewish Writers tell us, that Job upon this sight of God, had a spirit
of prophecy given him; but they need not insist upon that, for several have
had apparitions, who were no Prophets.

Secondly, others say, the appearance of God to Job was only in or by a cloud,
with the whirlwind. But that he had a vision or sight of God one way or other,
is asserted, as by many of the Jewish Writers, so by most of the Christian
Ancients.

And doubtless, when the Lord spoke to him out of the whirlwind, he had a
vision, or an extraordinary manifestation of God, even to his eye: Not that God
in himself can be seen, No man has seen God at any time (1 John 4.12.) It is
reported by the Jewish Writers, that the Prophet Isaiah was sawn asunder by his
own Nation, for saying, that he had seen the Lord ( Isa. 6.1.) I saw the Lord
sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up. This they counted blasphemy, and put
him to death for it, say some: yet others say, he was put to death for his
plainness in reproving the Princes and people of Israel, in those words ( Isa.
1.10.) Hear the word of the Lord ye Rulers of Sodom, give ear to the Law of our
God, ye people of Gomorrah. But of that by the way. I say, God in himself
cannot be seen; he is seen only by those visible demonstrations of his
presence, which he is pleased to make of himself, as here he spoke to Job out
of the whirlwind.

I conceive we may take in both; so that when Job speaks of his hearing by
the ear, he intends that teaching which he had in former times by the Ministry
of his Ancestors: And that, when he says, But now mine eye sees thee, he
intends that teaching which he had from the present appearance of God to him
for his instruction and humiliation; I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
ear, but now mine eye sees thee. As if he had said, Lord, heretofore I heard
of thee, for I was religiously brought up; I had Parents and Ancestors, who
declared to me who the Lord was; and I heard many things of thee, which took
impression upon my heart heretofore: but I never had such an impression as in
this tempest, I never heard God speaking thus immediately to me; nor did he
ever give me any such visible demonstration of his presence, as he has
vouchsafed me at this time, speaking out of the whirlwind. And from all we may
conclude, that as Job had a powerful illumination of the Spirit, so an outward
apparition of the Glory and Majesty of God, or of Gods glorious Majesty to
convince and humble him. So that, though Job had a saving knowledge of God
formerly, yet this discourse of God with him, and discovery of God to him, had
made him a better Scholar than all his earthly teachers. I have heard of thee
by the hearing of the ear, But now mine eye sees thee.

That is, now I have as clear a sight or knowledge of thy mind and will, of thy
justice and goodness, of thy power and sovereignty, as if I had seen thee with
mine eyes, and had seen or looked into thy heart. Or thus: Not only have thou
graciously instructed me, by speaking so much to me, but thou have manifested
thy self present with me, by an aspectable sign, Mine eye has seen thee; that
is, thou have given me to see that which assures me thou art near unto me,
namely, the Cloud, out of which thou have been pleased to speak and make known
thy mind to me, who am but dust and ashes.

The Lord may be seen these four ways;

First, In his Word. Secondly, In his works. Thirdly, In outward apparitions.
Fourthly, And above all, God is seen in his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, whom
the Apostle calls ( Heb. 1.3.) The brightness of his glory, and the express
image of his person; and in whose face the light of the knowledge of God
shines (2 Cor. 4.6.) And hence Christ says ( John 14.9.) He that has seen
me, has seen the father. The invisible father is seen in his Son, who was made
visible in our flesh, John 1.18. Thus God may be seen. But in his nature God is
altogether invisible, he cannot be seen. Moses saw him that is invisible (Heb.
11.27.) that is, he saw him by an eye of faith, who is invisible to the eye of
sense. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees
thee.

Hence note, First; It is a great mercy, and much to be acknowledged, that we
have the word of God sounding in our ears.

Faith comes by hearing (Romans 10.17.) The Prophet says ( Isa. 55.3.) Hear,
and your soul shall live. Now if faith and life come by hearing; to have the
word of God sounding in our ears, must needs be a great mercy. Though to have
the word only sounding in our ear, will do no man good, yet it is good to hear
that joyful sound. Though that sad Prophecy mentioned by Christ ( Mat. 13.14.)
be fulfilled in many, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand, and
seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive; Yet he said to his faithful
followers ( verse. 16.) Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for
they hear. They receive a blessing by hearing, whose ears are blessed when they
hear. O how many souls are blessing God, that ever they heard of himself and
his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, by the hearing of the ear. To have an ear to
hear, is a common blessing; but to have an hearing ear, or to hear by the
hearing of the ear, is a special blessing.

Observe, Secondly; We should hear the Word very diligently.

That phrase, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear (as the Hebrew
Writers note) signifies a very attentive hearing. Every hearing is not an
hearing with the ear, nor every seeing like that we intend, when a man says, I
saw it with my eyes. One may see and not see, hear and not hear. The Word of
God is to be heard with a hearing. Such doublings in Scripture have a great
emphasis in them. As when the Lord says, They are cursed with a curse, it
notes a great and a certain curse is coming; so to hear by the hearing of the
ear, implies fruitful hearing, and a laying up of that in the mind which has
been heard ( Psalm. 44.1.) We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have
told us, what work thou did in their days, in the times of old. They who
thus hear with their ears, treasure up in their hearts, and do with their hands
what they have heard. The Lord charged Ezekiel (Chap. 44.5.) Son of man, mark
well and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, all that I say unto
thee; that is, mind diligently what I show and say unto thee. The Lord called
for the exercise of both senses, in attending to what he spoke to the Prophet:
He did not only say, Hear with thine ears, but see with thine eyes; that is,
hear as if thou did even see that which thou hear. For though possibly the
Lord presented somewhat to the eye of the Prophet, as well as he spoke to his
ear, yet the former notion may well be taken in, yea, and intended in that
command. Many hear as if they had no ears, and see as if they had no eyes. One
of the Ancients taking notice of that, says, Such kind of hearers are like
Malchus in the Gospel, who had his ear cut off. From those words, But now mine
eye sees thee, taken distinctly,

Observe, Thirdly; God reveals himself more clearly and fully at one time,
than at another.

Seeing is somewhat more than hearing, though it be attentive hearing. As the
full and clear manifestation which we shall have of God in the next life, is
expressed by seeing, and called vision; so the fullest and clearest
apprehension which we have of God, and the things of God in this life, is a
degree of seeing both him and them, it is the sight of faith, and may also be
called vision. A true and strong believer tastes, and feels, and sees the truths
of the Gospel which he has heard; his faith (which is the eye of his soul) is
the evidence of those things to him which are not seen, nor can be seen by an
eye of sense: He by the help of the Holy Ghost looks steadfastly into heaven,
and (with this eye) sees the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right
hand of God (in his measure) as blessed Stephen did ( Acts 7.55.) This sight of
God and spirituals, has three things in it beyond that ordinary, though real
knowledge, which comes in by the hearing of the ear. First, a surpassing
clearness. Secondly, an undoubted certainty. Thirdly, a ravishing sweetness,
and the overflowings of consolation.

Fourthly, Note; According to the measure of Gods revealing himself to us, such
is the measure of our profiting in the knowledge of God.

The word is spoken to all, in the public Ministry of it, it is scattered upon
all; but they only learn to know God and themselves truly, to whom God does
inwardly reveal it, and whose hearts he touches and opens by his Spirit.
Every man (says Christ, John 6.45.) That has heard and learned of the father,
comes unto me; that is, All that are taught of God, believe on me. And the
more any learn of the father, the more they come to, and abide the more closely
with the Son. Job understood more of God, and the mind of God more, in all
those questions he put to him, concerning the heavens, the earth, the Sea,
concerning the beasts of the earth, and the fowls of the Air, concerning
Behemoth and Leviathan, than ever he did before. The more immediate and
extraordinary revelations of God, are always accompanied with notable effects:
And though few profit in knowledge, according to the measure of the mediate and
ordinary Revelation, yet probably the more revelation we have of that kind, the
more we profit.

Fifthly, Job had these great discoveries after God had kept him long in
affliction.

Hence note; God does usually reveal himself most to his people after great
sufferings.

Hence some are of opinion, that in these words Job pointed at his two states.
First, that of his prosperity; then he heard of God only by the hearing of the
ear. Secondly, Of his adversity; then his eye saw him, that is, he greatly
profited in the knowledge of him. There are two things which God usually
bestows upon his people in the day of, or soon after their affliction; First,
more cordials and consolations: He gives that strong drink to those that are
ready to perish, that wine unto those that be of heavy hearts, He bids them
drink and forget their poverty, and remember their misery no more; as Solomon's
metaphors may well import ( Prove. 31.6, 7.) Secondly, as the Lord gives more
consolation in such a day, so more illumination; the head is bettered by it as
well as the heart. Many have got much inward light or knowledge, both of God
and of themselves, of their mercies and of their duties, by being, or after
they have been brought into much outward darkness. David's experience taught him
this, else he had never said ( Psalm. 119.71.) It is good for me that I have
been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. He had never learned, either
to know the Statutes of God better, or to keep them better by his affliction,
if God had not been with him, and revealed himself further to him in the day of
his affliction.

Lastly, Note; When God manifests himself much to any man, great impressions
are left upon him.

As will appear further in opening the next verse.

Verse. 6. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. This verse
concludes that part of the Chapter, which I call Jobs humiliation. He made
confession before of his own ignorance, uttering things that he understood not,
things too wonderful for him, which he knew not; he confessed also the great
goodness of God to him, in that he had both heard of him by the hearing of the
ear, and also that his eye had seen him: from all which he inferred this
resolve of deepest self-abasement before God.

Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. This word (wherefore)
is diligently to be attended, for it is the hinge upon which the whole matter
turns. This wherefore, may have a double reference.

First, To the sight which he had gained of his own folly, weakness and
vileness, of which having made confession in the former words, he adds
wherefore; that is, for as much as I am thus convinced of mine own sinfulness,
I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

Secondly, This wherefore, may have reference to those higher, clearer and
fuller manifestations of God to him. He had heard of God by the hearing of the
ear, there was much in that; but now his eye had seen him, he had a light or a
discovery of the excellency and Majesty of God, as much surpassing and
exceeding what formerly he had, as eyesight does the hearing of the ear:
Wherefore, the light being come thus fully in upon him, concerning the glory,
sovereignty, goodness, faithfulness, and all sufficiency of God, he cries out,
I abhor my self, etc.

The Hebrew word signifies the greatest disgust against himself, a kind of
reprobating himself, (...) significat nauseare, vel reprobaro cum fastidio,
abjicere, abominare.
or (as we speak) a turning of his stomach, at the thought and remembrance of
what he had said and was. Some render, wherefore, I reprehend or reprove my
self: but to abhor our selves is more than to reprehend or reprove our selves.
Others, I reject, I despise, I slight my self, I turn away from my self. All
these renderings show to how little or low an account Job was now come in his
own sight: Our reading, I abhor, takes in all the rest and more. The Lord uses
this word negatively concerning his people ( Levit. 26.11.) I will set my
tabernacle amongst you, and my soul shall not abhor you; the meaning is, my
soul shall greatly delight in you: And at the 15th verse of the same chapter,
affirmatively of them, If you shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor
my judgments, then, etc. despising is less than abhorring. To abhor the
judgments of God, is to cast them not only out of our affections, but out of
our judgment too, and to judge them unworthy or unfit to be owned and obeyed.
Again, at the 30th verse of same chapter, I will destroy your high places, and
cut down your images, and cast your carcasses upon the carcasses of your idols,
and my soul shall abhor you; that is, I will manifest the utmost and highest of
my displeasure against you. Once more in the same chapter, When they be in the
land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them. To
abhor is to cast away, and to look upon a person or a people as cast-aways.
Read also ( Deuteronomy. 7.26. Deuteronomy. 23.7. Psalm. 5.6. Psalm. 129.163. Prove. 24.24.
Jerem. 14.21. Amos 5.10. chap. 6.8. Zech. 11.8.) from all which texts we may
collect the weight and great significancy of this word. To abhor things or
persons, imports the deepest displicency or dislike toward either. I (says
Job) abhor My self.

The word (my self) is here supplied by our translators. The Hebrew is only
this, wherefore I abhor, leaving us to suppose what he did abhor: Our
translators make the suppliment thus, I abhor my self, that is, whatsoever may
be called my self, self-wisdom, self-righteousness, self-strength, self ends,
and I would see the end of sinful-self. Another translation says, I abhor
those former things, Illa priora. q. d. non tantum illa prius a me cogitata and
dictaretracto, sed etiam detestor. Bez.
that is, whatsoever I formerly thought or spoke amiss. I do not only dislike
them, I do not only retract and recant them, but I abhor them. And if you would
know what those former things were, which here he renounceth and abhors, you
may take it in these seven words.

First, I abhor, that ever I cursed the day of my birth.

Secondly, I abhor, that I wished so often for death, that I wooed the grave,
and so ha^tily called for my return to the dust in the day of my affliction.

Thirdly, I abhor, that ever I despaired of my restoration, or that I gave up
my self as a man utterly lost for this world.

Fourthly, I abhor, that I used so many complaints of the severity of the Lords
dealings with me.

Fifthly, I abhor, that I was so bold, as to desire to plead with God.

Sixthly, I abhor, that I was so much in setting out my own righteousness and
innocence.

Seventhly, I abhor, that ever I spoke any word, which should in the least
darken or reflect upon the goodness, mercy, faithfulness, righteousness, and
soveraignity of God in his dispensations toward me. These are the things which
had unwarily passed him in the heat of disputation with his friends, and these
he now abhors. Take it either way, I abhor my self, or these things, it
comes all to one; for the truth is, he did abhor himself for those things,
which he had spoken with so much imprudence and impatience, while he was under
the hand of God. I abhor my self (neither is that all) And repent.

Job was not only affected to abhorrence, but to repentance. The word
translated repent, (...) in Niphal. significat consolari, in Piel. poenitere.
Drus.
signifies two contrary things in Scripture.

First, To grieve, which is proper to repentance; sorrow and repentance ought
to go together.

Secondly, To comfort or to take comfort; thus it is rendered ( Genesis 24.67.)
Isaac was comforted concerning the death of his mother (2 Samuel 13.39.) David
was comforted concerning Amnon. (Psalm. 77.2.) In the day of my trouble I sought
the Lord, my sore ran in the night and ceased not; my soul refused to be
comforted. It may seem strange, that the same word which signifies sorrow and
repentance, should signify also comfort and to be comforted: but sorrow and
comfort meet in true repentance; godly sorrow does not hinder, much less quite
exclude, and shut out joy in God. Repentance is ushered in by godly sorrow, and
grief of heart for sin, and it concludes with comfort and joy of heart in God
who pardons sinners; and therefore the same word which signifies to repent,
may well signify both to grieve and to take comfort. Repentance is a change
from a bad state to a good, and a turning from the worst of evils, sin, to the
chiefest good, God himself; and therefore must needs be followed, if not
accompanied with much sweetness and comfort. (...). Et consolationem accepi in
pulvere and cinere.
A Greek translator renders it expressly so in this place, Wherefore I abhor my
self, and take comfort in dust and ashes; and doubtless, while Job was
repenting in floods of sorrow, his comforts came flowing in. There is a
laughter, in the midst of which the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that
mirth is heaviness (says Solom, Prove. 14.13.) and there is a sorrow (that is a
blessed sorrow) in the midst of which the heart laughs, and the end of which
heaviness is mirth.

To repent (in the general nature of it) is to change both the mind and way,
and so take up new principles and new practices. A man that truly repents, is
not the same man he was before he repented; he can say, I am not I. And as in
true repentance there is a change from a bad to a good mind, and from a
perverse, to a right and righteous way; so in repentance, there is a change
from a troubled to a quiet mind, and from a painful to a pleasant and
delightful way. So then, there is a twofold change in repentance; First, A
change of the mind from sin. Secondly, A change in the mind from sorrow. Many
are the griefs and gripes, the troubles and perplexities, with which the
conscience of an awakened sinner is follows, till he has unburdened himself
by confession and repentance; when once he has truly done so, how great is his
peace! and how sweet are his consolations! And therefore, when the Apostle
says (2 Cor. 7.10.) Godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be
repented of; his meaning is, the repentance which it works is matter of great
rejoicing, or fills the soul of an humbled believing sinner with great joy.

I abhor my self (says Job) and repent. But how did Job repent? his was no
ordinary repentance, therefore, he adds, I repent, In dust and ashes.

That is, either;

First, Throwing my self upon the ground, ( Jer. 6.26. Jer. 25.34. 2 Samuel
12.16.) or,

Secondly, Sitting upon the ground in the dust, as ( Job 2.8. Isa. 58.5. Jonah
3.6.) or,

Thirdly, Casting dust upon my head ( Job 2.12.) Dust cast upon the head was
the emblem of an afflicted heart. And to sit in the dust, or to cast dust upon
the head was anciently the ceremonial part of repentance. Job does not leave
that out, I repent (says he) in dust and ashes; Solitis ceremoniis
poenitentiam ag^.
and so some express it, I repent with outward wonted ceremonies. But, I
conceive, we need not take it strictly; to repent in dust and ashes, being only
a proverbial speech, implying very great, solemn, and serious repentance.

There is another rendering of this latter part of the verse, thus, I repent, as
looking upon, or accounting my self dust and ashes; it is an argument of much
humility and humiliation to do so. Abraham gave himself no higher a title
before the Lord ( Genesis 18.27.) I have begun to speak, who am but dust and
ashes. If we take it thus, I abhor my self, and repent, looking upon my self
but as dust and ashes, it is a good sense also, and reaches the purpose which
Job was upon, or which was upon Jobs spirit in that day and duty of repentance.
There is no difficulty in the words, they yield many useful observations:
Wherefore I abhor my self.

First, As the word wherefore refers to that signal discovery which Job had of
God, who did not only manifest himself to him by the hearing of the ear, but by
the seeing of the eye, that is more fully than before;

Observe; The clearer manifestations we have of God, the greater and deeper are
our humiliations.

Job saw more of the power, more of the soveraignity, more of the holiness of
God in himself, and more of his goodness to him, Qui Deum vidit fieri non
potest quin seso accuset contemnat and despiciat; non enim certi^ noveris tuam
impuritatem, quam si divina puritas op osita fuerit. Brent.
than he had done before; and therefore he abhorred himself. That place is
parallel to this ( Isa. 6.) where, as soon as the Lord had declared himself in
his holiness and glory, the Prophet cried out ( ver. 5.) Woe is me, for I am
undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts;
that is, my bodily eyes have see the signs of his presence, and the eye of my
soul is so over-prest, with the present weight of his glory, that I cannot (in
this frail condition) bear it, but must sink under it; Woe is me, I am undone.
As the wicked shall at last cry, woe and alas, at the angry presence of God,
and shall indeed be undone for ever: So a godly man may now cry, Woe is me, at
any unusual appearance of the holiness and glory of God, and cry out, I am
undone, I know not how to bear it. Isaiah was not only a Prophet, and a true
Prophet, but a very holy Prophet, an Evangelical Prophet, one that spoke
glorious things of Christ to come, yet he had never seen so much of God before,
nor was he ever so deeply humbled before, he never cried out before, I am
undone; which word implies the greatest sense of his own nothingness,
vileness, and wretchedness. The true reason why men carry it so high at any
time with God, is, because their notions and apprehensions of God, fall so
infinitely below him. Did we know God more, how should we fear before him, and
stand as men astonished at the presence of his majesty! It is our darkness
about God which emboldens us bey^nd our bounds, or the line of creatures. The
Prophet Habakkuk faith of himself ( chap. 3.16.) When I heard, my belly
trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones, and
I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble. When I heard,
that is, when God revealed himself to me by that speech at the 2d verse of the
chapter, O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was afraid; then said he (at the
16. verse) When I heard, my belly trembled. The reason why carnal men and
hypocrites carry it so stoutly before God, is, because they know not God
aright; they may boast of their knowledge; but as the Apostle says (1 Cor.
8.2.) He that thinks he knows any thing knows nothing as he ought. The
Scripture tells us, what that knowledge is which a carnal man has of God: He
knows God in his own light, not in the light of God; or he judges what God is,
by what himself is ( Psalm. 50.21.) Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a
one as thy self. Not that he thought God was a man; he had not such gross
thoughts of God: but he thought God, as to his holiness, was such a one as
himself, who was indeed, notwithstanding his pretentions to holiness, a very
unholy, a mere carnal man. When the Lord said to him, Thou thoughtest that I
was altogether such a one as thy self; it is, as if he had said, Thou
measuredst me by thy self, and because such things pleased thee, thou would
needs conclude that they pleased me too. Had men a clear knowledge of God, as
he has revealed himself, they would soon be convinced, that God is not only
not altogether, but not at all such a one as themselves. We never see how
imperfect we are, till we see our selves in the light of Gods perfection: and
when we duly see our selves in that glass, we greatly abhor our selves; for we
cannot but see much deformity in our selves, Nusquam so melius deprohendit
modus humanae imperfectionis, quam in lumine vultus Dei; in spe^ulo divinae
visionis, ubi in die qui est plus and plus videns, quid sibi deest, ^mend^t
indies similitudine quicquid deliquit dissimilitudine. Similitudine
appropinquans ei, a quo long factus est dissimilitudine. August. l. 11.
Confess. c. 9.
when we behold the beauty and glory of God. And, as when we behold that
beauty, we shall abhor our selves for our deformity and defilements; so we
shall be daily mending and cleansing our selves from them, according to that
matchless beauty which we behold in him. As we have departed from God by our
unlikeness, so we shall get nearer to him by getting more of his image and
likeness.

Secondly, This wherefore in the Text refers to the fight that Job had of
himself, as well as of God. When Job saw more of himself, or himself more, then
he said, I abhor my self.

Hence, Observe; The more we see and know our selves, the more we shall be
abased, and lie low in our selves, and abhor our selves.

The reason why we are so proud of our selves, is, because we are so ignorant
of our selves. Did we know our own ignorance and mis-understandings, as Job now
at last did, we should strike sail and come lower; much more, did we know all
those abominations that are in our hearts, did we know what pride, and
coveousness, and earthly-mindedness lie there, what inordinate creature, love
what passions lie there, what envy lies there; did we understand how deceitful
and false our hearts are, both toward God, our selves, and toward one
another, we should abhor our selves exceedingly. There are two things which we
should study, that we may walk humbly. First, To know God; Secondly, To know
our selves. A Heathen said that word (know thy self) came down from heaven; and
did we once know our selves aright, what frail, and blind, and sinful creatures
we are, how humble and heavenly should we be! rightly to know that we are
creatures would cause us to live more like new creatures. David s eing some men
do things so unlike men ( Psalm. 9.20.) prayed thus, Put them in fear, O Lord,
that the Nations may know themselves to be but men. There are such in the world
as know not themselves to be but men; they behave themselves as if they were
gods, and not men, as if they were all-sufficient, or as if all their
sufficiency proceeded of themselves, and they the founders of their own
greatness and power. The Assyrian said in plain terms, I will be like unto the
most high, (Isa. 14.14.) I do not reckon my self amongst mortals. There are
many, who never attained that Assyrian Princes height, who yet have much of his
spirit, and speak as if they knew themselves to be more than men, at least, as
if they knew not themselves to be but men, nor considered themselves as frail,
dying, and accountable creatures. Did we remember that we are but creatures,
that we are the work of Gods hand, this would keep us low and humble; but did
we know what sinful polluted creatures we are, we should soon come, not only to
a lower estimate, but an utter abhorrence of our selves. We over-think our
selves, because we do not know our selves; we over-rate our selves, because we
do not understand our selves. Even Job was too high in his own thoughts, in his
own books, till he came to know and understand, that he had uttered things that
he knew not, that he understood not. Wherefore, I abhor my self, and repent in
dust and ashes.

Observe, Thirdly; True repentance is joined with self-abhorrence, and with an
abhorrence of all that we do, of all that we are.

True repentance is joined with an abhorrence,

First, Of sinful self, or of our selves for sin. The Prophet speaking of their
repentance, who had gone a whoring from God, says ( Ezekiel. 6.9.) They shall
loath themselves for the evils which they have committed in all their
abominations. And when the Lord had promised to bring the children of Israel to
their own land, he tells them, what work they shall be at there ( Ezekiel. 20.43.)
There shall you remember your ways and doings, wherein you have been defiled,
and ye shall loath your selves in your own sight, for all the evils that ye
have committed. Once more in that Prophet, ( chap. 36.31.) Then shall ye
remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall
loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your
abominations. In all these Scriptures we have loathing of self for sin and evil
done. And as there is a loathing of sinful self in true repentance, so

Secondly, Of righteous self, or a loathing of our selves in the good, in the
best, that we have done. We may soon see that in the best of our duties, which
will stir up this self-abhorrence, or which gives us cause enough to abhor our
selves. So Job did as to all the glitter of his moral virtues, of which he
spoke so much before in several places, especially in the 31. chapter. He that
truly repents, does not only abhor his sin, so as never to commit it again; but
he abhors his righteousness, so as never to trust in it at all. Thus the
Apostle spoke ( Phil. 3.7, 8.) I count all things but loss for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ. What did he account loss? not only the evil that he
had done, but all the good that he had done; he accounted that but dung, that
he might be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, which is of the
law. Self-righteousness is gold, and to be embraced in conversation; but it is
dung, and to be abhorred in justification. Job abhorred his own righteousness
from the beginning of this dispute in that point, though he spoke so much of it
( chap. 9.31.) If I wash my self with snow water, and make my hands never so
clean, yet shall thou plung me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor
me, or (as in the Margin) my own clothes shall make me to be abhorred. What
means he by his clothes? Surely, not the clothes that were upon his body, but
his moral clothing, his own works of righteousness, according to the law.
These clothes (says he) will make me to be abhorred; I see, I cannot be
accepted in them, nor justified by them. Job was clear in that before; but now
he does not only abhor his own righteousness, as to trusting in it, but as to
talking so much of it, or so much as to talk of it. Christ says, Let not thy
left hand know what thy right hand does; that is, take not much notice of thy
own good deeds. As a repenting person will not touch at all with his former
evil deeds, so he will not talk, nor take much notice of his own good deeds.
The best of himself is little to himself.

Before I pass this point, it may be enquired, First, what this
self-abhorrence, which accompanies true repentance, works in those that have
it, with respect to sin, or sinful self.

I answer, It works these five things.

First, A dislike of sinful self; he grows into a distaste with sin, it
relisheth not his renewed palate, and so will not (like unsavory meat) go down
with him.

Secondly, A hatred of sinful self. It Is but an easy step from distaste and
dislike to hatred. That soon falls under our displeasure which pleases us not.
No sooner did Amnon dislike his sister Tamar, whom he inordinately liked a
little before, but the Text says (2 Samuel 13.15.) He hated her exceedingly, so
that the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater than the love wherewith he
had loved her.

Thirdly, An indignation against sinful self. The spirit of a true penitent
rises against sin, as against an open enemy, or a false friend (2 Cor. 7.11.)

Fourthly, An utter aversation, or alienation from sinful self. As they who
live in sin are averse and alienated from the life of God, that is, from
holiness; so they who repent of sin, are alienated and turned away from the
sins of their former life.

Fifthly and lastly, An opposition against sin. There is not barely a turning
away from it, but a war against it, a desire to destroy and mortify it, to do
it (as I may say) the greatest mischief we can. Thus dislike is followed with
hatred, and hatred with indignation, and indignation with aversation, and
aversation with opposition, wrought and rising up in a penitent soul against
sin.

But, Secondly, it may be asked, why does a repenting soul abhor sinful self?

I answer, He does it upon these four considerations.

First, Because it appears to him as a filthy thing ( Ezekiel. 16.5. Psalm. 38.7.
Prove. 12.22.) All which Scriptures show, that as sin is a filthy thing in it
self, so it appears such to a repenting soul. They that love their sins, look
upon them as fine things, or as their beauty: but to a repenting soul, nothing
appears more dirty and filthy; and who abhors not that which is so to him?

Secondly, A repenting soul looks upon sin as a hurtful thing to him. We
naturally turn from, and abhor that which is so. We abhor the poison of a Toad,
and the sting of a Serpent: To taste the one, or to be bitten by the other, is
no more deadly to the body, than sin is to the soul.

Thirdly, A repenting soul is sick, very sick of his sins, they have burdened
his conscience, as unwholsom food does the stomach. Now, if a man abhors that
which has made him stomack-sick, much more will he abhor that which has
indeed, and not so much from the quantity as from the quality and nature of it,
made him conscience-sick.

Fourthly, A repenting person has vomited or cast up his sins by an humble
confession of them always to God, and in some cases to men (Repentance is the
souls vomit.) Now, as any man loathes his own vomit; so a man truly repenting,
loathes the sin which he has thus vomited. Upon all these accounts a repenting
soul loathes sinful self, or sin in himself.

Thirdly, But why does a repenting soul abhor righteous self? I answer,

First, Because he is convinced, that self-righteousness is a weak imperfect
thing, even in sanctification; and therefore he is so far from boasting of it,
or trusting in it, that he has a kind of abhorrence of it.

Secondly, He sees, that as to justification it is a filthy abominable thing (
Isa. 64.6.) All our righteousness are as filthy rags. And as he abhors it,
because it is unfit and incompetent in it self for that use, so because it is
utterly inconsistent with the tenor of the Gospel, wherein God has removed
all man's righteousness, how pure soever it may be, from that use, and directed
us to look only to the righteousness of Christ for that use, which the Apostle
calls the righteousness of God (Romans 10.3.) and that in a twofold respect.
First, because it is that which the wisdom of God the Father has provided for
us; and, Secondly, which the worthiness of God the Son has wrought out and
procured for us.

Take two or three Inferences from the general Observation thus far prosecuted,
That true repentance is joined with self abhorrence.

First, Then self-admirers are no repenters. They are at the furthest remove
from abhorring themselves, who admire themselves.

Secondly, Self-justifiers, are no true repenters. Christ told the Pharisees (
Luke 16.15.) Ye are they which justify your selves. They are far from
abhorring themselves, who justify themselves; such surely are highly pleased
with themselves, and have much confidence in themselves, therefore very far
from self-abhorrence.

Thirdly, What shall I say of their repentance, who instead of abhorring
themselves, abhor others? ( Luke 18.9.) Christ spoke a Parable unto certain
which trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others, and
presently instanced in the Pharisee, who despised the poor Publican, and called
him in contempt, This Publican; he would (as we say) hardly touch him with a
pair of tongs. They that despise others, are usually, if not always, much
pleased with themselves.

Fourthly, If these self-boasters, and self-admirers, etc. are not repenters,
then, do they repent who are so far from abhorring sinful self, and righteous
self, that they take pleasure in sin and unrighteousness, whether their own or
others? The Apostle speaks of such ( Romans 1.32.) Who knowing the judgment of
God, that they which commit such things, are worthy of death, not only do the
same, but have pleasure in them that do them. That Is a dreadful word (2 These.
2.12.) That they all might be damned, who believe not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness. O how far are they from abhorring their own
righteousness, who take pleasure in unrighteousness! How are they puffed up
with that which has but a show of righteousness, who please themselves with
that which is really unrighteous!

Fifthly, If true repentance be accompanied with self-abhorrence, then do they
repent, who return to those sins which they say they have repented of? do you
think the dog loathes his vomit, when you see him go back and lick it up again?
(2 Pet. 2.22.) When once the Jews loathed or abhorred Manna, they had no mind
to eat of it, though it was Angels food. When Job loathed his life, he said, he
would live no longer (Chap. 7.16.) I loath it, I would not live always; that
is, not at all, not an hour longer in this world. He that is weary of his life,
thinks, to live but a day, or a little longer, is to live always, or that his
life will never end. Thus, if a man does truly loath and abhor his sin, he will
not return to it again, though it has been as sweet to him as Manna, yea, as
life it self. I do not say, that he who loathes and abhors his sin, can never
relapse into the same sin, or be overtaken with it again; but this I say, he
that truly repents, never delights in sin again, he never goes back to it, and
licketh it up as a dog his vomit. A good man may fall into the same sin, but he
never returns to the same sin; he may be overtaken with the same sin, but he
never takes up the same sin again. That Is the Apostles word ( Gal. 6.1.) If
any of you be overtaken with a fault, etc. A good man may be overtaken with the
same fault, but he never takes up that fault, nor runs a course in that sin
again.

I shall only add these two words, for the working of our souls to this
self-abhorrence.

First, The more we abhor our selves, the more God delights in us; the more
we are displeased with our sins, the more is he pleased with our persons, the
worse, the viler we are in our own eyes, the better we are, and the more
beautiful in the eye of God.

Secondly, Unless we abhor our selves, God will abhor us. I may say, unless we
so repent as to abhor our selves, God will abhor our very repentance. There is
no true repentance, without some degree of self-abhorrence; yea, of
self-condemnation. Let us not take up this word repentance too easily, that is,
when we know not what this word self-abhorrence means. We defile this holy,
this precious thing called repentance, when our hearts are not fully taken off
from that or thole sins, of which we say we repent. All such would have that go
for repentance toward God, which indeed is but a mocking of God, and can never
be joined (from which true repentance cannot be separated) with faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ ( Acts 20.21.) I abhor my self (said Job) And repent in
dust and ashes.

I shall here give somewhat about the nature of repentance in general, and then
gather up those particular Observations which arise from these words about it.

Repentance is a grace of the Gospel wrought in the heart of a sinner by the
Word and Spirit, turning the whole man from all sin, to God, in the sincere and
universal obedience of his holy will. In this description of repentance, we
have four things considerable.

First, The nature of it, or what it is, A grace of the Gospel.

Secondly, The seat of it, or where it is wrought, The heart of a sinner.

Thirdly, The means by which it is wrought, and that twofold. First,
Instrumental, The Word. Secondly, Principal, The Spirit.

Fourthly, The issue or effect of it, Conversion or turning; wherein two things
are to be taken notice of. First, the term from which the turn is made, Sin,
and all sin. Secondly, the term to which the turn is made, God; thus explained,
In the sincere or universal obedience of his holy will, or in the practice of
every known duty.

First (I say) Repentance is a grace of the Gospel. Some possibly may say, Job
was before the Gospel. I answer, no; The Gospel was published long before Job
was born, even as soon as God promised the seed of the woman (Christ Jesus)
should bruise the Serpents head (Genesis 3.15.)

The whole body of Gospel duty moves upon these two feet, Faith and Repentance.
Some have questioned, which of these two graces has the precedence, or takes
the first step in the motion of the soul heavenward? All that I shall say in
answer to it, is, First, that where these two graces are mentioned together in
Scripture, usually repentance is named first, because it appears first, and is
most visible to us in its actings; yet Faith is to be understood first, because
without that no man can come to Christ as a true penitent, for pardon of sin
and reconciliation unto God. Secondly, in those Scriptures, where true saving
repentance is spoken of alone, it supposes faith also; and where true saving
faith only is spoken of, it necessarily implies true repentance.

This repentance is so much a grace of the Gospel, that the first Sermon that
ever was preached at the approach of Christ, or at the opening of the Gospel in
the new Testament, was, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand (Mat.
3.2.) And the end or design of the first Sacrament or seal of the
Gospel Covenant, is expressed to be repentance ( Mat. 3.11.) I baptize you with
water unto repentance; yea, the first word of the first Sermon (upon record)
which Christ himself preached in person, was, Repent (Mat. 4.17.) From that
time Jesus began to preach, and to say, repent. This also was the substance of
the Apostles Sermons, when first sent forth by Christ to preach the Gospel (
Mark 6.12.) They went out and preached, that men should repent. The first word
of counsel which the Apostle Peter gave to the Jews, crying out, men and
brethren, what shall we do, was, Repent (Acts 2.38.) And the Apostle Paul
says, that the whole of his work in preaching the Gospel, was his testifying
both to Jews and Gentiles, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ (Act. 20.21.) It Is through the Gospel only, that repentance is
possible. And this appears two ways.

First, Because we have not a liberty to repent, or we are not admitted to
repent, but by the Gospel. We find no place for repentance in the Law strictly
taken, or as opposed to the Gospel. The Law speaks thus ( Gal. 3.10.) Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things, that are written in the book of
the Law, to do them. Where we see, First, the Law requires personal obedience;
every one must do for himself. Secondly, The Law requires perpetual obedience,
every one that continues not doing. Thirdly, The Law requires universal
obedience, every one that continues not in all things. If any one continue not
at all times in all things (says the Law) or if he fail but once in any one
thing, he is gone for ever, he is cursed. The Law does not say, if a man
continue not to do all, let him repent; that admits no second thoughts, but
claps the curse presently upon the offender. If Adam as soon as he had eaten of
the forbidden tree, had bewailed his sin, and said, I repent, no favor could
have been showed him, while under the Law.

Secondly, Under the Law there is no ability given for repentance. All the
promises of a broken heart, and of godly sorrow, are appendants of the Gospel.
This spiritual curse which falls upon the soul sinning under the Law, is
impenitency for sin. Death in sin, is the punishment of sin; and therefore when
Adam had sinned, he never gave the least intimation of, nor showed the least
inclination to repentance; all he did, was to hide himself from God among the
trees of the garden, and to hide his sin from God (as well as he could) by vain
excuses; he had not a heart to mourn for his sin, nor a tongue to confess it,
till the Promise came, and the Gospel was published, and then (though his
repentance be not mentioned, yet) doubtless he repented. And hence the Apostle
concludes Apostates from the profession which they once made of Christ, under
an utter impossibily of repentance ( Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.) And the reason why the
fallen Angels never repented, was because they had no Mediator, nor did Jesus
Christ take their nature on him ( Heb. 2.16.) Thus far of the first thing in
the description of repentance, the general nature of it; it is a grace of the
Gospel.

Secondly, Consider the seat or subject of it, where it is wrought, the heart of
a sinner. Repentance is heart-work, or it is a work upon the heart: There
repentance began in those converts ( Act. 2.37.) whom the Apostle Peter advised
to a thorough work of repentance ( verse. 38.) The promise of repentance runs in
this tenor, I will take away (says the Lord, Ezekiel. 36.26.) the heart of stone
out of your flesh, and give you an heart of flesh. When David said ( Psalm.
51.17.) A broken and contrite heart (he means only a repenting heart) O God
thou will not despise. As faith is wrought in the heart, and with the heart man
believes (Romans 10.10.) so repentance is wrought in the heart, and with the
heart man repents. Neither a weeping eye, nor a confessing tongue, nor (in
case of wrong done to man) a restoring hand, will be taken for repentance,
without a broken heart.

Thirdly, Consider the means by which saving repentance, or repentance to
salvation, is wrought. 1st. the Word; 2ly. the Spirit. The Word of God is the
usual, the ordinary instrument in the hand, that is, in the power of the Spirit
of God, working repentance in the heart of man. The word of a Philosopher, with
all his reasonings; the word of an Orator, with all his flourishings, cannot do
it: only the Word of God spoken in plainness and simplicity, has strength and
efficacy to do it. The Word is compared to a fire, which melts the hardest
heart; it is also in the same place ( Jer. 23.29.) compared to a hammer, which
breaks the rock in pieces. The Word passing through the ear, pierces the
heart ( Acts 2.27.) Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart.
And when, even the devils Devotionists, they that used curious arts, burnt
their books (Acts 19.19.) it is said ( verse. 20.) so mightily grew the Word of
God and prevailed. The word of God clothed with the Spirit, has (as to this
matter) a fourfold operation. First, to awaken a drowsy soul ( Ephesians. 5.14.)
Secondly, to enlighten a dark soul ( Acts 26.18.) Thirdly, to convince a
gainsaying soul. Fourthly, to convert a wandering soul ( Acts 26.18. 1 These.
1.9.) Till the soul is awakened, it cannot be enlightened; till it is
enlightened, it cannot be convinced; till it is convinced, it cannot be
converted; and until it is all this, it has not truly repented. For,

Fourthly, (as was said in the description first laid down) the effect of true
repentance, is the turning of the whole man from all sin to God. All the
members of the body, the hand, the foot, the eyes, the ears, the tongue, are
turned; all the faculties of the soul, the understanding, will, affections, are
turned from all sin: First, of what kind soever, whether of omission or
commission against God, neighbor, self. Secondly, of what degree soever;
little, as well as great; appearances of evil, as well as apparent evils.

Further, as in repentance there is a turning from sin, so unto God, in the
sincere obedience of his whole will. We read in Scripture, First, of Gods
returning to us; Secondly, of our returning to God: both are acts of
repentance. When God returns to us, he repents of the evil of trouble brought,
or threatened to be brought upon us; and when we return to God, that is a fruit
of our repentance, for the evil of sin committed against him. Unless our
repentance bring us nearer to God, we (as we say) are never the near for our
repentance; that is, our repentance is not good, nor shall we have any good by
it. The Prophet found Isreal's repentance defective in this ( Hos. 7.16.) They
return, but not to the most high. Some in repenting, return only to self; that
is, their own peace, interest and advantage, is all that moves them to it, or
is designed and aimed at by them in it; they mind not the glory of God, nor his
reparation in honor, which has been by their sin greatly impaired. The Lord
was downright with Israel in this ( Jer. 4.1.) If thou will return, O Israel,
says the Lord, return unto me; intimating, that Israel used to make some kind
of repenting turns, but short of God; they minded not God sincerely in them,
but the removal of some rod or trouble that was come, or which they feared was
coming upon them. They return to God in repenting, who repent with a holy
resolve upon their hearts to obey God, and with a longing desire to enjoy God
all the days of their life.

Thus upon the occasion of Jobs saying, I repent, I have briefly opened the
duty of repentance, of such a repentance as without all peradventure Job was
then exercised in: His was the grace of repentance, his repentance was wrought
in his heart, chiefly by the immediate word and speakings of God to him; He
turned fully in it from all his passions and expostulations with God (which
were at that time his special sin) to a meek, quiet submission to the will of
God, and a resting in his dispensations. All this was wrapped up in this short
word, I repent.

Further, consider, when Job said, I repent in dust and ashes; he was not then
to begin his repentance, he had repented long before; yet then he began a new
work of repentance, or then he renewed his repentance.

Hence note, First; New sinnings call for new repentings.

As the new leakings of a ship calls for new pumpings and repairs; so, I say,
new sins call for new repentings. There is a first repentance, and there is a
second repentance: First Repentance is our coming out of a state of sin, of
which Christ spoke ( Mat. 11.20, 21.) Then began he to upbraid the Cities,
wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not: Woe unto
you Chorazin, and woe unto you Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which were
done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago
in sackcloth and ashes; that is, they had come out of their sins. Those
converts in the Acts of the Apostles (chap. 2.38.) repented, that is, they came
out of a sinful state. Now, as there is a repentance, which I call our coming
out of a state of sin; so there is a repentance, which is a coming off from
this and that act of sin; and this is the repentance which Job was upon.

Again; this repentance, as to acts of sin, is twofold. First, Our ordinary
and every days repentance. Secondly, Our extraordinary repentance. When we have
fallen greatly, when we have sinned extraordinary, of when the Lord brings any
extraordinary judgment upon us, then the Lord expects extraordinary repentance:
such was David's repentance in the 51. Psalm, and such was Jobs repentance here;
as it was in general for sin, so for some extraordinary sinful failings.

Secondly, Consider what was Jobs sin? Job was no vile person, he had committed
no gross acts of wickedness. If you would know what Jobs sin was, it was
impatience under Gods dealings with him, and his distrustfulness as to Gods
delivering of him; yet even his were great sins.

Hence note; Not only gross sins, murder, adultery, and the oppression of our
neighbors are great sins; but impatiency under the hand of God, and unwary
speeches concerning the dealings of God with us, are great sins.

Every great sin is not a gross sin. Drunkenness, and swearing and adultery,
and murder, are gross sins; but impatience under afflictions and unbelief, not
resting upon God in an evil day, these are great sins, though not gross sins.
Remember, not only are gross sins great sins; but many sins, which appear not
to the eye, nor to the ear, may yet be great sins, especially, as to the person
that commits them.

Thirdly, note; Not gross sins only, but slips of the tongue, and impatiency
under Gods hand are to be repented of.

Job not only acknowledged these to be sins, but repents of these; nor had he
any other matter to repent of. When we are under some great sickness, or any
other affliction, as we are to repent of former sins, so let us repent of our
sickness and affliction-sins, that is of impatience, or any unwary speeches in
our affliction. These Job repented of.

Again; how did Job repent? It was in dust and ashes.

Hence Observe, Fourthly; Open sins must have open repentance.

That Is intended by repenting in dust and ashes. We are not bound to repent
openly of all our sins; but in in these two cases we are. First, When we have
done any thing that has openly dishonored God. Secondly, When we have
scandalized or offended others. In these cases we must repent openly, so far,
that they who are concerned may have a testimony of our repentance. When Job
repented in dust and ashes, he (like those servants of Benhadad, who came with
ropes about their necks) testified that he deserved to be thrown into the dust,
or to be burnt to ashes. We can neither edify nor satisfy such as are grieved
by our sins, unless our repentance be visible, and we appear repenting. As the
light (of our zeal) must so shine before men, that they may see our good works;
so the light of our repentance must so shine before men, that they may see us
humbled for, and turning from our evil works, and glorify our father which is
in heaven.

Fifthly, Note; We may testify our repentance by outward signs.

Here was not only the reallity of repentance, but the ceremony of it. There
are many outward signs of repentance spoken of in Scripture: Such are, First,
Smiting upon the thigh; thus Ephraim is described repenting ( Jerem. 31.19.)
Secondly, Smiting upon the breast; so the Publican is described repenting (
Luke 18.13.) He smote upon his breast, and said, God be merciful to me a
sinner. Thirdly, Laying aside our ornaments; thus the Lord commanded the
Israelites (Exodus 33.5.) Put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know to do
unto thee; as if God had said, humble thy self openly and repent. F^urthly, The
putting on of sackcloth; this the Jews were called to do ( Isa. 22.12.)
Fifthly, Holding down the head. The Jews (Isa. 58.5.) were not reproved for
doing that, but because they did it like a bull-rush, only when a storm was
upon them: Sixthly, Renting the garment, and walking softly. So did Ahab (1
Kings 21.27.) Seventhly, as in the text Job says he did, sitting in dust and
ashes. I do not say these, or the like, are absolutely necessary to repentance,
but they are lawful, and have their use. When the Prophet ( Joel 2.13.) said,
Rent your hearts, not your garments, that is, rent your hearts, rather than
your garments; it was not a prohibition, but a direction: or if rent your
garments, be sure you rent your hearts also, else all your outward modes of
repentance are in vain and insignificant. Bellarminus l. 1. de poenitentio c.
7. SS. percurramus.
Some Popish Writers make the essence of repentance to consist in these or such
like outward signs; but though we deny that, yet we grant these may be signs of
true repentance: For as to bow the knee is not to pray, although he that
prays usually boweth the knees, as a sign of an humble heart in prayer; so to
sit in the dust and weep, is not to repent, although the truly penitent,
usually do so. The essence of repentance consists in a broken heart for sin,
and in breaking off the course and custom of sin, turning to God fully.

Further, this outward ceremony of sitting in dust and ashes, intimates the
greatness of Jobs repentance, or that he repented greatly, under a deep sense
of, and with bitter mournings for his former miscarriages in the time of his
affliction.

Hence note, Sixthly; A soul truly humbled makes a very serzous work of
repentance.

Poenitet me ex enime, and studiosissime, quod illis externa symbolis
significabatur. Jun.
It is a common thing to say, I repent; but few know what it is to repent in
dust and ashes. They who repent indeed, judge, arraign and condemn themselves
as at Gods tribunal, they put their mouths in the very dust. Repentan^e is
heart work, and deep work* they who are brought in a spiritual sense to dust
and ashes, find it so. Though some sinners corrupt themselves and their ways,
more deeply than others, yet all sin is of a deep dye, and corrupts deeply, and
therefore calls for deep, for heart-deep mournings and repentings in dust and
ashes.

Note, Seventhly; God will not give over dealing with his sinning servants,
till he has brought them to true contrition for their sins.

How long was Job dealt with by his friends, and by Elihu, and by God himself,
before his heart was wrought into this frame and temper, to repent in dust and
ashes? It was long before he understood that God might break in innocent person
to pieces, and give no account why. God did not give over afflicting Job, till
he came to that acknowledgment. Job said ( Chap. 40.4.) I am vile; and it might
be thought, that had been repentance sufficient: But though Job was then
brought low, yet he was not brought low enough: he cried, I am vile, but till
God spoke to him of Behemoth and Leviathan he repented not in dust and ashes.
Ephraim said ( Jer. 31.18, 19.) Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as
a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; thou
art the Lord my God. Surely, after that I was turned, I repented; and after
that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, yea, even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. The Lord never left
smiting Ephraim, till he made him smite upon his thigh. If we do not come home
in the work of repentance, by words, God will fetch us home with his rods.

In the eighth place; If we consider this repentance of Job, with what
follows presently upon it, his restoration,

Observe; When we are deeply humbled and brought low, we are near our
exaltation.

When Job lay in dust and ashes, God was about to set him upon a mountain, a
mountain of prosperity, and that a higher one than ever he was upon before (
Psalm. 126.5, 6.) They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy; they that go forth
weeping, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing,
bringing their sheaves with them. Therefore take the Apostles counsel (1 Pet.
5.6.) Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God (and what then?) he will
exalt you in due time. The due time of our lifting up is at hand, when we are
laid low and sincerely humbled under the hand of God. Jobs humiliation and
restoration did almost synchronize, or come near in time together.

Ninthly, Note; True repentance ends in true joy.

The word which signifies to be grieved, signifies also to rejoice; and Job
found it so, he was comforted as soon as fully humbled. Repentance issues in
joy three ways.

First, There is joy in heaven when a sinner repents ( Luke 15.7.) As he that
found his lost sheep brought it home, and rejoiced in it more than over the
ninety and nine that did not go astray: So (says Christ) there is joy in
heaven over one sinner that repents, more than over ninety and nine just
persons that need no repentance. True sorrow on earth makes joy in heaven.

Secondly, There is joy in the Church; The godly on earth rejoice at the known
repentance of a sinner. When the prodigal son came home, his father said to his
discontented brother, It was meet that we should make merry and be glad; for
this thy brother was dead, and is alive again, he was lost, and is found. The
Apostle greatly rejoiced at the repentance of the Corinthians (2 Cor. 7.9.) Now
I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that you sorrowed to repentance.
Their sorrow occasioned his joy, yet not that, but their repentance was the
cause of it. There is no better joy on earth, than that which arises out of
the dust of repenting sorrows. As the Apostle John had no greater joy than to
hear that his (spiritual) children walked in the truth (Ephesians. 3.4.) So, what
greater joy can we have, than to see any who had gone astray from, returning to
the truth?

Thirdly, Repentance issues in joy chiefly to the soul repenting. If other
men's repentance causes our joy, our own will cause it much more (2 Cor. 7.10.)
Godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of. The
Apostles meaning is more than he speaks; repentance not to be repented of, is
repentance to be rejoiced and gloried in. We cannot take comfort in our sins,
but we may take much comfort in repenting for our sins, as that repentance is
joined with faith in Christ, who has given us power to repent, and who is for
himself to be rejoiced in.

Lastly, Take this general note from the whole matter.

The speakings of God to man, whether mediate or immediate, are mighty and
effectual. The speaking of man to man barely can do nothing, but the speaking
of man to man in the power of God will do much; how much more if God himself
speak! God spoke to Job, and these mighty effects followed.

First, Self-abhorrence.

Secondly, Deep repentance.

Thirdly, Full submission to the will of God.

Fourthly, A readiness to testify, by all due means, how vile, how miserable
he was; yet cleaving fast to, and depending fully upon God, by faith in the
promise, for mercy, peace, and pardon.

Fifthly, A change both of mind and manners, both in thought, word and way. Job
thought no more as he had done, he spoke no more as he had done, he acted no
more as he had done in that condition, he was another manner of man than
before; a good man he was before, but now a better; he came out of the fire of
that affliction, and off from the heat of that long disputation, as gold well
refined.

So much of this verse, which concludes the first part of the chapter, Jobs
humiliation: the second follows, his friends reconciliation both to God and
himself.

The Reader may here please to take notice, that from the beginning of the
third chapter to this place, the writing is in verse; the latter part of the
chapter and book is prose.

JOB, Chap. 42. Verse. 7, 8, 9. 7. And it was so, that after the Lord had spoken
these words unto Job, the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, my wrath is
kindled against thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me
the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.

8. Therefore take unto you now seven bullocks, and seven rams, and go to my
servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt-offering, and my servant Job
shall pray for you, for him will I accept, lest I deal with you after your
folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing which is right, like my
servant Job.

9. So Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite
went, and did according as the Lord commanded them: the Lord also accepted Job.


THese three verses contain the second part of the chapter, in which the Lord,

First, Reproves Jobs three friends (ver. 7.)

Secondly, Directs them what to do for the making up of the breach, or for
their reconciliation (ver. 8.)

Thirdly, Accepts them; that is, Job, praying for them, the breach was healed,
and they reconciled (ver. 9.)

So then, here God appears as a Judge of the cause, and as a moderator of the
controversy between Job and his friends; and he appeared as a gracious judge,
ready to be reconciled to those whom he had blamed, and reproved for their
folly and misapprehensions of him, in his afflicting providence toward Job.

Verse. 7. And it was so, that after the Lord had spoken these words unto Job,
the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, my wrath is kindled against thee, and
against thy two friends; for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right,
as my servant Job has. In this verse we have the divine Judgment given in
Jobs case, and in it there are four things considerable.

First, The time or season of it, thus expressed; And it was so, that after the
Lord had spoken these words unto Job.

Secondly, The manner of it; The Lord said, he declared his mind.

Thirdly, The special person with whom the Lord dealt, and whom he chose out to
declare his mind respectively to the other two; Eliphaz the Temanite.

Fourthly, The decree or judgment it self, in which we may consider two things.

First, The matter of it; My wrath (says the Lord) is kindled against thee,
and thy two friends; I am not pleased with any of you, yea, I am highly
displeased, My wrath is kindled.

Secondly, The ground of it, plainly expressed in these words; For ye have not
spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has. As if the Lord
had said, if you would know the reason why I am so angry, it is this; Ye have
not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.

Thus we have the state of these three verses, and the parts of this seventh,
wherein God appears as a determiner of this long disputed controversy,
between Job and his three friends.

And it was so, that after the Lord had spoken these words unto Job. Here is
the time when the Lord gave this judgment, that is the first thing to be
considered in this verse; and it may be questioned, whether the Lord gave this
Judgment immediately after he had concluded his speech with Job, and Job had
made his confession to the Lord? or whether there were some space of time
between? The word after may be either presently after, or a good while after;
here is no express limitation of the time, it being only said, After the Lord
had spoken these words unto Job.

Some conceive it was a good while after God had done with Job, that he took
his friends to task, and they ground it upon those words, in the 8th verse,
Take unto you seven Bullocks, and seven Rams, and go to my servant Job: And it
is said at the 9th verse, That they went and did according to what the Lord had
commanded. Hence they collect, that Jobs friends were either returned quite
home, or far upon their way, when the Lord spoke this.

But this reason has no force in it, to prove that Jobs friends were absent;
and therefore I rather conclude, that God spoke to, and gave this judgment of
Jobs friends (as it were) upon the place, as soon as he had done with Job; for
it is more than probable, that Jobs friends stayed to hear both Elihu's speech,
and the discourse which the Lord made to Job out of the whirlwind; and that as
soon as he had done, and Job submitted, he presently passed this sentence for
the comfort of Job, and for the conviction of his friends.

So then, as soon as the Lord had spoken these words, and finished his business
with Job, when he had humbled Job, when Job had repented and confessed his
fault, in uttering things that he understood not, God proceeded presently to
deal with Jobs three friends. There are three things which give evidence to
this.

First, The Lord would not let them continue long in their hard opinion of Job.

Secondly, If they had continued any long time unreproved, they might possibly
have gloried as if they had got the victory, and had the better of Job.

Thirdly, They might have raised some undue report of Job, and have blamed him
among others where they came, as they had done to his face; therefore, the Lord
to prevent their continuing in any hard opinion of Job, or that they had got
the better of Job, or to stop their mouths from giving forth any hard words of
Job, presently called them to an account, gave them to understand, that they
had spoken amiss, and he, as it were, with the same breath comforted Job, and
convicted his three friends.

Hence note, First; God does every thing in its proper season.

That which is seasonably done, is doubly done. Words in season, are like
apples of gold, in pictures of silver; and therefore the Lord, who knows all
seasons, will do and speak in season, and take the fittest season for every
work and word, for every thing he either does or says. This should teach us to
mind the due timing, both of our actions and speeches, especially of our
reproofs; we should not let those who have committed a fault, go too long
unreproved, lest they think themselves faultless, and that we approve them, or
at least that their fault is small, and almost faultless. We must not suffer
sin upon our brother (Lev. 19.17.) But it may be said, how shall we hinder it?
That Text tells us how, Thou shall in any wise rebuke him. Though a man that is
rebuked may keep his sin upon him, and continue in it, notwithstanding our
severest and discreetest rebukes; yet he that rebukes a sinning brother, does
not suffer sin upon him, but has done his duty, and used the means appointed
by God for the removing of it. And as we should not let the Sun go down upon
our wrath against other men, nor give place to the devil in our selves ( Ephesians.
4.26.27.) so we should not suffer the Sun to go down upon the sin of other men,
nor give place to the devil in them, by our forbearance to rebuke them for
their sin. Thus the Lord dealt with Jobs three friends; he speedily reproved
them for their error, in not speaking of him the thing that was right.

Further consider, The Lord begins with Job, and then proceeds to deal with his
friends; Job had the first reproof, his friends the second.

Hence note; The Lord reproves them first, whom he respects most, who are
dearest to him.

We cannot show our selves more friendly to any man, than by an early reproof
of his error, or as the word is ( Lev. 19.17.) by not suffering sin upon him.
It Is a mercy (when we reprove not our selves) to meet with a reproof (though
late) from others; but to be soon reproved, is much mercy. Every good, the
sooner it comes to us, the better it is. To be helped out of sin-evil, is a
great good; and therefore, when we are in a fault with others, it is a
privilege to be reproved before others, and with all possible speed to be
brought unto repentance. The Apostle Peter says (1 Pet. 4.17.) Judgment
begins at the house of God. The Lord judges his own house, before he judges
the world: and it is in mercy to his own house, that he does so; for when God
judges those of his house, he chastneth them, that they should not be
condemned with the world (1 Cor. 10.32.) And as God usually begins to judge his
own house before he judges the world, so the nearer and dearer any of his
house are to him, the sooner he begins with them; as here, Jobs three friends,
Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar, were of Gods house, but Job was more eminent than
any of them, and therefore God reproved him, before he reproved them. It was
so, that after the Lord had spoken these words unto Job, The Lord said to
Eliphaz the Temanite, my wrath is kindled against thee, etc.

The Lord said.



These words contain the second thing to be considered in this verse, to wit,
the manner of proceeding, He said; that is, he openly declared it, he did not
whisper it in the ear of Eliphaz, he did not speak it to him inwardly by his
Spirit (there are inward reproofs, conscience-checks) he did not speak to him
in his sleep, or in a dream (that opinion of one upon this place, that God
reproved Eliphaz in a dream, is but a dream) but openly, that all might hear,
and so the innocence of Job, and the fault of his friends, might be manifest to
all. Some are of opinion, that the Lord said this to Eliphaz out of the
whirlwind, as he spoke to Job. And though I do not assert that, yet it cannot
be denied, but that as such a manner of speaking did best suit the Majesty of
God, so the matter spoken, which was a sore reproof, in which the Lord
manifested much displeasure. The Lord said, openly and and angerly To Eliphaz
the Temanite.

He spoke not to Bildad, nor to Zophar, but to Eliphaz the Temanite. But why
did the Lord direct his speech to him personally, and by name, while the
business concerned them all? I might answer as some do, because what any one of
them said to Job, was as if said by them all: And though their opinions
differed, yet their persons did not, all three agreeing in this (though upon
several grounds) to oppose Job. And therefore the Lord in speaking to one,
spoke to them all.

But I shall give three other Reasons for it, and from each a Note.

First, Eliphaz was the elder man, the graver person, as all agree, and
therefore God reproved him personally.

Note this from it; The elder and greater any are, the greater is their
offense, when they offend, though others offend with them.

When many are in a fault, the chiefs or heads of them are most faulty, and
deserve chiefly to hear of it. When Israel had committed that great sin in
Baal-peor (Numb. 25.4.) The Lord said, Hang up the heads of the people before
me, that is, the chiefs of the people. So, in proportion, when the Lord came to
deal with these three, he fell upon Eliphaz first, as the more eminent or first
of the three.

Secondly, as Eliphaz was the elder or first of the three, so he began first
with Job; he was not only the first and chief in person, but he was the first
and chief speaker.

Hence note; They who are first in a fault, shall be first in reproof.

It is dangerous to follow, or be a second in a bad matter, but more, to begin
and be leader.

Thirdly, Eliphaz was more sharp with, and violent against Job, than the other
two, and therefore the Lord began with him.

Hence note; The deeper any are in a fault, of any kind, and the more of the
heart appears in it, the worse it is, the more blameworthy are they, and they
shall be more blamed for it.

All the three friends of Job did much mistake him, but the spirit of Eliphaz
was hottest, therefore the Lord culled him out first. The Lord said to Eliphaz
the Temanite.

What said the Lord?

My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends.

My wrath is kindled.

These words are used by Elihu (Chap. 32.2, 3.) Then was kindled the wrath of
Elihu, the son of Barachel the Buzite; against Job was his wrath kindled, and
against his three friends was his wrath kindled. Here the Lord takes up the
same words concerning Eliphaz, My wrath is kindled against thee and thy two
friends. Elihu's wrath was kindled, not only against Jobs friends, but against
Job himself; but the Lords wrath was kindled only against Jobs three friends,
not against Job. He indeed displeased God, and was sharply reproved by him; but
the wrath of God was not kindled against him. It Is useful to consider the
difference between Gods judgment and man's, both as to things and persons.
Elihu thought Job was faulty as his friends, and therefore his wrath was
kindled, as against his three friends, so against him too; but the Lord thought
otherwise, and therefore said to Eliphaz, My wrath is kindled against thee and
thy two friends; he said not so to Job.

Again, consider the Lord spoke much with Job, but he spoke little with his
friends, he did not vouchsafe them any long discourse; and the words he spoke
to them, were very hot words; he in few words (as angry men use to do) told
them their own.

Once more consider, the difference of the Lords dealing with him and them. The
Lord fetched a great compass to reprove Job, as Nathan the Prophet did to
reprove King David; but he told his friends at first word, My wrath is kindled
against you. Though they were good men, yet not so dear to God as Job, and
therefore he dealt in a more fatherly and favorable way with Job, than with
them; (...) Exarsit incensus, inflammatus est. Inter septem voculas Hebraeorum,
quae iram significant, haec omnium est gravissima. Scult.
they had only hot words, My wrath is kindled against you, etc. I am more than
angry. As the coals of spiritual love (spoken of, Cant. 8.6.) so the coals of
divine wrath are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame. There are
seven words in the Hebrew language which signify anger, and this notes the
most vehement of them all.

My wrath is kindled. The Latin words Ira and Irasco, seem to be derived from
it. The word is sometimes applied to grief (there is a kind of fire in grief.)
Thus it is said (1 Samuel 15.11.) It grieved Samuel, and he cried unto the Lord
all night. Samuel was vehemently grieved, because of the ill performance of
Saul in his expedition against the Amalakites. It Is also translated to fret
(Psalm. 37.8, 9.) Fret not thy self in any wise to do evil; fretting has its
burning.

My wrath (says the Lord) is kindled. There is a wrath of God, which is not
kindled, as I may say, it is not blown up, it is covered in the ashes of his
patience and forbearance; but here, says God, My wrath is kindled. This is
spoken by God after the manner of men. God feels no change by wrath or anger,
no impression is made on him by any passion: Wrath in God, notes only his
change of dispensations toward man, not any in himself. When he acts like a
man whose wrath is greatly kindled, then it is said, his wrath is kindled; as
when he acts like a man that shows much love, it may be said, his love is
kindled.

Further, when God says, My wrath is kindled, it implies there is some great
provocation given him by man, as in the present case Eliphaz and his two
friends had done. The Lord threatened a sinful Land with brimstone, and salt,
and burning, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah; and, this being
executed, all Nations shall say, wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this
Land? what means the heat of this great anger? Then men shall say, because
they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers, etc. ( Deuteronomy.
29.23, 24, 25.) The wrath of God is never kindled till blown, and that which
blows it up is man's sin; nor does the ordinary sins of man kindle the wrath
of God, for then it must be always kindled, even against the best of men.
Doubtless, when the Lord said in the Text to Eliphaz, My wrath is kindled
against thee and thy two friends, there was somewhat extraordinary in their
sin, which kindled it; and therefore the Lord directed them an extraordinary
way (as to circumstances) for the querching of it, and the making of their
peace.

But here it may be questioned, why did the Lord say his wrath was kindled only
against Eliphaz and his two friends? had he nothing to say against Elihu? he
had spoken as harshly to Job as any of them, yet Elihu was not at all reproved,
much less was the wrath of God kindled against him.

I answer, It Is true, Elihu spoke very hard words of Job; yet we may say four
things of Elihu, which might exempt him from this blame which fell upon those
three.

First, He did not speak with, nor discover a bitter spirit, as they did.

Secondly, Elihu objected not against Job his former life, nor charged him as
having done wickedly toward man, or hypocritically toward God; he only
condemned him for present miscarriages under his trouble, for impatience and
unquietness of spirit under the cross.

Thirdly, That which Elihu chiefly objected against Job was, the justifying of
himself rather than God (as he speaks at the beginning of the 32d. Chapter) not
the maintaining of his own innocence, nor the justifying of himself before men.
Indeed Job failed while he insisted so much upon that point, that he seemed
more careful to clear himself, than to justify God.

Fourthly, When Elihu spoke hardly, it was more out of a true zeal to defend
the justice of God in afflicting him, than to tax him with injustice. Now
because Elihu did not carry it with a bitter spirit, and hit the mark much
better than his friends (though in some things he also shot wide and
misunderstood Job) therefore the blame fell only upon Jobs three friends, and
not upon Elihu; The Lord said to Eliphaz, my wrath is kindled against thee, and
against thy two friends; but his wrath went no further.

Hence note, First; The Lord knows how to declare wrath as well as love,
displeasure as well as favor.

He has a store of wrath as well as of love, and that is kindled when he is
highly displeased.

Secondly, Note; Sin causes kindlings or discoveries of divine wrath.

Had it not been for sin, the Lord had never declared any wrath in the world,
nothing had gone out from him but kindness and love, favors and mercies. Wrath
is revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness, and against
unrighteousness only (Romans 1.18.) Unrighteousness kindles wrath, sin is the
kindle-coal. When we see wrath or displeasure going out, we may conclude sin is
gone out. Moses said to Aaron (Numb. 16.46.) Take a Censer, and put fire
therein from off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the
congregation, and make an atonement for them, for there is wrath gone out from
the Lord, the plague is begun. Now as in this latter part of the chapter, Moses
shows that wrath was gone out against that people from the Lord; so in the
former part of it he shows, that sin, and that a great sin, was gone out from
that people against the Lord.

Thirdly, Note; The Lord sometimes declares wrath, even against those whom he
loves.

Wrath may fall upon good men; such were these friends of Job. All the Elect,
whilst they remain unconverted or uncalled, are called Children of wrath
(Ephesians. 2.3.) Though they are in the everlasting love of God, yet they are
children of wrath, as to their present condition, whilst in a state of nature
and unreconciled to God. Now, as the children of God, are children of wrath,
before their conversion; so, when any great sin is committed after conversion,
they are in some sense under wrath; and the Lord declares wrath against them,
till the breach be healed, and their peace sued out. It is dangerous continuing
for a moment in any sin unrepented of, or we not going unto God by Jesus Christ
for pardon. When once the wrath of God is kindled, how far it may burn, who
knows? There is no safety under guilt; Therefore kiss the son lest he be
angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little:
blessed are they that put their trust in him (Psalm. 2.12.) My wrath is kindled
against thee, and thy two friends. Why?

Because ye have not spoken that which is right of me. Hence note, Fourthly;
When the Lord is angry he will show cause of his anger.

God is not angry (as men often are) without cause. When Jonah was angry, the
Lord said unto him, Do thou well to be angry? Yea, says he, that I do, I
have reason enough (thought he) to be angry, though there was no true reason at
all for it. But when the Lord is angry, he always has reason enough, and he
sometimes gives his reason. That the Lord does us good, is from free grace:
there is no reason in us, why he does us good; as he told the people of Israel,
I did this, and that for you, not because ye were more than others (either in
weight or number) but because I loved you: but when the Lord afflicts his
people, he tells them the reason, it is for your sins, or to purge you from your
sins; and sometimes points them to the special sins, for which he punishes
them, and from which he would have them purged. As here he did Eliphaz, and his
two friends.

Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has. The
Lord does not charge them with any evil actings, but with undue speakings; Ye
have not spoken of me the thing that is right.

Hence note; Failings in speech, or in what we say, may kindle wrath, as well
as failings in what we do.

Further, The Lord does not charge them with speaking soul and filthy things,
they had only spoken the thing that was not right. A little failing in speech,
or in what we say concerning God and his ways, may kindle wrath.

(...) ad me, coram me Pagn.
Ye have not spoken of me, that is, concerning me, or concerning my proceedings
with Job, the thing that is right.

The Hebrew is, To me, ye have not spoken to me the thing that is right. God
was not only the subject of whom they spoke, but the object to whom they spoke;
this whole disputation being transacted as in the presence of God, and both Job
and his friends appealing to him, as the Judge and Moderator of it. Hence the
Septuagint render, ye have not spoken before me the thing that is right: As if
God had said, all that ye have spoken has been in my presence, I being
witness, yea, I being Judge; yet ye spoke not right. Did we remember that
whatsoever we speak, as well as whatsoever we do, is before God, and must come
under his judgment, we would be more careful both to do and to speak (which
these men did not) the thing that is right. Ye have not spoken of me The thing
that is right.

The Hebrew is but one word, and it may be taken two ways. (...) complectitur
and veritatem and convenientiam cum officio and decoro. Significat igitur and
falsa dixisse de Dei judicio and Jobo, and non eo animo dixisse sive vera, sive
falsa essent, quo decobat. Coc. Causam meam inique egistis. Jun.
First, For rightness in matter. Secondly, In manner. Our translation refers to
the matter; ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right. Yet they failed
(as the word implies) in their manner of speaking also; they handled Gods
cause unhandsomely, they spoke not as they ought, as well as what they ought
not, to a poor afflicted creature; they spoke not with that tenderness, pity,
and compassionateness as became them, to a man in that pitiful case.

But though the Lord might say in both these senses, Ye have not spoken of me
the thing that is right, yet he said not (as the Septuagint over-rashly render)
Ye have not spoken of me any thing that is right; nor does the Lord charge them
absolutely, as not speaking right of him, but with a modification, or
comparatively, Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, As my servant
Job has.

As if he had said, Job has been condemned by you, and yet Job has spoken
better than you, righter than you; though he has had his failings in speaking,
yet ye have failed more than he.

But it may be questioned, what was it that they did not speak right, and what
was it that Job spoke righter than they.

I answer, They had not spoken so right as he,

First, About the doctrine of Gods providence, by which he governs all things,
and distributes good and evil, that is, prosperity and adversity, to the sons
of men.

Secondly, They had not spoken so right as he, taking up the signs or tokens of
the love and hatred of God from his outward dispensations.

Thirdly, They censured Job as a sinful doer in former times, and that now his
sin had found him out, because at that time he was so great a sufferer. These
things were not right.

Or thus, Jobs friends did not speak right.

First, In judging that God was angry with him, because he afflicted him.

Secondly, Nor did they speak right in judging Job wicked, because afflicted;
they spoke many right things about the justice and power of God, but they did
not hit Jobs case right: They thought and concluded, that if Job had not been a
great sinner, God would not have afflicted him at all, at least, not so
greatly: They supposed God could not justly afflict Job as he had done, had Job
been a just man. This was not right; they did not well consider, First, That
God may afflict a just man out of Sovereignty. Secondly, They did not well
consider, that God has other ends and reasons in afflicting than for iniquity;
and therefore they knew not how to justify the proceedings of God, but by
condemning Job, which there was no necessity to do. So then, their great error
and mistake was in resolving this question affirmatively, Whether he that is
greatly afflicted, be a great sinner? or whether the severe judgments of God
light only upon ungodly men? Their affimation of this, was enough to make Job
despair, and did provoke him to utter several very passionate and unfitting
speeches.

For though Job spoke many things right, yet not all right. God judged him
according to the tendency and scope of his spirit and speech, not according to
the accidents and suddein extravagancies of either. Job spoke right,

First, In affirming constantly, that God did not afflict him for his sin.

Secondly, That his afflictions were no signs of Gods displeasure against him,
nor of his wickedness against God. Yet Job did not speak all nor always right:
He failed,

First, When he spoke impatiently of his own sufferings.

Secondly, When he spoke so boldly to God, asking (as it were) an account of
his doings and dealings with him.

Thirdly, He spoke not right (though that was right which he spoke) when he
spoke so much of his own righteousness, thereby (though not purposely, yet)
according to the apprehension of others, reflecting upon the righteousness of
God. In these things and more (which have been noted in opening this book) Job
spoke not right of God; yet righter than Eliphaz and his two friends, and
therefore the Lord told them, Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right,
as my servant Job has.

Further, To answer the question, and to clear the whole matter, we must take
notice.

First, In what Job, and his three friends agreed.

Secondly, In what they disagreed.

They all agreed, first, in This, that all the afflictions which befall man in
this life, fall within the sight and certain knowledge of God.

Secondly, they all agreed, That God is the author and efficient cause, the
orderer and disposer of all the afflictions that befall man.

Thirdly, they all agree, That God neither does, nor can do wrong to any man,
whatsoever affliction he lays upon him, or how long soever he continues it
upon him. Thus far they all spoke right things, and agreed in what they spoke.

But Jobs friends held other opinions, wherein he totally dissented from them.

First, That, whosoever is good, and does good, shall receive a present good
reward.

Secondly, That whosoever is evil, and does evil, shall receive present
punishment. So that, if any wicked man prosper, it is but for a while, sudden
mischief will overtake him: And if any godly man be afflicted, it is but for a
while, his affliction will soon end, and he return to a flourishing condition
in this life. From these premises they concluded, that whosoever is afflicted,
and continues long under affliction, certainly that man is wicked, and
thereupon they judged Job to be such a one.

But Job held this right position against them all, That the providence of God
dispenceth outward good and evil so indifferently to good and bad men, that no
unerring judgment can possibly be made of any man's spiritual state, by his
outside or temporal state: This Job stuck close to, as was showed more fully in
the Preface to the Second Part.

I conclude then, That neither did Eliphaz and his two friends, fail so much in
speaking, as to speak nothing right of God (yea, there was somewhat right in
every thing they spoke of God) neither did Job speak so right, as to speak
nothing amiss of God. Now God, who knew exactly who spoke rightest, determined
the matter for Job: Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my
servant Job has.

Yet before I pass from these words, it may be questioned, and some make it a
great question, Whether we are to understand this sentence and determination of
God (preferring what Job had spoken of him, before what Eliphaz and his two
friends had spoken of him) in reference to all that Job had spoken of him, in
way of assertion, throughout the whole dispute, when his soul was heated and
grieved; or, of what he spoke toward the latter end, in a cooler temper, when
his soul was humbled?

The Jewish Doctors (who for the most part are very severe against, and
censorious of Job) expound this sentence of God, as if it respected only what
Job spoke at the beginning of the 40th chapter ( ver. 3, 4, 5.) Then Job
answered the Lord, and said, behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? Once
have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea, twice, but I will proceed no
further. And what he spoke at the 42d chapter ( ver. 1, 2.) Then Job answered
the Lord, and said, I know that thou can do every thing, and that no thought
can be withheld from thee, etc. Concluding ( ver. 6.) Wherefore I abhor my
self, and repent in dust and ashes. In these places, say they, Job spoke
righter than his friends, but not so in the whole body of his discourse. Some
others possibly have concurred (though I have seen but one, and him only in
Manuscript) with the Rabbis, in this censure; affirming, that Jobs opinion was
the worst of all the four, yea, that it was little less than blasphemy, taking
men off from, at least, discouraging them in ways of godliness, while he
affirmed peremptorily ( chap. 9.22, 23.) He (that is, God) destroys the
perfect, and the wicked: if the scourge stay suddenly, he laugheth at the trial
of the innocent. This assertion of his concerning God (and of this, his whole
discourse with his three friends savoured) was not (say they) so right as
theirs: and therefore they restrain those words of God, Ye have not spoken of
me the thing that is right, as my servant Job, to what Job spoke in the
chapters mentioned, when he was upon his repentance; but will not allow them to
reach to, or be meant of what he spoke of God, in the course of his former
dispute with his friends.

But I shall close and join with those, who refer the words of this final
judgment which God gave upon this matter, to what Job spoke of God from first
to last; and that they are not to be limited to what Job spoke after God had
humbled him, by speaking to him out of the whirlwind.

I grant (as has been said) Job spoke unduely more than once, in the days of
his anguish and sore affliction; for which Elihu reproved him sharply ( chap.
34, ver. 35, 36, 37. chap. 35.16.) And so did God himself ( chap. 38.2. chap.
40.1, 2, 8.) Nor did Job in the issue spare, much less flatter himself, as if
he had spoken nothing amiss, but humbly confessed his error and ignorance in
speaking ( chap. 40.4, 5. chap. 42.3, and 6.) Wherefore I abhor my self, and
repent, etc. even, because in the extremity of my pains, I spoke so unadvisedly
with my lips.

I grant also, that Job spoke much more rightly, or rightest of God, after God
had humbled him and brought down his spirit by that dreadful dispensation out
of the whirlwind.

Yet, I say, Job spoke more rightly of God during his affliction, than Eliphaz
and his two friends had done; which, as it may appear by that brief account or
survey of their opinions a little before given, so I shall add somewhat more
toward the making of it yet more apparent.

For, First, That assertion laid down ( chap. 9.22, 23.) He destroys the
perfect and the wicked, etc. which has raised so much dust, and is judged by
some as a quench-coal to all piety and religion; and which occasioned the
Jewish Writers to say, that Job sought to turn the charger the bottom upward;
that his mouth was full of gravel, that he began his speech with cursing, and
continued it with blaspheming: That assertion, I say, is no more than Solomon
has given us ( Eccles. 9.1, 2.) All things come alike to all; and there is one
event to the righteous and the wicked. Now Job spoke this in his first answer
to Bildad, which was almost at the beginning of the dispute.

Secondly, Job spoke altogether right of God, and of his providence toward
himself and others all along; while he constantly maintained, First, That he
was not afflicted for any wickedness committed by him, in the former passages
of his life. Secondly, That outward good is not always the portion of the good,
nor outward evil the portion of evil men always in this life. Thirdly, That God
is not unrighteous, though he exercise the righteous with grievous troubles all
their days, and heap worldly blessings upon the wicked all the days of this
life. Fourthly, That we are not to take measure of, nor estimate the goodness
or badness of any man's person, by the good or bad days which pass over his head
in this life. Fifthly, That no man's happiness or unhappiness, is to be judged
by what befalls him in this life. Job spoke right, and righter of God than
Eliphaz and his two friends, in all these particulars. And whereas he sometimes
acted impatiently, and spoke uncomely, blotting a good cause with passionate
and hasty words, such as ignorant and evil men might make an ill use of, and
draw to the patronage of their prophanity; these proceeded not out of the
abundance of his heart, but from the abundance of his pains under the heavy
hand of God. And when he seemed to tax the judgment of God, it was not any
affirmation that God was unjust or unequal in it; but an expostulation with him
about it, or, as some express it, a confession of his own ignorance, and an
earnest desire of clearer light and better information concerning the way of it.

But if we consider the sum of what Eliphaz and his two friends spoke of God;
we shall find Eliphaz in this great mistake, affirming, that all the sufferings
and afflictions which befall man in this world, are laid upon him by God as a
punishment for sin. And all three joined in two other mistakes. First, That all
wicked men, sooner or later, are visibly punished for their sin in this life.
Secondly, That though a good man may possibly suffer grievous afflictions in
this life, yet God always delivers him out of them, before he departs this
life. Hence it must needs follow, that if a man for long continuance of time,
especially, if all his life long he continue in great calamity, that man must
be judged wicked, though no apparent wickedness can be charged upon him, nor
proved against him. Upon these unsound principles, they were all confident to
infer against Job, that he was an hypocrite, and that all those troubles which
befell him, were inflicted by the righteous hand of God as a punishment for his
sin.

Now if this be the sum of what they spoke, we have reason enough to answer the
question proposed, That the Lords decisive sentence between Job and his
friends, respects what Job spoke of or to God, throughout the book, and is
not to be understood only of what he spoke toward the close of it; Ye have not
spoken of me the thing that is right, As my servant Job has.

There are two parts of a Judges office. First, To condemn the guilty.
Secondly, To acquit the innocent. God the great Judge does both here; the
first, in the former words; the second, in these: Yea, the Lord does not only
acquit, but own Job in the close of all, as his servant. The Lord said to Satan
in the first chapter, Have thou considered my servant Job; and here he
concludes (after Satan had done his worst to make Job quit the service of God)
in the same style, my servant Job; as if the Lord had said, Job shall wear my
livery still, he is my servant still.

Several useful observations issue from this latter part of the verse, which I
shall briefly hint.

First, Who were these that had not spoken aright? they were wise, grave, and
learned men, yea, they were godly men too.

Hence note, Wise, learned, and good men may err.

They may err in judgment, and in speech. Jobs friends spoke many truths, but
did not apply them truly to Jobs case. The best men may not only miss, but
mistake their mark. They who are in the light, yea, who are light in the Lord,
have yet some darkness in them, and may both do and speak from that darkness
(such was the case of these men in the text.) David may be understood of good
men, in a degree, as well as of bad men, when he said ( Psalm. 62.9.) Men of low
degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: they are so, both actively
and passively; they may be deceived, and they may deceive. As when the Lord of
old hearkened and heard, they (that is, all wicked men) spoke not aright, no
man repented of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? (Jer. 8.6.) So when
the Lord hearkens and hears at this day, they, that is, all good men, speak not
aright in all things, neither of him, nor of what he has done.

Secondly, Consider who it was that God vindicated in this matter? It was his
servant Job.

Hence note; God will sooner or later, one time or other, vindicate the credit
of his faithful servants.

He will (as we speak proverbially) set the saddle upon the right horse; and
make it appear before men and angels, who have done and spoken right, yea, who
rightest. Let patience under sufferance have its perfect work, for God will
give a perfect judgment of every man's word and work ( Psalm. 37.6.)

Thirdly, Note; The Lords knowledge is infinite and unerring.

He knows who has the better, who is in the right: He could tell Eliphaz and
his two friends, that though they had spoken some things right, yet not all,
nor so right as Job. The Lord (as we say) can cleave a hair in any
controversy, and tell every one where he is out, whether in opinion or
practice. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all (1 John. 1.5.) Our
light is but little, and it is mingled with much darkness; our light is dark,
and will be so, till we come to that inheritance among the Saints in light. But
Gods light is all light, altogether light, both concerning things and persons.

Fourthly, What Eliphaz and his friends spoke, that was not right, concerned
Job immediately; they spoke very glorious things of God out of his case: yet
the Lord says not, Ye have not spoken of Job the thing that is right, but, Ye
have not spoken of me the thing that is right.

Hence note; God takes himself concerned in what is spoken amiss, of or
concerning his servants.

Jobs friends looked upon themselves as strong witnesses, yea, as great
Advocates for God; and doubtless, they intended no less than a plea for God, in
what they spoke to and against Job: yet because they in many things grieved,
and in some things wronged his servant Job, therefore says God, ye have not
spoken of me the thing that is right. The Lord will say, in the great day, to
the wicked, about their neglects of duty to his faithful ones, In-as-much as ye
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me (Mat. 25.45.)
In-as-much as ye have not fed and clothed these, ye have not fed nor clothed
me. Now, as the Lord takes all the neglects of good to his people, to himself;
so the Lord takes all that evil which any speak of his people, to himself: He
(says God) that speaks amiss of mine, speaks amiss of me. The Lord
accounts himself interested in all that good or evil, which is done and
spoken to his people; and he is very angry when any thing is mis-spoken of, or
misapplied to them, though with respect to himself, or as a service unto
himself.

Fifthly, Consider, Jobs friends spoke many excellent truths; yet says the
Lord, ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.

Hence note; The Lord is greatly displeased, when truth, or that which is right
in it self, is wrong applied.

Jobs friends were mostly right in their Doctrine, but often out in their Uses;
all their open assertions had some truth in them, but so had not all their
secret Inferences. God will not bear it, to have truths put to any ill use,
especially this, to grieve and discourage any of his suffering servants. To
speak of the holiness, justice and righteousness of God, so as to terrify an
afflicted soul, is to make a bad improvement of the best things: It Is a fly in
the box of ointment. Dead flies (says Solomon, Eccles. 10.1.) cause the
ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor; so does a little
folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honor. Jobs friends were in
reputation for wisdom and honor; yet this little folly sent forth an ill
savor in the Lords nostrils, and caused him to say, Ye have not spoken of me
the thing that is right.

Sixthly, Jobs friends certainly meant well, and had a zeal for God; yet God
was angry, and said, they had not spoken right.

Hence note; Our good intentions, yea, zeal for God, will not bear us out when
we do or speak amiss.

These men had a zeal for God, else Job had not said as once he did, Will ye
lie for God? Though they did not knowingly speak a lie, yet a lie was in what
they spoke; and therefore their speaking for God would not bear them out.

Seventhly, The Lord said to Jobs friends, Ye have not spoken of me the thing
that is right, as my servant Job has. Though Job spoke some things amiss, yet
the Lord did not charge him with them, as he did his friends.

Hence note; The Lord over-looketh many failings, and will not upbraid his
servants with them.

Job had his failings; but the Lord took no notice of them, but made a
determination in his case, as if he had spoken right in all things. The Lord
will not flatter his servants when they fail, yet he is very favorable to
them, even when they fail; he told Job plainly enough, that he had darkened
counsel by words without knowledge, while he asked him, who did it? (Chap.
38.2.) He intimated also, that Job had contended with him, and reproved him,
that he had (consequentially) attempted to disannul his Judgment, and condemn
him (Chap. 40.2, 8.) yet here when the Lord came to make up the matter between
Job and his friends, he spoke as if he had forgot both his own censures of him,
and the occasion of them. Holy David acknowledged ( Psalm. 130.3.) If thou Lord
should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand! The Lord does not mark
iniquity where he sees much integrity; the Lord does not mark every arrow that
flies beside the mark, when he sees the mark was honestly aimed at. We say, he
may be a good Archer that does not hit the white, if he come but somewhat near
it; he indeed is a bungler that misseth the Butt. Job aimed at, and came near
the mark, though he did not always hit it. The Lord will give a good testimony
of us, if we aim right at, though we sometimes miss the mark. It is said of
Zachariah and Elizabeth (Luke 1.6.) They were both righteous. There Is not a
word spoken of their failings, though doubtless they had their failings, both
as to the Ordinances and Commandments of God.

Eighthly, The Lords wrath being kindled against Jobs friends, we might expect
he would thunder upon them; yet he only says, Ye have not spoken of me the
thing that is right.

Hence observe; The Lord deals mildly with sinners.

He did not give wrathful words, though his wrath was kindled; he did not call
Eliphaz and his friends Heretics, nor tell them they had belyed him, and
slandered his proceedings; he did not aggravate their fault by grievous words,
he did not upbraid them particularly: but, without bitterness or hard
reflections, comprehended their all faults in one general soft word, Ye have
not spoken of me the thing that is right. This should be our pattern in dealing
with an offending brother: whereas many, if a brother do but differ from them a
little, if he do not say as they say, and concur with them fully in opinion,
are ready to censure him hardly, and give him reproachful language. The
Apostles rule is ( Gal. 6.1.) Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye
that are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering
thy self, lest thou also be tempted. God who is above all temptation, meekly
restored these faulty men; yea, though his wrath was kindled against them, yet
his speech was mild and cool, only saying (and what less could he say, if he
said any thing) Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, As my servant
Job.

Why does the Lord call Job his servant? Surely at once to put an honor upon
him, and to comfort him. Eliphaz and his two friends were Gods servants; yet
because of their miscarriage in that service, God did not own them at that time
as such. God was wont to call David his servant at every turn; yet when he had
numbered the people, Nathan was sent to him with a hard message, and is bid, Go,
and say unto David, not, my servant David (2 Samuel 24.12.)

Hence note, Ninthly; God honors man much, by owning him as his servant.

To serve the Lord, is as much our privilege as our duty; and when the Lord
calls us to his service, he rather puts a favor up-us, than a burden. The
Lord is the highest master, and they are highly honored who are his servants.
It is an honor to serve Kings and Princes: what is it then to serve the King
of Kings, the Prince of the Kings of the earth! as Jesus Christ is called (
Rev. 1.5.) It Is also profitable as well as honorable, to serve the Lord; for
he is the best master, his work is the best wo^k, and his wages is the best
wages. And not only so, but it is easy to be the Lords servant; for as he
expects we should do his work, so we may expect help and strength, hearts and
hands from him to do it. If the Lord does but own us for his servants, we shall
not faint at his work, whether it be doing or suffering work. God upheld his
servant Job in, and carried him through all those trials and troubles, which
would have sunk him a thousand times, had not he stood by him and assisted him.
The Lord is a master in Covenant with his servants, and that a Covenant of
grace, in which every command has a promise annexed to it; and that not only a
promise of reward, when we have done it, but of strength to do it: and if so,
then we may conclude it easy as well as hohonourable and profitable, to serve
the Lord. Therefore

Let us labor to approve our selves the Lords servants. And if any ask, who is
the Lords servant? I answer,

First, He is the Lords servant that does the Lords work; His servants we are,
whom we obey; he is our master whose work we do. It is good for us to consider
whose work we are about. Jesus Christ was the fathers servant in that great
undertaking, the redemption of lost man. Now, all his work on earth was his
fathers work ( John 9.4.) I (said he) must work the work of him that sent me.
Unless we are in the Lords work, and doing the Lords will, we cannot be
reckoned among his servants.

Secondly, If you are the Lords servants, then as you do the Lords work, so you
are ready to do all his work. He is not a servant that does what he pleases.
Some say, they will do the Lords work, but they pick and choose, they do this,
and leave the other undone: He is the Lords servant, that goes through all the
Lords work. If we do easy work, and refuse hard work; if we refuse that work
which displeases the world, and choose only that which is pleasing to the
world, we serve not the Lord, but the world and our selves. Here is the trial,
when we do what God wills, whether the world will it, and like it, yea, or
no. The Lord said of David, He is my servant (and what will he do?) he will do
all my will; that is, he will not stick at any of my work.

Thirdly, If ye are the Lords servants, as ye will do all his work, so no wo^k
but his; you will not do the work of the flesh, you will not do any work for
man, in opposition to the work of God. In subordination to the will of God, we
should readily do the work of man. In serving men thus, we are also the
servants of God. But he that is the Lords servant, will not do any work for man
which contradicts or crosses the service of God. Christ says expressly, No
man serves two Masters; ye cannot serve God and Mammon (Mat. 6.24.) We may
serve many Masters, if they command the same thing, or things subordinate; but
we cannot serve two Masters if their commands interfere and clash one with the
other, as the work of God and Mammon does. And thus the Apostles caution is to
be understood (1 Cor. 7.23.) Ye are bought with a price: be not ye the servants
of men.

Fourthly, If ye are the Lords servants, as ye do the Lords work, and all his
work, and only his work, so ye will do his work willingly. All the Lords
servants are free men, his servants are sons; they do not serve as slaves, but
as children; and God deals with them as a Father, more than as a Master.
Consider, have ye a free spirit for the service of God? His servants find
themselves indeed constrained to serve him, but they do not serve him by
constraint; they are constrained by love, not by base fear to serve him.

Fifthly, If ye are the Lords servants, ye do his work for his sake; the will
of the Lord is as much the reason why ye do his work, as the rule by which ye
do it. Should we do never so much of that which is materially the Lords work,
unless we do it because it is his work, we are not his servants in doing it. He
that does the Lords work for self ends only or chiefly, is not the Lords
servant, but his own.

Sixthly, If ye are the Lords servants, ye have resolved to be his servants for
ever; your ears are bored at his post, and ye have have said (as the servant
under the Law that loved his Master, Exodus 21.5, 6.) Ye will not go out free.
It was so with Job; he was the Lords servant before his rrouble, and he was so
at the end of his troubles. The Lord does not take servants for months and for
years; we must be his everlasting servants, always his servants, if his
servants at all. And this should rejoice our souls, that we are and shall be
for ever in the Lords work. To serve the Lord, is better than to rule the
world. God is so good a Master, that we shall never have any, the least,
occasion to desire a change; and he is so sure a Master, that we need not fear
it.

Lastly, Though the Lord said, his wrath was kindled against Eliphaz and his
two friends, yet in the very next words he is directing them how to make their
peace, and return, or be received again into his favor.

Hence note; God often manifests more displeasure, than ever he intends to act.

Yea, when ever he manifests displeasure against his children, it is that he
might not act it. Nineveh was threatened with destruction, that repenting it
might not be destroyed. Sinners of all sorts are threatened with death and
damnation, that believing, they may be saved and live. What could Eliphaz and
his two friends expect, when the Lord said, My wrath is kindled, but that his
wrath should have swallowed them up, and consumed them in a moment? Solomon
says ( Prove. 16.14.) The wrath of a King is as messengers of death, and like
the roaring of a Lion (Prove. 19.12.) much more is the wrath of God like the
roaring of a Lion, and as the messengers of death. But, though the Lord told
Jobs friends of wrath, and of kindled wrath, yet he only, First, reproved them
mildly; and, Secondly, instead of blowing up that fire, shows or directs
them how to quench it, and get into the Sunshine of his favor; as will appear
further in the verse.

Verse. 8. Therefore take unto you now seven Bullocks, and seven Rams, and go to
my servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt-offering, and my servant
Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept, lest I deal with you after your
folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, like my
servant Job. This verse holds out the counsel or direction which the Lord gave
Eliphaz and his two friends for the making of their peace, and the reconciling
of themselves to his Majesty, whose wrath was kindled against them. And here
the Lord directs them to a twofold means of their reconciliation.

First, The offering up of a sacrifice, in which we may consider two things.

First, The matter of the sacrifice, or what was to be sacrificed, Bullocks and
Rams.

Secondly, The quantity or number of the sacrifice, seven and seven, seven
Bullocks and seven Rams; such was the matter, such the quantity of the
sacrifice which they were commanded to offer.

Secondly, The Lord directs Eliphaz and his two friends to apply themselves
unto Job, and desire his intercession for them; Go to my servant Job, and my
servant Job shall pray for you. To this direction the Lord subjoyns two things,

First, An encouragement by a gracious promise, in these words; For him will I
accept.

Secondly, A threat, in case they should neglect or refuse to go and perform
this duty, laid down in the close of the verse; Lest I deal with you according
to your folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing which is right, like
my servant Job.

These are the particulars considerable in this 8th verse.

Therefore take unto you seven Bullocks and seven Rams. The Lord spoke this to
Eliphaz and his two friends. The word of illation, Therefore, at the beginning
of the verse, refers to the word For, at the latter end of the former verse. As
if the Lord had said unto them, Because ye have sinned against me, and provoked
me to anger, so that my wrath is kindled by your not speaking of me the thing
that is right; therefore I advise you (and be ye sure at your peril, to follow
my advice; I advise you) for the making up of this breach, and the recovery of
my favor, to take unto you seven Bullocks and seven Rams.

Take unto you. Some conceive that these words, Unto you, are redundant, yet
doubtless they carry a clear sense, as they stand in the Text, Take unto you;
that is, for your use and behoof in this great service, Take unto you Seven
Bullocks and seven Rams.

This was a great sacrifice, and it was so under a twofold consideration.

First, As to the matter of the sacrifice, bullocks and rams were great cattle,
there were sacrifices of lesser matters. We read in the law of Moses, of a pair
of turtle doves, and two young pigeons for a sacrifice; these, the poorer sort
under the law, did offer with acceptance, whereas rich and great men (and such
were these Eliphaz and his two friends in their time) were commanded to bring
great and richer sacrifices. The rich (as Solomon exhorts, Prove. 3.9.) were to
honor the Lord with their substance, and with the first fruits of their
increase. These rich men were to bring bullocks and rams, a great sacrifice in
the matter of it.

Jubentur septem tauros, etc. immolare, quis perfectissimum est sacrificium
Christ, una expiotione omnia peccata delens. Perfectus cuim uumerius septe
narius est. Brent. Septem est numerus plentitu dinis and persectionis, id quod
obsolutam expiationem s remissionam clpae eorum designabat. Etsi interim in
omnibus sacrificiis veteribus, ad emicum Christi sacrificium cujus illa erant
imago and umbra respiciebatur. Nerc.
Secondly, It was a great sacrifice, if we consider the number, seven bullocks,
and seven rams. One bullock was a sacrifice, and one ram was a sacrifice, but
here God commanded seven of each. Seven is a number of perfection, and of
plenitude; seven is a great number, and seven is a perfect number: it is often
used mystically or enigmatically, to note perfection. The Lord made all things
in six days, and rested the seventh; seven days made up a complete week, and
seven years are a week of years. We read of A candlestick all of gold, with a
bowl upon the top of it, and his seven lamps thereon, and seven pipes to the
seven lamps which were on the top thereof (Zech. 4.2.) We read also of the
seven spirits (Revel. 1.4) and of seven golden candlesticks (Rev. 1.12.) These
were mysterious sevens, and there are many more mentioned in Scripture, which
to insist upon, would make too great a digression from the purpose of the text
under hand, where we have seven bullocks and seven rams, which make up and
imply a great and perfect sacrifice; as the law of Moses also directed in some
cases ( Levit, 23.18.) And ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without
blemish. So (1 Chronicles. 15.26.) When the Lord helped the Levites that bare the
Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, they offered seven bullocks, and seven rams.
Again (2 Chronicles. 29.21) They brought seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven
lambs, and seven he-goats for a sin-offering, for the kingdom, and for the
sanctuary, and for Judah. Balaam incited and hired to curse Israel said unto
Balak (Number. 21.1.) Build me here seven altars, s prepare me here seven seven
oxen, and rams, He would needs imitate them whom he desired to ruin, and offer
a full sacrifice that he might curse them fully. The greatest sacrifice for
number that we read of, was at the dedication of the Temple, where the offering
of the King was two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty
thousand (htep (l Kings 8.63.) We read also of great sacrifices (1 Chronicles.
29.21. 2 Chronicles. 17.11. and Chap. 30.24.) There were greater sacrifices than
seven, yet seven was a great sacrifice. Some Interpreters conceive, that every
one of the three was to offr seven bullocks, and seven rams; that had been a
very great sacrifice, but in that the Text is silent. The law of Moses
appointed ( Levit. 4.3.) that if a Priest committed a sin of ignorance, he
should bring a young bullock without blemish unto the Lord for a sin-offering.
Thelaw required no more for a sin of ignorance in a Priest, and if the whole
congregation were guilty of a sin of ignorance, their ossering was no more (
ver. 13, 14.) and if a Ruler had committed a sin of ignorance, the law required
only a kid of the goats, a male without blemish (ver. 23.) and if any one of
the common people committed a sin of ignorance they were to bring a kid of the
goat, a female (ver. 28.) So that whereas the law required but one bullock for
the sin of ignorance in a Priest, and but one bullock for the whole
congregation; and for a Ruler, but a kid of the goats, a male; and for any
common person, but a kid of the goats, a female: Here Jobs friends were
commanded by the Lord to offer up seven bullocks, and seven rams for the
expiation of their sin, which doubtless was only a sin of ignorance. This
plainly signified, that the Lord was highly displeased with them for their
harsh judgment, and uncharitable censures of his servant Job; and to let them
know, that their doing so, could not be excused by their good intentions, and
zeal for God.

Thus we see, what the sacrifice was, both for kind and number. The next words
tell us, what they must do with their sacrifice.

Go to my servant Job (faith God) Why to Job? several reasons may be given, why
they should go to Job; I shall name five or six.

First, Because they had wronged Job, and therefore they must be reconciled to
him.

Secondly, Because God would have them understand, that himself,
notwithstanding their ill opinion of Job, approved him as a good man, yea, as a
man far exceeding them in godliness, though they had judged him an hypocrite,
or an ungodly man. Thus the Lord sent them to Job, that they might eat their
words, and receive a full conviction of their error.

Thirdly, God would have them go to his servant Job, to make them sensible,
that the favor he intended them, was very much for Jobs sake, and that they
must, in part, be beholding to Job for it.

Fourthly, The Lord sent them to Job, that he might give a high evidence of his
grace, especially, of his charity in forgetting injuries, and requiting good
for evil. His friends had reproached him ten times, and grieved his spirit very
much, yet he must show how ready he was to forgive them, and pray that they
might be forgiven.

Fifthly, God would have them to go to Job, that they might know that Job was
reconciled to them as well as himself.

Sixthly, God would have them go to Job, that this might humble them, or that
they might show their humility and submission. It was a great piece of
self-denial, for them to go to Job, after such a contest; and entreat him to
speak for them, of whom they had spoken so hardly, and with whom they had long
contended so bitterly. Thus the Lord tried both Job and them; the Lord tried
Jobs charity, and their humility. We are hardly brought to confess that we have
wronged others, or have been out and mistaken our selves. It Is no easy matter
for a man to acknowledge himself overcome; it is extreme hard to become a
suppliant to one, whom we lately despised and trampled upon. All this is his
hard meat, and not easily digested; yet Eliphaz and his two friends must digest
all this, before they could acceptably obey the Lords command, in going to his
servant Job.

Nor was it an easy matter, for Job to forget so many affronts and
unkindnesses, as he had received from his friends. ' It Is hard for a man that
has been wronged and reproached, yea, condemned, to pass air by, and not only
embrace his opposers and reproachers, but pray and solicit for them. Thus the
Lord, in sending them to Job, took trial both of Job and them. The Lord
commanding them to supplicate him, whom they had offended, and expecting that
he should make suit and supplication for them who had offended him; put both
their graces to it, and in a most sweet and gracious way, at once healed the
breach, which had been between Job and them, as also that between them and
himself. Who ever took up a difference more sweetly, or reunited dissenting
brethren thus wisely? Go to my servant Job,

And offer up for your selves a burnt-offering. That is, those seven bullocks,
and seven rams.

Here (as was said before) was the facrifice; but who was the Priest? The text
says, Offer up for your selves, which may intimate that, that as they were to
offer a sacrifice for themselves, so, that they themselves offered it. But as
Interpreters generally, so I conceive Job was the Priest, who offered it in
their behalf, We read ( chap. 1.5.) that Job offered sacrifices for his
children, and there it was showed that he was the Priest. Every sacrifice must
be offered by a Priest; the people brought the sacrifice unto him to offer for
them. No sacrifice is acceptable without a Priest: Therefore Jesus Christ, who
was our sacrifice, was a Priest also, none could offer him but himself, he was
both sacrifice, and Priest, and Altar. So then, whereas the Text says, they
were to offer a burnt-offering for themselves, the meaning is, they were to
bring it unto Job, and he to offer it for them. The Priest offered, and Israel
offered; that is, Israel offered by the Priest; they brought the matter of the
sacrifice to the Priest, and the Priest slew and presented the sacrifice to the
Lord. It is one thing to offer, another thing to slay the sacrifice. They
offered a sacrifice who brought it, or at their cost caused it to be brought to
the holy place; and this any of the people might do. They offer it upon the
Altar to the Lord, who were especially appointed thereunto: These were the
Priests only. Before the Ceremonial law, as given by God to Moses, the
Priesthood lay in the eldest or father of the family, upon which account Job
was a Priest; whereas afterward, the Priesthood was settled in the family of
Aaron, and it was forbidden to any, but one of hs line, to offer sacrifice.

So that, when the Lord said to Eliphaz and his two friends, Go to my servant
Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt-offering, he directed them to Job,
Non est hic curiouse captendo distinctio holocausti aboliis victimis cim haec
ante legem contigovint. Quasi latin diceres-holocaustabitis holo caustum; i.e.
in solidum offeratis, and ut in auras totum abort officietis. Merc.
as having the honor of Priesthood in him, and so the power of doing it for
them, or in their behalf. Offer up for your selves

A burnt-offering. That is, a sacrifice wholly consumed by fire. The Hebrew is
very elegant, make an ascentton to ascend. The whole burnt-offering was the
most perfect offering; and therefore the Hebrews express it by a word that
signifies the perfect consumption of it in the fire, and so the ascension of
it to heaven in smoke and vapor, as a sweet odor in the nostrils of the Lord,
as the Apostle speaks ( Ephesians. 5.1.) and as David (Psalm. 141.2.) A part of many
sacrifices was saved to feast upon afterward, as the harlot spoke ( Prove.
7.14.) I have peace offerings with me; this day have I paid my vows: but the
burnt-offering was wholly consumed, and sent up unto the Lord. Go to my servant
Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt-offering.

Hence note; First, The Lord is very ready to forgive; and to be at peace with
those that have offended him.

Though the fire of his wrath be kindled (as it is said in the former verse)
yet he is willing to have it quenched. The Prophet Micah (chap. 7.18.) makes
this report of God, He retains not his anger for ever, that is, he retains
it but a little while, he is speedily pacified, and forgives; and sometimes (as
here) he forgives, without any higher signification of his anger than a bare
rebuke. The Lord did not lay the least mul^t, the least chastning or affliction
upon Eliphaz and his two friends, though his wrath was kindled against them. I
grant, it is not so always; some smart sorely, and pay dearly for their errors.
When the anger of the Lord was kindled against Aaron and Miriam ( Number. 12.9.)
for speaking against Moses (as those three had against Job) he was not then so
easily pacified; for, first, it is said in the close of the 9th verse, he
departed, and ( ver. 10.) the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; here was
much displeasure, yet not all, for it follows, and behold Miriam became
leprous, white as snow. In this case God was angry with two that had spoken
against a servant of his; and they felt more than a bare rebuke, here was a
blow given, and that a sore one. The Lord deals gently with some sinners, that
none may despair; and severely with others, though his servants, that none may
presume.

Only let us remember, that when the Lord at any time does chasten and rebuke
his servants for sin with great severity, he does not drive them away, nor
discourage them, but would have them look to him for pardon and healing. When
he judges them (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 11.32.) he does not condemn
them; or if we call it a condemnation, yet he does not condemn them with the
world, nor as he condemns the world. God condemns the unbelieving world to
destruction, but he condemns his servants only for their humiliation. The
goodness of God appears much in these two things.

First, In his flowness to anger, his mercy does even clog his justice, and
gives it leaden feet, it comes slowly.

Secondly, In his readiness to show mercy. The Scripture says he is slow to
wrath, and ready to forgive; his goodness does even add wings to his mercy,
causing it to fly swiftly, to the relief of sensible and humbled sinners; or
(as one of the Ancients expresses, he sharpneth the sword of his justice with
the oil of his mercy; and so it becomes a healing, as well as a wounding,
sword.

Secondly, In that the Lord himself gave this direction, Take unto you seven
bullocks, and seven rams, etc.

Observe; God, against whom we sin, shows us the way to get peace, and the
pardon of our sins.

When man sinned at first, or when the first man fell into sin, there he had
lain for ever, if the Lord had not showed him a way out: Had it been left to
man to devise a way to recover himself when he was fallen, his fall had been
irrecoverable, he had never found how to get at once his sin pardoned, and the
justice of God satisfied. This was the Lords own invention (and it was the most
noble and excellent one, that ever was in the world) he showed fallen man at
first how to get up; and here he gave direction to these fallen men, what to do
that they might: The Lord, who was their Judge, was also their Counselor.

Thirdly, Consider the particular way of their peacemaking, it was by
sacrifice, Take unto you seven bullocks, and seven rams, etc.

Hence note; Sacrifices for sin were appointed and commanded by God, not
devised by man.

Sacrifices have been from the beginning. Cain and Abel brought their offerings
unto the Lord ( Genesis 4.3, 4.) Noah, also, builded an altar unto the Lord, and
offered burnt-offerings on the altar (Genesis 8.20.) Abraham offered the ram for a
burnt-offering ( Genesis 22.13.) Now though the law for sacrifices was not
formally given in those times, yet it was really given. All those elder
sacrifices were of the Lords appointment, and by his direction, as well as
those in and after the days of Moses. There is no expiating of sin against God,
by the inventions of man. Heathens offered sacrifices to their Idol-gods,
imitating the worship of the true God (The Devil is Gods ape.) Typical
sacrifices were of God, for the taking away of the sin of man: And so was the
true sacrifice, the Lord Jesus Christ; when he (that is, Christ) said,
sacrifice and offering, and burnt-offering, and offering for sin, thou would
not (that is, thou would not have those legal sacrifices, nor did ever
intend to have them, as satisfactions to thy offended justice, ultimately to
rest in them) then said he (that is, Christ) Lo, I come to do thy will, O God
(Heb. 10.8, 9.) It was the will of God, that Jesus Christ should be the
expiatory sacrifice for the sin of man; by the which will ( v. 10.) We are
sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. The
sacrifice of Christ himself had not saved us, if it had not been of Gods
appointment; nor could any sacrifice have so much as shadowed the way or means
of our salvation, if God had not appointed it.

Fourthly, Consider the purpose for which the Lord commanded Eliphaz, etc. to
offer their sacrifice, it was to make an atonement for their sin.

Hence Observe; Sin must have a sacrifice.

There was never any way in the world, from first to last, to help a sinner but
by a sacrifice; and who was the sacrifice? Surely Jesus Christ was the
sacrifice; it was not the blood of bulls and goats, of bullocks and rams, that
could take away sin, as the Apostle argues at large in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, these could never take away sin, these only pointed at Jesus Christ,
who alone did it, by bearing our sins, and by being made a sacrifice for them.
To typifie or show this, we read in the law of Moses, that the sin of the
offender was laid upon the sacrifice; and a sacrifice for sin, was called sin
by the Prophet, long before Christ came ( Dan. 9.24.) He shall make an end of
sin, that is, when Christ shall come in the flesh, he shall make an end of all
sacrifices for sin; and so the Apostle called it after Christ was come, and had
suffered in the flesh (2 Cor. 5.21.) He made him to be sin (that is, a
sacrifice for sin) for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. The sacrifice was called sin, because the sin of
the person who brought it, and in whose behalf it was offered, was laid upon
the sacrifice; there was as it were a translation of the sin, from the person
to the sacrifice. In which sense Luther is to be understood, when he said,
Jesus Christ was the greatest sinner in the world; not that he had any sin in
his nature, or any sin in his life, but because he had the sins of all that are
or shall be saved, laid upon him; as the Prophet spoke ( Isa. 53.6.) The Lord
has laid upon him the iniquity of us all; or (as our Margin has it) He has
made the iniquity of us all to meet on him. And there is no atonement for sin,
but by a sacrifice. So the Lord ordained the offering up of a whole
burnt-offering for the taking away of sin, that sinners might see what they had
deserved, even to die; and not only so, but to be wholly burnt and consumed in
the fire of his wrath. Impenitent sinners shall be consumed in fire, that shall
never be extinguished, nor ever extinguish them; they shall abide in an
ever-living death, or in an ever-dying life. They who rest not upon the
sacrifice of Christ, once offered, must be a sacrifice themselves, always
offered to the justice and wrath of God.

Here it may be questioned, why the Lord commanded them to offer seven Bullocks
and seven Rams? what could the blood of seven do more than the blood of one?

I answer, First; This being a great sacrifice, possibly the Lord commanded it,
thereby to intimate the greatness of their sin. Two things chiefly show the
greatness of a sin. First, the greatness of the punishment laid upon the
sinner. Secondly, the greatness of the means used for the healing of that
breach which sin has made.

I answer, Secondly, the number seven being a Symbol of perfection (as was said
before) figured the perfect sacrifice of Jesus Christ, who by one offering,
has for ever perfected them that are sanctified (Heb. 10.14.) A perfect number
of sacrifices was fittest to shadow the infinite perfection of that one
sacrifice, which makes, and which only makes all the comers thereunto perfect.
For though a person under the Law having offered his sacrifice, was no more
reckoned guilty of that sin by men; yet his conscience did still accuse him of,
and charge him with sin, and therefore sacrifices were renewed ( Heb. 10.1, 2.)
nor could the accusings of conscience be quieted, but by looking to Christ by
faith, whom the sacrifice shadowed, and the sacrificer was to point at.

Fifthly, In that the Lord sent Eliphaz and his two friends unto Job with their
sacrifice,

Observe; We must reconcile our selves to those we have wronged, before we can
look to be reconciled unto God, against whom we have sinned, or to be accepted
of him in any service.

The counsel of Christ directs to this ( Mat. 5.23, 24.) If thou bring thy
gift unto the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against
thee, leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way; first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. This general
command of Christ, is the same in effect, with what the Lord here long before
gave particularly and personally to Eliphaz and his two friends; they must
first go and be reconciled to Job, and then offer their sacrifice. This the
Apostle also gave in charge (1 Timothy 2.8.) I will therefore, that men pray every
where, holding up holy hands; but how? without wrath and doubting. There are
two things required, if we look to be accepted of God in any service. First,
Faith. Secondly, Love or charity. There must be faith, else we cannot lift up
holy hands without doubting: There must be love, else we cannot lift up holy
hands without wrath. They who are suing for, and expecting favor and mercy
from God, have need to discharge themselves of all wrath and revenge toward
man. With what face can any expect favor from God, who will not acknowledge
wherein they have wronged man?

Sixthly, Observe; God is very tender of the credit of his faithful servants;
he will not be reconciled, unless they are righted.

Job had been wronged, no man more, by the censures of his friends; and God was
so tender of his honor and reputation, that his friends must make him
reparation, before God will accept their sacrifice. One reason why God is so
tender of the credit of his servants, is, because they are tender of his, and
will undergo any wrong, rather than his Name shall be blasphemed or wronged. As
God will himself honor them, who honor him (1 Samuel 2.30.) so he will one time
or other, some way or other, retrench and cast back upon men, all that dishonor
which they have received from men, or cause them to take it off, and wipe them
clean whom they have undeservedly aspersed.

Observe, Seventhly; God will humble proud and high spirits, and make them
submit to those whom they have wronged.

There is a twofold submission, which is the duty of a Christian. First, to God
( James 4.7.) Secondly, to man; and this is twofold.

First, To those that are over us, and above us, in power ( Romans 13.1. Tit.
3.1.) And thus not only are subjects to submit to Magistrates; but all of a
lower degree, are to submit to their superiors, servants to their Masters,
wives to their Husbands, children to their parents.

Secondly, There is a submission to those that are wronged by us; and though
they be our inferiors, yet (in this sense) we are to submit to them, that is,
acknowledge that we have wronged them. The Apostle James intimates such a
submission (Chap. 5.16.) and the Apostle Paul speaks it plainly ( Ephesians. 5.21.)
Submitting your selves to one another in the fear of God. Here is a mutual
submission, a submission in case of wrong (and doubtless that rule of Scripture
is extendible to other cases) not only of equals one to another, but of
superiors to inferiors. Our spirits like not this, we hardly submit to those
that we have wronged; but there is no remedy, we must. Some say they will submit
to God, but they cannot submit to man, they cannot stoop to that. Let such
remember, that without this submission, even to an inferior whom we have
knowingly wronged, or are made to know (which was the case here) that we have
wronged, we cannot hopefully apply to God for peace and reconciliation.

Eighthly, Observe; They that are wronged by others, must forgive them their
wrongs.

God sent Eliphaz and his two friends to Job, not only that they should
acknowledge they had wronged him, but that Job might freely and fully testify
(so far as concerned him) his forgiveness of that wrong. As it is the duty of
them that have wronged others to submit to them in the acknowledgement of it;
so they that are wronged, ought to forgive and receive them in that submission.
We must forgive, as we look to be forgiven ( Mat. 6.12.) We cannot pray
believingly, that God would forgive us the guilt of our iniquity committed
against himself or others, unless we forgive others the injury which they have
done us.

Observe, Ninthly; Good men are ready to give and take satisfaction in point of
wrong.

Jobs friends had done him wrong; and as they (good men) were ready to give
satisfaction, so Job (good man) was as ready to take it. Many wrong others, but
will give no satisfaction; many are wronged by others, and will take no
satisfaction, nothing will quiet or appease them. Jobs friends and himself were
highly to be commended, that they were willing to give, and he to take
satisfaction. The Apostle urges this ( Ephesians. 4.26, 27.) Be angry and sin not,
let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the devil. They
give up their hearts as lodging-chambers to the devil, who let the Sun go down
upon their wrath; therefore it follows ( verse. 31.32.) Let all bitterness,
and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you,
with all malice, and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ sake has forgiven you. They that know what it
is to be forgiven by God, they that know what need they have continually of
Gods forgiving grace and mercy, will be as ready to accept satisfaction, as any
can be to give it. This was eminent in Job, as will appear further in opening
the next words in this verse. Go to my servant Job, and offer up for your
selves a burnt-offering, And my servant Job shall pray for you.

How eminent Job was in prayer, and how available his prayers or intercessions
were for others, may be collected from that in the Prophet ( Ezekiel. 14.14.)
where he is joined with Noah and Daniel. Job being here called to pray for his
friends, was put upon another piece of the Priestly Office. There were two
parts of the Priestly Office, and Job is adorned with them both. First, the
Priest was to offer sacrifice. Secondly, to pray for the people. Jesus Christ
filled up both these parts of the Priestly office for us. First, he offered
himself a sacrifice for us. Secondly, he interceded, yea, he ever lives to
make intercession for us ( Heb. 7.25.) Job, as in offering up a sacrifice, so
in praying for his faulty friends, was a type of Christ; My servant Job shall
pray for you. But for what should he pray in their behalf? Surely, that their
sin might be forgiven, and they find favor with God,

The word here rendered to Pray for, is elegant and significant, Verbum pertinet
ad rem forensem and judicialem; significat orare vel deprecari more ejus qui ad
judidicem appellat, and illum supplex adit and precabundus. Coc.
implying a forinsecal act, when an advocate in Court moves the Judge in behalf
of an offender; so that when the Lord says, My servant Job shall pray for you,
his meaning is, he shall deprecate the wrath and vengeance that your sin has
deserved, and entreat my favor for you, and seek your peace with me. My
servant Job shall pray for you.

Hence observe, First; It is a duty to pray for those that have wronged us.

Not only is it a duty to forgive them, and be reconciled to them; but to pray
for them, and heartily wish their good. The Apostle James having said (Chap.
5.16.) Confess your faults one to another; presently adds, Pray for one
another: yea, Christ commands us to pray for the good, not only of those that
confess they have wronged us, and desire reconciliation to us, but to pray for
our enemies, that is, such as still hate us, and continue to contrive all the
mischief they can against us. It is a duty, not only to pray for them that
acknowledge their fault, but for the^ also who go on in their fault against us;
enemies do so. Bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray
for them that despitefully use you and persecute you. These are Christ's, not
only counsels, but commands ( Mat. 5.44.) Even for them we should pray, that
God would pardon their sin, turn their hearts, and give them repentance, which
is the best we can pray for them.

Again, the Lord says, My servant Job shall pray for you.

Hence observe, Secondly; God undertakes and gives his word for a good man,
that he will do his duty.

God having spoken to Job about this matter, undertook for his performance; My
servant Job shall pray for you, I will put it into his heart to do it. The Lord
may very well be bound for a good man, that he shall do his duty, because, as
he has promised, so he will help him to do his duty. Thus the Lord engaged for
Abraham (Genesis 18.19.) Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I am doing? I
know Abraham (I am well enough acquainted with Abraham) that he will command
his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord. I know him, I will be surety for him. The Lord speaks with confidence
concerning his people, that they will do this and that, they will humble
themselves before him, and that they will forgive and pray for their enemies;
he knows they will do all these things, because he knows he has given them
power and a heart to do them. The Apostle was confident of the obedience of the
Church of Galatia (Gal. 5.10.) I have (says he) co fidence in you, through the
Lord, that you will be none otherwise minded. When the Apostle undertook that
they should do their duty, he did it respectively to a divine assistance and
presence with them; I have confidence in you (not in your selves, but) through
the Lord, etc. but God undertakes absolutely, My servant Job shall pray for you.

Thirdly, Note; The prayers and intercessions of the righteous, prevail much
with God.

The Lord having assured them that his servant Job should pray for them, tells
them in the next words, Him will I accept; which intimates, that his p^ayers
should have a great power with God for them ( James 5.16.) The effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much; and it does so in a twofold
respect.

First, For himself. A godly man gets much good of God in his own case, by
prayer.

Secondly, It prevails very much with God, in respect of others. It Is a great
honor with which the Lord crowns the prayers of his faithful servants, that
they prevail, not only for themselves, but for others. Thus the Lord spoke to
Abimelech (Genesis 20.7) Now therefore restore this man (meaning Abraham) his
wife, for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee. And his prayer was
answered. When the Lord had smitten Miriam with the Leprosy, Moses cried unto
the Lord, saying, heal her now, O God, I beseech thee; and she was healed
(Numb. 12.13.) Thus Samuels prayer prevailed (1 Samuel 7.9.) And Samuel took a
sucking Lamb, and offered it up for a burnt-offering, and Samuel cried unto the
Lord for Israel (not for himself, but for Israel) and the Lord heard him. And
in the twelfth Chapter of the same Book ( verse. 19.) the people begged prayers
of Samuel; And all the people said unto Samuel, pray for thy servants unto the
Lord thy God, that we die not. And at the 23d verse, Samuel said, As for me,
God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you, but
I will teach you the good and the right way; and he prayed for them, and the
Lord spared the people at that time. Not to pray for others, proceeds from
uncharitableness: not to desire the prayers of others, proceeds either from
ignorance, not knowing of what value the prayers of others, who are godly, are;
or from pride, that we will not be beholding to others for their prayers. It is
a great mercy to have the prayers of good men going for us.

Fourthly, Note; The prayers of others may prevail with God, when our own
cannot.

Eliphaz and his two friends were good men, yet the Lord did not give answer to
them, but to the prayers of Job. The prayers of others may be answered, when
ours are not, in a double respect.

First, Others may be in a better p^aying frame than our selves. Every one that
is in a praying state, is not always in a praying frame, especially not in
such a praying frame as another may be in; another may be in a better praying
frame, and so may prevail more for us, than we for our selves.

Secondly, Some other persons may be more accepted with God, than we; some are,
as it were, favorites with God. God shows favor to all his servants, but all
his servants are not his favorites: Moses was a favorite, Abraham was a
favorite, God called him his friend; and Job was a favorite. The Lord shows
favor to many, who yet are not his favorites. Kings and P^inces show favor
to all their faithful subjects, yet but one (possibly) is a Favorite. The
Lords chief favorite, is his Son Jesus Christ, he has his ear continually: I
knew, said Christ ( John 11.42.) that thou hear me always. Now, as Christ
is a favorite above all men; so among good men, some have favor with God
above others. A King will hear a favorite, when he will not a common person.
Our Annotators upon this very place, tell us out of Mr. Fox, that when Sir John
Gostwich had falsely accused Archbishop Cranmer to King Henry the VIII, he
would not hear him, nor be reconciled to him, till Cranmer himself, whom he had
wronged, came and spoke for him. Thus the Lord will not be reconciled to some,
till the wronged party intercedes for them. Yet we must remember, that the
power or effect of all our prayers, depends upon Jesus Christ alone; by him it
is, that any have access to the father, and he is the way to the holiest, the
beloved, in whom God is well pleased, whom he hears always, and through whom
God hears his best beloved favorites on earth.

Observe, Fifthly; It is a great mercy to have the prayers of a good man going
for us.

The Lord told not Eliphaz and his two friends, of any thing else that Job
should do for them, he only says, Job my servant shall pray for you. If the
Lord does but stir up the heart of a Job, of a Moses, of a Jacob, a Wrestler in
prayer, to pray for us, who knows what mercy we may receive by it! And
therefore, when the Lord forbids his favorites to pray for a people, as
sometimes he does, it is a sign that such are in a very sad condition, yea,
that their case is desperate. Jeremiah was a mighty man with the Lord in
prayer, and the Lord said to him ( Jer. 14.11.) Pray not to me for this people
for good. Jeremiah was forward to pray for them, but the Lord stopped him, Pray
no more; not that the Lord disliked his prayer; but, because he was resolved
not to forgive them, though he prayed for them, therefore he said, pray not.
The Lord would not let such precious waters run wast, as the prayers of
Jeremiah were. They are in a remediless, ill condition, of whom the Lord says,
pray not for them. Of such the Apostle spoke (1 John 5.16.) If any man see his
brother sin a sin not unto death, he shall ask and God shall give him life.
There is a sin unto death, I say not that he shall pray for it. The pardon of a
sin unto death is not to be prayed for. Every sin deserves death, but every sin
is not unto death: They who sin so, are past prayer; and in how woeful a plight
are they, whose sins are past prayers! They who have been much in prayer
themselves, and afterward fall off from, or walk contrary unto their prayers,
come at last to this miserable issue, that either they give over praying for
themselves, or others are stopped from praying for them. And though an outward
bar be not laid upon their friends prayer, as in Isreal's case, yet there may be
a bar upon the spirit of such as used to pray for them. It is a bad sign, when
the Lord shuts up the heart from praying for any one; and it is a sign of
mercy, when the Lord inlargeth the heart of any that are godly to pray for
others.

Sixthly, Observe; Prayer for another does not profit him, unless he be
faithful himself.

I ground it upon the text, Job shall pray for you; but you must carry a
sacrifice, which implied their faith; and they must carry a sacrifice to Job,
and that implied their repentance; and both implied that they prayed for
themselves also. It is in vain to offer a sacrifice without faith and
repentance (being in this frame) My servant Job shall pray for you. Conjunctis
precibus nihil impetratu impossible est. Conjunctae autem preces esse non
possunt ubi est offensio. Coc. vid.
The prayer of faith prevails not for those that go on in their unbelief and
impenitency. Job prayed for his friends; and they repenting and believing, he
prevailed for them. The reason why the Prophet Jeremiah, in the place before
mentioned, as also ( chap. 7.16.) was commanded not to pray for that people,
was, because they were a hardened people in their sins, and therefore his
prayers could do them no good. Yea, the Lord told him ( cha. 15.2.) that though
not only he, but other great favorites joined in prayer for them, it should do
them no good. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, my mind could not be
toward this people. The reason why those eminent favorites, and mighty men in
prayer, could do no good, was (as was said before) because they were
unbelieving, and hardened in their sins, as appears upon the place. The Prophet
Ezekiel speaks the same thing ( chap. 14.14.) Though these three men, Noah,
Daniel, and Job (this Job that we have in the text) were in it, they should
deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, says the Lord. Jobs
prayers obtained good for his friends; but the children of Israel were in such
a condition, that though Noah, Daniel, and Job were praying for them, they
should get no good by it; their sins were so high, and their hearts so hard,
that the prayers of the holiest men in the world could not prevail with God for
mercy.

It cannot be denied, but the prayers of a godly man may profit a wicked man,
an unbeliever, an impenitent person, for his conversion to the faith, and the
bringing of him to repentance; but they profit not any man, who as he has not
faith, so continues in his unbelief.

Yet, I grant, that the prayers of a believer may profit such an unbeliever, as
to the avoiding of some temporal evil, or as to the obtaining of some temporal
good; as is clear in Abraham's prayer for Abimelech (Genesis 20.7.) But how much
soever a godly man prays for the pardon of a wicked man's sin, or the
salvation of his soul, he shall never be pardoned or saved, unless himself
repent and believe. They who never pray in faith for themselves, shall not get
favor with God, by any prayer of faith made by others for them.

Now as from this, and such like Scriptures, it appears, that the prayers of
godly men, for good men here on earth, are very pleasing unto the Lord, and
receive great answers: So they do absurdly, who, from this Scripture infer,
that the Saints departed pray for us, as if they knew or understood our
condition; and they do more absurdly, who living here on earth, pray to the
Saints in heaven to pray for them. The Scripture speaks nothing of prayers to
departed Saints, nor of departed Saints praying for us; the Scripture speaks
only of the living on earth, praying for those that live on earth. Job was
alive in the body, and so were those three men, to whom the Lord said, My
servant Job shall pray for you.

The Lord having assured Eliphaz and his two friends, that Job would pray for
them, gives them encou^agement to go and desire his prayers, by a gracious
promise.

For (says he) him will I accept; and threatens them in case they should
forbear, in the next words, Lest I deal with you according to your folly, in
that ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, like my servant Job.

First, Of the gracious promise, him will I accept. The Hebrew says, his face
will I lift up. Acceptance with God is the lifting up of the face of man; then
man lifts up his face with boldness when he is accepted with God. When God
refused to accept Cain and his offering, his countenance fell, or was cast down
( Genesis 4.5.) Unless the Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon us, as
David prayed ( Psalm. 4.6.) we cannot with any comfort, much less with true
confidence, lift up our face or countenance unto God. That Is the significancy
of the word.

Him will I accept. God is no accepter of persons, as the word is often used in
Scripture ( Deuteronomy. 10.17.) The Lord is a great God, mighty and terrible, which
regards not persons. It is the same phrase in the Hebrew, with this in the
Text, he lifts not up faces, that is, the Lord does not accept persons upon
any outward respect.

First, The Lord does not accept persons for their personableness, as I may
say; the Lord does not delight in any man's legs, his delight is in them that
fear him (Psalm. 147.10, 11.) he does not accept men for their goodly stature,
as he told Samuel, when he would needs have poured the oil upon the firstborn
of the Sons of Jesse (1 Samuel 16.7.) Look not on his countenance, or on the
height of his stature, because I have refused him: for the Lord sees not as
man sees; for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on
the heart. It Is the beauty of holiness and integrity in the heart, not the
beauty of fairness upon the face, with which God is taken; it is a lowly mind,
not a high stature, which God accepts.

Secondly, The Lord is no accepter of persons, as to the nation or country
where they were born or live. Thus the Apostle Peter spoke ( Acts 10.35.) I
perceive, that God is no respecter of persons; but in every Nation, he that
fears him and works righteousness, is accepted with him. God does not
prefer Jews before Gentiles, Barbarians or Scythians: that a man had his birth
in this or that Nation, neither helps nor hinders acceptance with God.

Thirdly, The Lord accepts no man's person for his riches ( Prove. 11.4.)
Riches profit not in the day of wrath. No man's person is acceptable to God for
his purse, or his penny, no not at all.

Fou^thly, The Lord ^ccepteth no man's person for his worldly greatness, honor
and dignity; He pours contempt upon Princes (Psalm. 107.40.) The day of the
Lord is against the hills and mountains (Isa. 2.14.) The great God regards
not any man merely for greatness; the Lord accepts no man's person upon these or
any such like accounts: He only accepts the persons of those that fear him, and
do his will.

Suscipit faciem Deus quando precantem c^audit.
The Lords acceptance of any person, in the sense of this promise concerning
Job, is, First, To show favor and manifest affection to him. Secondly, To
honor and highly esteem him. Thirdly, (Which is here specially intended) to
answer his prayers, and grant his requests, not only for himself, but for
others. When a person is once accepted, his prayers shall not be denied, nor
suffer a repulse. The Lord accepts persons, as a King the persons of those
loyal Subjects, who come to entreat his favor and pardon for those that have
offended him, and rebelled against him; he grants their suit, and treats them
fairly. In this sense the Lord makes promise to Eliphaz and his two friends,
that he will accept Job.

Hence, Observe; First, It is a very high favor and privilege to be accepted
of God.

Him will I accept, says the Lord, of Job. This was a favor beyond all the
favors, that follow after in the close of the book, about the doubling of his
estate. If Jacob (Gen 32.20.) was so taken with a hope of acceptance by his
brother Esau; Peradventure he will accept me; If when he was accepted by Esau,
he said ( chap. 33.10.) I have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of
God, and thou wast pleased with me: Then, how much more should we rejoice in
this assurance, that God has accepted of us, and that he is pleased with us!
If the Apostle ( Romans 15.3.) prayed so earnestly, and desired others to strive
with him in prayer to God, that his service, which he had for Jerusalem, might
be accepted of the Saints; then how much more should we pray, that our services
may be accepted of God, and rejoice when they are accepted! The Apostle made it
his chief work, to get acceptance with God (2 Cor. 5.9.) Wherefore we labor,
that whether present or absent (that is, whether living or dying) we may be
accepted with him; we are ambitious of divine acceptance. The word which we
translate labor, notes a laboring after honor, which ambitious men labor
much after, implying that to be accepted with the Lord is a very high honor,
indeed the highest honor.

There is a twofold acceptance. First, Of our persons. Secondly, Of our
services. The former is the ground of the latter, and Jesus Christ is the
foundation of both ( Ephesians. 1.6.) He through glorious grace has made us
accepted in the beloved. Jesus Christ is so dearly beloved of the father, that
he is called, The Beloved, as if only beloved. The acceptance of our services
is often promised in Scripture, as a high favou^ ( Exodus 28.38. Ezekiel. 20.40,
41. Isa. 56.7.) This Moses prayed for in the behalf of the Tribe of Levy, which
Tribe was appointed to offer sacrifice, and to pray for the people, ( Deuteronomy.
33.11.) Bless Lord his substance, and accept the work of his hands. What was
the work of Levies hands? it was to offer sacrifice, to which prayer and
intercession was joined. That Levi, who had the priest-ho^d fixed in the family
of Aaron, should be accepted in the work of his hands, was a blessing not only
to himself, but to many more. This David prayed earnestly for ( Psalm. 19.14.)
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord, my strength, and my redeemer. He put up a like prayer ( Psalm.
119.108.) Accept, I beseech thee, the free-will-offerings of my mouth, O Lord.
This was the prayer of Araunah for David (2 Samuel 24.23.) The Lord thy God
accept thee. So great a privilege it is, for our persons and services, to be
accepted with the Lord; that when once we have it, we may rejoice all our days
( Eccles. 9.7,) Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a
merry heart, for God now accepts thy works. Solomon does not mean it of a
sensitive joy only, much less of any sensual joy, but of a gracious and
spiritual joy. In this joy we may eat and drink, when our work is accepted; and
our work is never accepted, till our persons are.

Now, if it be so great a privilege to be accepted with the Lord, how great a
misery is it not to be accepted? this inference flows naturally from that
great truth. And how great a misery it is, not to be accepted of God, several
Scriptures hold out. The Prophet ( Amos 5.22,) declares no other judgment upon
that people but this, The Lord accepts them not. And the same declaration is
made by several other Prophets ( Jerem. 14.10, 12. Hos. 8.13. Mal. 1.8, 10.)
Acceptance is our greatest mercy, and non-acceptance our greatest misery; and
that is the reason why the understanding and faithful servants of God are so
strict, or (as the world accounts it) precise and scrupleous, that they will
not turn aside, no not in those things which are called small matters, and of
which many think God will take no notice. They desire to be accepted of God in
every thing, and because they know (in some measure) what is acceptable to him,
therefore they would do nothing, no, not the least thing, which is unacceptable
to him ( Prove. 10.32.) The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable. The
lips are organs or instruments of speech, not of knowledge; the understanding
knows, the lips only speak: Yet here Solomon ascribes the work of the
understing to the lips; and this he does, because there is or should be a great
cognation, between the understanding and the lips; we should speak nothing but
what we understand, we should speak only what we know, and according to our
knowledge. The lips of the righteous have such an intercourse with their
understanding, that their very lips may be said to know what is acceptable, and
therefore they speak what is acceptable. It is said of David, that he guided
the people with the skilfulness (says our) with the discretion (says another
translation) with the understanding of his hands, says the original ( Psalm.
78.72.) The hand has no more understanding, skill, or discretion seated in it,
than the lips; yet because David consulted with his understanding, in what he
did with his hand, it is said, He guided them by the skilfulness, or
discretion, or understanding of his hand. Thus the lips of the righteous
understand and know what is acceptable; and they know that unless they have an
aim to honor God in small matters, yea, in all matters, they greatly
dishonor him, and so cannot be accepted with him at all. The excellency of a
gracious heart, appears greatly when he makes conscience of doing the least
thing which he knows, ye, only fears, will be unacceptable to God, or wherein
he may run the hazard of this privilege, his acceptance with him.

There are three things, which show why it is so great a privilege, to be
accepted with God, and why his servants are so careful not to do any thing that
is unacceptable unto him.

First, Because, Once accepted with God and always accepted. For though
possibly a person accepted may have some frowns from God upon his uneven
walkings, or sinful actings; yet his state of acceptance, continues firm in
the main. The Lord does not utterly cast off his favorites, no, nor any whom
he takes into his favor, or a nearness with himself.

Secondly, If we are once accepted with God, he can make us accepted with men;
and that, not only with good men ( Romans 14.18.) but, even with bad men. God can
give us favor in the eyes of those men, who have not an eye to see, that we
are in his favor. Daniel, who was so careful to keep up his acceptance with
God, That he purposed in his heart, not to defile himself with the portion of
the Kings meat (Dan. 1.8, 9.) Of him it is said ( ver. 9.) God had brought
Daniel into favor and tender love, with the Prince of the Eunuchs. He, a
conscientious Jew, had great acceptance with him, who was an idolatrous
Heathen.

Thirdly, If once accepted of the Lord, we need not be much troubled, though we
are reprobate to the world, though the world reject and cast us off, yea, cast
us out. The Lords acceptance of us, will bear or may bear up our spirits, in
the midst of the worlds reproaches, repulses, and rejections.

Again, When the Lord says, Him will I accept.

Observe; The Lord accepts some godly men more than others.

Jobs three friends were godly men, questionless they were, yet they had not
that acceptance with God which Job had. All that are godly have acceptance
with God, but they have not all alike acceptance ( Acts 10.35.) In every
Nation, they that fear him and work righteousness, are accepted with him: Which
we must not take merely for a moral or legal righteousness, but as in
conjunction with an Evangelical righteousness. Now let them be who they will,
that fear God and work righteousness, they are accepted: but all are not
equally accepted; him will I accept, says the Lord concerning Job, with an
Emphasis; why was it so? because Job was one of the most eminent persons for
godliness, yea, the most eminent, at that time, upon the face of the whole
earth, as was showed at the 2d verse of the first chapter. Noah was a man
highly accepted of the Lord above others, and he was righteous above others (
Genesis 7.1.) Thee (says God) have I seen righteous before me in this generation.
Possibly there might be others righteous, but there was no man so righteous as
Noah, and none so accepted as he.

And if it be enquired, who amongst good men are most accepted, or accepted
beyond other good men? I answer,

First, They among good men are most accepted, who live most by faith. As
without faith it is impossible to please God, in any degree ( Heb. 11.6.) so
they that live most by faith, please God most, or in the highest degree, and
are most accepted by him. Abraham, who lived so much by faith, that he was
called the father of the faithful, was so much accepted of God, that he is
called The friend of God (Jam. 2.23.)

Secondly, Among godly men, they who are most upright in their walkings, who
walk with a single eye, and with a right foot, are most acceptable; such a man
was Job. The character given him (Chap. 1.1.) was, A man perfect and upright.

Thirdly, They that walk most humbly, are most acceptable unto God. For, (...)
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble (Jam. 4.6.) so he
shows grace, that is, favor, or graceth and adorneth them with his favors.
When one said ( Mich. 6.6.) Wherewith shall I come before the Lord? etc. The
Prophet answered ( verse. 8.) He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God? That is, as he requires of thee to exercise justice
toward all men, and mercy to the poor, or any in misery, so to walk humbly with
himself; that is, to acknowledge thou have need of the righteousness of a
Savior, and of the mercy of a God, how much righteousness and mercy soever
thou have exercised toward others. When we are low in our own eyes, then are
we highest in Gods eye; when we, as it were, reject our selves, and all that we
have done, as unworthy of any acceptance, then are we most accepted of the
Lord.

Fourthly, Among Believers, they are most accepted with God, who are most
fruitful in their lives, and do most good in their places, and according to
their opportunities. The Lord loves a fruitful Christian. Many are barren
trees, unfruitful ground, little can be seen of good which they do; these are a
burden to God. But, when a Christian (as it is said of Christ, Act. 10.38.)
goes about doing good; when a Christian, as Christ gives the account of his
own life ( John 17.4.) Glorifieth God on earth, and finisheth the work which
God gives him to do, O how acceptable is such a one to God! And therefore,

Let us labor to know, and do what is acceptable to the Lord. The Apostle
would have us prove what is acceptable to the Lord (Ephesians. 5.10.) that is, First,
study the Word, to find out what is acceptable to the Lord. Secondly, approve
and embrace with our whole hearts, what we find to be so. Thirdly, practice and
do what we have so approved or embraced. And because the Scripture speaks of
some duties which are specially acceptable to the Lord, I shall instance the
Point in a few particulars.

First, Doing right to every one ( Prove. 21.3.) To do justice and judgment, is
more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice. This is true, or may be affi^med of
justice, both commutative and distributive. To do justice in our dealings with
men, called commutative justice, is more acceptable than sacrifice, that is,
than any outward worship given to God without this. It Is true also, of
distributive justice, which is done by Magistrates in rewarding good men, and
in punishing them that do evil; these works of justice also, are more
acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice.

Secondly, The true worship and service of God, which the Apostle calls
sacrifice, is highly acceptable to God ( Romans 12.1.) I beseech you therefore,
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service. These
first Table-duties, when in consort with those former second Table-duties, are
highly honorable, and therefore cannot but be highly acceptable to the Lord.
Sacrifice to God, without justice to man, is mere hypocrisy; Justice to man,
without sacrifice to God, is no better than Heathenish morality: Both united,
are the beauty of Christianity.

Thirdly, To serve Christ, that is, to aim at the honoring, as well as the
enjoying of Christ, with our Gospel-priviledges and liberties, is exceeding
acceptable. The Apostle having said ( Romans 14.17.) The Kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but righteteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost,
presently adds ( verse. 18.) He that in these things (that is, in righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost) serves Christ, is acceptable unto God;
that is, this shows he is a person accepted with God. The doing of things
purely acceptable to God, is a clear and strong argument of our acceptance
with him.

Fourthly, To do any good we do, be it little or much, with a willing mind, is
very acceptable to God (2 Cor. 8.12.) If there be first a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man has. Though it be little that we have, yet if
the mind be free, if there be much of the will in it, though but little of the
purse (if we have no more to give, or give according to what we have) if there
be much of the heart in it, though but little of the hand (if we do according
to the power that is in our hand) the Lord has a very great respect to it.

Fifthly, To be much in prayer for others, especially for those that are in
power over us, is very acceptable to the Lord (1 Timothy 2.2, 3.) I exhort that
supplications, etc. be made for all men, for Kings, and all that are in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. As it
is good and acceptable in the sight of God, that we should lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, under Kings and all in authority;
so that we should pray for Kings, and those that are in authority.

Sixthly, When children do well requite their parents; that (says the Apostle,
1 Timothy 5.4.) is acceptable unto God.

Seventhly, To suffer patiently for well-doing, is greatly pleasing unto God (1
Pet. 2.20.) In a word, they among good men are most acceptable of God, who are
most zealous in doing any thing in a right manner, which for the matter is
acceptable unto God.

Observe, Thirdly; As the Lord accepts some godly men more than others, so he
accepts some godly men for others.

The Lord does not speak here of accepting Job strictly for himself, but of his
acceptance in the behalf of his friends, Him will I accept, that is, for you;
I will be entreated by him, I will not give you the honor to be entreated by
you, but to him I give it, I will be entreated by him. The Prophet Elisha said
to the King of Israel (2 Kings 3.14.) Were it not that I regard the presence of
Jehoshaphat the King of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee; he
would not vouchsafe that bad King a look, but for the respect that he bare to
good Jehoshaphat. And it is a truth, that God would not have so much respect to
some good men, were it not for the sake of some others, who are better. Yet,
that the Lord accepts one man's person more than another, or one man's person
for another, is primarily and principally, in and for the sake of Jesus Christ.
Job had acceptance with God more than his friends, and for his friends; he had
the former by his being in Christ, and the latter as he was a figure of Christ.
No man's person, no man's work is accepted of, otherwise than in relation to
Christ. The Apostle affirms this fully ( Ephesians. 1.6.) He has made us accepted in
the Beloved. Christians are beloved, but Christ only is the Beloved: we are
accepted in him, the beloved, as to our selves; and it is in the beloved that
any are accepted more than others, or for others.

Take this Inference from the whole.

The Lord accepted Job praying for others; then he will accept a good man
praying upon right grounds, and for right ends, against another. It is
dangerous to stand in the way of their prayers, who are accepted of God. That
man is more safe, against whom a thousand are acting, than he against whom any
one godly man upon a just ground is praying. The Lord has done great things
against evil men, upon the prayers of the faithful, as well as he has done
great things for good men at their prayer. David by one ejaculatory petition,
spoiled the plot of Achitophel; the Lord, according to that short prayer,
turned his counsel into foolishness, and so overturned the whole design laid
against his servant David. Thus far of the promise, which the Lord gave Eliphaz
and his two friends for their encouragement, to go unto Job and entreat him to
offer up a burnt-offering, and to pray for them, for him will I accept.

Now follows a threat, in case they did not: Lest I deal with you according
to your folly.

As if the Lord had said, Do not slight this advice that I give you, no, nor
forslow it, make have to make your address to Job; I will accept him, and I
tell you, I will not accept you alone; therefore make have, and do as I have
commanded, else I shall deal with you according to your folly.

There is some difference in the reading of these words.

First, Some read, Lest I do or act folly to you. But how can the Lord do or
act folly toward any? We may expound this translation, by that ( Psalm. 18.26.)
where David says of the Lord, With the pure thou will show thy self pure, and
with the froward or perverse, thou will show thy self froward or perverse. But
how does the Lord show himself froward with those that are froward? there is no
frowardness in the Lord, he is always in a composed and sedate frame,
infinitely beyond any passion or perturbation: the meaning is only this, The
Lord will deal with men according to what they are; the actings and effects of
his providence shall be toward a froward man, as if he were froward. If a man
deal perversely with God, he will deal with him as if he were perverse; and
with the pure, God will show himself pure, that is, he will carry it purely
toward them; they shall receive good, who are and do good. Thus here, go,
says the Lord, and do as I bid you, Lest I deal folly to you. In the Hebrew
Language, to do kindness with one, is the same as to exercise or show kindness
to him. That form of speech is used, Genesis 20.13. Genesis 24.49. Genesis 40.14. And so
to do folly with one, is to show or exercise folly to to him. The Lord does
folly to them that do folly; that is, he makes them see by his wise doing, how
foolishly they have done.

Others express it thus, Lest I deal foolishly with you, or, folly to you; that
is, lest I do that which may be accounted foolishness in me. You having
appeared Advocates in my cause, and pleaded for me ('it is folly to pay any man
with unkindness for the service he has done us.) Well (says the Lord) look to
it, I will not accept you, but deal folly to you, or foolishly with you, in the
sense of some men (possibly) but wisely in my own. The Lord is always to be
admired, in his wisdom, holiness, and in the serenity of his spirit; yet in the
opinion of the wise men of this world, he may seem to deal foolishly, or do
folly.

Secondly, The words may be rendered, Lest I do that which may be disgraceful to
you. Thus the Chaldee paraphrase reads, Lest I put a disgrace, or an affront
upon you, and make it appear, to your shame, that you have not carried it
aright in this matter, but have been shamefully out. The word here used, is
several times used in Scripture, to note the defiling or disgrace of a thing (
Nahum. 3.6.) I will cast abominable filth upon thee, and I will make thee vile,
that is, I will disgrace thee, and (as it follows) I will set thee for a
gazing stock. So ( Micah 7.6.) when the Lord would show the exceeding
sinfulness of those times, he says, Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not
confidence in a guide, keep the door of thy mouth from her that lies in thy
bosom; for the son dishonors the father; it is this word, the son disgraceth
the father, he deals with his father as if he were a Nabal, a very fool. When
a son knows not his distance, nor performs his dury, he dishonors his
father. The Prophet ( Jer. 14 21.) speaks in a way of deprecation, Do not abhor
us, for t^y name sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory. The Lord is
^ometimes so angry with his people, that he even casts dirt upon the throne
of his glory, that is, upon his Church, in and by which he should be glorified,
as upon his Throne. The Lord disgraceth his Church, the throne of his glory,
when his Church disgraceth him, and dishonours his glori^us name ( Deuteronomy.
32.15.) Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked (that is, Israel, the Church was waxen
fat; the Lord fed Jesurun his Church to the full, they had not a lean se^vice
of it: but what did J^surun?) he forsook God wh ch made him, and lightly
esteemed the rock of his salvation. The word which we transla^e, he lightly
esteemed, is the word of the Text: Now when Jesurun did lightly esteem or
disgrace the Lord, he soon after disgraced Jesurun, his Church, The throne of
his glory. This is a good sense of the words; do as I di^ect, lest I put a
disgrace upon you. Thus folly is put for the punishment of folly, as sin often,
for the penal effects and fruits of sin; as it is said (1 King. 13.34.) This
thing ^ecame sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off.

Our reading says, Lest I deal with you according to your folly; that is,
according to your sin, and the hard censures which you have given of my servant
Job, and, as it follows, In that you have not sp ken of me the thing that is
right. These things have been your folly; and (...) do not speedily repair with
your sacrifice to Job, and get him to pray for you, what you can do your
selves, will not mak^ amends for your folly, nor mend this breach, but, I will
deal with you according to your folly, you shall taste of the fruit of your
doings; the reward of your hands, or of your tongues, shall be given to you.
That Is the general sense of our translation; As if the Lord had said, Lest I
make you understand by your sad experiences, by the punishments and
chastisements laid upon you, that you have done very foolishly, and were
greatly mistaken in your apprehensions of me, and of my providence concerning
Job. Or thus, ye have declared much folly in the management of this matter with
my servant Job, ye have offended against the common Laws of friendship and
humanity, insulting over a man in misery; and your folly has been greater,
while, against the Laws of piety, ye have judged of a man's holiness, by his
outward unhappiness, and have censured him as a bad man, because he has in
this world endured so much evil. This has been your sin, ye have in this dealt
foolishly with my servant Job; therefore hasten to him, and do as I have said,
Lest I deal with you acaccording to your folly.

Hence note, First; Sin is folly.

And not only is it simple folly, which a man commits for want of wit, or
because he has little understanding (what a man does for want of wit and
understanding, is simple folly) but sin is wicked folly, which is the abuse of
wit, and parts, and gifts, yea, the overflowing of lust. And though we cannot
charge these men, that they did intentionally use their wit and parts to grieve
Job, yet it proved so; though it was not the end or design of them that spoke,
yet it was the issue of their speech; they did him a great deal of wrong, and
doubtless, Satan stirred much, or provoked them to use their parts and gifts to
imbitter the spirit of the poor man, and God left them to do it. This was their
folly; and all such actings or speakings are no better, nor do they deserve
better or softer language. This word folly, is often applied in Scripture, to
sin, especially to great sins. Another word is used in the Proverbs of Solomon;
but in several other places, sin is expressed by this ( Gen 34.7.) When that
great affliction fell upon Jacob, the ravishing of Dinah, her bret^^^^ came
home very wroth, saying, He has committed folly in ^^^^^l. So ( Judges 19.23.
Judges 20.6.) the abusing of the Levites Concubine is called the committing of
folly. Whoredom is expressed by folly ( Deuteronomy. 22.21.) And this word, with
reference (I conceive) to the sin of whoredom, which is spoken of in that
place, is translated villainy (Jer. 29.23.) All sin is folly, especially any
great sin is so. For,

First, It is a folly to hurt our selves. No man can hurt us, if we do not hurt
our selves by sin. The Apostle Peter says (1 Epist. 3.13.) Who is he that will
harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? It Is strange, that any
should. Though it be true enough that many have had, not only a will to harm
them that follow good, but have actually done them many and great outward
harms; yet this is a great truth, none can indeed harm them that follow good,
because all harms turn to their good. Nothing can hurt us but our sin.

Secondly, Sin is folly, for in sinning we strive with one that is too hard for
us. Do we (says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.23.) provoke the Lord to jealousy? (are
we so simple?) are we stronger than he?

Thirdly, It is folly to do that by which we can get no good, that is the part
of a fool ( Romans 6.21.) What fruit have ye of those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? What have ye got by them? have ye made any gains or earnings to boast
of? the end of those things is death; and is it not folly to begin that which
ends in death, and that a never-ending, an eternal death.

Fourthly, It is folly to sin, for by that, at best, we run a hazard of our
best portion, for fading pleasures, and perishing profits. If we have any
pleasure by sin, it is but pleasure for a season, and that a very short one
too. What a foolish thing is it to venture things that are incorruptable, for
perishing things? It were a great folly for a man to venture gold against
grass: they do infinitely more foolishly who sin against the Lord; for all that
they can get by it, is not so much, to what they hazard, as grass to gold (
Mat. 16.26.) What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? As all flesh
is grass, so all that flesh lusts after is no better. What kind of Merchants,
what kind of Exchange-men are they, that will traffic or truck away their
souls, for the profits or pleasures of sin? and it is for one of these that
most, if not all men, traffic away their souls.

Secondly, Observe; When God deals m^st severely with sinners, he deals
justly with them.

What rod soever he lays upon their backs, what shame, what poverty, what
sickness he affl cts them with, It is but according to their folly, they have
but their own, they have no reason to complain. The Prophet told the people of
Israel, as one man, when under grievous affl ctions ( Jerem. 4.18.) Thy ways
and thy doings, have procured these things unto thee: Thou have no reason to
complain, for thy punishment is of thy own procurement, that is, thy sin is
visible in thy punishment, thou eatest but the fruit of thy own doings, how
bitter soever it is. Another Scripture says ( Number. 32.23.) Your sin shall find
you out, that is, you shall suffer according to what you have done, and reap
what ye have sowed. And is it not folly to sow to the (corrupt) flesh, when of
the flesh we shall reap corruption (Gal. 6.8.) The flesh is a corrupt thing,
and can yield us no better a thing than it is (the effect is like the cause)
corruption, that is, a miserable condition both here and hereafter, now and for
ever.

Thirdly, Note; The Lord will not pass by, nor spare, no not a godly man, when
he sins and repents not.

All this is included in the going of these men to Job. As if the Lord had
said, I will punish you Eliphaz, and Bildad, and Zophar for your folly, unless
ye repent. They that are in a state of grace, cannot expect favor from the
Lord, unless they turn from their sin, and give him glory by repenting and
believing. Good men doing evil may suffer for it, as well as the worst of men.
The Lord will see a work of repentance and sel^-humbling, a work of faith,
looking to Christ the sacrifice, else he will deal with them, even with them
(as he threatened these good men) according to their folly.

But what was the folly of Eliphaz and his two friends, for which the Lord
threatened to deal so severely with them? The latter part of the verse tells us,
what God accounted and called their folly.

In that ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right. The Lord had told
them as much at the seventh verse, My wrath is kindled against you, because ye
have not spoken of me the thing that is right. Here the Lo^d points them to
their sin again, and lays his finger afresh upon the soar.

But why does he so?

Take these three reasons why. Probably the Lord repeated these words,

First, To show that he was very sensible of their sin, in speaking amiss of
him, and very angry with them for it. They provoked the Lord much, when they
measured him, as it were by themselves, or by their own meet-wand, in his ways
of judgment, and procedure with Job; and therefore they must hear of it a
second time, or (as we say) at both ears.

Secondly, The Lord tells them again of it, that he might fasten the sense of
their sin more upon them. We very hardly take the impression of our follies and
failings, we are ready to let the thoughts of them wear off and slip from us;
they abide not, but glide away as water from a stone, or from the swans-back,
unless fixed by renewed mindings: and for this reason the Lord repeateth the
mention of sin so often, in the the ears of his people, by the ministry of his
word, that the evil of it may more fully appear to them, or that they may the
more clearly see, and the better know how bad, how base, how foolish a thing it
is to sin against him.

Thirdly, I conceive, the Lord repeated these words, to confirm the judgment
which he had given before concerning them in those wo^ds, Ye have not spoken of
me the thing that is right. Quicquid in divino colloqui^ re^etitur, robustius
confirmatur. Greg. lib. 35. moral. c. 8.
As if the Lord had said, that which I said before, I say again, I do not
change my opinion, either concerning you or my servant Job; and therefore, I
say it once more (the rep^^ting of a matter is for the confirmation of it, as
Joseph told Pharaoh about the doubling of his dream.) Ye have not spoken of me
the thing that is right, Like my servant Job.

These words also are a repetition, yea, a triplication, and more than so, this
is the fourth time, that the Lord has called Job his servant, in the compass
of two verses, three times in this 8th verse, and once in the 7th.

But what should be the meaning of this? why did the Lord call Job his servant
so often, even four times, as it were in one breath?

I answer, First, It intimates that Job was the Lords steady servant, that what
he was at first he was then at last, and what he had been long ago he was
still. Some have been called the servants of God, who have given it over in the
plain field; but here the Lord calls Job his servant, over and over, four
times over, as being his sure servant.

Secondly, It was to show that as Job retained the same duty and respect to the
service of God, so God retained the same opinion of Job, and of his service
then as at first.

Thirdly, The Lord in repeating this relational title, servant, so often, would
assure us that he knew not how (if I may speak so) to speak more honorably of
him. The Lord gave no other title to Moses (Number. 12.7.) nor to Caleb (Number.
14.24) nor to David (2 Samuel 7.5, 8.) The Lord did not speak this so often,
because he wanted other titles to give him, or because he had not variety of
phrases to express himself by, but as if he knew not where to find a more
honorable title. I grant that title of relation, Son, is more noble, and more
endearing; but that is not at all spoken of in the Old Testament, nor is it
given to any particular person in the New. Believers, as to their state, are
all the sons of God; but no one believer is spoken, either to, or of, under
this title, Son. The Apostle Paul still called himself only a servant of God.
He that is the Lords servant, is the best of freemen. We have enough to glory
in, when we are his servants. The History reports of the French King, That the
Ambassador of the King of Spain repeating many great titles of his Master; the
King of France commanded this only to be mentioned of him, King of France, King
of France; implying, that this single title King of France, was as honorable
as that large roll of titles given the King of Spain. Thus the Lord calls Job
his servant, his servant, his servant, to show that all honor is wrapped up in
this word, A servant of God.

Fourthly, This repetition may signify, That Job had been a very great, good,
and faithful servant to the Lord; not only a servant, but a laborious and
profitable servant to the Lord; so the Scripture calls those who are laborious
in his service, though at best, as to the Lord, we are unprofitable servants,
nor can any be profitable unto him.

Fifthly, The Lord multiplieth this title upon him, because whatsoever a godly
man does, is service to the Lord. This word service is comprehensive of all
duties; to hear the Word is, to serve the Lord; to pray, to fast, to give
alms, is to serve the Lord all is service to the Lord.

Job was every way a servant of the Lord.

First, As he was a Ruler. To rule well in a family is to serve the Lord; to
rule Nations is to serve the Lord much more. Job was a ruler, and he ruled well
in both capacities, as was showed in opening the 29th, 30th, and 31st chapters.

Secondly, Job was a great servant of the Lord, as he was a worshipper.

Thirdly, Job was a great servant of the Lord, as he was a sacrificer; he had
the honor of the priesthood.

Fourthly, Job was a great servant of the Lord, as a teacher of the truth; he
had instructed many, as Eliphaz acknowledged ( chap. 4.3.) And as he was a
great servant of the Lord in teaching the truth, so in opposing error; he stood
firm to his own opinion (the truth) against the tenent of his friends.

Fifthly, Job served the Lord as he was a sufferer. To suffer is very great
service, especially (as he did) to suffer greatly. We serve the Lord as much
with his cross upon our backs, as with his yoke upon our necks, or his burden
upon our shoulders. Job was a great servant of the Lords, as in holding forth
the doctrine of the cross, or maintaining that God afflicts his choicest
servants; so in bearing the cross himself.

Sixthly, Job was a great servant of the Lord in praying for his friends, and
in being so willing to be reconciled to them; and therefore, the Lord having
had so many services of him, and so many ways, repeateth, my servant Job, my
servant Job, as if he could not say this word often enough, My servant Job.

Thus we have the Lords command or charge given to Eliphaz and his two friends,
what they must do for the quenching of that fire which was kindled in his
breast against them, for their folly in dealing with his se vant Job. How they
answered that command, will appear in the next words.

Verse. 9. So Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the
Naamathite, went, and did according as the Lord commanded them: the Lord also
accepted Job. This verse holds out the obedience of Eliphaz and his two
friends, to the charge and command which the Lord gave them in the eighth
verse; where the Lord said to these three men, Take to you seven bullocks and
seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt
offering, etc. This Text answers that command, they went, and did according
as the Lord commanded them. Their obedience to the Lords command is described
three ways.

First, by the speediness of it; They went.

Secondly, by the exactness of it; They went, and did according as the Lord
commanded them.

Thirdly, by the good issue and fruit of it; The Lord also accepted Job.

So Eliphaz the Temanit^, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite,
went. These were the three persons who had to do with Job in that long contest
opened in the body of this book; these are the persons against whom the Lords
wrath was kindled, because they had not spoken of him the thing that was right,
as his servant Job; these were the persons to whom the Lord gave command to b
ing their sacrifice to Job, and offer it up for themselves, that reconciliation
might be made; the^e persons went, all three went: As all th ee were wrapped up
in one fault, as all three were in the same sin, so they all three joined
together and agreed in their obedience to the command of God, and in repentance
for their sin and faultiness.

They went. Having received a command to go, they did not tarry and stay to
consider whether they should go or stay, they did not put in any demur to the
matter, but went; which implies, first (as was said) the speediness of their
obedience, they went presently; secondly, the willingness of their obedience,
their minds were in the work, as well as their bodies; thirdly, the
cheerfulness of their obedience, they went as if they had been to take a
pleasing or pleasant Journey. They went; and what did they? They went And did
according as the Lord commanded them.

Their obedience was not only speedy, and willing, and cheerful, but exact.
These words, They did according as the Lord commanded them, yield us a great
example of full, of complete obedience; they not only did what was commanded,
but they did it as it was commanded, yea, and they did it because it was
commanded, Singular e^ emplum docilitatis et modestiae, ut qui etiam nec
improbitate nec malevolentia sed pet imprudentiam peccarunt. Bez.
for that must come in to make up the fullness of our obedience. Here is then a
great example of humility, of modesty, of meekness, and of submission to the
will of God, They went and did according as the Lord commanded them. What was
that? They brought their sacrifice, first, for kind, and secondly, for number,
as the Lord had commanded them: The Lord commanded them to bring Bullocks and
Rams; they brought them: The Lord commanded them to bring seven Bullocks and
seven Rams; they brought them as the Lord commanded, both for kind and for
number.

Secondly, They brought them to Job. The Lord said, Go to my servant Job; they
went to Job according as the Lord commanded them.

Thirdly, We must suppose they entreated Job to undertake the Office of a
Reconciler, of a Mediator, of a Priest, between God and them, according as the
Lord commanded. Though this piece of their submission and obedience be not
expressed, yet it is intimated and employed; nor could it be omitted, it being
not only a part, but the principal part, of that duty which the Lord laid upon
them. Thus in all things they submitted and were obedient according to the
command of the Lord.

First, In that we have all three named here in this matter of obedience;
Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, went,

Observe; It is very good in it self, and very pleasing to God, when they who
have joined in any sin or miscarriage toward himself or others, join readily
together in showing their sorrow and repentance for it.

It was a blessed sight to see those three men coming as one man about this
duty, not one of them drawing back, not one of them putting in any plea against
the command of God. There are three things wherein it is very pleasant to
behold the people of God joining in one.

First, when they join or are one in Opinion and Judgment, when they all think
the same thing, and are of one mind in the truth.

Secondly, When they join together and are one in affection, when they are all
of one heart, though possibly they are not all of one mind, or, when they meet
in affection, though not in opinion, ( Psalm. 133.1.) Behold how good and how
pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity! And when David had
spoken admiringly of this goodly sight, he spoke declaratively concerning the
goodness of it ( verse. 2.) It is like the precious ointment upon the head: It Is
so, first, for the sweetness of it; it is so, secondly, for the diffusiveness of
it (as follows) that ran down upon the beard, even Aarons beard, that went
down to the skirts of his garments.

Thirdly, (which is the matter in the text) it is a blessed thing to see them
joining together in duty, either as duty is considered

First, in doing that which is good; or, when, as the Apostles word is (2 Cor.
6.1.) they are (among themselves) workers together in any good work; we say (to
fill up the Text) workers together with God. That Is a blessed sight indeed,
when we join with God, and God joyneth with us in his work: It is also a
blessed sight, when all the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and any as members of
Jesus Christ, join in any good work, in this especially, to beseech all we have
to do with, that they receive not the grace of God in vain.

Secondly, in turning from evil, and putting iniquity far from them; in praying
for the pardon of sin, and making their peace with God. In this work the three
in the Text joined together. It Is a good work to turn away from evil,
especially when all who are concerned in it join in it. A great mourning is
prophesied ( Zech. 12.11, 12, 13.) And the land shall mourn every family apart;
the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the family of
the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart; the Family of the house of
Levi apart, and their Wives apart, etc. Here Is a great mourning with a turning
from sin prophesied of, as also the manner of it; Every family shall mourn
apart: But though they shall mourn apart, yet they shall all join in mourning;
a whole family shall mourn apart, not a part of a family; and as the whole of a
family shall mourn, so ^ll the Families shall mourn and repent, and seek
reconciliation to God, as if they were but one family, yea, but one person. As
to join in sin, and to be brethren in iniquity, is the worst of unions, indeed
a combination against God; so to join as Brethren in mourning for sin, and
repenting of our iniquities, is a blessed union, and highly pleasing unto God.

Secondly, In that it is said, They went and did as the Lord commanded,

Observe; When the Lord commands we must speedily obey.

We must make no excuse, no delay, we may not dispute the commands of God, nor
may we at all excuse our selves from doing the commands of God: These men did
not so much as desire to be excused; they said not, it is true, we have failed,
but it was through ignorance, or we had a good meaning in what we said, we
intended Job no hurt; may we not then be spared this cost and trouble? we hear
of none of this, but presently they did as the Lord commanded. Though the
command of the Lord be hard and very unpleasing to flesh and blood, yet we must
speedily obey it. The command which these men received was to flesh and blood a
hard command. Is it not hard to flesh and blood,

First, to confess that we have erred, and are out?

Secondly, Is it not hard to flesh and blood? goes it not against the grain,
to submit to one whom we have wronged?

Thirdly, Is it not hard to flesh and blood, to honor whom we have reproached
and thought light of? All these are hard meat to flesh and blood, and we can
hardly digest them (as was touched before) yet these men without disputes and
delays went about the work. Abraham received a hard command from God, a far
harder command to flesh and blood than these men received: For, First, they
received a command to go and offer bullocks and rams in sacrifice; but Abraham
was commanded to offer his Son in sacrifice. Secondly, He was to offer his only
Son; that was harder. Thirdly, He was to offer his only Son Isaac, whom he
loved. A man may have an only son, who is a vexation and a trouble to him: but
as he was a son, and an only son, so a son whom Abraham greatly loved; yet God
laid this hard and grievous command upon him, Go and offer up thy son, thine
only son Isaac, whom thou love, upon one of the mountains that I shall show
thee (Genesis 22.2.) When Abraham had received this command from God, to offer up
his son for a sacrifice, as these had received a command to offer up beasts in
sacrifice; What did Abraham? He rose up early in the morning (says the text)
and sadled his ass, and took two of the young men with him, and Isaac his son,
and went unto the place which God had told him. As here these men went, so
Abraham went, he did not linger, nor lie long in bed, but rose up early in the
morning. This was an amazing work of obedience to the command of God, a very
hard and grievous command of God. Abraham had showed an eminent act of
obedience to the Lord, before this offering up of his son; when God called him
out of Vr of the Caldees, he went. The Apostle says ( Heb. 11.8.) By faith
Abraham when he was called, to go out into a place which he should after
receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out not knowing whither he
went; he followed God as it were blindfold. So the Apostle yielded present
obedience, he made no diversions, no stop; When it pleased God (said he) who
separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his
son in me, that I might preach him amongst the heathen; immediately I conferred
not with flesh and blood, neither went I up to Jerusalem, to them which were
Apostles before me, but I went into Arabia, etc. (Gal. 1.15, 16, 17.) He
conferred not with flesh and blood, that is, neither with his own heart, or
with his own interest, what would be safest and best for him, nor did he go to
consult with other men who were flesh and blood, but followed his call.
Whatever God commands we have nothing to do but to obey. As the Centurion said
( Mat. 8.9.) I am a man under authority, and I have soldiers under me; and I
say to one, go, and he goes; and to another, come, and he comes; and to a
third, do this, and he does it: Such an obedience are we to yield to the
commands of God. The Apostle gives a like charge concerning servants, with
respect to all their masters lawful commands ( Tit. 2.9.) Exhort servants to be
obedient unto their own masters, and to please them well in all things, not
answering again, that is, not gainsaying, or not contradicting, as the word
may be translated. When a servant receives a just command from his master, he
must not contradict, he must not put in his advice, thus or thus, but follow
the orders given him. Now, if Masters on earth ought to receive, in all lawful
commands, such obedience from their servants, how much more is this due to our
Lord and Master in heaven? especially, if we consider what the commands of the
Lord are, under these three titles or attributes of them.

First, They are all just and good. It is impossible for God to command that
which is not right to be done, for his command makes that right which is done,
whatsoever it is; his will is righteousness it self, and the rule of it.

Secondly, His commands are not only just and good in themselves, but they are
good to us, they are given for our profit and benefit, it is our interest as
well as our duty to obey them. In keeping them there is great reward (Psalm.
19.11.) yea, the keeping of them is a great reward. Do not my words (says the
Lord, Mic. 2.7.) do good to him that walks uprightly?

Thirdly, The commands of the Lord are easy: That Is the Apostles meaning, when
he says (1 John 5.3.) His commandments are not grievous. The Lord does not
put grievous things, nor heavy burdens upon his people. My yoke (says Christ,
Mat. 11.30.) is easy, and my burden light. Easy and light to a spiritual
mind; to the new creature, though grievous to corruption, and burdensome to the
flesh. Hard things are easy, and heavy things light to a suitable mind; whereas
easy things are hard, and light things heavy to a mind that is not so. Seeing
then the commands of the Lord are just in themselves, good to us, and not
grievous, he being our Sovereign, we ought speedily to obey whatsoever he
commands; and leaving off, or laying aside all disputes and excuses, presently
fall upon the work which he at any time calls us unto. This was commendable
in Eliphaz and his two friends, They went and did as the Lord commanded them.

Thirdly, Observe; The Lords commands must be done as he commands them.

We may do what the Lord commands, yet not as he commands. The Lords
commands must be done, as we say to a hair, to a tittle, they must be done
exactly: It is not enough to do what God commands, but according as he
commands. The As is remarkable. Not only must we do good, but we must do it
in a good way, that is, in Gods way. First, The matter must be according to his
command. Secondly, The manner must be according to his command; and this a
twofold manner. First, the external manner must be as the Lord has commanded.
David bringing home the Arc (2 Samuel 6.3.) they carried it on a new Cart, when
it should have been carried upon the Levites shoulders; that was a failing in
the outward manner of that work. Hence that confession of David, when he
undertook that work a second time (1 Chronicles. 15.13.) The Lord made a breach upon
us at first, for that we sought him not after the due order. We must worship
God aright, for the outward manner of his commands and institutions, else we
dishonor him, while we intend to worship him. Secondly, The inward manner must
be according to the command of God. It Is possible we may hit the outward form
of worship, yet miss in the inward manner of it. The Lord searches the heart,
he knows what is within, and must be worshipped in spirit and in truth (John
4.24.) that is, according to the truth of the rule made known in the word, and
in truth of heart. The inward manner of worship is,

First, That we worship in faith; Without faith it is impossible to please God
(Heb. 11.6.) If we have not a justifying faith, yea, if we have not a
persuading faith ( Romans 14.5, 23.) that what we do is according to the will of
God, our worship i^ not according to what the Lord has commanded, and so
becomes sin to us.

Secondly, That we worship in love. Though we do never so many holy services to
the Lord, if we do them not in love to him, we fail in the inward manner of our
worship. The sum of all the Lords commands, is, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. It is
not hea^ing and praying, but these in love, which is the fulfilling of the
commandment. Every duty must be mixed also with love to man. We may do many
things commanded to men, yet, if we do them not in love to men, we do nothing
as the Lord commands. Thus the holy Apostle concluded peremptorily (1 Cor.
13.1.) Though I speak with the tongue of men and angels, etc. and have not
charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cimbal; and though I
bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burnt,
and have not charity, it profits nothing.

Thirdly, To do all that the Lord commands according to the inward manner, is
to do all in humility; that is, First, Acknowledging that we have no power of
our own to do any thing; Secondly, That we have deserved nothing, how much
soever we have done, or how well soever we have done it.

Thus in doing the Lords commands we should labor to answer the mind of the
Lord fully, and to hit every circumstance, to omit nothing, no not the lest
thing. Moses (Exodus 10.16.) being to carry the people of Israel out of Egypt,
would not compound the matter with Pharaoh: Ye may go said Pharaoh (after he
had been broken by several plagues) Only let your little ones stay; no, says
Moses, that is not as the Lord has commanded me. And at another time, he said,
Go, only let your cattle stay; no, says Moses, this is not as the Lord
commanded, I will not leave so much as a hoof behind me. And so said Moses
concerning the observances of the law, For, thus I am commanded, or this is as
the Lo^d commanded, as we read all along the books of Exodus and Leviticus. We
are not full in our obedience, till we obey fully. It is said of Caleb (Number.
14.24.) He had another spirit, he followed the Lord fully, that is, as to
matter and manner, as to outside and inside. Let us labor to be full
followers of God; not outside followers of God only, but inside followers.
Let us not rest in the inside, when we are not right in the outside, nor
please our selves with an outside service, when we are careless of the inward.
Thus of their obedience, as considered in general, They did according as the
Lord commanded.

Further, consider their doing as the Lord commanded them in that special
matter, their reconciliation, first to himself, and then to Job.

Hence Observe, Fourthly; What the Lord appoints for our reconciliation, we
must do, and we must do it as he has appointed.

Cur te pudeat peccatum tuum dicere cum non pudet facere? Bernard. in Sentent.
Erubescere mala sapientiae est, bonum vero erubescere fatuitatis. Greg. l. 1.
in Ezekiel. hom. 10.
Though the means which God appoints seem to us improbable and weak, though it
be troublesome and chargeable, as here the offering up of so many bullocks and
rams, yet we must do it; Yea, though it put us to shame before men, by the
acknowledgment of our errors and mistakes, as here Eliphaz and his two friends
also did, yet we must do it. They who are ashamed of sin, will not be ashamed
to acknowledge their sin. But what must we do to be reconciled to God or man?

They who desire reconcilion with God, must go out of themselves, and go to
Jesus Christ; they must (as Eliphaz, etc. did) bring a sacrifice to God, not
(as they did) of bullocks and rams, but (which was shadowed by those legal
sacrifices) the sacrifice of Jesus Christ himself, Who by one offering has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified (Heb. 10.14.)

They who desire reconciliation with man, must do that which God here appointed
these men, go to him whom they have wronged, and acknowledge their error, or
that they have wronged him; they must also desire his pardon and prayers. Thus
did these men, and they did as the Lord commanded for their reconciliation,
first, to himself, and then to Job.

Fifthly, We may consider this their obedience, as to the spring of it. What
made them so ready, when the Lord commanded them, to go and do as he had
commanded them? doubtless this was one thing, the men were now humbled, God had
brought them to a fight of their sin; Ye have not spoken of me the thing that
is right; this they were made sensible of, and confessed, and so obeyed.

Hence, Observe; They who are truly humbled and touched, with a clear sight and
deep sense of their sins, will do whatsoever the Lord commands, and as he
commands.

They who are made sensible of the wrath of God, deserved by and kindled
against them for their sins, will do any thing which he commands for the
obtaining of his favor. God may have any thing of an humble soul; had the Lord
commanded these men to go to Job, and offer sacrifice, before he had convinced
them of their sin, they might have flung away over the field, and not have kept
the path of his commandments; but having humbled them they submitted. When
Peter had preached that notable Sermon, which pricked his hearers at the very
heart ( Acts 2.37.) Then they said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles,
men and brethren, what shall we do? They were not only ready to do what they
were commanded, but did even ask for commands; What shall we do? They, as it
were, threw down a blank, and desired the Apostles to write what commands they
would that tended to salvation; as if they had said, we are ready to do what
the Lord commands, and according as the Lord commands: Thus being made
sensible of their sins, and of the wrath of God, which they had provoked
against themselves, by crucifying the Lord of life, They cried out, what shall
we do? We will submit to any thing that is fit to be done. Saul, afterward
Paul, came out with fury to persecute the Disciples of Christ; but the Lord
having beaten him from his horse to the ground, he trembling and astonished,
said, Lord what will thou have me to do? (Acts 9.6.) He was fit to take any
impression, and to be molded into any form, by the hand of God. They who have
been made to know what it is to break commands, are willing to obey and keep
them. This was the first spring of their obedience; God had humbled them.

There was a second spring of their obedience, which will yield a sixth
Observation: For, as the Lord had convinced them of their sin, so he had given
them hopes of mercy in the pardon of it, and of reconciliation to himself. So
much was intimated in that gracious counsel given them; Take unto you seven
Bullocks and seven Rams, and go and offer up a burnt-offering for your selves,
etc. This was a comfortable word, and doubtless they understood it so, and said
in their own hearts, God might have made us a sacrifice, but he commands us to
offer a sacrifice. And what does this signify? Surely, that he will be
gracious to us, and is ready to pardon us. Having these hopes of pardon, they
went and willingly did what the Lord commanded, they went to Job, they
submitted to him whom they had contemned, they honored him whom they had
despised before.

Hence note; The intimations of mercy, and hopes of pardon, prevail mightily
upon the soul of a sinner.

The Lord did not only show them their sin, and terrify them with kindled
wrath, but showed them a sacrifice, and this presently won upon them. The love
of God is more constraining than his wrath; and hopes of pardon and salvation,
than the fear of punishment and damnation: both have their effects, and are
strong motives, wrath and love, but the strongest is love. As when the Apostle
beseeched the Romans (Romans 12.1.) to present themselves a living sacrifice, he
besought them by the mercies of God: So when the Lord commanded these men to
offer up slain beasts in sacrifice, hope of mercy was the motive. It Is mercy
which moves most effectually, to offer both our services and our selves a
sacrifice unto God; that is the same Apostles argument again (2 Cor. 7.1.)
Wherefore having these promises, let us cleanse our selves (that is, use all
means of cleansing our selves, let us go to Christ for the cleansing of our
selves) from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of the Lord. The end of the Commandment is charity (1 Timothy 1.5.) that
is, it is charity or love which gives the Commandment its end. What is the end
of the Commandment? it is that we should obey and fulfill it. To what end does
the Lord give us Commandments? it is that we should keep them. Love is the end
of the Commandment, as it gives the Commandment a completing end. Now,
whence comes our love, either to God or man? Surely from the manifestation of
Gods love to us. So that, when the Lord manifests his love to us, raising and
confirming our hopes by promises, then our love appears in doing and keeping
Commandments; and therefore, love is there joined with faith unfeigned, a
faith without hypocrisy or deceit. Now, the work of faith in God for pardon
and reconciliation, is grounded upon a sacrifice. Thus, as Evangelical
obedience is better than legal, so mercy revealed in the Gospel, quickens to
obedience, more than wrath revealed in the Law. The sight of mercy, and the
sense of the lov^ of God, in sending his own Son to be a sacrifice for us,
works more upon us, than if the Lord should threaten to make us a sacrifice, or
to consume us in the fire of his wrath for ever. It was the sacrifice which
made these men go to Job and humble themselves, they perceived there was hope
now, and that though they had failed, yet the Lord was ready to rece^ve them,
and would not deal with them according to their folly, as he told them he
would, if they did not (according to his command) go to Job with their seven
Bullocks, etc. and offer up a burnt-offering. They went and did as the Lord
commanded them.

But what came of it? how did they speed? what was the issue of all? The Text
says, The Lord also accepted Job.

This may seem a strange connection; they going and doing as the Lord commanded
them, one would have thought, it should be said, And the Lord accepted them,
whereas the Text says only thus, The Lord also accepted Job.

But were not Jobs friends accepted? shall we think that they lost their
labor? not so neither; without all question these three b^inging their
sacrifice according to the command of God, both for matter and manner, were
accepted too: yet, because it was at the request and prayer of Job for them,
therefore the Text says not, The Lord accepted, but, The Lord also accepted
Job; Accepit Jehova personam Jobi sacerdotio jungentis nomine Christi
sacerdotis, and victimae sempi^^rnae nostrae quam iste figurabant. Jun.
that is, he offering sacrifice, and praying for them, they were accepted. This
shows us the great mystery, or the sum of the Gospel; the Lord did not accept
them in themselves, but he accepted Job in sacrificing for them, and all in
Christ. And consider, it is not said, The Lord accepted the sacrifice, or the
prayer of Job, but, The Lord accepted Job; his person was accepted in and
through the sacrifice or intercession of Christ, and his sacrifice and
intercession for Eliphaz and his two friends were accepted also in him.

How the Lord testified his acceptance of Job, whether by consuming his
sacrifice with fire from heaven, or by any other outward token of his favor,
is not here expressed, and therefore to us uncertain; only this is certain, and
that is enough for us to know, that God accepted him.

What it is to accept, was showed in opening the former verse.

In brief, to be accepted, is to have favor with God, our petitions answered,
and the things done which we move or petition for. The Lord also accepted Job.

Rogavit Job and Dominus ignavit; profuit illis amicitia, quibus obsuit
insolentia Ambros. 3 Offic. c. ult.
And when it is said, The Lord also accepted Job, this implies, that Job did
willingly undertake the service and duty for his three friends. Though it be
not said, that Job offered sacrifice and prayed for them, yet both are wrapped up
and understood in this conclusion, The Lord also accepted Job. This gives
evidence or witness to the goodness of Job, and his eminence in grace; how full
of love, how ready to forgive was he! He did not insult over Eliphaz, etc. nor
say, now I have got the day, God has determined the matter for me; Amice ut
amicos illos amplexus est.
he did not tell them, ye have wronged and abused me, ye have unjustly censured
and reproached me; but putting their unkindnesses into oblivion, and laying
aside the thought of them, he laid out his soul to the utmost for the healing
or making up of the difference (arising from their folly) between God and them.

For the better improvement of these words,

First, Let us compare them with those in the eighth verse. Here it is said,
The Lord also accepted Job; and there the Lord said, Him will I accept; there
it is a promise, here a performance.

Hence note; Whatsoever the Lord promises to do, he will certainly perform and
do.

A word from God is as sure as his deed; our hope upon promise, as good as
possession; In hope of eternal life, which God who cannot lie, promised before
the world began (Tit. 1.2.) Christ will be Amen, that is, performance (2 Cor.
1.20.) to all the promises (2 Cor. 1.20.) As they are all made in him, so they
shall every one of them, and in every thing, be made good by him, unto the
glory of God by us; that is, we shall at last have abundant cause of glorifying
of God, in performing and making good of all the promises, upon the undertaking
of Jesus Christ for us. No man shall fail of acceptance, that is under (as Job
was) a promise of acceptance; get under promises, and you shall partake the
good promised.

Secondly, Whereas upon their doing according as the Lord commanded, presently
it follows, The Lord also accepted Job,

Note; Though the Lord will surely perform what he has promised, yet if we
would have the good promised, we must do the duty commanded, otherwise our
faith is but presumption.

If Eliphaz and his two friends had not done as the Lord commanded them, they
could not rightly have expected God should do what he promised, accept Job, and
so themselves. There are promises of two sorts. First, of preventing grace;
these are made to the wicked and unconverted. Secondly, there are promises of
rewarding grace; these are made to the godly, who must perform the duty
commanded, if they would receive the mercy promised. As many as walk according
to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy (Gal. 6.16.) If you will have peace,
you must walk according to rule; the Lord is not bound to fulfill promises, if
we take liberty to break Commandments, or neglect to do them. And they who
have true faith in the truth, and faithfulness of God to fulfill the one, can
never take liberty to break the other. None are so sure to the Command, as they
who have fullest assurance in the Promise.

The Lord also accepted Job. Here are but few words, yet much matter; and who
knows how much mercy? Here is much, yea, all in a little, The Lord accepted
Job.

Hence note, Thirdly; To be accepted of God, is the answer of all our prayers
and desires, a full reward for all our services.

Acceptance with God is the happiness of man, and should be his satisfaction.
If we are accepted in our services, we are bountifully rewarded for them; and
if our persons are accepted, we shall be everlastingly saved. When the Lord
accepted Job, he he heard his prayer for his friends, they were reconciled.
This good news, The Lord also accepted Job, was enough to make their hearts
leap for joy. Acceptance is a reviving word, the sum of all that we can wish
or pray for; it is enough and enough to confirm our faith, and to wind up our
assurance to the very highest expectation of a supply to all our wants, and of
pardon for all our sins. All the kindnesses of God are comprehended in this one
word, Acceptance.

Fourthly, The Lord accepted Job. Here is no mention at all of accepting his
sacrifice, yet that was accepted too.

Hence note; The Lord having respect to our persons, cannot but have respect to
our services.

If our persons are accepted, our services are; and if the services of any are
not respected, it is because their persons are not. It Is said ( Genesis 4.4, 5.)
The Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering; but unto Cain and his
offering, he had no respect. Respect or no respect to what is done, always
begins with the person of the doer.

Yet further, Job was accepted; but upon what account? or how was Job accepted?
not in himself, nor for himself, but in Christ the promised Messiah.

Hence note, Fifthly; That any man's person is accepted, is from free grace,
through Jesus Christ.

When we have done all, we deserve nothing, we are only accepted. The Lord
accepted Job, not for his own sake, not for the worth of his service, not for
the worthiness of his person, but for him whom he in that action represented,
and in whom he believed, Jesus Christ. Job himself needed Christ for his
acceptance; it is in and through him that any are accepted. The word Acceptance
plainly implies, that there is nothing of merit in us; acceptance notes grace
and favor. This respect to us, is not for any desert in us.

From the whole, we may infer, First, If the Lord accepted Job when he offered
sacrifice, and prayed for his friends; how much more does he accept Jesus
Christ, who offered himself a sacrifice for sinners, and ever lives to make
intercession for them, whose sacrifice he is!

Did the Lord presently accept Job and his friends, or Job for his friends?
then what confidence may we have, that Jesus Christ, who is our everlasting
sacrifice and Advocate, who is entered into the holiest, the Sanctuary of
heaven, and there pleads for us with his own blood, is accepted for us, and we
through him. Christ's suit shall never be refused, nor shall we, while we come
to God through him. This act of divine grace, was, as I may say, but a shadow
or figure of that great work of Jesus Christ, in reconciling sinners, and
making them accepted with the Lord; and therefore, as often as we pray, Christ's
everlasting sacrifice should come to our remembrance, for the confirmation of
our faith, and our encouragement against fears. We may argue down all our
doubts about acceptance by Christ, upon this account, that Jobs friends were
accepted at his suit, and their acceptance not bottomed on him, nor in his
sacrifice, but as both shadowed Christ. Where the Reconciler is accepted, they
that are in him, and for whom he makes request, are accepted too. What the Lord
spoke from heaven ( Mat. 3.17.) This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, reaches all believers to the end of the world, whose head and
representer Christ is. Let us adore, and ever be thankful, that we have
received such grace in Christ; for, though Jesus Christ in his person is of
infinite worth, and his sacrifice of so great a value, that it became a price
sufficient for the ransom and redemption of all sinners: yet, it was of free
grace that Christ was made a ransom for sinners, and we accepted through him.

Secondly, Take this Inference: If the Lord be ready to hear a Job for his
friends, then the Lord will much more hear a Job for himself.

That the prayers and supplications which Believers put up to the Lord, obtain
mercy and good things for others, may strengthen faith, that they shall obtain
for themselves.

Thirdly, We may infer, Job was become a great favorite with God, after his
humiliation and self-abhorrence.

He no sooner fell out with himself for his former miscarriages, but the Lord,
as it were, fell in love with him afresh. What a favorite was he grown, who
could thus readily get an answer, and obtain favor for those, against whom the
Lord said, My wrath is kindled?

Thus much concerning the judgment and determination of God in this matter,
which put a period to the long continued controversy between Job and his three
friends, and reconciled both parties both unto God and between themselves. O
how blessed is the issue of the Lords Judgment and undertaking toward his
servants and children! When once he was pleased to appear in the case, he soon
silenced both sides, and made them in the conclusion both of one heart, and of
one mind.

And no sooner was this humbling and reconciling work done and over, but
restoring and restitution work followed, as will appear in opening the third
and last part of this Chapter, which is also the last part of the whole Book.

JOB, Chap. 42. Verse. 10. 10. And the Lord turned the Captivity of Job, when he
prayed for his friends: Also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before.
THis verse begins the third part of the Chapter. We have seen J^b humbled
before God in the first part; we have seen Jobs friends reconciled to God, and
his anger turned away from them in the second: In this third, we have Job
himself restored, or the restitution of Job to as good, yea, to a better estate
than he had before; and this was done when he prayed for his friends: The Crown
is set upon the head of prayer.

The restitution of Job is set down two ways.

First, more generally, in this verse, where it is described three ways.

First, by the Author of it, The Lord; it was he that turned the Captivity of
Job.

Secondly, by the season of it; When he prayed for his friends.

Thirdly, by the degree and measure of it; Also the Lord gave Job twice as much
as he had before. His was not a bare return or restitution, but with advantage,
and that to a duplication.

And the Lord turned the captivity of Job. Before I open the words as
translated by us, I shall briefly mind the Reader of another translation.
Probarem si esset (...) ubi nunc (...) nam (...) conversio paenitentia. Drus.
Dominus quoque conversus est ad paenitentiam Job. Vulg.
The word which we render Captivity, is by some rendered Repentance; and there
is a twofold interpretation of that rendering.

First, Some refer it to God, and read the words thus, The Lord was turned to
repentance concerning Job: And then the meaning is, the Lord repented or
changed his dispensation with respect to the affliction of Job, when he prayed
for his friends. The Scripture speaks of the Lords repentance two ways.

First, that he repents of the good which he has done for, or bestowed upon
man ( Genesis 6.6.) It repented the Lord that he had made man; he seemed as one
troubled in his mind, that ever he had set up man in such a condition. And as
there the Lord repented of his making mankind in general in that good natural
state, so elsewhere he is said to repent of his doing good to some men in
particular, as to their civil state (1 Samuel 15.11.) The Lord repented that he
had made Saul King, that he had set him upon a Throne to rule men on earth, who
had no better obeyed the Rule given from his own Throne in heaven.

Secondly, The Lord is said to repent of the evil which he has either actually
brought upon man, or threatened to bring upon him. In the former sense Moses
says ( Deuteronomy. 32.36.) The Lord shall judge his people and repent himself for
his servanss, when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up
or left; that is, when they are in an afflicted low condition, the Lord takes
the opportunity or season to restore them, and then he is said to repent
concerning any afflictive evil brought upon his people. In the latter sense (as
he is said to repent of the evil threatened) it is said of repenting Niniveh
(Jonah 3.10.) The Lord repented of the evil that he had said that he would do
unto them, and he did it not. Thus the Lord is turned to repentance with
respect to evil, either brought or threatened to be brought upon a people; for
which we have that remarkable promise ( Jer. 18.7, 8.) At what instant I shall
speak concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull
down, and to destroy it; if that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn
from their evil, I will repent of the evil I thought to do unto them. If they
turn, I will turn. Another word is used in the Hebrew there, but it imports the
same thing. Repentance in God is not any change of his Will, Counsel, or
Purpose; it only notes a change in his providence and dispensations. The Lord
is of one mind: who can turn him? (Job 23.13.) But he is not always of one
way; he repents, that is, he changes his way sometimes, and so he did toward
Job: He once cast him down, and left him as a captive bound hand and foot under
the power of Satan, as to his outward man and worldly enjoyments; but the Lord
turned and repented, that is, turned his Captivity. This sense and reading is
much insisted on by several Interpreters, and it is a comfortable truth; yet I
am not satisfied that it is the truth intended in this place.

Secondly, Others who follow that translation, refer this repentance to Job,
and so the sense is this, The Lord turned at the repentance, or upon the
repentance of Job when he prayed for his friends; of which repentance we read
in the fo^mer part of the Chapter. The Observation which naturally arises from
this interpretation, is clear from many other Texts of Scripture.

When persons or Nations pray and depart from iniquity, when they join true
repentance with prayer, the Lord turns to them in mercy, and turns evil
away from them. The Lord turned in mercy to repenting Job when he prayed for
his friends. And this was promised to Gods peculiar people the Jewish Nation (2 Chronicles. 7.14.) If my people which are are called by my Name shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then
will I hear in heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.
This was performed to the Ninivites, a heathen Nation; when they repented of
the evil which they had done, God repented of the evil which he threatened to do
unto them, or bring upon them, and did it not, brought it not. But I shall not
stay upon this useful point here, because it is grounded upon a translation
which is not (as I conceive) so clearly grounded upon the Original as our own.

The Lord turned the Captivity of Job. In Hebraeo est pulchra paranomasia, nam
(...) est vertere aut convertere, et (...) captivitas. (...)
The Hebrew is very elegant, He turned the turning or captivity of Job. Why his
Captivity? Job was never lead captive in person, he was not carried away
prisoner by the Chaldeans an^ Sabeans, who captivated his cattle. How then is
it here said, The Lord turned the captivity of Job?

I answer, These words, The Lord turned the Captivity of Job, may be taken two
ways.

First, thus, Jehova restituit, quod captum fuerit Jobo, Jun. Captivitas
ponitur pro ipsis captivis. Drus.
He turned that to Job (whatsoever it was) which was lead into Captivity. So
some translate, The Lord restored that which was taken from Job. His Cattle,
which were taken away by violent men, and his children, which were taken away
by a vehement wind, were returned or restored to him again. The word Captivity
is elsewhere in Scripture taken tropically for things or persons captivated;
that which is captivated is called captivity. The Lord turned the captivity of
Job, that is, he returned that which was captivated or taken away. Take a
Scripture or two for that s^nse of the word captivity (Judge. 5.12.) Awake,
awake Deborah, awake, awake, utter a song, arise Barak, and lead thy captivity
captive, thou son of Abinoam.. That is, bring them back who were taken
captives; or thus, lead those captive who have taken thy people captives. So (
Psalm. 68.18.) which is quoted by the Apostle ( Ephesians. 4.8.) When he ascended up
on high, he lead captivity captive. The Psalmist gives us a prophecy, and the
Apostle reports the history of the glorious ascension of Christ. When he
ascended up on high, he lead captivity captive. Which text, as the form^r, may
be taken two ways.

First, Christ ascending, led those captive, who had led poor soul^ ^aptive,
that is, the devils; which the Apostle expresses thu^ ( Col. 2.15.) And having
spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing
over them in it, that is, in his cross or ^uffering^, or (as our Ma^gin has
it) in himself: And as Christ spoiled those principalities, and triumphed over
them, not only really, but openly in his passion; so he led them captive and
triumphed over them more openly in his ascension.

Secondly, He led those that were captives, sinful men, captive; he brought
them out of a miserable captivity into a blessed captivity, that is, from the
cap^ivity of sin, Satan, and the world, into a cap ivi^y to himself. The
Apostle speaks so of the mighty power of the Word, in the mini^tery of the
Gospel: The weapons of our warfare (that is, the weapons with which we, the
Ministers of the Gospel, m^ke war upon sinners to convert them) are not carnal
(that is, weak) but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds,
casting down imaginations, etc. and bringing into captivity every thought to
the obedience Christ (2 Cor. 10.4, 5.) Not only are our persons, but our
thoughts captivated to Christ, by the power of the Spirit ministered in the
Gospel. Thus the Scripture speaks of captivity in both these notions: the
captivaters and the captivated are called captivity. Here in this place, we may
take it in the latter sense, the Lord turned the captivity of Job; that is,
what was captivated or taken away, the Lord, as it were, fetched back again,
and restored it to him. In this sense Abraham, when he heard that his Nephew
Lot was taken captive, led captivity captive (Genesis 14.16.) He pursued them that
had taken him captive, he brought back Lot, and the rest of the prisoners,
together with the spoils. Thus the Lord did not only deliver Job from all those
evils, which he was under, but restored the good things to him which he had
lost or were carried away.

Secondly, We may take it thus, The Lord turned the captivity of Job; that is,
he took away, or called in Satan's commission, which he had given him over Jobs
estate and body, and by which Satan held Job in captivity, or as his captive;
for as we read ( chap. 2.6.) Satan could not touch him, till he had leave, or a
letter of license from God; till God said, Behold, all that he has is in thy
power, only upon himself put not forth thy hand (chap. 1.12.) Nor could he
touch his person, till his commission was enlarged; and the Lord said again,
Behold, he is in thine hand, but (or only) save his life (chap. 2.6.) And as
soon as his commission was taken away, or called in by God, he could trouble
him no longer. The Lord forbidding the devil to meddle any more with him,
Turned the captivity of Job.

Hence, Observe; First, To be in any affliction is to be in bonds or captivity.

The afflicted condition of Job was a captivity. Troubles in our estate,
troubles in our relations, troubles in our bodies, troubles in our souls, are
like bonds and prisons. It is a very uneasy and an uncomfortable condition to
be in prison, and so it is to be in any afflicted condition considered in it
self. Job spoke as much of himself, while his affliction continued upon him
strongly ( chap. 13.27.) Thou put my feet in the stocks, and thou look
narrowly unto all my paths. Job was not only as a man in captivity, but as a
man in the stocks, which is a great hardship in captivity. David calls such
an estate an imprisonment ( Psalm. 69.33.) The Lord hears the poor, and
despises not his prisoners. Some are prisoners strictly, being under
restraint; all are prisoners largely, or (as we say) prisoners at large, who
are in any distress. The Lord makes many prisoners by sickness and weakness of
body, as also by poverty and the want of bodily comforts and conveniences. The
afflicted condition of the Church in any kind is expressed by captivity, as
captivity, in kind, is sometimes the affliction of the Church. The ten tribes
were led into captivity by Salmanazar, Judah by Nebuchadnazzar. Hence that
promise ( Jerem. 30.18.) Behold, I will bring again the captivity of Jacobs
tents; And that prayer ( Psalm. 14.7.) O that the salvation of Israel were come
out of Sion. When the Lord brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob
shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad. This Scripture may be taken both
strictly, as a prayer for their return out of proper captivity, and largely,
for their deliverance out of any adversity: So ( Psalm. 126.1.) When the Lord
turned the captivity of Sion we were like them that dream. Read also ( Zeph.
2.7.)

Secondly, From the author of this turn, The Lord turned the captivity, etc.

Observe.

Deliverance out of an afflicted state is of the Lord. He is the author of
these comfortable turns, and he is to be acknowledged as the author of them.
The Psalmist prayed thrice, Turn us again (Psalm. 80.3, 7, 19.) The waters of
affliction would continually rise and swell higher and higher, did not the Lord
stop and turn them, did not he command them back, and cause an ebb. Satan would
never have done bringing the floods of affliction upon Job, if the Lord had not
forbidden him and turned them. It was the Lord who took all from Job, as he
acknowledged ( chap. 1.21.) and it was the Lord who restored all to him again;
as we see here the same hand did both in his case, and does both in all such
cases ( Hos. 6.1.) Let us return to the Lord for he has torn, and he will heal
us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up. David ascribed both to God ( Psalm.
66.11, 12.) Thou broughtest us into the net; thou layedst affliction upon our
loins: thou have caused men to ride over our heads, we went through fire and
through water. The hand of God led them in that fire and water of affliction,
through which they went; but who led them out? The Psalmist tells us, in the
next words, Thou broughtest us into a wealthy place; the Margin says, into a
moist place. They were in fire and water before. Fire is the extremity of heat
and dryness; water is the extremity of moistne^s and coldness. A moist place
notes a due temperament of ^eat and cold, of dryness and moistness, and
therefore el^gantly shadows that comfortable and contentful condition, into
which the good hand of God had brought them, which is significantly expressed
in our translation, by a wealthy place; those places flourishing most in
fruitfulness, and so in wealth, which are neither over-hot nor over-cold,
neither ove^-dry nor over-moist. And as in that Psalm David acknowledged the
hand of God in this, so in another, he celebrated the Lords power and goodness
for this ( Psalm. 68.20.) He that is our God is the God of salvation, and unto
God the Lord belong the issues from death; that is, the out-lets or out-gates
from death, are from the Lord; he delivers from the grave, and from every
grief. The Lord turned the captivity of Job, not only p eserving him from
death, but filling him with the good things and comforts of this life.

Thirdly, Note; The Lord can suddenly make a change or turn.

As he can quickly make a great change from prosperity to adversity, and in a
moment b^ing darkness upon those who enjoy the sweetest light; so he can
quickly make a change from adversity to prosperity, from captivity to liberty,
and turn the darkest night into a morning light. For such a turn the Church
prayed ( Psalm. 126.4.) Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the
south, that is, do it speedily. The south is a dry place, thither streams come,
not by a slow, constant current, but as mighty streams, or land-floods, by a
sudden unexpected rain; like that (1 Kings 18.41, 45.) Get thee up (said Eliah
to Ahab) for there is a sound of abundance of rain, and presently the heaven
was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. When great rains
come, after long drought, they make sudden floods and streams. Such a sudden
income of mercy, or deliverance from captivity, the Church then prayed for, and
was in the faith and hope of; nor was that hope in vain; nor shall any, who in
that condition wait patiently upon God, be ashamed of their hope. The holy
Evangelist makes report ( Luke 13.16.) that Satan had bound a poor woman
eighteen years, all that time he had her his prisoner; but Jesus Christ in a
moment made her free. Ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom
Satan has bound, lo, these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the
sabbath day? The devil, who had her in his power eighteen years, could not hold
her a moment, when Jesus Christ would turn her captivity, and loose her from
that bond. If the Son undertake to make any free, whether from corporal or
spiritual bondage, they shall not only be free indeed (as he spoke, John 8.36.)
at the time when he is pleased to do it, but he can do it at any time, in the
shortest time, when he pleases. We find a like turn of captivity is described
( Psalm. 107.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.) such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, being bound in affliction and iron, because they rebelled against the
word of the Lord, etc. These ( verse. 13.) cried unto the Lord in their trouble,
and he saved them out of their distresses: He brought them out of darkness, and
the shadow of death, and brake their bands in sunder. Thus far of the first
particular considerable in Jobs restitution, the Author of it, The Lord turned
the captivity of Job.

The second thing to be considered, is the season which the Lord took for the
turning of Jobs captivity; the Lord did it says the text, When he prayed for
his friends.

Some conceive the turn of his captivity was just in his prayer time, and that
even then his body was healed. I shall have occasion to speak further to that
afterward upon another verse. Thus much is clear, that When he prayed,

That is, either in the very praying time, or presently upon it, the Lord
^urned his captivity. Possibly the Lord did not stay till he had done,
accor^ing to that ( Isa. 65.24.) It shall come to pass, that before they call,
I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear. Or according to
that ( Dan. 9.20.) While I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin,
and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplications before the
Lord my God, for the holy mountain of my God: Yea, while I was speaking in
prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning,
being caused to fly swiftly, touched me, about the time of the evening
oblation, and he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am come
forth to give thee skill and understanding; at the beginning of thy
supplications the commandment came forth, and I am come to show thee, etc.
What commandment came forth? even a command for the turning of their
captivity. Thus here (I say) possibly the Lord gave out that word of command,
for the turning of Jobs captivity, at that very time when he was praying for
his friends.

But without question, these words, when he prayed for his friends, note a very
speedy return of his prayers; that is, soon after he had done that gracious
office for them, he found matters mending with himself, and the answers of
prayer in the mercies of God coming tumbling in thick and threefold. His
captivity fled far away when he had thus drawn near to God; he had, as a very
full and satisfactory, so a very speedy answer, When he prayed.

Prayer is the making known our wants and desires to God. It is a spiritual
work, not a mere bodily exercise; it is the labor of the heart, not
lip-labor. Jobs prayer was a fervent working, or effectual prayer (as the
Apostle James speaks, chap. 5.16.) not a cold, slothful, sleepy prayer; when he
prayed, he made work of prayer. Many speak words of prayer, that make no work
of prayer, nor are they at work in prayer. Job prayed in the same sense that
Saul (afterward Paul) did ( Acts. 9.11.) when the Lord Jesus bid Ananias go to
him, for, Behold he prays, implying, that he was at it indeed. He had been
brought up after the strictest rule of the Pharisees, who prayed much, or made
many prayers; but he prayed to so little purpose before, that we may well call
that his first prayer, and say he had never prayed before. Job prayed for his
friends, as Paul for himself; he was very earnest with God for them, and
prevailed. Extraordinary cases call for extraordinary layings out in duty. It
was an extraordinary case, When he prayed For his friends.

The Hebrew is, When he prayed for his friend. Singular partitivum pro
plurali. Merc.
It is usual in the Grammar of the holy Text, to put the singular for the
plural: It Is so here, either, First, because he prayed for every one of them
distinctly, and by name; or, Secondly, because he looked upon them all as one,
and bound them up in the same requests, When he prayed For his friends.

They are called his friends, to show the esteem that he had of them,
notwithstanding all their unkindness and unfriendliness toward him. He prayed
for them in much love, O, raram and singularem virtutem, quae in paucissimis
vel Christianis reperiatur. Merc.
though they had showed little love to him; and his heart was so much toward
them, that the Text speaks as if he had forgot himself, or left himself at that
time quite out of his prayers. Doubtless Job prayed for himself, but his great
business at that time with God, was, for his friends.

Now, in that Jobs prayer is said expressly to be for his friends, not for
himself, though we cannot doubt but that he prayed, and prayed much for himself;

Observe; A godly man is free to pray for others, as well as for himself, and
in some cases, or at some times, more for others than for himself.

He seldom drives this blessed trade with heaven for self only, and he
sometimes does it upon the alone account of others. It Is a great piece of
spiritualness, to walk exactly, and keep in with God to the utmost, that so our
own personal soul concerns may not take up our whole time in prayer, but that
we may have a freedom of spirit to enlarge for the benefit of others. Many by
their uneven walkings, exceedingly hinder themselves in this duty of praying
for friends, and of praying for the whole Church. Uneven walkings hinder that
duty in a twofold respect.

First, Because they indispose the heart to prayer in general; which is one
special reason why the Apostle Peter gives that counsel to Husband and Wife (1
Pet. 3.7.) to walk according to knowledge, and as being heirs together of the
same grace of life, that (says he) your prayers be not hindered; that is, lest
your hearts be indisposed to prayer.

Secondly, Because uneven walkings will find us so much work for our selves in
prayer, that we shall scarce have time or leisure to intend or sue out the
benefit of others in prayer. He that watches over his own heart and ways,
will be and do most in prayer for others. And that,

First, For the removing or preventing of the sorrows and sufferings of others.

Secondly, For the removing of the sins of others; yea, though their sins have
been against himself, which was Jobs case. He prayed for those who had dealt
very hardly with him, and sinned against God in doing so; he prayed for the
pardon of their sin, God being very angry with them, and having told them he
would deal with them according to their folly, unless they made Job their
friend to him. This was the occasion of Jobs traveling in prayer for his
friends; and in this he showed a spirit becoming the Gospel, though he lived
not in the clear light of it. And how uncomely is it, that any should live less
in the power of the Gospel, while they live more in the light of it? To pray
much for others, especially for those who have wronged and grieved us, has
much of the power of the Gospel, and of the Spirit of Christ in it. For, thus
Jesus Christ, while he was nailed to the Cross, prayed for the pardon of their
sins and outrages, who had crucified him, Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do (Luke 23.34.) Even while his crucifiers were reviling him, he
was begging for them, and beseeching his Father that he would show them mercy,
who had showed him no mercy, no, nor done him common justice. And thus (in his
measure) Jobs heart was carried out in his prayer for his friends, that those
sins of theirs might be forgiven them, by which they had much wronged him, yea,
and derided him (in a sort) upon his Cross, as the Jews did Christ upon his.
This also was the frame of David's heart, toward those that had injured him (
Psalm. 109.4.) For my love they are my adversaries (that is an ill requital; but
how did he requite them? we may take his own word for it, he tells us how) but
I give my self unto prayer; yea, he seemed a man wholly given unto prayer. The
elegant conciseness of the Hebrew is, But I prayer; we supply it thus, But I
give my self unto prayer: They are sinning against me, requiting my love with
hatred, But I give my self unto prayer. But for whom did he pray? doubtless he
prayed, and prayed much for himself; he prayed also for them. We may understand
those words, I give my self unto prayer, two ways. First, I pray against their
plots and evil dealings with me (prayer was David's best strength always
against his enemies) yet that was not all. But, Secondly, I give my self to
prayer, that the Lord would pardon their sin, and turn their hearts, when they
are doing me mischief; or, though they have done me mischief, I am wishing them
the best good. David (in another place) showed what a spirit of charity he was
clothed with, when no reproof could hinder him from praying for others (in
some good men, reproofs stir up passion, not prayer) ( Psalm. 141.5.) Let the
righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness (smite me, how? with reproof; so it
follows) Let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not
break my head, for yet my prayer shall be in their calamities; that is, if ever
they who are my reprovers fall into calamity, though they may think they have
provoked me so by reproving me, that they have lost my love, and have cast them
out of my prayers, or that I will never speak well of them, or for them again,
yet I will pray for them with all my heart, as their matters shall require; I
will pray for them when they have most need of prayer, even in their calamity.
Some heighten the sense thus; The more they sharpen their reproof, the more I
think my self bound to pray for them. It shows an excellent spirit, not to be
hindered from doing good to others, by any thing they do or speak against us,
nor by their sharpest (though perhaps mistaken) reproofs of us. Thus it was
with this good man, Job prayed for his friends, who had spoken much against
him, and not only reproved him without cause, but reproached him without
charity; and God turned his captivity when he prayed for them.

Hence observe, Secondly; Prayer for friends, especially for unkind friends, is
very pleasing to God, and profitable to us.

We never reap more fruit or benefit by prayer our selves, than when we lay out
our selves in prayer for others; and then most, when we pray for those who have
deserved least at our hands. Prayer for unkind friends, is the greatest
kindness we can do them, and the noblest way of recompencing their unkindness.
Holy David was much in this way of duty, and found the benefit of it ( Psalm.
35.12, 13.) They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul; but as
for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth, I humbled my soul with
fasting (that is, I was greatly affected with, and afflicted for them in their
affliction; and see what followed) My prayer returned into my own bosom. There
is some difference about the Exposition of those words; but I conceive that is
clear in it self, as well as to my purpose, that David received fruit and a
good reward for those prayers. As if he had said, If my prayer did them no
good, it did me good; if it did not profit them, it profited me; my prayer
returned into my own bosom, I found comfortable effects of it. We never gain
more by prayer, than when we pray for those by whom we have been losers; we
never find more comfort by prayer, than when we pray heartily for those by whom
we have found much sorrow: whatever good we pray for in the behalf of others,
falls upon our own heads; and the more we pray for good upon the heads of those
that have done evil to us, the more good is like to fall upon our own heads and
hearts. Christ says ( Mat. 10.13.) When ye come into an house, salute it
(Christ means not a Courtly complemental salute, but a Christian spiritual
salute, wishing them mercy and peace, as is plain by that which follows) and
if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it; but if it be not worthy,
let your peace return to you. As if he had said, When ye come into an house,
good or bad, salute it; if the house be good, they shall receive the benefit of
your prayer, if not, you shall have the benefit of it your selves; though they
get no good by your good wishes to them, or prayers for them, yet you shall.
This is more expressly assured us again by our blessed Savior ( Luke 10.6.)
Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, peace be to this house (bestow a
prayer upon them) and if the Son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon
it; if not, it shall turn to you again; your prayers shall not be lost, nor
shall ye be losers by your prayers.

Hence take these two Inferences.

First, If when we pray for friends, for unkind friends, God be ready to do us
good, then he will be much more ready to do us good, when we (as he has
commanded us) pray for professed or real enemies. The worse they are (if not so
bad as to be past prayer, by the Apostles rule, 1 John 5.16.) for whom we pray,
the better are our prayers, and an argument, as of our greater faith in God, so
of our greater love to man.

Yet this is not to be understood, as if we should pray for the prosperity of
enemies, or evil men, in their evil purposes or practices (this were to pray at
once for the misery of Sion, for the downfall of Jerusalem, and the dishonor of
God.) Our prayer for enemies, should only be, that God would change their
hearts, and pardon their sins, as was touched before. I grant, we may (in some
cases) pray, Lord, overturn, overturn them; or (as David against Achitophel)
Lord, turn their counsels into foolishness; yet even then we should also pray
(with respect to their persons) Lord turn them, turn them. The Gospel teaches
us to do so ( Luke 6.28.) Bless them that curse you, pray for them that
despitefully use you: Not that we should pray for a blessing on them as they
are cursers and despisers, but that they may repent, and give over their cursed
cursings and despiteful usages. The Apostle is full for this ( Romans 12.14.)
Bless them that persecute you, bless and curse not (verse. 19.) Avenge not your
selves. And as we should not avenge our selves, so we should be sparing in
prayer, that God would take vengeance; and if ever we put up such prayers,
beware they flow not from a spirit of revenge. We, indeed, are sometimes afraid
to be over-gentle and kind-hearted toward them that offend us; and this bad
Proverb is too much remembered, If we play the Sheep, the Wolf will eat us up,
as if to do our duty, were to run further into danger, and that it must needs
turn to our wrong, not to avenge our wrongs. But know, if we carry it meekly
like sheep, we have a great Shepherd, who will take care of us, and is able to
preserve us from the Wolf. Consider these two things in praying for enemies, or
for those that have any way wronged us.

First, If by prayer we gain them ('it is possible by prayer to turn a Wolf into
a Sheep) then it will be well with us, they will be our friends.

Secondly, If they continue Wolves and enemies still, God will be more our
friend, and turn the evil which they either intend or do us, to our good.

A second Inference is this.

If God be ready to deliver us from evil, and do us good when we pray for
others, then he will be ready to do us good, and deliver us from evil, when we
pray for our selves. This Inference appears every where in Scripture. And as
the Lord himself has often invited or encouraged us to the duty of prayer for
our selves by this promise; take one instance for all ( Psalm. 50.15.) Call upon
me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me; that
is, thou shall have both occasion and a heart to glorify me. So the Lords
servants have often had experience of his power and goodness in delivering
them; or, as it is here expressed concerning Job, of turning their captivity;
take one instance for all ( Psalm. 34.4, 6.) I (said David) sought the Lord, and
he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. This poor man cried, and the
Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. The Lord, who does us
good when we pray for others, cannot but do it when we pray for our selves. The
Lord turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends.

But some may ask, will the Lord turn any man's captivity, when he prays for
his friends? whose prayer, and what prayer is it that obtains so high a favor?

I answer, in general; It is the prayer of a Job. That is,

First, The prayer of a faithful man, or of one who is perfect and upright with
God. It is not the prayer of every man that prevails with God ( Jam. 5.16.) The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man (only) avails much. Nor is it the
prayer of a mere morally righteous man, that avails; he must be an
Evangelically righteous man, that is, a man estated by faith in the
righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, As it is the prayer of the faithful, so the prayer of faith; as it is
the prayer of one in a state of grace, so of one acting his graces, especially
that grace of faith. It is possible for a man that has faith, not to pray in
faith; and such a prayer obtains not ( Jam. 1.5, 6, 7.) If any man (says
that Apostle) lack wisdom; we may say, whatsoever any man lacks, let him ask
of God; but let him ask in faith, nothing wavering: for let not that man (the
man that wavereth) think that he shall receive any thing (that is, any good
thing asked) of the Lord. To ask without faith, may bear the name, but is not
the thing called prayer; and therefore such receive nothing when they ask.

Thirdly, It is the prayer of a person repenting, as well as believing. Job was
a penitent, he repented in dust and ashes for the evil he had done, before he
obtained that good for his friends and for himself by prayer. If my people
(says the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.) Which are called by my name, shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways
(there is complete repentance) then will I hear from heaven, and forgive their
sin, and heal their Land (there is complete mercy.) Some pretend, at least, to
be much in believing, yet are little, if at all, in repenting and humbling
themselves under the mighty hand of God. How can their prayers prevail, for the
turning away of their captivity, who turn not from iniquity? If I (said David,
Psalm. 66.18.) regard iniquity in my heart (his meaning is, if I put it not both
out of my heart and hand, by sound repentance) God will not hear me; that is,
he will not regard, much less favorably answer, my prayer. It is a piece of
impude^c^, I am sure, such a piece of confidence, as God will reject, and
wherein no man shall prosper, to expect good from God by prayers, while our
evils are retained, or abide in our bosoms unrepented of. God has joined faith
and repentance together; woe to those who put them asunder. They who either
repent without believing, or believe without repenting, indeed do neither; they
neither repent, nor believe, nor can they obtain any thing of God by prayer.
But, the prayer of a faithful man, made in faith, and mixed with sound
repentance, will make great turns; such a one may turn the whole world about by
the engine of prayer.

But, what is there in such a prayer, that should make such turns, and move the
Lord to change his dispensations, or our conditions? I answer,

First, Such prayer is the Lords own Ordinance or appointment; and he will
answer that. When we meet God in his own way, he cannot refuse us; he seals to
his own institutions, by gracious answers.

Secondly, As prayer is the Ordinance of God, so he has made promise to hear
and turn the captivity of those that pray, as was showed before. Promises are
engagements to performance. God will not be behind hand with man, as to any
engagement: For, as he is powerful, and can, so he is faithful, and will do
whatever he has engaged himself to do by promise. A word from the God of
heaven, is enough to settle our souls upon for ever, seeing his word is settled
for ever in heaven (Psalm. 119.89.) Half a promise, or an half promise, an it
may be (Zeph. 2.3.) from God, is better security than an absolute promise, than
an it shall be, yea, than an oath from any of the sons of men.

Thirdly, Prayer honors God. Our seeking to him in our wants and weaknesses,
in our fears and dangers, are an argument that we suppose him able to help us,
and that all our ruins may be under his hand: Such a seeking to God, is the
honoring of God; and therefore, God is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him, and call upon him. Our coming to God in all our wants, shows, that he is
an inexhaustible fountain; so thick a cloud, thar we cannot weary him, nor he
spend all his waters, how much soever he showers down, or spends upon us. He
can distill mercies, and drop down blessings everlastingly. We often want
vessels to receive, but he never wants oil to give. It is the glory of Kings
and Princes, that so many come with petitions to them; that they have many
suitors at their gates, may possibly burden them, but undoubtedly it honors
them; does it not signify, that he has a purse to relieve their necessities?
or power to redress their wrongs and injuries? O thou that hear prayer, is a
title of honor given to God ( Psalm. 65.2.) To thee shall all flesh come. As
God has said ( Psalm. 50.15.) they that call upon him shall glorified him, for
help received, so they do glorify him, by calling upon him for help: No marvel
then, if he turn a Jobs captivity, when he prays.

Fourthly, Prayer is the voice of the new creature. The Lord loves that voice,
it is music, the best music, next to praise, in his ear. Let me hear thy voice
(Cant. 2.14.) that is, let me hear thee praying, or thy prayer-voice; let me
see thy countenance: for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. The
Lord delights in prayer; therefore the Lord will turn the captivity of a Job
when he prays.

Fifthly, Prayer is not only the voice of the new creature, but it is the voice
of the Spirit with the new creature. The Spirit himself makes intercession for
us (Romans 8.26.) It Is the holy Spirits work to form requests in our hearts to
God. As the Spirit it self witnesses with our spirits, that we are the
children of God (Romans 8.16.) so he prays in the spirits of Gods children. The
prayer of a believer has the power of the holy Spirit in it, and therefore it
must needs make great turns. God turned the captivity of Job when he prayed.

Sixthly, Jesus Christ presents such prayers, the prayers of faith, the prayers
of repentance, unto God his Father. Christ's intercession gives effect, or gets
answer to our supplications. The Father hears the Son always ( John 11.42.) and
so he does all them, whose prayers are offered to him by the Son ( Revel. 8.3.)
The angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and there was
given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all
Saints, upon the golden altar which was before the throne. The angel there
spoken of, is the angel or messenger of the Covenant, prophesied of ( Mal.
3.1.) that is, Jesus Christ, it is he, he alone, who offers the incense of his
own prayers, with the prayers of all Saints, upon the golden altar, which is
before the throne; and being there represented doing so, presently (as it
follows, ver. 5.) There were voices, and thunders, and lightenings,
signifying the wonderful effects of prayer, till it should come (after many
turnings in the world, or, as I may say, after a world of turnings) to the
Lords turning of Sions captivity, as here of Jobs.

Seventhly, Jesus Christ does not only present the prayers of believers to God,
but also prays in them; when saints pray he prays in them, for he and they
are mystically one: And as Christ is in believers the hope of glory (Col.
1.27.) so he is in them the help of duty; and so much their help, that without
him they can do nothing (John 15.5.) Now a believers prayer being, in this
sense, Christ's prayer, it cannot but do great things.

Lastly, As Jesus Christ presents the prayers of believers to the Father, and
prays in them, or helps them to pray, by the blessed and holy Spirit sent
down, according to his gracious promise, into their hearts; so he himself
prays for them, when they are not actually praying for themselves. For (says
the Apostle, Heb. 7.25.) He ever lives to make intercession for them. The best
believers do not always make supplications for themselves; but Christ is always
making, as well as he ever lives to make, intercession for them. The Apostle
(speaking of Christ's intercession) uses the word in the present tense or time,
which denotes a continued act ( Romans 8.34.) Who is even at the right hand of
God, who also makes intercession for us. The sacrifice of Christ (though but
once offered) is an everlasting sacrifice; and this other part of his
priestly-office, his intercession, is everlasting, as being often, yea, always
or everlastingly offered. The way or manner of Christ's making everlasting
intercession for us, is a great secret; it may suffice us to know and believe
that he does it. Now it is chiefly from this everlasting intercession of
Christ, that both the persons of the elect partake of the benefits of his
sacrifice, and that their prayers are answered for the obtaining of any good,
as also for the removal of any evil, as here Jobs was for the turning of his
captivity.

Thus I have given a brief account of this inference, that if prayer prevails
to turn the captivity of others, then much more our own. Prayer has had a
great hand in all the good turns that ever the Lord made for his Church: And
when the Lord shall fully turn the captivity of Sion, his Church, he will pour
out a mighty spirit of prayer upon all the sons of Sion. The Prophet
fore-shewed the return of the captivity of the Jews out of Babylon (Jerem.
29.10.) After seventy years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and
perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return to this place; for I
know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace,
and not of evil, to give you an expected end. But what should the frame of
their hearts be at that day? the 12th verse tells us, And ye shall go and pray
unto me, and I will hearken. These words may bear a twofold sense. First, The
sense of a command; Then shall ye call upon me, and then shall ye go and pray,
That is your duty in that day. Secondly, I conceive they may also bear the
sense of a promise; then shall your hearts be enlarged, then I will pour out a
spirit of prayer upon you, And ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will
hearken. We may conclude the approach of mercy, when we discern the spirits of
men up in and warm at this duty. Many enquire about the time, when the
captivity of Sion shall fully end? we may find an answer to that question best,
by the enlargement of our own hearts in prayer. David speaking of that, said (
Psalm. 102.17.) He will regard the prayer of the destitute (the meanest and
lowest shrubs in grace, as the word there used imports) and not despise (that
is, he will highly esteem, and therefore answer) their prayer: How much more
the prayer of the tall cedars in grace, or of the strong wrestlers, when they
call upon him, and cry unto him, with all their might day and night? The Lord
turned the captivity of Job when he prayed for his friends.

Nor was it a bare turn. As Job did not offer a lean sacrifice to God in
prayer, but the strength of his soul went out in it; so the Lord, in giving him
an answer, did not give him a lean or slight return, but, as it follows, Also
the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before.

The Hebrew is, The Lord added to Job to the double. Some translate too barely,
The Lord made an accession or an addition; but that does not reach the sense
intended: For, a little more than he had before, had been an addition to what
he had before; but double is more than a little, or the common notion of an
addition; the Lord gave him twice as much, or double, to that great estate
which he had before. This doubling of his estate may be taken two ways.

First, Strictly, as four is twice two, and eight twice four. See the wild
conceits of the Jewish Rabbis about the doubling of Jobs estate, in Mercer
upon the place.
In that strict sense it may be taken here, as to his personal estate; but as
to persons it will not hold, the number of his children was the same as before.
If we compare this chapter with the first chapter ( ver. 3.) we find his estate
doubled in strict sense: Whereas Job had then seven thousand sheep, now says
this chapter ( ver. 12.) he had fourteen thousand sheep; and whereas before he
had three thousand camels, now he had six thousand camels; and whereas before
he had five hundred yoke of oxen, now he had a thousand yoke of oxen; and
lastly, whereas before he had five hundred she asses, now he had a thousand she
asses. Here was double in the letter; In duplum, i. e. in plurimum. Quam
plurimum? numerus finitus pro infinito. Jun.
the Lord added all his cattle double in number: Yet we need not tie up the
word double, or twice as much, strictly to that sense. Therefore

Secondly, Double may be taken largely, and so double or twice as much, is very
much. He added to him double, that is, he made a very great addition, possibly
in some things treble, yea, fourfold to what he had before. And thus the Lord
made good what Bildad had spoken to Job, closely hinting, that surely Job lay
in some secret sin, and was not right with God, because God let him lie in that
forlorn condition, and did not so much as restore him to the same, much less
raise him to a better estate, than he had before ( chap. 8.6, 7.) If thou were
pure, and upright, surely, now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation
of thy righteousness prosperous: Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter
end should greatly increase. It is usual in the Hebrew, to say those things are
double, which excel and are great. Thus spoke Zophar (chap. 11.6.) O that God
would speak and open his lips against thee; and that he would show thee the
secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that which is. Know therefore, etc.
The secrets of Divine wisdom are double to what is, namely, to what they
appear, or are apprehended to be: The wisdom of God is double, yea, an hundred
fold more than what man is able to conceive it to be; The secrets of Gods
wisdom are unsearchable, and past any creatures finding out. Thus in other
Scriptures double is put for very much ( Isa. 40.2.) Speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her
iniquity is pardoned, for she has received of the Lords hand double for all
her sins. We must not think that Jerusalem made satisfaction to the Lord for
her sin^, much less may we imagine that Jerusalems sufferings did exceed her
sins, or the desert of her sins: For it is said ( Ezra 9.13.) Thou have punished
us less than our iniquities deserve. And ( Lam. 3.22.) It is of the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed. But the meaning of double th^re, is plainly
this, she has received a very great punishment, the Lo^d has made her feel
the sorrowful effects of her sin fully; For said Daniel (chap. 9.12.) Under the
whole heaven has not been done, as has been done unto Jerusalem. This is
called a double recompense by another Prophet ( Jerem. 16.18.) I will
recompense their iniquity, and their sin double, because they have defiled my
land. And thus Jeremy prayed, against the opposers and despisers of his
prophecy ( chap. 17.18.) Destroy them with double destruction. So then, when
it is said, the Lord added double, or twice as much to Job as he had before, it
notes, at least, a very great addition to the prosperous estate which Job had
before, even in outward things.

Hence Observe, First; When we are about spirituals, the Lord takes occasion to
minister to us in temporals. The Lord not only turned the captivity of Job,
when he prayed for his friends, but gave him twice as much.

Job did not pray for the doubling of his estate, or for great things in the
world; we find him many times giving up his hopes as to temporals, when he
would not give up his hopes as to spirituals and eternals: Though he kill me,
yet will I trust in him; he also shall be my salvation. He submitted his life
to God, in hope of a better life, but he had little or no expectation about the
things of this life; yet the Lord gave him abundance with his life, as also an
abundant, or long life, as we read at the end of this Book. There are two
special reasons, why the Lord gave Job a great increase in temporals.

First, Because in those Old Testament times the promises went much in
temporals.

Secondly, Because Job having lost his credit in the world, when he lost his
estate, spiritual supplies would never have set him right in the eye of the
world, he had suffered, as to his reputation in spirituals, by his loss in
temporals; and therefore the Lord doubled his estate, to vindicate his
reputation in the eye of the world. And the Lord did this unsought and
unthought of by Job; therefore (as the point says) it is a truth, that while
we are careful about spirituals, the Lord takes care of our temporals ( Mat.
6.33.) Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you.

Secondly, Note; The Lord is a bountiful rewarder of his servants, and a
liberal repairer of their losses.

The Lord is a bountiful rewarder two ways.

First, For what we do, we shall not lose our labor in serving him. God gives
good and great wages (1 Cor. 15.58.) Be ye steadfast and unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord; for as-much as ye know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord; that is, labor abundantly, for your labor shall have
an abundant reward: Not only shall it not be in vain, but richly rewarded. The
Lord is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love (Heb. 6.10.) The
Lord should be unrighteous to forget our labor of love; not because any labor
of ours can endebt him to reward us, but, because he has freely promised to
reward us.

Secondly, The Lord is a bountiful rewarder of us for what we suffer: And that,
First, When we suffer under his own hand. Secondly, When for his sake we suffer
peaceably and patiently under the hand of men. Job was a great sufferer both
ways; he suffered greatly under the afflicting hand of God, and he suffered
greatly under the violent hands and reproachful tongues of men, and the Lord
was to him a bountiful rewarder, with respect to both: For he did not only heal
his wounded state, and make him up as well as he was before, according to that
in ( Jerem. 30.17.) I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thy
wounds; but he did it double, insomuch, that he, who in the days of his former
prosperity, was only the greatest of all the men of the East, became in the
days of his latter prosperity, greater than he had been himself. The Lord has
plentiful rewards for the godly, and so he has (though of another kind) for
the wicked. He (says David) plentifully rewards the proud doer (Psalm.
31.23.) There is a reward of wrath, as well as a reward of favor. Wrath is the
reward of proud men: Thus the Lord will plentifully reward proud Babylon, at
one time or other, by some hand or other ( Revel. 18.6.) Reward her, even as
she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works: In the cup
which she has filled fill to her double. Babylon shall at last lose double
blood, for the blood that she has drawn, yea (as the Text says) double,
double, that is four times as much; and who knows how much that double unto her
double means? For it is said ( ver. 7.) How much she has glorified her self,
and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her. Now as no man can
tell nor imagine, how much she has glorified her self, nor how deliciously she
has lived; so no man can tell how much torment and sorrow she shall have! Yea,
we read not only of a double, and quadruble, but of a sevenfold reward of
wrath for evil men ( Psalm. 79.12.) Render unto our neighbors sevenfold into
their bosom. And surely that Scripture means bad neighbors. Now as the Lord
does plentifully reward the proud and evil doers in a way of wrath, so he will
plentifully reward well-doers and well-sufferers, whether under his own hand,
or the hand of man, in ways of mercy. And if so, then,

First, Fear not to lose by God, and that in a twofold respect. First, When he
comes to borrow of you for the poor. He that has pity on the poor, lends to
the Lord (Prove. 19.17.) Every time we are asked to give to the poor, upon due
occasion, God sends to borrow of us, and he will surely repay what he has
borrowed; therefore fear not to lose by God, when he borrows of you for the
poor. Secondly, Fear not to lose by God, when he takes all from you, and makes
you poor. Sometimes God does not come a borrowing, but he comes a taking; he
will have all, whether you will or no: He will sometimes take all away by fire,
by losses at sea or land; in these, and such like cases, fear not ^o be losers
by God: But, First, Trust him, as Job did. Secondly, Be patient, as Job was.
They that have an interest in God, and a portion in the promise, need not fear
they shall lose a thread or a shoe-latchet by God, though his providence takes
all away, and strips them (as it did Job) naked. What God takes from his
servants, he keeps for them, and will restore to them, either in the same kind
with much more, as he did to Job at last, or in some other kind, which is much
better, as he did to Job at first. While Job was deprived of his all worldly
good things, God gave him much patience at first, so that when all was lost and
gone, he could say, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
return thither: The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the
name of the Lord. While this frame of heart lasted, it was better than all that
he had lost; and though through the extremity of his pains and temptations, it
was somewhat abated, and his patience somewhat ruffled, yet it was never wholly
lost; and when it was worst with him, his faith failed not, which was best of
all.

Now what the Apostle spoke concerning those troubles which befell the
Israelites in the wilderness, They happened for examples (1 Cor. 10.11.) So all
these troubles and takings away, happened to Job as our example, or (which the
Greek word signifies) as a type, that we should be patient under the Lords
hand in taking; and remember for the encouragement of our faith, the Lords
bounty in restoring. For this end the Apostle James calls us to consider this
dealing of God with Job (Jam. 5.11.) Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and
have seen the end of the Lord. What is that to us (may some say) that Job was
patient? Yes, all the matter is to us, it was written for our example and
admonition; and says the Apostle, ye have not only heard of the patience of
Job, but have seen the end of the Lord. Here is an exercise of those two noble
senses, Hearing and Seeing, mentioned, and doubtless for great purposes both.
But why does he add, ye have seen the end of the Lord? Some interpret these
words as a second instance; the Apostle mentioning Job in the former words, and
Christ in these, Ye have seen the end of the Lord, that is, how it was with
Christ in his sufferings. The Lord Jesus Christ was well rewarded for all that
he suffered, God highly exalted him (Phil. 2.7.) because he humbled himself,
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. It Is a truth, if
we take those latter words of the verse, Ye have seen the end of the Lord, for
the issue of Christ's sufferings. But I rather conceive, that the whole verse
relates unto Job; and so the end of the Lord in the latter part, is the end
which the Lord made with Job. As if the Apostle James had said, Has it not
been set before your eyes, what end the Lord made with him? or how he gave him
double in the end? Be not afraid to lose by God, either borrowing or taking,
for he is a bountiful rewarder.

Secondly, As we should not be afraid to lose by God (when he comes either to
borrow a part, or (as the case was with Job) to take all from us) so, let us
not be afraid to lose for God (which was touched before, together with the
former Inference, upon the 11th verse of the 41 Chapter.) We have no ground in
the world of fear, when all that we have in the world is taken from us for Gods
sake, that is, for righteousness sake, seeing, God who here restored to Job
double, all that himself had taken from him, has also promised to give his
faithful servants double for all that is taken from them (upon his account) by
men, or which they lose for him. That Is the meaning of the Prophet ( Isa.
61.7.) For your shame ye shall have double; that is, ye having suffered shame,
or been put to shame for Gods sake, or for doing that which is honorable and
commendable in it self, shall receive double. What double? As by shame we are
to understand any evil suffered, so by double any good promised as a reward for
suffering that evil, especially such good as stands in direct opposition to
that evil. As if it had been said, ye shall have double honor for shame, and
double riches for poverty, and double health for sickness, and and double
liberty for imprisonment and captivity. It Is much to have double reparation of
any loss; yet this doubling is a poor matter to what is promised in another
place, to those who lose for God. We have Christ's word, with an asseveration
for it ( Mat. 19.28, 29.) Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me
in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory,
ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel: And
every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name sake, (here are great
sufferings, but behold a greater reward follows; not like Jobs, twofold, but
an hundredfold; so says that Text) shall receive an hundredfold, and (which
is ten-thousand-fold more than that) shall inherit everlasting life. Be not
afraid to lose for God. Job had double, who lost by God, and so may you; but if
ye lose for God, here is an hundredfold for you. But some may say, this
hundredfold is a great way off, in the next Life. I answer, If it be so, yet
do not think ye shall be losers; for if ye should never see good day more in
this world, yet if ye are assured of everlasting life in the world to come, is
not that enough? What pitiful spirits have they, that are not willing to take
their hundredfold in the life to come! Yet mark it, Jesus Christ does not put
us off so neither; therefore another Gospel expresses the promise fully, to
meet with this objection ( Mark 10.29, 30.) when some told Christ, they had
left all to follow him, Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you, there
is no man that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother,
or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the Gospels, but he shall
receive an hundredfold, now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters,
and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to
come, eternal life. Jesus Christ gives present recompenses, as well as future;
in this time, as well as in the time, or rather eternity, to come. And that
there is a kind of Synchronism, or near joining, in time of payment and loss,
of suffering and rewarding, some have found in the letter; they have had great
worldly exaltations, soon after their depressions in this world. And Jesus
Christ, who made this promise, has made it good in spirituals, to the
experiences of many thousands, who have lost all for him; they have had that at
present given into their souls, which has been to them, or in their
estimation, an hundredfold better than what they lost. They that have indeed
suffered loss for Christ, never complained of their sufferings or losses; they
have often triumphed in them, and rejoiced (as the Apostle Peter speaks, 1
Epist. 1.8.) with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. If any think they do
foolishly, who suffer worldly losses for Christ's sake, let them remember this
return of a hundredfold, and be ashamed of their own folly in thinking so. It
is not foolishness, but true wisdom, to lose much, for the gain of more. Are
not they wise, who lose one, upon good assurance to get an hundred? have we not
Christ's word for it? and is not that good assurance that it shall be so? Sure,
no Merchant can put off his goods at a better market, than he that puts them
all off for God. How rich would men be, if they could get an hundred for one?
Such a rich trade has Christ opened, and they are the wisest Merchants now,
who venture in it, and will be so accounted in the end, even by those who now
call them fools and madmen. That which is lost for Christ, is sown; and though
the seed that is cast into the ground, may seem cast away, yet it will spring
up again. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in
heart (Psalm. 97.11.) And what Christ says of the good ground, is most true in
this case; that seed of light is sown in such ground as will bring forth, to
some thirty, to some sixty, to some an hundredfold. Therefore, to conclude
this Inference, Be not afraid to lose for God; he will not only see you
indempnified, but (at least) doubly rewarded. Job, who once lost by God, or by
the hand of God upon him, was repayed by the same hand with him, double in
kind; and if we have double in a better kind, double faith in God, and double
love to God, and double zeal for God, and double peace in our own consciences,
this is an hundredfold better than all we can lose for him, in or of this
world.

JOB, Chap. 42. Verse. 11. 11. Then came there unto him, all his brethren, and
all his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did
eat bread with him in his house; and they bemoaned him, and comforted him, over
all the evil that the Lord had brought upon him; every man also gave him a
piece of money, and every one an ear-ring of gold.
IN the former verse we have the blessed turn of Jobs state in general; The
Lord gave him twice as much as he had before: In this verse, begins the
particular account of Jobs restorings. There were four things wherein Job
suffered loss.

First, He suffered the loss of his estate.

Secondly, The loss of his children.

Thirdly, The loss of his health.

Fourthly, The loss of his friends.

Jobs repair begins with his last loss; his friends were the last that he lost
in the day of his affliction, Inter adversitates Jobi quasi praecipua erat quod
fuerat ab amicis suis desertus, and ideo hujus adversitatis primo remedium
ponitur. Aquin.
but the first that he recovered in the day of his restoration. The first
budding or spring of Jobs felicity, after so long and sharp a Winter of sorrow
as he had gone thorough, was, the putting forth of fresh and fragrant acts of
love from his ancient friends, that of late had forsaken him, and left him in
the hour of his temptation.

This verse, wherein the account is given about this first mercy, I may call,
or entitle, The address of Jobs friends, and in it we may consider,

First, How they are described, or what they are called. First, as to their
relation, His brethren, his sisters, and acquaintance came. Secondly, in their
quantity or number, they came all: Here is all, all, all; All his brethren, and
all his sisters, and all that had been of his acquaintance before; there was
not one missing, not one that forbore to make this friendly address unto him.

Secondly, As we have an account who they were that came to him, so what they
did when they came; and that is set forth four ways in this one verse. First,
They did eat bread with him. Secondly, They bemoaned him. Thirdly, They
comforted him. Fourthly, They were very bountiful, and very respectful to him;
They gave him every one a piece of money, and every one an ear-ring of gold.
Thus you have the state and parts of this verse, which I call, The address of
Jobs friends unto him.

Then came there unto him, all his brethren, and all his sisters. Then. The
word in the Hebrew, is the ordinary copulative, And, which has various
rendrings in Scripture, according to the state of the place. Here we translate
it, Then, which may have a double reference. First, to the turn of his
captivity, Then they came. Secondly, to his prayer for his friends, and the
Lords acceptance of him; when God had so eminently declared his favor to him
and his friends, upon his intercession, Then there came unto him, All his
brethren, and all his sisters.

Brethren and sisters are taken two ways in Scripture.

First, Strictly; and so they that are of, or have the same parents, at least,
one of them, are brethren and sisters.

Secondly, Brethren and sisters are taken largely, for all of the kindred. The
kindred of Christ, are called his brethren ( Mark 3.31.) Then came his
brethren, and his mother, standing without, that is, his kindred; for whether
Christ had any brother, in a strict sense, as born of the same Mother, we have
nothing from Scripture to affirm; it is generally agreed that he had not, his
brethren were his kindred at large. Abraham spoke truly, though not the whole
truth ( Genesis 20.12.) when he called Sarah his sister, that is, his kinswoman.
Moses called Israel brother to the Edomites, who were distant from that people,
many degrees, they descending from Esau, these from Jacob (Numb. 20.14.) Thus
says thy brother Israel; that is, Israel that is of thy blood, though a great
way off, Isaac being their common Father. Thus here, all Jobs brethren and
sisters are all his kindred; and not only these, but, All that were of his
acquaintance before.

The Hebrew is, All that knew him before, that is, had familiarity and converse
with him before. Christ ( Mat. 7.22.) said of those that did so hotly press
acquaintance upon him, I know you not, ye are not of those that I know, or have
had fellowship with, you are none of my acquaintance. So that, there was a
collection of all Jobs relations and friends at that time, they all flockt to
him, and thronged about him, as to and about some strange sight; the fame of
his restoration was soon blown all the Country over. Hence the Septuagint
render the words paraphrastically; Audierunt omnes fratres, quae cunque
acciderant ei, and venerunt. Sept.
All his brethren heard all that had befallen him; and so they came.

But, where was his wife? There is no mention here of her return; she had
spoken as a foolish woman (Chap. 2.10.) and did not answer the duty of her
relation after that, as he complained (Chap. 19.17.) My breath is strange to my
wife, though I entreated for the childrens sake of mine own body; yet doubtless
she returned to her duty, and honored him as her head and husband, now at
last, else the mercy had not been complete, but defective in a very
considerable part of it.

Now, in that Jobs restoring, or the repair of his losses, began with the
return of his friends,

Observe; The loss of friends, is a great and grievous loss.

He that loses the affection of friends, loses a great possession, a great
interest. Friends indeed are great helps, great helpers; to be in a friendless
condition, is to be in a helpless condition; to have friends, is a very
valuable mercy. Let us bless God that we have men to friend us, above all, that
God is our friend.

Secondly, These words, Then came all his brethren, imply, that when he was in
an afflicted condition, none of his friends came at him, neither those that are
here called his brethren and sisters, nor those that are called his
acquaintance.

Hence observe; In times of affliction, worldly friends will leave us, and
godly friends may prove strange to us.

Doubtless, among those brethren, sisters and acquaintance of Job, some, that I
say not, many, were godly, yet even they left him, in the day of his distress.
Men are but men, and they oftentimes show themselves unconstant to man. As
Christ had those that followed him for the loaves, Amicitia mundi sequitur
marsupium.
so have we too. Friendship follows the purse, the bag; and when all is gone,
such friends are gone. When Christ himself was in affliction, those that were
in near relation to him, his very Disciples, left him; they all left him, and
Peter denied him. When the Apostle Paul was in a great affliction, and stood as
a prisoner, to answer for his life before Nero, his friends durst not appear;
At my first answer (says he, 2 Timothy 4.16.) no man stood with me, all men
forsook me. He had not a friend that would own him, nor appear for him, in the
time of his affliction and persecution; and he prayed that God would not lay it
to their charge, that they had been thus unfriendly to him.

Then, First, Let us not trust in friends, no, not in a brother; and not only,
not in a brother at large, but not in a brother in the strictest sense, not in
a brother of the same blood and bowels with us, no, not in a brother of the
same faith with us ( Mich. 7.5.) Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not
confidence in a guide; keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy
bosom. Trust not in nearest friends, no, not in godly friends; they may fail:
Though we are to trust them so, as not to suspect them, yet we are not to trust
them so, as to rely upon them, or to make them our strength; for then they
prove Egyptian reeds, which will not only not support, but wound us. That Is
good counsel ( Isa. 2.21) Cease ye from man (let him be who he will, though a
brother, though of most intrinsic and nearest acquaintance, though never so
great and potent, yet cease from him; the reason there given, is) his breath is
in his nostrils; the man is frail, his life is short and uncertain, he may not
last long. And we may take another reason from the Point in hand; his love is
uncertain, as well as his life, and his affections seldom last long; let us
therefore have weaned affections from those that affect us, and are friendly to
us.

Then, Secondly, It Is our wisdom to get Christ for a friend; he is a friend for
ever: He that would have a friend to stick to him in adversity, as well as
prosperity, let him get Christ to be his friend, who is unchangeable, whose
love fails not; that is our greatest and surest interest. Christ having loved
his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end (John 13.1.) That Is
the spirit of unfeigned friendship ( Prove. 17.17.) A friend loves at all
times, and a brother is born for adversity. That Is true of a real friend, who
lives up to the rule of friendship, He loves at all times, and therefore to
the end. When the Prophet Malachi says (Chap. 1.6.) A son honors his
father, his meaning is, a son should or ought to honor his father, or, a son
who knows his duty, will honor his father; so, a friend ought to love at all
times, and a true friend will: yet that Scripture in the Proverbs is chiefly
true of Christ, and absolutely true of him only; he alone is such a friend as
loves at all times. Hence that divine challenge ( Romans 8.35.) Who shall
separate us from the Love of Christ? And then the Apostle proceeds from who, to
what. As no person, so no thing, can separate us from the love of Christ. Shall
tribulation, or anguish, or peril, or sword? shall these separate us from the
love of God? no, these shall not, these cannot; these cannot make Christ
strange to us, nor love us the less; he loves in tribulation, as well as out of
tribulation; in streights, as well as in our greatest inlargements; in
sickness, as well as in health; in disgrace with men, as well as when most
honored and cried up by them; when naked, as well as when clothed; as well in
rags, as in the richest array. Hence that confident conclusion ( verse. 38.) I
am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, etc. shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And if so, then we see
where our true interest lies: Let us make sure of Christ; he will never leave
us; all earthly friends may. Friends are a great mercy, but they are not a sure
mercy.

Again, Consider Jobs friends, who came not at him when in that afflicted
condition; yet as soon as ever God turned his captivity, and made him prosper
in the world, then they would own him, then they came.

Hence note, Thirdly; Such as are no friends in adversity, will readily show
themselves friendly in prosperity.

That they came then, is an intimation, if not a proof, that they came not
before; but then they came. What Christ spoke in another case, I may apply by
way of allusion to this; Where the carcass is, thither will the Eagles be
gathered together. When Job was up, his friends appeared. All are ready to
worship the rising Sun. When the face of things and times change with us, then
the faces of friends change toward us, then they have other respects and
countenances for us; this spirit of the world has been anciently observed, Si
fueris foelix multos numerabis amicos. Tempora si fuerintnubila solus eris.
even by Heathens; If you be happy, or restored to happiness, you shall number
many friends, though you had none before. Such friends, are like those birds
that visit our coasts in Summer, when it is warm weather, when every thing
flourishes and is green, then some birds visit us, who all the Winter, when
it is cold, frost and snow, leave us.

Fa^ther, it may be conceived, that several of Jobs friends left him, not only
upon the occasion of his poverty and want, but upon the supposition of his
hypocrisy and wickedness; many of them might have the same opinion of him,
which those three had, who particularly dealt with him, that surely he was a
bad man, because the Lord brought so much evil upon him. Now, when the Lord
restored Job, they had another, a better opinion of him, the Lord also giving a
visible testimony of his accepting Job.

Hence note, Fourthly; God will one time or other vindicate the integrity of
his faithful servants, and set them right in the opinion of others.

God suffered Jobs integrity to lie under a cloud of supposed hypocrisy, but
at last the Lord restored him to his credit, as well as to his estate, and made
his unkind, and not only suspicious, but censorious friends, acknowledge that
he was upright and faithful. The Lord promises ( Psalm 37.6.) to bring forth
the righteousness of his servants as the light, and their judgment as the
noonday; that is, a right judgment in others concerning them, as well as the
rightness of their judgment in what they have done and been, or his own most
righteous judgment in favor of them. They who had a wrong judgment, and took
a false measure of Job (measuring him by the outward dispensations of God, and
judging of his heart by his state, and of his spirit by the face of his
affairs) these were at last otherwise persuaded of him. It Is, as the way, so
the sin and folly of many, to judge upon appearance, upon the appearance of
Gods outward dealings; they conclude men good or bad, as their outward
condition is good or bad; and therefore, the Lord, to redeem the credit of his
faithful servants that lie under such misapprehensions, sends prosperity, and
manifests his gracious acceptance of them, that men of that perverse opinion
may be convinced, and delivered out of their error.

Note Fifthly; The Lords favoring us, or turning the light of his countenance
toward us, can soon cause men to favor us, and shine upon us.

See what a change the Lord made at that time, both in the state of things, and
in the hearts of men, when the Lord outwardly forsook Job; friends forsook him,
children mocked him, acquaintance despised him, his very servants slighted him:
yet no sooner did the Lord return in the manifestations of his favor, but they
all return, desiring to ingratiate themselves with him, and strive who shall
engage him most. God can quickly give us new friends, or restore the old.
Exple^^ contumelias honoribus, detrimenta muneribus, execrationes precibus.
The hearts of all men are in the hand of the Lord, who turns them from us, or
to us, as he pleases. When God manifests his favor, he can command our favor
with men. Though that which is a real motive of the Lords favor to his people,
their holiness, and holy walkings, gets them many enemies, and they are hated
for it by many; yet the Lord discovering or owning the graces of his servants,
by signal favors, often gets them credit, and sets them right in the opinion
of men. Thus it was with Job; all his friends returned to him, upon the Lords
high respect to him in turning his captivity.

Again, in that Jobs friends came to him, Cui dominus favet, ei omnia favent.


Observe, Sixthly; It is the duty of friends to be friendly, to come to and
visit one another.

It is a duty to do so in both the seasons, or in all the changes of our life:
It is a duty to do so in times of prosperity, when God shines upon our
Tabernacle. When any receive extraordinary mercies, it is the duty of friends
to show them extraordinary courtesies, and to bless God for them, and with
them. When Elizabeth's neighbors and cousins heard how the Lord had showed
great mercy upon her, they rejoiced with her (Luke 1.58.) It is a duty to
rejoice with those that rejoice, and to come to them that we may rejoice with
them. It is a duty also to visit those that mourn, and to mourn with them.
Friendly visits are a duty in all the seasons of our lives.

Once more. Then came all his brethren, etc. It was late e're they came, but
they came.

Hence Note; It is better to perform a duty late, than not at all.

They had a long time, even all the time of his long affliction, neglected, or
at least slackned this duty of visiting Job; yet they did not reason thus with
themselves; It is in vain to visit him now, or our visiting him now may be
thought but a flattering with him, or a fawning upon him: No, though they had
neglected him before, they would not add new to their old incivilities. We say
of repentance (which is a coming to God) Late repentance is seldom true, yet true
repentance is never too late. None should think it too late to come to God,
though they have long neglected him; nor should sinners, who have long
neglected God, be discouraged: Though it be best for us, and our duty, to
repent betimes; yet God will not refuse a sinner at any time, who indeed
repents. Now as late repentance, so any late duty, is better than none, or than
a total neglect of it. Jobs friends came to him, though late, and were friendly
received. But what came they for? or what did they when they came? That Is set
forth in four things, as was showed in opening the Text.

First, The Text tells us, They did eat bread with him in his house.

I shall not stay upon that nicety which some take notice of, that when bread
and water are named together, they always signify poor fare (1 Kings 18.4.)
Obadiah fed the Prophets whom he secured from the fury of Jezabel in Caves,
with bread and water: He could not feast them there, but gave them what might
keen them alive. So that threatening ( Isa. 3.1.) imports they should not have
necessaries. But when bread is put alone, that signifies (say they) a full, or
at least, a very competent and comfortable provision (2 S^m. 9.7.) And so to
eat bread together is to feed liberally together. Yet I find these two, bread
and water, put together, and signifying a full Table in one place of Scripture.
When that Syrian Army, smitten with blindness, was led by Elisha into Samaria,
the Prophet said (2 King 6.22.) Set bread and water before them, that they may
eat and drink; then it follows, he (that is, the King of Israel) prepared
great provisions for them. The greatness of the provision which the King
p^epared for them, is not spoken of only with respect to their number (an army
being many, cannot be fed with a little) but with respect to the nobleness of
their entertainment; which yet I conceive was but answerable to what the
Prophet desired, when he said, set bread and water before them. As if the
meaning were, Make them good cheer: So that bread and water may imply plenty,
Praefigurat hic Jobus Christum post resurrectionem, honoribus restitutum,
honoratem non tantum ab Apostolis, sed etiam patribus Judaeis et Gentilibus
fidelibus, et in domo ejus Ecclesia convivantibus, Passionem ipsius cum dolor
recolentibus, et in coelesti aulacum ipso panem vitae comesturis. Greg. l. 35.
Moral. c. 9, 10, 11.
as well as bread alone. Jobs friends

Did eat bread with him. Not the bread of mourners (as some expound) of which
we read ( Deuteronomy. 26.14. Hos. 9.4.) but the bread of rejoycers. I shall not omit
to mind the Reader of what one of the Ancients meditated upon this passage. Job
(says he) does here prefigure Christ after his resurrection, restored to his
honors, and honored, not only by his Apostles, but also by the fathers, both
Jews and Gentiles; the faithful flocking to him, and feasting with him in his
house the Church, there with sorrow remembering his sufferings, and in that
heavenly Court eating with him the bread of life. Christ after his resurrection
called his Apostles to eat bread with him; as here, after Jobs restitution,
which may be called his resurrection, it is said, All his friends came and did
eat bread with him in his house.

Hence Note; For friends to eat, yea, to feast soberly together, is not only
lawful, but sometimes a duty.

The creatures are given to us, not only for our necessity, but for our
comfort, and to maintain society. Solomon says ( Eccl. 8.15.) Then I commended
mirth, because a man has no better a thing under the Sun, than to eat, and
drink, and to be merry. He speaks not of a sensual mirth and eating, like
voluptuous Epicures, but of eating with gladness and singleness of heart, as
it is noted of the Primitive Saints (Acts 2.46.) There is no worldly thing
better than to eat and drink with sobriety in the use of the creature, and with
singleness of heart one toward another. To use what we have, is better than
the having of it. To eat together is good, with these limitations or cautions.
First, if we eat to the glory of God (1 Cor. 10.31.) Secondly, if we eat with
joy in God ( Eccl. 9.7.) Thirdly, if we eat tasting and remembering the goodness
of God ( Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12.) Fourthly, if we eat fearing to offend God, and wrong
our selves with access ( Prove. 23.1, 2. Luke 21.34.) Fifthly, if we have a
sense of the afflictions of others ( Amos 6.6.) especially of those who have
nothing to eat. Sixthly, if we eat with thankfulness, or giving thanks to God,
who satisfies our hunger ( Mark 8.6. John 6.11.) Seventhly, if we eat with
charitableness, giving a portion of what we have in plenty, to those that are
in want and hungry ( Jam. 2.15, 16.)

Again, They came to eat bread with Job in his house. See the nobleness of Jobs
spirit. Doubtless, when they came they made their Apologies, pleaded their
excuse, and confessed that they had failed in friendship, and had not lived up
to the law of love. Courteous and noble spirited Job took all well, past by all
discourtesies, welcomed and embraced them: He did not only not upbraid them
with former unkindnesses, why came ye not to me in the day of my trouble and
affliction, in the day of my distress and sorrow? where were ye? Thus some
would have rounded them; ye come to me when all is well with me; but where were
ye when I wanted comfort and company? Job, I say, did not only not upbraid them
with their former unkindnesses, when they came to him, but took their coming
kindly. When the Elders of Gilead came to Jepthah, to desire him to be their
Captain against the children of Ammon, he said ( Judge. 11.7.) Did not ye hate
me, and expel me out of my fathers house? and why are ye come unto me now when
ye are in distress? Jepthah cast their ill carriage toward him in their teeth,
and only not rejected them and their request. Thus Job might have said, why did
you leave me in the time of my distress? etc. but we have no such language from
this good man, not a word of that.

Hence Note; It becomes us to accept the love of formerly unkind friends, and
not to twit them in the teeth with their unkindnesses.

Job well understood that it was a part of his trial and burden from God, that
his friends forsook him, and were once uncivil to him: therefore he would not
burden them with it. A godly man considers, it is of the Lord if friends prove
unfriendly to him, and that it is for trial whether he can trust upon and
cleave unto God alone when friends leave him. Thus to receive unfriendly
friends is to be perfect (in our measure) as God is perfect. How unkindly have
we dealt with God! and yet when we come to him he accepts of us. They that are
sensible how they have refused the Lord sometimes, and that he has yet
graciously accepted of them, they (I say) will be ready to accept of friends
that have been froward and unkind to them: It is much the will of God, that we
should do so, and it is a great part of our conformity unto God when we do so.
It was very well that Job gave fair respect to his friends, and treated them
lovingly when they came to him; and it was well, and but their duty that they
came to him.

Yet this was not all they did; Jobs friends did not only come and eat bread
with him (thar had been but according to the custom of common friends) they
went further,

They bemoaned him. That Is the second friendly office which they did him. The
word signifies, to shake the head; so the Latin Translation renders it, His
friends came to him, and moved their heads over him, so expressing their
compassion. Moverunt super eum caput. Vulg. Consolati sunt eum et mirati sunt
super omnibus, etc.
That gesture of moving the head, was used sometimes in derision, sometimes in
admiration, in which latter sense the Septuagint take it here, They comforted
him, and wondered at all the evils that God had brought upon him. It might
well move wonder, that so good a man should suffer so much evil; yet this
gesture of shaking the head, is rarely, if at all used in way of admiration;
whereas, in way of compassion, (...) est proprie migrare, unde pro condolere
sumitur; quod qui aliquem solari volunt and ejus vicem dolere, e loco suo ut id
faciant soleant migrare.
nothing is more usual, and it complyeth fully with our translation, they
bemoaned him. As they feasted with him, so they bemoaned him, and condoled his
former sad stare; and to do so is a proper act of sincere love and friendship.

Hence Note; It is our duty to pity and bemoan the afflicted.

We read of Ephraim bemoaning himself (Jer. 31.18.) and there is a twofold
bemoaning of our selves. First, With respect to the sins that we have
committed. Secondly, There is a bemoaning of our selves, as to our afflictions;
and possibly both are to be understood in that place concerning Ephraim. It Is a
duty also with respect to others; we ought to bemoan those that are in
sufferings, and those that have sinned, as well as our own sins or sufferings.
And though, that which gives us the greatest occasion of bemoaning others is
their sin, yet it is a great duty also to bemoan those that are under
sufferings, and to have bowels of compassion, or a fellow feeling of their
afflictions.

But it may be objected, what need had Jobs brethren to bemoan him now that he
was delivered out of his afflictions, and his captivity turned? were not these
bemoanings improper and unseasonable?

I answer, First, Though Job was come out of his afflictions, yet he was but
very lately come out of them; he was yet, as it were, upon the borders of
sorrow, and was come only a step out of his troubles; so that his tears were
then scarce wiped away, or dried up, and the sorrow of his late adversity was
even forced to intermingle with the joy of his newly begun prosperity: The
remembrance of his affliction was, doubtless, yet very strong upon him, and the
pain of it scarce off him; he had, as yet, a taste of the wo^mwood and gall of
that most bitter cup, of which he had, a little before, drank so deeply; his
wound was but in healing, not quite healed; and therefore they might well
bemoan him, as to his former afflictions, in that morning or daybreak of his
mercies. Joy and sorrow use to conflict together, and strive for masteries,
whether the one shall keep, or the other get the ground, at the beginning of
all great changes.

Secondly, This act of Jobs friends in bemoaning of him, might respect not only
the abiding sense of his former affliction, but the sharpness, and soreness of
it, while it was upon him; so that, as his own remembrance of his former
sufferings might still hang upon him, so while his brethren, and other
visitants, remembered how grievous and tedious his sufferings had been, it might
well stir their compassions, and cause them to bemoan him.

Thirdly, Job had none to bemoan him, while the affliction was actually upon
him; Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, said he in the 16th Chapter, yet
found little or no pity from any: Now that being a great part of his suffering,
that he had none to pity him while he suffered; the Lord sent his brethren to
him, when he was new come out of his sufferings, to perform that duty to him,
which should have been done him while he suffered.

Further, Because we ought not only to pity and bemoan our friends in
adversity, but to help them out, and make a perfect cure; therefore Jobs
friends proceed to that duty also: For, having bemoaned him, the text says,
They comforted him.

That is, they used all the means they could to comfort him, they gave him
comfortable words, cordial consolations. Job himself had been a great comforter
of others (as Eliphaz acknowledged in the 4th Chapter) and now he has his
comforters; even they comforted him concerning his former miseries, who
formerly had been miserable comforters.

From the method of their proceeding; First, They bemoaned him; and, Secondly,
They comforted him,

Note; We can never truly comfort others, till we have pitied others.

Comforting begins at pitying. It is possible to pity one, and not to comfort
him: Some will give bemoaning words, yet are not able to minister real
comforts; so then, there may be pitying without comforting, but there cannot
be comforting without pitying. God himself is thus expressed (2 Cor. 1.3, 4.)
First, He is called, The father of mercies, that is, he is full of pity, full
of compassionate bowels. And then, Secondly, He is called, The God of all
consolation. He is a comforting God, because a pitying God. If God were not
pitiful and compassionate, we should have to comfort from him: so it is with
men, if we pity not others we cannot comfort them. Job called his friends
miserable comforters (chap. 16.2.) They came to mourn with him, and to comfort
him (chap. 2.11.) but had they more affectionately mourned with him, they would
have more effectually comforted him. They did not pity him enough in his
misery, and so they proved but miserable comforters to him.

Secondly, From the work it self,

Observe; To comfort those that are in affliction is our duty, and a work of
charity.

To minister comfort to the sorrowful, is a greater point of charity, than to
minister bread to the hungry, or clothing to the naked. As the soul is better
than the body, so those acts of charity, which offer relief to the soul in any
kind, are better than those by which the body is relieved. Though to give bread
be more costly to us than good wo^ds (we use to say good words are cheap) yet
good and comfortable words are worth much more than bread, they are better than
gold, yea, than fine gold, sweeter also than the honey, and the honeycomb. The
Apostle gave this duty in charge to believers (1 Thessalonians. 5.11.) Comfort your
selves together, and edify one another. And at the 14th verse. Now we exhort
you brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble minded, support the
weak. The weak, in the latter words, are the same with the feeble in the
former; and the support spoken of in the one, is nothing else but the comfort
spoken of in the other. Comfort to a feeble mind, is like a prop or a pillar to
a feeble building, the supporter of it.

And because it is so important a work, to comfort feeble minds I shall briefly
name some special cases, wherein the mind of man is feeble, and then hint what
word of comfort is most proper for its support, in each case.

First, If the mind be infeebled by outward wants, apply that comfortable
Scripture ( Mat. 6.32, 33.) Your father knows that ye have need of those
things; which if received by faith will give the mind great support in that
case.

Secondly, In case of the loss or death of friends; the Apostle has put words
into our mouths for the comforting of such (1 Thessalonians. 4.13.) chiefly these two
ways. First, By remembering that their friends are only asleep in Jesus, or gone
to sleep in the bosom of Jesus. Secondly, That they shall be raised again at
the coming of Jesus.

Thirdly, In case of suffering and persecution, read comfort and support, Mat.
5.11, 12, 13. 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14.

Fourthly, In case of bodily sickness, or any chastenings from the hand of God,
we have a store or treasure of comforting words, Heb. 12. from the 5. to the
14th verse.

Fifthly, In case of desertion, or Gods hiding his face, take comfort from Isa.
50.10. Isa. 54.7, 8.

Sixthly, When any are under the sense of divine wrath for sin, they may take
comfort by meditating all those Scriptures which hold out the free grace of God
to sinners, and the full satisfaction which Christ has made for sin to the
justice of God, and so for deliverance from the wrath which is to come (1 Thessalonians. 1.10.) These are the principal cases wherein we need a comforter; and
most of these, if not all, met in Jobs case. He was poor and had lost all, that
was the first case; his children were dead, that was the second; he was
persecuted, vexed, and reproached, that was a third; he was sick and weak in
body, that was a fourth; he was under grievous desertions, that was a fifth; he
was also under the sense of wrath, the arrows of the Almighty drunk up his
spirits. All these evils God brought upon him, and some of them in the highest
degree; and though he were then got out of them all, yet (as was said before)
being got but a little way out of them he needed comfort; and therefore his
new-come old friends and acquaintance, bemoaned and comforted him, as a man
newly come out of great affliction.

And we should be much in this duty of comforting others upon these
considerations.

First, Comfort upholds the soul, when burdened or weakened, from sinking.

Secondly, Comfort quiets the soul, when tossed up and down as with a tempest;
comforts wisely and seasonably ministered will make a great calm. Comfort is the
repose and rest of the soul.

Thirdly, Comfort quickens and revives the soul when dying away with sorrow;
comforts are cordials: For which cause we faint not (2 Cor. 4.16.) And what the
cause was which kept them from fainting, we may find both in the verse, going
before, in those words, All things are for your sakes (verse. 15.) or in the
verse following, Our light affliction, etc. (ver. 17.) Comforts either prevent
and keep us from qualms and swoonings, or bring us out of them again. Give wine
to him that is of a heavy heart; let him drink and forget his sorrow (Prove.
30.6, 7.) Give him this wine of comfort, and it will renew his spirit more than
wine.

Fourthly, Comfort confirms and establishes the soul, when we are ready to let
go our hold. The Apostle sent Timotheus, to establish and comfort the
Thessalonians concerning their faith (1 Epist. 3.2.) that is, to establish them
in the faith (both in the doctrine and grace of faith) by comforting them.

Jobs friends might see cause of comforting him upon many considerations,
possibly upon most of these: The Text says only, They comforted him Over all
the evil which the Lord had brought upon him.

The plaster was as broad as the soar, or they administered as many plasters
as there was soars; They comforted him over all the evil, etc. This directs us
to a great point of holy prudence in comforting the sorrowful, even to comfort
them in or about every thing, which has been an occasion of their sorrow. When
we are to stop the holes of a leaking vessel, if we stop three or four, and
leave but one, we endanger all the liquor in the vessel; you were as good stop
none at all, as not stop all: so it is in this case; therefore see how wisely
Jobs friends carried it, They comforted him over all the evil Which the Lord
had brought upon him.

And all that was the evil of suffering. The Lord is the bringer of such evils
upon all that suffer them, even upon his dearest and most faithful servants;
those evils come from him who is only good, and altogether good: The Lord takes
these evils to himself, I create evil (Isa. 45.7.) and faith the Prophet ( Amos
3.6.) Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? As the Lord
owns these kind of evils, so we honor God in acknowledging him the Author of
them. Our crosses are of God, as well as our comforts; our poverty, as well as
our riches; our sickness, as well as our health. This point has occurred more
than once from other passages in this Book, and therefore I shall add no more
now.

This was the third labor of love which the brethren of Job bestowed upon him,
They comforted him over all the evil which the the Lord had brought upon him.

Yet this was not all, they did not only bestow a mouthful of good words upon
him (I speak not lightly of good words, they are a weighty piece of charity)
Good words are much better (as was touched before) than gold and silver, and may
be much more beneficial and useful to the receiver, than thousands of gold and
silver: Yet, I say, Jobs friends did not only bestow a mouthful of good words
upon him, for the removal of his inward grief, but they brought their handsful
of good things to bestow upon him, for the making up of his outward losses; and
this was the fourth act or office of love which they did him, as it follows,
Every man also gave him a piece of money, and every one an ear-ring of gold.

Here was real kindness, as well as verbal. Though good words (as was said) be
a great charity, yet it is no charity to give nothing but good words where more
is needed, unless this be our case, that indeed we have nothing more to give.
The charity of some is only in words, to those who are in extreme need of more;
and it is only so, not because they have no more in their hands to give, but,
because they have no hearts to give more. To say to a naked or hungry one, be
clothed and sed, or to give a large parcel of condoling and bemoaning words,
and then do nothing, no not give a Doit, for the supply of his wants; is this
love or charity? Jobs friends loved him now, not in word and in tongue only,
but indeed and in truth; their deeds showed the truth of their love.

They gave him every one of them a piece of money. There are two readings of
this clause. The word which we here render a piece of money, signifies also a
sheep; according to which Master Broughton translates, and so do others,
Dederunt ei quisque pecudem unam. Bez.
They gave him each one a lamb, we say, a piece of money; the same word
signifying both, as is plain from other Scriptures ( Genesis 37.19.) And he (that
is, Jacob) bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent at the hand
of the children of Hamor, Shechems father, for an hundred pieces of money, or
lambs, as we put in the Margin. The same thing is reported again, in the same
words ( Josh. 24.32.) Now the reason why that word is rendered both a lamb and a
piece of money, is, say some, because money in those times, bare the stamp or
figure of a lamb upon it; as in some times and places money or coin was stamped
with the figure of an ox; from whence came that Proverb, The ox is upon his
tongue, that is, he speaks as he is bribed. A second reason given of it, is,
because the riches of the Ancients was most in cattle; Recunia a pecore dicta
est. Plin. l. 18. c. 3. Severus rex ovium boumque effigy primus ^s assignavit.
Plin.
and that kind of riches being as money, by which all things are valued, and by
which they made their payments, therefore the same word was used for cattle,
and for coin or money. The Latin word for money is also derived from another,
which signifies cattle. And it is reported by Pliny, that Severus first stamped
money with the effigies or image of sheep and oxen.

They gave him every one a piece of money, or a lamb. Some are most for that
reading, they gave him a lamb, because that seems most answerable to the loss
of Job; he lost all his cattle, and now every one brought him a lamb: But it is
not much to the matter, whether we take their reading or ours. If it were a
lamb, it was worth a piece of money; and if it were a piece of money, it would
buy a lamb.

But, why did they bring Job either a piece of money or a lamb? I answer.

First, To testify their renewed friend-ship, or as a signification of their
love, and so to ingratiate themselves with him.

Secondly, It might be toward the repair of his losses; every one brought him
somewhat; yet I conceive they bestowed those gifts upon him, rather as an
honor than a relief, yet possibly they might intend both in giving them. Upon
the one account or the other, or upon both, the Lord brought over Jobs friends
to congratulate him with these presents. It has been an ancient usage to
present Princes with gifts in way of honor and homage, as appears plainly from
what is of the refusal of some called Sons of Belial (a Title of disgrace
bestowed by the Spirit of God upon none but the worst of men) to bring presents
unto Saul, the first King of Israel (1 Samuel 10.27.) And many superiors in any
kind think themselves slighted, if they have not gifts from their inferiors.
Job was a Prince, the greatest man of the East, and for that reason it was but
a duty in his friends to bring him presents. Every one gave him a piece of
money (or a lamb) And every one an ear-ring of gold.

Gemmas a front pendentes. Vulg. M^ntl^ demissum, Sept.
There is some: dispute what this ear-ring of gold was. The word is translated (
Isa. 3.21.) A nose jewel; which was not a jewel to hang upon the nose, but a
jewel that was fastened upon the forehead, and hung down toward the nose. In
other places it is called an ear-ring (Genesis 24.47. Genesis 35.4. Ezod. 35.22.)
Such jewels were doubtless used, and worn by great persons in the Land of Vz,
where Job dwelt, and was chief among them. Jobs friends brought him not only
presents of money or cattle, which are useful to all, Honoraria obtulerunt.
Jun. Munere haec erant, tum amicitiae, tum obsequii symbola. Sic enim viri
principes munere salutabantur.
but jewels, which are ornamentals, and used only by persons of noble quality
or of great estate. An ear-ring in some men's ears, would be no more becoming
nor better placed, than a jewel in a swines snout; to which Solomon compares
beauty in a woman without wit, discretion, and understanding. A jewel, or an
ear-ring, is not for every man's wearing. The presents brought Job, showed him a
person of honor. Every one also gave him a piece of money, and every one an
ear-ring of gold.

Hence Note, First; To send or bring gifts in many cases, is not only lawful,
but necessary, and a duty.

Though both the giving and taking of gifts, hears ill, in Scripture and
common language, yet there are six sorts of gifts which may lawfully be given
and taken; and there is a seventh sort, which none ought either to give or take.

First, Gifts of pure charity, or Eleemosinary gifts, such as are bestowed
upon, and distributed among the poor, are a duty. We should be much in gifts of
charity for this very reason; because to give them is not so much a bounty, as
a duty: A part of all we have, is due to those that have nothing.

Secondly, There are gifts of respect to those who are not in want, yea, to
those who abound; these are honorary gifts. It Is lawful, and a duty also to
bring gifts to Kings and Princes, as was showed in opening the words. When
Christ is spoken of as a King, the Scripture says, The Kings of Tarshish, and
of the Isles shall bring presents; the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer
gifts (Psalm. 72.10.) And as that holy Prophecy says it should be so, so the
holy History says it was so; the wise men of the East came with gifts to
Christ, as soon as he was born ( Mat. 2.)

Thirdly, There are gifts of courtesy from equals. One friend sends a gift to
another, in testimony of love and kindness, or as rejoicing in the goodness and
kindness of God to them, in delivering them from any evil (as Jobs case also
was) These are congratulatory gifts.

Fourthly, There are gifts of bounty, such are from superiors to inferiors, to
testify their greatness and magnificence.

Fifthly, There are gratulatory gifts, in token of thankfulness for benefits
and favors received.

Sixthly, There are gifts of encouragement to those that are industrious and
deserve well, which we may call remunerative gifts: These are as oil to the
wheel of ingenuous spirits in a good work; it is lawful at any time, and
sometimes necessary, to bestow such gifts.

Seventhly, There are gifts of bribery, which pervert justice, and put out the
eyes of Judges: They are not the rewards of industry, but the wages of
unrighteousness; such as Balack would have given Balaam, he offered him great
gifts, I will promote thee to honor. But what was it for? even to hire him to
curse the people of God. Let all take heed of giving or taking gifts to pervert
justice, or to encourage any in the doing of any wickedness or unworthiness;
these are corruptive gifts.

Further, Whereas they gave not only a piece of money or a lamb, but every one
an ear-ring of gold; which we may consider not only as to the matter, as it was
gold, but as to the form, as it was an ear-ring, or an artificial piece of
gold, and that an ornamental piece of gold; they might have given gold (and
probably they did) in the pieces of money which they gave him, but they gave
him earrings also, in which the fashion or use is most considerable, and the
workmanship more worth than the metal.

Hence, Note; It is lawful to wear ornaments.

Not only may we wear that which serves for a covering to the body, but that
which is for the adorning of it. An ear-ring is an ornament. As all are to wear
cloths to hide their shame and nakedness, so some may wear robes, to show their
state and greatness. Job received earrings; he did not cast them by as vain
things. When Abraham sent his servant to take a wife for his Son Isaac, he
stored him with cabinets of precious jewels to bestow upon her ( Genesis 24.) and
when he found Rebeccah at the well, and found who she was, he took a golden
ear-ring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten
shekels weight of gold, and gave them to Rebeccah. And afterward, when her
parents had given consent to the marriage, then ( ver. 53.) The servant brought
forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave them to
Rebeccah, etc. Abraham would not send such things to a Wife for his Son, had
they been vain in their own nature, or sinful in their use. Yet take the point
with these cautions. We may wear ornaments, but,

First, We must not be proud of them.

Secondly, We must not set our affections upon them.

Thirdly, We must beware of an affectation in wearing them.

Fourthly, We must take heed of wastfulness; we may not lavish out an estate
upon ornaments, nor make our selves poor, to make our selves fine.

I grant some Scriptures speak negatively in appearance, as to the use and
wearing of jewels and ornaments (1 Timothy 2.9.) In like manner also let women
adorn themselves in modest aparel, in shame fastness and sobriety, not with
broidened hair or gold, or pearl, or castly array. This Scripture seems to
cross the point directly, and so does that other (1 Pet. 3.3.) Whose adorning
(speaking of women) let it not be that outward adorning of plating the hair,
and of wearing of gold, and of putting on of aparel; but let it be the hidden
man of the heart. How then can good women wear these ornaments?

I answer, These Scriptures do not absolutely forbid the wearing of ornaments,
but only as to those exceptions before given, to wear them in pride, or to set
our affections upon them, or to affect them, or to wear them wastfully, beyond
our purse and place; such wearing of ornaments is indeed unlawful. Again, it is
not sinful to have or use ornaments, but to make them our ornaments, that is
sinful; our adorning must be the hidden man of the heart, that must be grace:
That this is the Apostles mind is clear, because he says their adorning must
not be the putting on of apparel, as well as not the plating of the hair, and
wearing of gold. Therefore the negation is not absolute, but comparative; let
not them count these their ornaments, but grace or the hidden man of the heart.
As the Lord says, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, that is, mercy rather
than sacrifice; so, I will have the hidden man of the heart, not costly jewels
and apparel, your ornament; that is, I esteem the one much rather than the
other, and so ought you to esteem both your selves and others accordingly.

Take this caution further. Times of affliction and suffering, are very
unseasonable to wear earrings of gold and ornaments. When there is any great
appearance of the displeasure of God against a people; then how unsuitable are
all our pleasant things! The Lord said to the people of Israel, Put off your
ornaments, that I may know what to do with you (Exodus 32.) When we live in such
a time, in humbling days, or are called to humbling duties, we should be very
watchful about these things, and rather appear in rags than robe^, with dust
upon our heads, rather than with ornaments upon our backs.

Thus far of the first part of Jobs restoration, the return of his friends,
and the significations of their friendliness toward him, eating bread with
him, bemoaning him, comforting him, and presenting him with gifts of honor, if
not of enrichment, pieces of money, and earings of gold: Yet all their
civilities and bounties reached but a little way, if at all toward that
restoration which the Lord intended him, the doubling of his whole estate,
which he soon received in full measure, heaped up, pressed down, and running
over, as will appear in opening the two next verses, and those which follow to
the end of the chapter.

JOB, Chap. 42. Verse. 12, 13. 12. So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job
more than his beginning: For he had fourteen thousand Sheep, six thousand
Camels, and a thousand yoke of Oxen, and a thousand She-Asses.

13. He had also seven sons and three Daughters.


IN these two verses we have the second and the third part of Jobs
restoration: His friends were restored to him in the former verse; his further
restoration is set down in these two verses.

First, generally at the beginning of the 12th verse: So the Lord blessed the
latter end of Job more than his beginning.

Secondly, Particularly; and

First, With respect to his Cattle of outward estate; for he had (says the
Text) Fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand Camels, etc.

Secondly, With respect to his issue or children, ( verse. 13.) He had also
seven Sons and three daughters.

Verse. 12. So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning.
In these words we may take notice of four things.

First, the means, or as I may call it, the procuring cause of Jobs increase,
or of his growing and flowing prosperity; it was a blessing.

Secondly, We have here the Author or Fountain of this blessing; it was the
Lord.

Thirdly, We have the Subject of this blessing, as here expressed; and that was
the latter end of Job, or Job in his latter end.

Fourthly, We have the quantity or greatness of this blessing, which is expressed
comparatively, it was more than his beginning. The Lord blessed his beginning,
but his latter end was more blessed.

I shall consider the two first together, the cause of his flowing prosperity,
a blessing; and the Author, or fountain of it, the Lord, the Lord blessed.
There is a twofold way of blessing.

First, a wishing or desiring of a blessing: We are not thus to understand it
here, as if the Lord did only wish a blessing upon Job.

Secondly, There is a commanding of a blessing, and so we are to understand it
here. The Lord blessed, that is, the Lord commanded a blessing, or effectually
poured out a blessing upon Job. The word blessed (The Lord blessed) has two
things in it.

First, It implies plenty and abundance, a copious and a large provision of
good things. For as the word [abundare] in Latin, and to abound in English,
Sicut abundare ab undis Latin dicunt; ita videri possunt Hebraei (...) quasi
affluentiam denominare a font aut piscina, quam appellant Berecah.
comes (say Grammarians ab unda) from water, because waters abound and flow; so
this Hebrew word [Beracah] which signifies a blessing, comes from, or at
least, is near in sound to the word Berecah, which signifies a Fish Pond,
where there is a great confluence of waters, and a great multiplication of
fishes, or, a Fountain, from whence waters flow continually. So that to bless,
notes the bringing in of abundance, or of a great increase, like the waters of
a Fish Pond, or Fish in the waters. To increase as Fish, is to increase
abundantly. It is said of the Children of Israel, They multiplied like fish
(that is the significancy of the word used Exodus 1.12.) while they were under
the oppression of the Egyptians.

Secondly, This Expression, The Lord blessed, Dei benedicere idem est quod
benefacere. Beatum non facit hominem nisi qui fecit hominem. August. Epist. 52
ad Macedon.
imports a powerful effect following it. The Lord blessed the latter end of
Job; that is, he made his latter end very blessed. As the Lords saying is
doing, as his word is operative, and will work; so the Lords blessing or
well-saying, is well-doing; his saying is doing, whether for good or hurt. Man
blesses man by wishing or praying for a blessing upon him, or that God would
do him good: Man blesses God, when he praises him for his goodness, and for
the good which he has done, either to himself or others: But when God blesses
man, he does more than wish, he makes him blessed. Man blesses man
ministerially; God blesses man effectually, as he also did the seventh day (
Genesis 2.3.) And therefore the Lord is said to command the blessing (Levit.
25.21.) especially in Sion, even life for evermore (Psalm. 133.5.) Nor was it
less than a command, by which The Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than
his beginning.

Hence Note; The good word or blessing of God, is enough to procure the good of
man.

Every word of God has its effect; he speaks no vain words: his Word going out
of the mouths of his Ministers, returns not to him void, but accomplisheth that
which he pleases, and prospers in the thing whereunto he sends it (Isa.
55.11.) that is, either for the conviction or conversion of those that hear it.
Surely then, the word of blessing going out of his own mouth, shall not return
to him void, or without effect. David spoke thus of, or to God ( Psalm. 145.16.)
Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. When
the Lord opens his hand, he also opens his heart: and when his heart and hand
open, his mouth opens too; that is, he gives forth a word of blessing, and he
gives it forth to satisfaction, Thou satisfiest every living thing. And again (
Psalm. 104.28.) Thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good. They, that
is, whatsoever lives upon the earth or in the Sea, wait upon thee (as it is
said, verse. 27.) that thou may give them their meat in due season; that thou
give them, they gather; thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good. The
hand of God is full of good, and his blessing fills all with good, out of his
hand.

This may comfort the godly in their lowest condition. What was it that raised
Job from poverty to riches, from weakness to strength, from the dunghill to the
throne? Only this, The Lord blessed him. Though all be lost, his word of
blessing will restore all again. If estate be lost, his blessing will make us
rich; if health be lost, his blessing will make us well; if strength be lost,
his blessing will renew it; if credit be lost, his blessing will repair it, and
get us honor for disgrace or reproach. The blessing of the Lord is every good
thing to us, and does every good thing for us. As it is dreadful to stand under
the droppings of a curse; to be cursed is every evil: so happy are they who
stand under the sweet influences of a promise; to be blessed is every good. And
if God blesses us, the matter is not much, who curses or wishes ill to us.
The curse causeless shall not come, nor can any curse come where God has
blessed.

But some may enquire, who are they that the Lord will bless? To be blessed, is
not every man's portion. A man may be rich, yet not blessed; great, yet not
blessed; healthful, yet not blessed: A man may have many blessings, for the
matter, yet not be blessed. This then is a material question, Who are they that
may expect a blessing from God upon their souls, upon their bodies, upon their
estates, upon their families, upon their all?

I answer, First, In general; They that are in a state of grace, they that are
in the Covenant, or as the Apostle calls them ( Heb 6.17.) Heirs of promise:
These are the blessed of the Lord; and these, both great and small, the Lord
will bless ( Ephesians. 1.3.) Blessed be God, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things in Christ. Being in Christ, we are in Covenant;
and being there, we cannot miss being blessed with all spiritual blessings, and
with whatever is a needful blessing, in outward things to: He that blesses in
the greater, will not withold his blessing in the less, according to our need.

Secondly, As they are the general subjects of the blessing, who are in the
Covenant of grace, or in Christ, so are they more specially, who act
graciously, and walk as they have received Christ; for a person that is in a
state of grace, may hinder the blessing from flowing down upon his soul, upon
his body, upon his estate, upon any thing, upon every thing he has and does,
by acting sinfully, and walking unevenly. David put the question ( Psalm. 24.3.)
Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? etc. and answered it ( verse. 4, 5.)
He that has clean hands, and a pure heart, who has not lift up his soul to
vanity, nor sworn deceitfully; he shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and
righteousness (that is, a righteous reward, or a reward according to
righteousness) from the God of his salvation. Solomon asserts the present
performance of what is only promised in this Psalm; he says not, The just
shall receive the blessing, but they have actually received it ( Prove. 10.6.)
Blessings are upon the head of the just. By the just man we may understand;
First, him that is in a justified state, or him that is just by faith;
Secondly, him that walks in a just way, or that do justly: And they who are
indeed justified, are not only engaged by that high act of grace to do justly,
but are either constantly kept in doing so, or are soon brought to see they
have not done so, and to repentance for it. Just and upright men, in these two
notions, are so much blessed, that they are a blessing ( Prove. 11.11.) By the
blessing of the upright, is the City exalted. As an upright man wishes and
prays for a blessing upon the City where he lives, so he is a blessing to
it, and that no small one, but to the greatning, enriching, and exaltation of
it. He that is good in his person, becomes a common good to Cities, yea, to
whole Nations; such are a blessing, because they receive so many blessings (
Pro. 28.20.) A faithful man shall abound with blessings. This faithful man is
one that acts and does all things faithfully, as appears by his opposition (in
the same verse) to him that makes have to be rich, of whom the Text says, he
shall not be innocent; that is, he must needs deal unfaithfully or
unrighteously; for in making such post-hast to riches, he usually rides (as we
say) over hedge and ditch, and cannot keep the plain way of honesty.

Thirdly, As they who are in a state of grace, and they who act graciously in
that state, so they who worship holily, or holy worshippers, have a special
promise of the blessing. As Sion is the seat of holy worship, so there the Lord
commands the blessing upon holy worshippers ( Psalm. 133.3.) And again ( Psalm.
115.12, 13.) He will bless the house of Israel, he will bless the house of
Aaron, he will bless them that fear the Lord, both small and great; that is,
the generality of holy worshippers shall be blessed. The fear of the Lord is
often put in Scripture, for the worship of the Lord; and so they that fear him,
are the same with them that worship him.

Fourthly, They are the blessed of the Lord, who trust the Lord for all, and so
make him the all of their trust ( Psalm. 34.8.) O taste and see that the Lord is
gracious; blessed is the man that trustith in him; that is, in him only or
alone, being convinced of the utter insufficiency of the creature. That man is
cursed, who trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm (Jer. 17.5.) therefore,
pure trust in God has the blessing.

Fifthly, They that are a blessing unto others, shall have the blessing from
the Lord. What it is to be a blessing to others, read at large in the 29th
Chapter of this Book ( verse. 11.) and in 31. Chapter ( verse. 20.) They that do
good to others, they especially who do good to the souls of others, are a
blessing to others. Now, they who do good, they shall receive good themselves (
Prove. 11.25.) The liberal shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall be
watered also himself. He that waters is a common good, a blessing to the
place where he lives, a blessing to the rich, a blessing to the poor, a
blessing to relations, a blessing to strangers; upon such, the Scripture
assures the blessing of the Lord.

Sixthly, They who promote the worship and service of God, they that are
friends to the Ark of God, shall be blessed (2 Samuel 6.11.) The Lord blessed the
house of Obed-edom, because he entertained the Ark, showed kindness to the Ark,
and was ready to do any service for the Ark of God; he will be a friend to the
true friends of his Church.

Seventhly, They shall receive a blessing of God, who strive in prayer for his
blessing. Jacob was blessed; but he w^estled for it. They that would have it,
must ask it with a gracious importunity; they that seek it diligently, shall
find it.

These are the chief characters of the persons whom the Lord will bless. And
seeing his blessing is so effectual for the procurement of our good, we should
above all things labor to procure his blessing. When Jacob wrestled with the
Angel, he asked nothing of him but a blessing ( Genesis 32.26.) He did not say, I
will not let thee go, except thou deliver me from my brother Esau; he did not
say, I will not let thee go, unless thou make me rich, or great; he only said,
I will not let thee go, except thou bless me; let me be blessed, and let me be
what thou will, or I can be. What should we desire in comparison of the
blessing of God, seeing his blessing (strictly taken) is the fruit of his
fatherly love! A man may be rich, and great, and honored among men, yet not
beloved; but he that is indeed blessed, is certainly beloved of God. Esau could
not obtain the blessing: Now what says the Lord by the Prophet of him, as the
Apostle quotes the Prophet? ( Romans 9.13.) Esau have I hated. Esau got much
riches, but he could not get the blessing, for he was hated of the Lord; and
therefore it is said ( Heb. 12.17.) He found no place for repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears; that is, he could not make Isaac repent of
blessing Jacob (though through a mistake, yet) according to Gods appointment;
he could not prevail with him, no, not by tears, to take off the blessing from
his brother Jacob, and place it upon himself: And the reason why the blessing
remained with Jacob, was, because he was loved of God. The blessing must go,
where the love goes. The loved of the Lord, are and shall be blessed; and they
who are blessed, have all good with a blessing. (Read, Genesis 24.35. Genesis 26.13.
Genesis 28.3. 2 Samuel 6.11. Psalm. 107.38.) Yea, as God gives all good with a
blessing, so he gives himself, who is the chief good, best of all, and blessed
for evermore, to those whom he blesses.

Then how should we desire the blessing of God, or to be blessed by God? It is
wonderful, how passionately, and even impatiently, the Votaries of Rome desire
the Popes blessing; they think themselves made men, if they can but have his
blessing. I have read of a Cardinal, who seeing the people so strangely
desirous of his blessing, Quando quidem populus hic vult decipi, dicipiatur.
said, Seeing this people will be deceived, let them be deceived. But we cannot
be too desirous of a blessing from the Lord; if we have a blessing from him,
and he bless us, we cannot be deceived; we can never miss of comfort, if he
bless us.

But whence is it then, that some look so much after creature-helps, not
minding the blessing of God? Doubtless it slows or springs from one of these
three bad fountains or bitter roots.

First, From ignorance; they know not what the blessing of God means; for, as
Christ told the woman of Samaria (Acts 4.10.) If thou knew the gift of God,
thou would have asked, etc. So, did they know what it is to be blessed of
God, they would ask it above all things. It proceeds,

Secondly, From a spirit of profaneness in many; they despise God in their
hearts, and think it below them to call for his help or blessing. Of such David
speaks ( Psalm. 14.6.) Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord
is his refuge; or, because ('it is all one in effect) he lives upon the blessing
of God, you are ashamed of this; this is poor counsel, think you, as it is the
counsel of the poor; this trusting in God, this making God our refuge, this
living upon the blessing of God, is a pitiful life, say you. The wicked through
the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God, God is not in all his
thoughts, or not at all in his thoughts, to seek unto him, and depend wholly
upon him ( Psalm. 10.4.) As Ezra was ashamed to require of the King a band of
soldiers and horsemen, to help them against the enemy in the way, because he
had spoken unto the King, saying, the hand of our God is upon all them for
good, that seek him, etc. ( Ezra 8.22.) So, profane persons are ashamed to ask
help of God, and his blessing at any time, but then especially, when they have
bands of soldiers and horsemen to help them, as will appear further in the next
thing. For,

Thirdly, This mindlessness and regardlessness of the blessing of God proceeds
in some, from confidence in an arm of flesh, either their own or others. The
Prophet reproved the Jews for this in the day of their trouble ( Isa. 22.8, 9,
10, 11.) And he (that is, God) discovered the covering of Judah (that is, what
Judah covered himself with, or thought himself safely sheltered by from all
danger; what was that? the next words tell us) thou did look in that day to
the armor of the house of the Forest; ye have seen also the breaches of the
City of David, that they are many, ye have fortified the wall, etc. but ye have
not looked to the maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that fashioned it
long ago. The meaning of all is this; ye relied upon, and put confidence in
your own strength, but looked not after, nor sought unto me for my blessing; ye
thought ye should do well enough, if your magazines were well stored, and your
City well fortified, and therefore neglected me. The same Prophet (Chap. 31.1.)
shows the same reason why they neglected God, why they looked not to the holy
One of Israel, nor sought the Lord; it was, because they went down to Egypt for
help, and stayed on horses, and trusted in charets, because they were many, and
in horsemen, because they were very strong. We cannot trust in God, and
creatures too. If God alone be not trusted to, he is not at all trusted; and
they who put their trust in any creature, withdraw it from God, and make that
creature their God. They cannot so much as mind, much less seek a blessing from
the true God, who choose to themselves another God.

Again, seeing the Lords blessing is effectual, then whatever our successes and
increases are, let us ascribe all to his blessing. Do not sacrifice to your own
nets, nor burn incense to your own drags, but say, this has God wrought, the
blessing of the Lord has brought it to pass. As the Apostle spoke about
spirituals (1 Cor. 3.6.) I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the
increase; so it is in temporals, all our encreasings are of God: Therefore let
us say with the Psalmist, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be
the praise. Do not thank your wit for riches, nor your industry for increase,
nor your strength for victory, not any humane help for any of your seize:
The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread
to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, etc. ( Ecrl. 9.11.) All is
of God, it is his blessing upon the means, which makes the means successful.

But some may say, are all men to ascribe all their successes and increases to
the blessing of God?

I answer, Negatively; All increases and outward successes are not to be
ascribed unto, nor fathered upon God. A man may increase in riches, and double
his estate, as Jobs was, yet not by the blessing of God: Only that comes by a
blessing from God, which is got in Gods way, or by good means, according to the
characters before hinted of the persons whom the Lord will bless; for they who
either make a profession of dishonesty, or are dishonest in their profession,
let them take heed of pinning their successes upon God, and of thanking him for
them. Many say in their hearts, and some are not ashamed to say it with their
mouths, Honest dealers must die beggars. They never came by riches in the way
of a blessing, who say honesty is the way to poverty; much less, they whose
consciences know and tell them (though others know it not, and so cannot tell
them) that they have enriched themselves by the wrong, or raised themselves by
the ruin of others.

Job was enriched and raised high, and the Text assures us what enriched him,
what raised him; The Lord blessed The latter end of Job, more than his
beginning.

We have seen the Author of this blessing: These words show the subject of this
blessing, The latter end of Job, (...) Prae initio ejus.
or Job in his latter end, together with the quantity and abundance of this
blessing, More than his beginning. The Lord blessed The latter end of Job.

That is, Job in the latter part of his life; and he blessed it more than his
beginning, that is, than the former part of his life. God blessed, and greatly
blessed the former part of Jobs life, for he was the greatest man of all men in
the East; but now Job shall be greater than Job, he shall be greater than
himself. His affliction razed down his house, and all he had, to the very
foundation; but when God would hold the plummet in his hand, and rebuild him,
to what an amazing height did his house arise! The Lord blessed his latter end,
more than his beginning. The words are plain, and need no comment. From them we
may observe, First, The latter part of a good man's life, is the best part of
his life.

It is often so, I do not say, it is always so, in outward things, God deals
not with all alike; but it is often so, God gives them their best at last, even
in the things of this life. As the Governor of the Feast said to the
Bridegroom ( John 2.) Thou have kept the best wine till now. So the Lord often
keeps the best wine of outward comforts, to the very last of our lives. Bildad
put it only as a supposition to Job (Chap. 8.7.) If thou were pure and upright,
surely then he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy
righteousness prosperous; though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end
should greatly increase. But we may resolve it as a Position concerning Job;
surely he was pure and upright, for God did awake for him, and made the
habitation of his righteousness prosperous; his beginning was (comparatively)
small, but his latter end did greatly increase, or he had a great increase at
his latter end. And though this be not always true, as to outward things, that
the Lord blesses the latter end of a good man more than his beginning; yet it
is always true, as to spiritual things, it is always true, as to the best
things. The Lord gives his people their best soul-blessings at last; though
they have great good before, yet greater good, or their good in a greater
measure then; he gives them more grace, more of his Spirit, more of his
comforts, and their latter end is most blessed, as it is the beginning of
endless blessedness. Abraham said to the rich man in the Parable, Son, remember
thou have had thy good things, and Lazarus evil things; but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented. The Lord deals best with all his people at
last, one way or other; to be sure, all shall be well with them in the latter
end. Solomon says ( Eccl. 7.8.) Better is the end of a thing, than the
beginning. And he said so, not because all things end better than they begin;
but because when things or persons end well, it is then surely well with them,
whatever their beginning was. That is well, which ends well.

Hence, let us be minded not to judge the work of God before the latter end.
The works of God seem cross many times to his people; but he will set all
right, and make them amends for all at the latter end. The Apostle James calls
us to consider Job's latter end (Chap. 5.11.) Ye have heard of the patience of
Job (that is, you have heard of his sufferings in the flesh, and of his
suffering spirit) and ye have seen the end of the Lord; that is, what end the
Lord made for him. Some give another interpretation of these latter words (as
was showed formerly) but this I conceive most clear to the context, Ye have
seen the end of the Lord, that is, what end the Lord made for Job: Though the
middle part of his life was very grievous, yet God changed the Scene of things,
and his end was very glorious. David (Psalm. 37.37.) would have the end of
upright men marked and well considered; Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright, the end of that man is peace. Possibly he has had a great deal of
trouble in his way, but his end is peace. Let not us be offended at the crosses
which we meet with in the course of our lives, but look to the promised crown
at the conclusion of our lives. Let us not stay in the death of Christ, nor in
the grave of Christ, but look to the resurrection and the ascension of Christ.
You may see those who are Christ's on the Cross, and in the Grave, but mark and
you shall see their resurrection and ascension. The two witnesses are
represented slain, yet raised, and then ascending up to heaven in a cloud,
their enemies beholding them ( Rev. 11.11, 12.) Despise not the day of small
things (Zech. 4.10.) the latter end may have a great increase; despond not in
the day of sorrowful things, for the latter end may be full of joy. There are
three things which should much comfort us in our afflictions.

First, That they cannot last always, they will have an end.

Secondly, That while they last, or before theyh ave an end, they are medicinal
and healthful, they are for our good while they continue upon us, or we in them.

Thirdly, (which we have in the Text) we may expect, that as they shall surely
have an end, so that they will end comfortably. No chastning for the present
(says the Apostle, Heb. 12.11.) seems joyous, but grievous; nevertheless,
afterward it yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness, unto them which
are exercised thereby. God will not only bring our troubles to an end, but he
will give us sweet fruit at the end of them, as a recompense for all our
troubles. God will not only bring our sufferings to an end, but to such an end
as will make us gainers by them. Those are even desirable and lovely losses,
which issue in such advantages.

Secondly, In that the Lord gave Job so great an advance in worldly things,

Observe; The Lord sometimes gives his people much more of this world, than
they desire, or ever looked after.

Job was far from praying for such an increase, he never desired that his
earthly substance should be doubled in his latter end: Indeed, we find him once
wishing that it were with him as in his beginning, but he wished not for more
(Chap. 29.2.) O that it were with me as in the months past, as in the day when
the Lord preserved me, when his candle shined upon my head, and by his light I
walked through darkness. Job wished that he were in as good a condition as he
once had, but he never wished that all might be doubled, or that his latter end
should be more than his beginning; yet the Lord gave him more, gave him double
to his beginning, God exceeded his prayers and his wishes. As the Lord is able
to do exceeding abundantly for us, above all that we ask or think (Ephesians. 3.20.)
so he often does; and usually, therefore, moderates the desires and askings of
his people, as to the things of this world, that he may out-give their askings,
and outdo their desires.

Thirdly, The Lord made Job the greatest man in the East in his beginning, but
he blessed his latter end more than his beginning.

Hence note; How much soever the Lord gives at one time, he can give more at
another.

God gave Job good measure before, but now according to that expression ( Luke
6.38.) he gave him good measure, heaped up, pressed down, and running over. Let
us not say, when God has given us much, or done much for us, he can give or do
no more for us: he has more in his treasure of temporal good things, and he
has more in his treasure of spiritual good things, than he has yet given out
to any; he can give more faith, how much faith soever he has given; he can
give more patience, how much patience soever he has given, and so of every
grace and good thing. The Lords stock and treasure can never be drawn dry; he
is an ever-over-flowing fountain. If you had much at the beginning, you may
have much more at the latter end. So much of these words, as they hold out the
restoring of Jobs estate in general; the particulars are summed up in the close
of the verse: For he had fourteen thousand Sheep, and six thousand Camels, and
a thousand yoke of Oxen, and a thousand She-Asses.

The increase of his estate is here set forth in cattle only, as his first
estate was (cattle were the riches of those times and Countries) yet doubtless
his estate increased in every thing or kind. First, his family and servants
increased, to look to so many cattle. Secondly, his Lands and pastures
increased to feed them. Thirdly, his house and buildings increased, to receive
and lodge so numerous a Family. Fourthly, his honor and dignity increased.
Some affirm, that whereas before, he had only some small principality under his
government, now he was declared King over all the Land of Vz. Thus all sorts of
good things were given him double; but whether at once, or by degrees, is not
expressed.

Some of the Rabbis have a fancy, and it is a wild one, that Jobs cattle which
were taken from him, were not carried quite away, but only driven into some
other Country, and there kept; so that when he was restored, they were brought
home to him again, with this double increase. This may well go for a fancy;
for, not his own cattle, but cattle of the same kind, were restored to him
double. There is no difficulty in these words. The Lord blessed the latter end
of Job more than his beginning, giving double or twice as many Sheep, Oxen,
Camels, Asses, as he had before.

Hence note; Outward good things, Sheep and Oxen, Houses and Lands, Gold and
Silver, are a blessing, as they come from God unto his servants.

Here is nothing said of the best things; all was but Sheep and Oxen, yet in
these Job received a blessing. The Lord ( Deuteronomy. 28.4.) made large promises of
blessings to his obeying people, or to his people in case of obedience, and all
in outward comforts; Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed shall thou
be in the field; blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks
of thy sheep; blessed shall be thy basket, and thy store. Spiritual things are
the best blessings; spiritual things are not only the noblest, but the most
necessary blessings. The favor of God, the light of his countenance, pardon of
sin, grace in our hearts; these are excellent blessings, and these make us
exceedingly blessed; and no doubt but Job did chiefly look after these
blessings; this good man desired the light of Gods countenance, the shinings of
his face upon him, the workings of his grace and spirit in him, the evidences
of his love to him, infinitely above cattle, corn and wine. A godly man
accounts himself but in a poor condition, if he were to reckon all his estate
in Houses and Lands, in Sheep and Oxen; yet these are a blessing from the Lord
upon him, and so he accounts them. And still it must be remembered, which has
already been touched, that before the coming of Christ, before there was a full
discovery, and a clear manifestation of the grace of God in Christ to his
people, they in those times were much led and fed with promises of temporal
blessings. The faithful were allured to heaven by earthly things. Jesus Christ
(who came down from heaven to lift us up thither, who took our nature, that we
might partake of the divine nature, who was clothed with our flesh, to show
that God dwells in us, and has joined us to his glory and immortality; Jesus
Christ, I say) was known only in shadows and remote prophesies, in those times,
and therefore it was necessary the Lord should deal with them accordingly, and
allure them by promises of cattle, and corn, and children, especially by the
promise of long life (which has the greatest resemblance to, and bears the
fairest image of eternal life) and all because the heavenly life was not then
so perfectly discovered, as it is now in these Gospel Times. For though it be a
truth, that all the good things of the world are not sufficient to make a
love-token, yet God gives those good things to his people as tokens of his
love, and they see love in them; and these lesser good things are then best to
us, when we can look on them as blessings coming from the love of God, which we
may do,

First, When we can say we have got and keep them with a good conscience.

Secondly, When we use and order them with prudence.

Thirdly, When we dispense them charitably and freely, according to the needs
and necessities of others. When we truly and intentionally honor God with our
substance, in doing acts of love, it shows that he has given it us in love.

Fourthly, When the Lord with increase of riches, gives us an increase of
grace, when our souls thrive as well as our estates, then we may look upon
riches as coming to us in love. Sheep and Oxen, Gold and Silver, without a
just, and wise, and gracious possessing and using of them, prove curses at
last, not blessings, snares, not favors. There are none so unhappy as foolish
rich men, none so base as covetous rich men, none so intolerable as proud rich
men, none so vile and despicable as sluggish voluptuous rich men, none more
ungodly and irreligious, than they who having riches, trust in them, and dote
upon them; only when the Lord gives spiritual things with temporal, grace with
goods, they are mercies to us. When Luther received a favor from a great
Prince, he began to be afraid that God would put him off with such things. A
godly man receives a portion in earthly good things, but he will not take all
the good things of the earth for his portion.

Now, as all spiritual things are better than temporal, so among temporals,
some are better than others. Job received good things when his cattle were
doubled, but he had better blessings of this life restored to him than those;
his estate restored double in cattle was nothing to his children restored
single, as it follows in the next words.

Verse. 13. He had also seven sons, and three daughters. This is the third part
of Jobs restoration sons and daughters. We may consider this blessing, First,
In the number, Secondly, In the sex. In number, his children were seven and
three. As to sex, they were both sons and daughters; he had seven sons and
three daughters, in all ten, just the number he had before, as we read at the
second verse of the first chapter.

Some of the Jewish Rabbis (before spoken of) say, his former children were
not indeed slain, but removed during the time of his affliction, and that,
being ended, were restored the same both in number and person. This is as
groundless a dream as the other about his cattle, and so I leave it. For,

That his children were really slain with the fall of the house where they were
feasting, the history makes evident in the first chapter; and that he had the
same number of children (not the same children) restored, is all that is
evident in this.

Only here a question arises, and some trouble themselves much about it, to
little purpose, how to make good that of the 8th ver. where it is said, The Lord
gave Job twice as much as he had before, whenas he had but just so many sons
and daughters as he had before. Here is no doubling of them, and it may be
thought, that the Lord, being now blessing his latter end more than his
beginning, should have given him more children, double children, because the
more children the greater is the blessing.

I answer, First, Negatively. The reason why his children were not double,
though his cattle were, was not, First, Out of any want of power in God, he
could have doubled his children as well as his cattle. Nor was it, Secondly,
For want of love or good will to Job: Nor was it, Thirdly, (As, Tertul. lib. de
patientia. c. 14*
one of the Ancients, Tertullian, gives the reason) that Job might never want
something to exercise his patience with while he lived, forasmuch as he saw
himself shortened in that mercy. Nor was it, Fourthly, (As Aquinas conceived)
because, if his children had been doubled as well as his estate, then his
children would not have had a double estate, nor more than they should have had
before. Forty proportionably divided among twenty, yields each of them no
greater a portion, than twenty will do to ten. Nor was it, Fifthly, Because the
Lord would not have him over-burdened with cares about their education; none of
these were any reason, why Jobs children were not doubled to him in number, as
well as his cattle. And therefore,

I answer affirmatively,

First, For the word double, or twice as much, in the Text, which this seems
not to come up unto, we may easily salve that difficulty, for the Text speaks
not of persons, but of things, or of his substance, with respect to doubling or
a twice as much. As for his children they come in with an also, as an
additional blessing to all the rest; He had also seven sons, and three
daughters.

Secondly, Those words twice as much, need not be taken strictly, as was showed
before; Job might, and doubtless did receive a double mercy in his children,
though their persons were not doubled nor multiplied, as will appear further
afterward.

Thirdly, I answer, it was the pleasure of the Lord; to give him no more than
the same number of children, and that may suffice us.

Fourthly, Some of the Ancients are much pleased with this other answer,
saying, Job, in a sense, had his children doubled; for his slain children were
not lost, but gone before, and lived still in a blessed state: They having
immortal souls, and being the seed of the righteous, their father had reason to
believe them safe in Abraham's bosom. Those children are not lost to their
parents when they dye, Tibi non perit qui Deo non perit. Non numero sed valor,
quod occulte insinuatur in filicabus, quae pulcherrimae fuisse leguntur. Aquin.
who are not lost to God, or are not themselves lost children.

Fifthly, Though Jobs children were not doubled in number as his cattle were,
yet we may judge them doubled to him in goodness and virtuous qualities. The
beauty of his daughters is expressly noted in the following words: And shall
we think that God, who had a blessing for Job, blessed his children only with
fading bodily beauty? doubtless, their minds were more richly endowed, and
their souls more beautiful than their bodies. And if Jobs daughters were such,
we may well conceive his Sons were not inferior to them in gracious
qualifications, and that they much exceeded the sons he had before his
affliction. Some have spoken doubtfully, at least, of Jobs former children, as
if (though good, yet) not very good; and they give two reasons for it out of
this book. First, Because, when they went to feast at each others houses Job
used to offer sacrifice, fea^ing his children had cursed God in their hearts.
Secondly, Bildad (chap. 8.4.) seems to lay a blot upon his former children, If
thy children (says he) have sinned against him, and he have cast them away for
their transgression, etc. which may intimate the sinful miscarriages of his
former children in the course of their lives, as well as that dreadful accident
by which they dyed. Yet, I conceive, we need not cast any such blot upon them;
they might be good, though these were better, and so a double mercy to their
father. He had also seven sons, and three daughters.

Hence note; Children are great blessings.

When the Lord told Abraham (Genesis 15.2) I am thy shield, and exceeding great
reward, Abraham said, Lord what will thou give me, seeing I go childless? As if
he had said, what is an inheritance without an heir? Children are a blessing
which God many times denies his own children: God denied Abraham that blessing
long, yet gave it him at last. Abraham's servant reporting the blessings of God
bestowed upon his master, put this as chief ( Genesis 24.35.) The Lord has
blessed my master greatly, he is become great, he has given him flocks and
herds, silver and gold, men servants and maid servants (what follows?) and
Sarah my masters wife, bare a son to my master, when she was old. Abraham's
servant counted this the complement of all his masters outward blessings, that
as the Lord had given him a great estate, so a son to inherit and possess it
after him. And if children be a blessing? let all who have them take heed of
looking upon them as a burden.

And seeing they are a blessing of the Lord, seeing they come from him, let all
who have them be admonished to bring them up for him, or, as the Apostle
directs, In the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Whatever we receive from
God we should use for him, and return to him; our estates should be serviceable
to the Lord, and above all we should labor to make our children serviceable to
him.

Thus we have seen the three parts of Jobs restoration. First, His friends;
Secondly, His wealth; Thirdly, His children, were restored to him. But Job had
four losses, and we hear nothing about the restoring of the fourth. First, He
lost his substance; Secondly, His children; Thirdly, His health; Fourthly, His
friends: Here Is a restoring of three of them, but nothing is spoken of the
fourth, which I place third, the restoring of his health. Now health being the
chief of outward blessings, better than sheep and oxen, and whatever we can
have in this world, why was not the restoring of that mercy mentioned?

I answer, Though the restoring of his health and strength be not expressed
verbally, yet it is expressed equivalently or vertually; for when it is said he
offered sacrifice, when it is said he did eat bread with his friends in his
house, these are proofs of his health; and what was last spoken, that he had so
many children, proves it much more. So then, though this fourth part of his
mercy, be not mentioned, yet it is implied in all that went before.

But, that being granted, it is further queried, when his health was restored?
whether before he prayed for his friends, or in the time of his prayer for his
friends? or whether after all was done? Some make hot disputes about this
matter, which surely is not much material, if we knew the certainty of it; nor
do I know how any should attain the certain kuowledg of it, seeing the Scripture
is utterly silent, as to any determination of it.

There is one question more. The text says, God gave Job twice as much in
cattle, etc. but here is nothing said of his twice as much in grace, here is no
mention of any amendment in his spiritual state; his goods were doubled, but
was his goodness? did Job recover only in temporals?

I answer, First, The graces of Job were never lost, as his cattle and children
were; and therefore there needed no mention of the restoring of his graces.
Satan, by the Lords permission, put him to it, and tried all his graces, but
could not rob him of one.

Secondly, Jobs graces were not only not lost, but doubled in that exercise or
combat. True grace increases by the ordinary use of it, much more by the
extraordinary trials of it. And doubtless Job, who was so eminently gracious,
increased in every grace, while he continued in this fiery trial. He said of
himself ( chap. 23.10.) When he has tried me I shall come forth as gold. I
shall come out better than I came in. He lost dross and corruption in the
trial, but no grace, nor any degree of grace; his graces were doubled or
increased. A believer thrives (as to the inner man) in affliction, how much
soever he loses and goes backward as a man. As the time of affliction is a
special time for the using of grace, so for the increasing of it: Grace never
grows more in a gracious heart than in a day of trouble. And though possibly a
godly man does not sensibly, or to appearance grow in grace presently, yet he
truly does so, and in due time it will appear that he has done so: We may take
this chapter for a proof of it. God himself found Job much bettered in his
graces, else he had not used him as a mediator for his friends, which was as
high a spiritual honor as could be put upon him, acceptance being promised and
given him in that work. Nor would the Lord have used that endearing word, My
servant, my servant Job, four times in one verse, had not Job improved in his
service, which could not be but by the improvement of his graces. God called
Job servant once in the first chapter; surely he was become a better servant
now that the Lord seemed so much delighted to call him servant in this last
chapter of the book, when he had taken full trial of him by suffering, as
formerly by doing. We may well conclude, Job was become a more humble servant,
a more profitable servant, a more holy servant, a more spiritual servant, than
ever he had been, when we find the Lord insisting so much upon, and so often
repeating that relation to him, My servant Job. His sufferings had mended his
service, and his passive obedience had fitted him more for active. God was so
much pleased with his service, that he took pleasure to call him servant. So
then, we may answer the querie proposed; Jobs increase was not only in cattle
(that had been but a poor increase) his increase was also in grace and
goodness; and he who was a servant of the Lord before, was then a more approved
servant.

The Lord having told us, in the close of this verse, how many sons and
daughters Job had, he is pleased to give us a character or description of his
daughters in the two verses following.

JOB, Chap. 42. Verse. 14, 15. 14. And he called the name of the first Jemima,
and the name of the second Kezia, and the name of the third Keren-happuch.

15. And in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job;
and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren.


THe former verse gave us the account of Jobs children; He had also seven sons
and three daughters: Nor is any thing more said of his sons, but that they were
seven; but much more is said of his daughters in these two verses, than that
they were three; and more is spoken of his daughters in three particulars.

First, They are set forth by their names.

Secondly, By the comeliness of their persons.

Thirdly, By the greatness of their dowry.

Their names are expressed in the 14th verse.

He called the name of the first Jemima, and the name of the second Kezia, and
the name of the third Keren-happuch. The comeliness of their persons is showed
at the beginning of the 15th verse, And in all the land were no women found so
fair as the daughters of Job.

The greatness of their dowry is set down at the close of the 15th verse,

And their father gave them inheritance among their brethren. Some have
queried, why no more is said of the sons of Job, than how many they were? To
such, this answer may suffice, it was the Lords pleasure to have no more spoken
of them; and where no more is said, why should we expect more?

If any shall further enquire; but were not his sons worthy persons, that they
are put off thus slightly, and mention made only of their number, not of their
weight? Were they not worthy to have so much as their names recorded? which
honor, and much more, is done their sisters, the daughters of Job.

I answer, We may upon good ground believe, that Jobs seven sons were worthy
persons, because they were a great part, yea, the chief part of his restored
happiness; for as children are better than riches, so among children, sons are
better than daughters, as being the more worthy sex. Sons, if not well
qualified, are not only less worthy than daughters, but a great cross to their
father: And therefore it would have been a diminishing of Jobs felicity, to
have had sons equal in number with the former, yet inferior in virtue and
man-like qualities; we may, for this reason, safely conclude, that (though
nothing be said of their worth) that Jobs sons were worthy persons, or persons
of praise worthy qualities. But seeing we have nothing from divine authority,
but only from well-grounded reason, to assert concerning Jobs sons, I shall not
stay the reader in any further discourse about them; but proceed as the text
does with the daugtiters, concerning whom we have many things to say from
divine authority. And, First, Their names must not be past with silence.

And he called the name of the first Jemima,
He,
That is, Job, I say, it was he. Though some make a question whether it was he
or no? or whether Job gave the name, or the people? I shall determine it upon
Job; he Called the name of the first.

The Hebrew is he called the name of one. Every first is one, but every one is
not first; and therefore to distinguish who this one was, we render the word
First. It Is usual in Scripture to call that one which is First. Thus spoke
Moses, describing the works of creation ( Genesis 1.5.) So the evening and the
morning were the first day: The Hebrew strictly is, The evening was, and the
morning was, day one. Any day is one day, the fifth day was one day, and the
sixth day was one day, as well as the first; but the fifth or sixth were not the
first day; therefore we translate for one day, the first day. Thee here he
called the name of one, that is, of the first Jemima.

There is a two fold firstness. First, In order of time. Secondly, In order of
honor. First here is first in time. The other two might equal, yea, exceed the
first in worth and dignity; but this was Jobs firstborn daughter, his first in
time. He called the name of the first Jemima.

Hence note, First; It is a duty to give names to our children.

It Is not merely matter of prudence, it is not humane invention to give names.
God himself gave the name to the first man; God called him by the name, which,
doubtless himself had given him, when he called him Adam. The proper name of
the first man, is a name common to all men; Adam signifying red earth, shows
us of what matter all men are made. And as God called the first man by that
name Adam, so Adam gave a name to the first woman, his wife ( Genesis 3.20.) He
called his wifes name Eve, because she was the mother of all living. And as God
gave the first man a name, and he named the first woman, so God appointed the
first man to give names to all living creatures ( Genesis 2.19.) The Lord brought
all the beasts of the field to Adam to see what he would call them; and
whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof. The
Lord would have nothing nameless, or without a name; surely then, he would have
men and women known by their names. Abraham was once called Abram, a high
father; but God changed his name, and would have him called Abraham, the father
of a multitude. Were it not for names we should be in a great confusion, both
about persons and things; we could not distinguish men had we not names to call
them by; Nomon quasi notamon. Shem, quasi Sham, positum.
and therefore the Latins say the word (nomen) signifying a name, comes from
(notamen) a word which signifies a mark of distinction. Whatsoever God is made
known by, is called his name in Scripture, because men, and all things else,
are known by their names. Though some in a special manner are called men of
name in Scripture ( Genesis 6.4.) which we therefore translate men of renown; and
men of no account or reputation among men, are called men of no name: yet the
poorest, the obscurest man has a name, by which he is known and distinguished
from other men. And as by names we distinguish persons at present, so we
preserve the memory of persons, and of their actions, and of their sayings,
whether good or bad for hereafter. How can it be cold who did, or who said,
this of that, unless we had their names who said or did it.

Secondly, He called, that is, Job called the name of, etc.

Hence note; It is the fathers privilege to give the name to his children.

To give a name is an act of power; and therefore the Lord, as I showed before,
brought all the creatures to Adam as their Lord: Having said ( Genesis 1.28.) Have
thou dominion over the beasts of the earth, and the fowls of the air, and the
fish of the sea, He brought them to Adam, as their Lord, to receive their names
( Genesis 2.19.) It is an act of great power either to give or to change names.
When Saul (Acts 9.) was converted or changed, the Lord changed his name, he was
no more called Saul, but Paul; In signum herilis potestatis.
being now become the Lords servant, and (as it were) one of his menial or
household servents, he gave him a new name. The Prince of the Eunuchs changed
the names of Daniel and his three companions; He gave unto Daniel the name of
Belteshazzar, and to Hananiah of Shadrach, etc. ( Dan. 1.7.) Yet we read in
Scripture that women very often gave names to their children. It Is conceived
that Eve gave the name to Cain, I have gotten a man from the Lord (Genesis 4.1.)
yea, as some expound her meaning in those, words, she thought she had gotten,
That man the Lord, even the Lord Jesus Christ, the promised seed (Genesis 3.15.)
and then she had gotten somewhat indeed, a possession to purpose, as the name
Cain signifies. In the history of Jacob, we find the mothers, Leah and Rachel,
still giving the name ( Genesis 29.32, 33, 34, 35. chap. 30.6, 8. etc. 1 Samuel
1.20.) But as it is well distinguished, though the nomination was often from
the mother, yet the imposition or confirmation of the name, Nominatio a matre,
impositio nominis a patro.
was always from the father: the mother desired the name, the father ratified
it; as is plain in the case of John the Baptist ( Luke 1.59.60, 61, 62, 63.)
Friends present at his circumcision called him Zacharias, after the name of his
father; his mother answered, not so, but his name shall be called John. How was
this matter determined? They made signs to his father, how he would have him
called, he must end the matter; and he called for a writing table, and wrote,
saying, his name is John. There have been many nominations from the Mother, but
the imposition ever was from the Father; and usually, the Father only is
mentioned in giving the name ( Genesis 5.3, 29.) as also here in the Text, it is
said of Job alone, He called the name of the first Jemima, and the name of the
second, Kezia, and the name of the third Keren-hapuch. I shall,

First, Consider the signification of these names in the original Language.

Secondly, Give some account why Job gave them these names; for we must not
think they were given (as we say) at a venture, nor in a fancy.

He called the name of the first Jemima. (...). Sept. Diem. Vulg. A Radice (...)
The root of this name in the Hebrew, signifies Day, or, the light of the day;
and so both the Septuagint and the vulgar Latin translate: as if we should
render it in English, He called the name of the first, Day.

He called the name of the second Kezia. That, in the Hebrew, signifies a
Spice or Perfume, a very fragrant and pleasant spice, of which Naturalists
speak much, and is commonly known by the name Cassia, and so rendered ( Psalm.
45.8.) All thy garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia: as if in English Job
had called his second daughters name, Sweet spice or perfume.

And the name of the third Keren-happuch. That Is a compound word, from Keren,
which signifies a Horn; and Happuch, which among the Learned has a double
signification.

First, It signifies a powder, of which they made a kind of ointment,
wherewith proud ones painted themselves, called in Latin Stibium. Some say it
was a mineral; others say it was a plant growing in the Sea, which being ground
to powder, was of an excellent redness in color. Here the word Keren
signifying a Horn, is prefixed to it, because they used to preserve such
painting-pouder in a horn. We find this word Happuch made use of in the Verb (2
Kings 9.30.) where it is said, that Jezebel hearing Jehu was come to Jezreel,
Painted her face, and tired her head, etc. The Prophet also makes use of it (
Jer. 4.30.) when he would show how unable anything should be to do them good,
the Lord being provoked by their evil deeds. True bodily beauty cannot, much
less can a painted face procure them favor with men, with whom the Lord is
angry for their wickedness and soul-pollutions; and therefore, says the
Prophet there, Though thou cloathest thy self with crimson, and deckest thy
self with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in
vain shall thou make thy self fair, thy lovers will despise thee, they will
seek thy life. When he says, Though thou rentest thy self with painting, it is
only to show, that though they did their best, and used their utmost skill to
make themselves look fair, though they should rub their faces with this
vermillion, till they cracked their very skin, yet it would do them no good,
the enemy would not be enamoured with them, nor pity, nor spare them for their
fine clothes and fair faces.

Secondly, Others derive this word Happuch from a root, which signifies to
turn, and then the sense of the Text is, He called the name of the third
Keren-happuch, that is, The horn of conversion, or of turning. I shall give the
reason of that translation by-and-by. The Septuagint render it by a word which
signifies Plenty, The horn of plenty. But I conceive our rendering most proper:
He called her name Keren-happuch, that is, The horn of beauty, alluding to the
custom of proud women, who to make themselves look fair, and so to ensnare
others with their beauty, anointed or painted themselves with that tincturing
stuff. Thus we have the signification of these names.

But why did Job give his daughters such names as these?

First, I suppose this may be given as a reason of it, That he might in these
names remember, or be minded of, his wonderful restoration. God having brought
him out of a low and miserable estate, to a very high and comfortable one, he
therefore called the name of the first Jemima, that is, Day, to signify that
he who before was in a night, a dark night of sadness and sorrow, of trouble
and adversity, was now come to a comfortable day of prosperity. The Scripture
says, Light is sown for the righteous. They may be in the dark, in a dark day,
in a day as dark as night, and where the very light (as Job spoke, Chap. 10.)
is as darkness; but there is a Day coming, Light is sown for the righteous. Job
might say, I have been in the dark night of affliction, but now it is break of
day with me; and therefore that I may remember this goodness of God, my first
daughter shall be named Day, that her name may help me to remember the goodness
of God all my days.

Again, When he called his second daughter Kezia, that also might refer to his
new state. As if he had said, My former condition of stink and filth is passed
away; I once sat (as it were) upon a dunghill, being little better than dung my
self, full of ulcerous soars; my breath savored so ill, that my Wife could not
endure me, and I was an offense to all near me: but now the Lord has renewed
my flesh, as the flesh of a child, now I am sweet and clean, my savor is like
a perfume; and therefore my second daughters name shall be Kezia, Spice or
perfume.

Job might also say, My late affliction was a state of deformity, I was black
and uncomely, my face was all as a scab, and my body as a sore, my countenance
was slurr'd with tears and weeping (as he complained, Chap. 16.16.) there was
no beauty in me; Job might say of himself in that state, as it is said of
Christ in the Prophecy, When we beheld him there was no beauty, no comeliness
in him: but now my sores are healed, now I have recovered my former strength,
freshness and comeliness; and therefore, the name of this daughter shall be,
The horn of beauty, to mind me how the Lord has given me beauty for ashes, and
garments of joy for a spirit of heaviness. Thus he might very well, and very
piously, give his children these names, to mind him of the blessed change which
the Lord had made in his outward condition. And this is the reason of that
translation before mentioned, of the name of the third daughter, called
Keren-happuch, The horn of Conversion, intimating how great a change the Lord
had made in his horn; his horn was in the dust before, it was empty and had
nothing in it but filth, whereas now is become or turned to be a Horn of
plenty. Jobs estate was changed from poverty to plenty, and his horn raised
from the dust to honor and dignity; and therefore he called the name of his
third daughter Keren-happuch, The horn of Conversion, or, The change of the
Horn. Thus Job might have great reason to call his daughters by these names,
with respect to the change of his condition.

Hence observe; Godly Parents do well, when they give such names to their
children, as may be memorials of the providence of God toward them.

Joseph had a mighty turn in his estate, as the Psalmist epitomizeth the
History of Moses in Genesis concerning him ( Psalm. 105.17, 18, 19, 20, etc.) He
was sold for a servent, his feet were hurt with fetters, he was laid in irons,
until the time that his word came; the word of the Lord tried him: The King
sent and loosed him, he made him Lord of his house, and Ruler of all his
substance, etc. This Joseph had two sons in the Land of Egypt, after this turn
of his estate; but what were their names? The Text answers ( Genesis 41.51, 52.)
And he called the name of his firstborn Manasseth, which signifies
forgetfulness; and he gives this reason of it; for (said he) God has made me
forget all my toil, and all my fathers house. And the name of the second called
he Ephraim, which signifies fruitful; for (said he) God has caused me to be
fruitful in the land of my affliction. He was once very much afflicted, and now
he was very fruitful; therefore, he called the name of his younger son,
Ephraim, that he might remember the kindness of God to him, as often as he
beheld or spoke to, or of, that son. So Moses called his son Gershom (stranger)
for he said, I have been a stranger in a strange Land (Exodus 2.22.) We find
also names given to things, as well as to persons, by way of remembrance. Thus
(1 Samuel 7.12.) after a great victory obtained against the Philistines, Samuel
set up a stone, and gave it a name, He called it Eben-ezar, or the Stone of
help: The reason was, for (said he) hitherto the Lord has helped us. The name
of the stone, was, to mind them of the Lords constant readiness to help them,
even unto that day. So Moses (Exodus 17.) after that great deliverance from the
Amalekites, built an Altar, and called it Jehovah nissi, which signifies, the
Lord is my Banner, to put them in remembrance how the Lord went forth as a man
of War, and mightily confounded their enemies. There is a prudence to be used
in the names, both of things and persons. We read ( Genesis 10.25.) Unto Eber were
born two sons, and the name of the one he called Peleg; and why Peleg? for in
his days (says that Text) was the earth divided. Peleg signifies division.
The whole world, which lay before as one common field in his days, was divided
and cantoniz'd into several Countries, therefore his name was called Peleg.
And, as many names have been given from past or present providence, so some
names have been given, as it were, by Prophecy, with respect to after
providence ( Genesis 5.29.) Lamech lived a hundred eighty and two years, and
begat a son, and called his name Noah, which signifies rest. Why so? not from a
providence that was past or present, but from what he believed should be; For
this same (said he) shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands,
because of the ground which the Lord has cursed. Thus much of the names of
Jobs daughters, as they signified the providence of God toward him, and the
turn of his state.

Secondly, We may consider these nemes, with reference to the personal
qualifications or endowments of his daughters, and those twofold; First, their
corporal and external qualifications. Secondly, their spiritual and internal
qualifications, which we may well conceive Job had a chief respect unto, in
giving them these names.

First, He called the names of the first Jemima, or, Day, thereby signifying,
First, the clear natural beauty of that daughter, or the brightness of her
complexion like the brightness of the day, or as if she shined in beauty like
the day, when beautified by the beams of the Sun. Thus Christ spoke of the
Church ( Cant. 6.10.) Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the
Moon, clear as the Sun? Jobs eldest daughter looked forth as the day, she was
of a resplendent comeliness: and we may well suppose, Job, who gave her this
name, had prayed she might have, and hoped she would have, and doubtless in her
time she had not only a beautiful face, and a comely feature of body, but (which
is far better) a beautiful soul, a well-featured disposition of mind, much
grace and goodness; in which sense, the Church (in the place last mentioned) is
said to look forth as the morning, to be fair as the Moon, and clear as the
Sun. The name Day, does very well shadow, both the virgin beauty of the body,
and the divine unspotted beauty of the soul. Secondly, he might call her so,
thereby signifying, that as the day is sweet and pleasant, so was she, both as
to her bodily aspect in comeliness, and the aspect of her soul in holiness.
Thirdly, (say some) he called her name Day, Vna dies aperit, susturit uno dies.
because beauty (bodily beauty they mean) is of no long continuance, it is but,
as it were, for a day; like a flower, which a day opens and withers.

He called the second Kezia, or as one of the Ancients renders, Cassia,
signifying spice and perfume, to note that she was of a fragrant temper, of a
winning disposition and conversation. Grace and virtue yield the sweetest smell
in the nostrils of God, and of all good men. The Church ( Cant. 1.3.) says of
Christ, Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is an ointment
poured forth; therefore do the virgins love thee. These ointments were the
precious graces of Christ. It Is so in some proportion, with all the godly;
their ointments (the unction of the Spirit poured upon them) cast a delightful
savor. Solomon says ( Eccl. 7.1.) A good name is better than precious
ointment. A good name, arising from good qualities, from grace received and
acted, is the most precious ointment, more precious than all the ointments
which affect the sense. To be Jemima, beautiful in body as the day, and not to
be Kezia, not to have a spirit sweet as Cassia, what is it, but a piece of
pageantry, or gilding upon a common post?

Job called the name of the 3d Keren-happuch, or, Horn of beauty; First, with
respect to her outside, intimating, that she was a great beauty. Some say, she
was called Keren-happuch by an Antiphrasis, because she needed not, much less
used, the horn of beauty to make her self beautiful; she was even beauty it
self: Her natural beauty exceeded all that artificial beauty which proud women
make show of, by painting their faces. She was also a horn of beauty, as to her
graces and spiritual endowments. Thus Job might give his daughters these names,
not only with respect to the change of his condition, but considering the
conditions of his daughters, both with respect to their bodily beauty, and the
divine excellency of grace bestowed upon their souls.

Hence note; It is good to give names, exciting to virtue and to duty.

The names of Job's three daughters, Day, Perfume, Nomina bona calcar ad
virtutem habent.
Horn of beauty, might stir them up to approve themselves such as their names
imported! Virtuous names, or names of virtue, should mind us to do virtuously.
It Is also a piece of spiritual prudence and policy, to put, as the names of
excellent things, of graces and virtues, so of excellent persons, such as have
excelled in grace and virtue, upon our children, that they may be provoked to
imitate and follow their examples, whose names they bear. The good wishes and
desires of parents concerning children, may be silently (if I may so speak)
expressed in their names. They who would have their children excel in such a
grace or good way, may do well to six it in their names, Apud nos votiva and
quasi ob virtutis auspi cium ponuntur vocabula, sc. Victoris, Casti, Pii.
Probi; sic apud Hebraeos, Micheas, and Habdias and Zacharias caeteraque his
similia ex virtutem vocabulo liberis a parentibus imponuntur. Hieron. in
Proaem. Comment in lib. Mich.
as prophesying or hoping, at least, they will really be what they are in name,
or what their names promise. One of the Ancients reports this practice of the
Ancients; We give names (says he) wherein we hold forth our wishes and
desires, and pray to God that our children may answer the signification of
their names. Many Scripture-names have mysterious meanings in them. Hosea,
signifies a Savior, his parents therein prophesying (as it were) and showing
their faith, that he would be a Prophet, and prove instrumental for the
salvation of others. Obadiah, signifies the servant of God; his parents gave
him that name (we may suppose) hoping he would, and wishing he might be a
faithful servant of God. Zachariah, signifies the memery or remembrance of
God; his parents earnestly desiring, that God would both remember him (which is
all mercy to man) or that he might always remember God (which is all duty to
God) Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth; that is; perform all
duty to God.

Nomina erant quasi omina vel monita vel v^ta rei futurae.
We see then, it has been usual among godly parents, to give significant names
to their children, either that they might be minded of the mercies of God to
them, or of the duties which they were to perform to God.

I shall only add for the close of the point, this short admonition to all, to
women especially (because the Text speaks of them) that, As it is useful and
usual for parents to give good names to their children, so children should have
a gracious ambition to make good the signification of their names. What will it
advantage a man to be called John, which signifies grace, if himself be
graceless? or to be called Obadiah, which signifies a servant of God, if he
neglect to serve God? or to be called Zechariah, which signifies the
Remembrance of God, if he forget God? Again, what will it benefit a woman to be
called Susanna, which signifies a Lilly (a beautiful flower) if she be not
like that lilly among thorns, the Church ( Cant. 2.2.) but only a lilly in the
wilderness of this world? What will it benefit a woman to be called Tamar,
which signifies a Palm Tree, tall and strait, if her self be of a low, base,
and crooked di^position. It Is better to be a crooked shrub in bodily stature,
than a tall strait Palm Tree with a crooked mind, and a low spirit. To be named
Jemima, as fair as Day; to be named Kezia, as sweet as spice or perfume; to be
called Keren-happuch, as beautiful as the very horn of beauty; what will it
advantage any women, unless they have real virtues, and gracious qualities
answering these names? Yea, these names will be real witnesses against them at
last, and fill their faces with shame. To profess our selves to be, or to have
a name to be, what we are not, is to be deeply hypocritical; and to bear that
in our names which we are not, nor take any care to be, is highly disgraceful.
But when names are fulfilled in persons; when men and women, who wear good
names, are or do the good signified by their names, how precious are their
names! and their memories, how honorable! And when the good or virtues of the
three feminine names in the Text meet and center in the person of any one
woman; when Jemima, the daylight of true knowledge and understanding is joined
with Kezia, the perfume of reputation, ascending from Keren-happuch, store of
beautiful graces, put forth in the gracious actions of a spotless and
unblameable conversation; what Pencil is able to draw to the life the ravishing
features of such a person? Such, I believe, were those noble Ladies, Jobs
daughters, named in the Text, which was the joy of their fathers heart, and the
staff of his old age.

Thus much of the names of Jobs daughters, and of the signification of them;
both in reference to the then present change of Jobs estate, and the hope he
had of their future good estate; with respect to the beauty and gracefulness of
their bodies, but especially to the beauty and graciousness of their souls or
minds.

Now as the beauty and virtues too of Jobs three daughters were employed, and
wrapped up in their names, so their beauty is plainly expressed in the next words.

Verse. 15. And in all the land were no women found so fair as the daugh^ers of
Job, and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren. In this verse
we have two things concerning Jobs daughters. First, The supereminency of their
beauty. Secondly, The greatness of their dowry or portions, bestowed on them by
the bounty of their father. The former we have at the beginning of the verse.

And in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job. When
it is said, in all the land, we are to understand it of all the land of Vz:
(...). In ea quae sub coelo. Sept. Tota terra est sub coelo; hic autem
restringitur ad certam Regio^em. Drus.
Yet the Septuagint extend it to all lands all the world over, rendering all
under heaven; but the word in the Original will not reach so far, though the
truth might. But in all that land were no women (or women kind, as Master
Broughton reads) found so fair, that is, none were so fair as they. The word
found is to be taken as in that of Moses (Exodus 35.23.) Every man with whom was
found (that is, with whom there was, or who had) blue and purple, etc. brought
them: And as in that which is spoken of Christ ( Phil. 2.8.) He was found (that
is, he was or appeared) in the form of a man. So ( Mal. 2.6. 2 Chronicles. 19.3.)
For we are not to conceive that there was an inquiry or search made amongst all
the women of the land of Vz who was fairest, and that upon the return, none
were found so fair and beautiful as Jobs daughters: The meaning is only this,
none were known so fair as they, or they had no known Peers in fairness; and
this is a sufficient proof, that those notable names were not given Jobs
daughters without a cause, either seen or foreseen, at least desired, the issue
answering the desire; In all the land there were none so fair as they.

There is a bodily fairness, and a soul fairness. The word into which we render
the Hebrew signifies properly the fairness of the face or body: Non sunt
inventae juxta filias Job meliores eis. Sept.
but the Septuagint translate it by a word signifying the souls fairness; They
say, No women were found better than the daughters of Job. Their goodness
without question, as it was far more excellent in it self, so more contentful
and delightful to him than their fairness. But we may very well take in both,
as was hinted before, namely, that his daughters were excellent, both for the
one beauty and for the other. Yet, I conceive, Pulcritudo terrenae faelicitatis
eximia portio est, ad dispensationem veteris testamenti pertinens.
the fairness here spoken of, was that of the body; and we must reckon it as a
part of Jobs renewed felicity, not only that he had three daughters as he had
before, but that his daughters were fairer than any in the land.

Hence note; The bodily beauty of our children is a gift of God, and no small
one.

Beauty is not only one of the excellencies of nature, but some part of Gods
image in man, and much respected in women. Species corporis simulacrum est
mentis and figura probitatis. Amb. l. 2. de virgin.
The beauty of the body, bears the image of a beautiful mind, and is a figure
of holiness; hence that Scripture phrase, The beauty of holiness. It is said of
Moses, He was a goodly child; and of Sarah, that she was a very beautiful
woman; so beautiful, that Abraham was afraid her beauty might endanger him
among strangers. Rebeccah also was beautiful, and very fair; Gratior est
pulchro veniens e corpore virtus.
and though beauty is no grace, yet it is a grace to grace. Beauty is, and duly
may be, a great attractive of love and affection: Though we know it is often an
incentive to lust, yet it is an attractive of true love. What is said of the
Church ( Psalm. 45.11.) So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty, thy
spiritual or inward beauty, is true also of outward or corporal beauty. Beauty
to some is a portion among men; to others, a favor from God. Beauty is a
silent eloquence, a tacit persuasion, it works much. But consider, I speak of
that beauty first, which is natural, not artificial; I speak not of beauty out
of a box, but of that which is laid on by the hand of God, that is a blessing
and a mercy, then especially, when it is joined with better beauty. Only
remember, though bodily beauty be a blessing, it is but an inferior blessing;
it is a gift of God, yet an inferior gift: And there are many considerations
which may keep them humble in their own thoughts, who are most beautiful in the
eyes of others.

For, First, As beauty is a blessing, so it is a snare oftentimes; and that in
two respects.

First, It proves a snare to them that have it. Fastus inest pulchris,
sequiturque superbia formam.
If they have not grace, it makes them proud and vain; such are often given up
to newfangled inventions; their natural beauty will nor serve them, they must
have artifical set-offs. Again, much beauty makes many disdainful of others;
and they who are so, are under the disdain of God; and it had been much better
for such, if they had been the veriest Doudes (as some call unhandsome ones) or
the most deformed creatures in the world. Therefore (I say) remember there is a
snare in beauty to those that have it; yet by how much beauty has the more
temptation in it, by so much are they the more to be commended, who being
beautiful, overcome those temptations, and continue humble, modest, chaste,
discreet, and diligent, avoiding evil, with all the occasions of it, turning
from every vanity, and doing good.

Secondly, Beauty is often a snare to others. When the Persian Captive Ladies
were presented to Alexander the Great, he called them, The sores or pain of the
eyes; He was afraid they might wholly conquer him, who had conquered so great a
part of the world. What reason have any to be proud of that, which may ensnare,
and so undo, both themselves and others?

Secondly, Consider there is nothing more frail, nor sooner lost than bodily
beauty. A little sorrow, a few tears, spoil and fully a a fair face; a fit of
sickness withers beauty, and, inevitably, old age will do it; Est exigui
donum breve temporu. Sen. in Hippol.
at best, it is quickly gone, and every day, when once at best, abates it; the
longer you have it, the less you have of it. Some conceive (as I touched before)
that Job called his eldest daughter Jemima, Day, because beauty lasts but as
it were a day; one day blows it, and another day blasteth it.

Formae omnes insidiantur.
Thirdly, Beauty endangers the weaker sex to become a prey to the lusts of
adulterous men, who often lie in wait for such a booty. So then, though beauty
be a blessing, yet we have little reason to be proud of it, if these three
things be true (as who can deny the truth of any one of them) which have been
said of it; and three times three things more might be said of it, with as much
truth, to take all off from overmuch valuing it, or to abate our valuation of
it.

Therefore, above all, look to the beauty of the mind, that is a beauty worth
the striving after; and that is truest bodily beauty, which is adorned with
soul-beauty, or when the beauty of comeliness is associated with the beauty of
holiness. It had been no great matter of commendation to Jobs daughters, that
they were the fairest women in all the and, if they had not been the holiest.
The beauty of the mind is ten thousand times more commendable than that of the
body; the King of heaven desires such beauty. It is not a naturally fair face
that will make the Lord Jesus desire you; and as for an artificially fair, that
will cause the Lord Jesus to abhor you. The Kings daughter is all glorious
within (Psalm. 45.13.) her glory is a spiritual glory. Solomon has told us what
natural beauty is without spiritual ( Prove. 11.22.) As a jewel in a swines
snout, so is a fair woman which is without discretion; especially, that fair
woman is so, who (as the Margin has it) departs from discretion. They are
truly beautiful and lovely, who have beautiful dispositions, and follow
beautiful and lovely actions. The Lord said of the Jewish Church ( Ezekiel.
16.14.) Thy renown went forth among the heathen for beauty; for it was perfect
through my comeliness which I had put upon thee. But what was the comeliness
which God had put upon her? It was the comeliness of divine gifts and graces
planted in her, and exercised or held out by her. That Is the ornament with
which the Apostle Peter says, the good women in the old time adorned
themselves, even the hidden man of the heart, a meek and quiet spirit (1 Epist.
3.4, 5.) And let men as well as women strive for these ornaments. They that are
deformed in person, may more than make it up, by being conformed to Christ in
their ways and works. Better be deformed in body, and conformed to Christ, than
to have a well-proportion'd comely body, and no conformity unto Christ. It has
been said of some wise and worthy men, that their souls were ill-housed, that
is, they had ill shaped or unhandsome bodies. But though the house of the body
be mean and despicable, yet if the inhabitant, or the soul, be wise and good,
that makes a mends for all outward deficiencies, yea, for deformities and
monstrosities; whereas if the house of the body be never so well framed and
built, yet if it be inhabited by a proud, unclean, ignorant, impious soul, how
does that spoil, defile, and dishonor that body, and make it no better than a
darksome dungeon.

So far concerning the names of Jobs daughters, who being qualified in body and
mind according to the import of their names, were themselves portion enough to
any husband; yet Job did not put them off so, but gave an honorable share of
his plentiful estate to them, as it follows, And their father gave them
inheritance among their brethren.

And well they deserved it. Their father gave them. He made the distribution to
prevent contention, which often falls out among children (and possibly might
among Jobs) about their fathers estate. This was a high favor, and somewhat
unusual, to give daughters inheritance among their brethren; they use only to
inherit, when they have no brethren. For among the Jews, and probably among the
Idumeans, it was a custom, and it past into a law among the Jews, that sons
should have the whole inheritance; the reason was, because their families and
inheritances were preserved distinct by the male, not so by the females. The
Hebrew word for a male signifies Remembrance, (...)
but that for a female Forgetfulness; because daughters lose the name of their
family in marriage, and therefore daughters did not inherit, but when there was
no male issue. Thus it was in the case of the daughters of Zelophehad, their
father left no son, and so they inherited ( Number. 27.7.) An immovable
inheritance came not to daughters; they had only a moveable inheritance. Illud
Inter, vel ut in Hebraeo est in medio fratrum aequalitatem quandam and communem
rationem denotat. Pined.
But Job giving his daughters inheritance among their brethren, implies (as
some Interpreters conceive) that they had an equal inheritance in lands with
their brethren, which is also the opinion of our Annotators; as if out of love
to them, and in reward of their virtues, he gave to every one of them, as to
his sons, a portion of land to inherit, so that they shared proportionally with
their brethren, by their fathers Will and Testament, and were coheirs with them
in his estate equally.

Inter fratres sc. ad designandum convenientiam virtutis in utrisque. Aquin.
Yet those words, among or in the midst of their brethren, note, faith another
Expositor, only an equality in their good qualities and virtues. I suppose, if
you take equally in a strict sense, that is, just as much, foot for foot, penny
for penny, they did not inherit equally; but if we take it in a common or large
sense, so they had as great an inheritance as their brethren, they had as much
for daughters, as their brethren for sons. Their fathers gave them inheritance
among their brethren.

Hence note, First; It is the fathers duty to provide for his Children.

(1 Timothy 5.8.) If any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his
own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel. The Apostles
meaning is, in that point, he has denied the faith, and does not carry it like
a believer, no, nor so well as unbelievers or infidels commonly do.

Secondly, Their father gave them inheritance.

Hence note; It is the fathers privilege to dispose of his estate to his
children.

Children must not take their portions; their father must give it them.
Children must not carve to themselves: It is the privilege of the father to
dispose of what he has, according to right and reason, and the law of the
place.

Thirdly, Who were they that had this gift, they were his daughters, Their
father gave them inheritance.

Hence note; Daughters are to be provided for, as well as sons.

Some fathers are all for their sons, and neglect their daughters altogether.
Sons should not be denied their privilege, and daughters should not be
unprovided for. Sons bear up the name of the family, and daughters may bring
both strength and honor to the family; by matching into worthy families.

Note, Fourthly; The better daughters are, the better should parents, father or
mother, do and provide for them.

The reason why Job went so high, to give his daughters inheritance among their
brethren, was, because his daughters were not only beautiful, but dutiful, and
though women by sex, yet of a masculine spirit. The very grammar of the Text
(as some take notice) leads us to this ground of their fathers bounty and
nobleness to them; he dealt with them as with sons, because they had the
virtues of sons;; for in three places the Holy Ghost uses the masculine affixe
( mem) where (according to ordinary rule) he should use the feminine ( nun) to
show (say they) that Job was not moved by fond affection to his daughters, but
sound judgment; he seeing them exceed their sex in virtue, equaled them in his
fatherly provision, with those who were of a more excellent sex, and dealt with
them as with sons in their degree.

Lastly, Observe; Children ought to be satisfied with their fathers pleasure in
disposing his estate among them.

We do not hear that there was any discontent in the sons, because the
daughters had so much; nor in the daughters, because they had no more: both
rested in what their father was pleased to do for them. How much more should we
rest content with that portion and inheritance which our father in heaven
provides for us? and indeed he will give all his daughters at last inheritance
among his sons: For as the Apostle speaks with respect to grace, so it is true
in respect to glory, There is neither male nor female; but Christ is all and in
all. The grace of God is not more to the male than to the female; and, as it is
in the giving of grace here, so it will be in the distribution of glory
hereafter: Brethren and sisters, husbands and wives, who are heirs of the same
grace of life, shall be all heirs together in the life of glory, o^ in the
glorious life; and therefore let us be content with what portion or inheritance
our heavenly father is pleased to give us, to allor, or allow us in this life.

JOB, Chap. 42. Verse. 16, 17. 16. After this lived Job an hundred and forty
years, and saw his sons, and his sons sons, even four gegenerations.

17. So Job died, being old and full of days.


THese two verses conclude the History and whole Book of Job, and in them we
may consider these six things.

First, The length of Jobs life, or how long he lived, even an hundred and
forty years.

Secondly, From whence we are to date this account of his life; After this,
says the Text, lived Job an hundred and forty years.

Thirdly, We have here the great increase of his family; he had not only sons
of his own, but, saw his sons, and his sons sons, even four generations.

Fourthly, We may consider the comfort and content in which he spent this long
life, and run out those many years, which is implied in those words, He saw his
sons, and his sons sons, even four generations.

Fifthly, We have the close of his life, So Job died.

Sixthly, The state of life in which he died, set forth two ways; First, Being
old (or an old man.) Secondly, Full of days. So Job died, being old (or an old
man) and full of days.

Verse. 16. After this Job lived an hundred and forty years. He survived all his
sorrows, and saw a very blessed resurrection of his comforts and enjoyments.
After this, that is, after this unparalled affliction was over-past, after
the Winter of his sorrows and troubles was over-blown, after the dark night of
his calamity was full spent, After this lived Job an hundred and forty years.
The Septuagint make this exposition their translation, rendering the Text thus
our of the original, After this Plague or blow lived Job, etc. So that, here we
have not the account of the whole race of his life, but of his new life, as we
may call i^, or, of his life, in the third edition of it: For, as there are*
(if I may so speak) three editions of man's life in general, whereof the first
was a happy one in Adam, as created; the second, miserable, by Adam, as fallen;
the third, more happy than the first, as we are restored by Christ, the second
Adam: So there were three editions or volumes (at least) of this one man's life,
whereof the first was very prosperous, the second very troublesome, the third
more prosperous than the first. This prosperous edition or state of Jobs life,
continued an hundred and forty years.

But have we no ghess about the computation of his whole life, or how long he
lived in all?

I answer, we have none from the holy Scriptures; and therefore, where the
Scripture has not a tongue to speak, I would say but little: Yet give me le^ve
to report the opinion, both of the Jewish Writers, and of several others, both
Greek and Latin, concerning that point.

First, It is generally agreed by the Jewish Writers, and by most of the
Latins, that Job was threescore and ten years old at the conclusion of his
trouble; and if he were seventy when his trouble ended, adding an hundred and
forty more after the end of his trouble, it makes up just two hundred and ten
years, as the general account of his whole life. Thus the Jewish Doctors
conclude the race of Jobs life, as long as the abode of the children of Israel
in Egppt, after their coming thither, till their going out.

Secondly, The seventy Interpreters give another reckoning, both of the time he
lived after his affliction, and of the time before, and so consequentially of
his whole life; for thus they translate, After this trouble, Job lived an
hundred and seventy-years; and all the days which Job lived, were two hundred
and forty years. Thus they render the Text, but by what warrant I do not
understand. The ground of this addition, by which some endeavor to preserve
the credit of that translation, is this; The Septuagint (say they) by after
this, do not understand only the time when Job was just come out of his
troubles, but, by after this, they mean the whole time that Job was recovering
out of his trouble, and growing up into that greatness. As if the meaning of
those words, after this, were to be taken thus: After Jobs cattle were doubled,
and his Family was completed, after he had seven sons and three daughters born
unto him, and after his daughters appeared to be according to their names, and
the report made of them in the former context, the fairest women in all the
Land of Vz; and after he had disposed of them in marriage, to his comfort and
content, after all this was in doing and done, he lived an hundred and forty
years. Now, for the doing of all this, they allow thirty years, which being
added to the hundred and forty years in the Text, make up the full sum of an
hundred and seventy years, as they translate; to which, if we add seventy
years, which is supposed to have been the time of his life, when his troubles
ended, then the total amounts to two hundred and forty years, which the
Septuagint in their translation say he lived.

But it may suffice to mention this, it being only the opinion, and possibly
the mistake of those ancient Translaters. We have no more in Scripture, but
that he lived an hundred and forty years after his troubles were ended; and
taking it strictly so, he must needs be a very old man, for he was a perfect
man, and had ten children before his troubles began.

After this lived Job an hundred and forty years. But why does the Spirit of
God reckon up his years? Surely to set forth a further blessing bestowed upon
Job, than as yet had been named, even the blessing of long life. All that is
spoken of him, is in a way of mercy; and to make the measure of his mercies
full, this is added or cast in, that he lived after the days of his trouble
were ended, an hundred and forty years.

Hence note; Long life is to be reckoned among divine blessings; and it is a
right hand blessing (Prove. 3.16.)

Job had many blessings of this life, but his long life on earth was the
chiefest of mere earthly blessings. The first Ages of the world had very long
livers: Adam, the first man, lived well toward a thousand years, complete nine
hundred and thirty years, after he was created ( Genesis 5.5.) which being in a
perfect man's estate, we may well reckon him as a man of near a thousand years
old, and nearer to a thousand than Methusalah, when he dyed. That whole Chaprer
is a clear proof, that all before the Flood lived to a great age.

Four reasons may be assigned, why the thread of man's life was drawn out to so
great a length, in those early ages of the world.

First, That they might learn the works of Creation, and be skilled in the
course of nature, which, having no books nor antecedent studies of men, they
must collect by observation.

Secondly, They lived long, that they might instruct others in what themselves
had observed.

Thirdly, They lived long, that mankind might be multiplied; for of those long
livers ( Genesis 5.) when the firstborn is mentioned, it is still added, they
lived so many hundred years after, and begat sons and daughters.

Fourthly, They lived very long, that they might both invent and perfect those
Arts and Sciences with which the world afterward abounded, when drawn into
writing, and set forth by rule. And though after the Flood, the years of the
longest livers were much short of theirs, yet the holy Patriarchs received a
great share of his blessing. Abraham lived an hundred seventy and five years (
Genesis 25.7.) Isaac lived something longer, an hundred and fourscore years ( Genesis
35.20.) Jacob lived an hundred forty and seven ( Genesis 47.28.) Joseph lived an
hundred and ten years ( Gen 50. ult) Job, if we take in that common account of
the antecedent part of his life, lived longer than any of these, even two
hundred and ten years. The fifth Commandment has this promise ( Exodus 20.12.)
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land, which
the Lord thy God gives thee. And the Apostle calls that the first Commandment
with promise ( Ephesians. 6.2.) that is, the first Commandment with an explicit
promise (all the Commandments have promises employed to those that obey them)
Eliphaz assured Job of this blessing, in case of his repentance (Chap. 5.26.)
Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of Corn comes in
his season: And in this he was a true Prophet.

Now, that long life is a blessing, I would show briefly, under these six
considerations.

First, It is a blessing to have a long opportunity of doing good, of being
useful and serviceable to our generation; long life gives an advantage for that.

Secondly, It is a blessing to have opportunity to gain experiences; First, of
the various providence of God toward men, whether in ways of judgment or of
mercy. Secondly, to get experiences of the manners of men, of the vanity,
unfaithfulness and inconstancy of some men, and of the goodness, faithfulness
and constancy of others. Though we sometimes smart in getting our experiences,
yet it may be a great blessing to have them.

Thirdly, It is a blessing to have an opportunity to hold forth the grace of
God to us, and the graces of God in us, by a holy example. The longer we live a
natural life, the more we may manifest the power of a spiritual life, to those
among whom we live.

Fourthly, It is a blessing to have opportunity for improvement and growth in
grace, to attain the highest stature in, and pitch of holiness. This benefit we
may make of long life, even increase in grace, as our years increase, and grow
better as we grow older.

Fifthly, It is a blessing to have opportunity to bring up our children in the
nurture and fear of God; long life gives liberty for this.

Lastly, it is a blessing to behold the blessing of God upon our posterity;
long life gives us opportunity for this blessing, and this was Jobs blessing
eminently. In all these respects, and many more might be added, long life is a
blessing.

Yet, let me give this corrective, Long life is but a common blessing; it is no
distinguishing blessing, it is not a certain love-token from God to man. Bad
men have lived long, as appears both in sacred and common Histories. Old age is
then a blessing, and good indeed, when we are old in goodness, or grow old
doing good. Solomon's conclusion reaches this fully ( Prove. 16.31.) The hoary
head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness: And
Solomon tells us in Ecclesiastes, Better is a child that will be ruled, than an
old and foolish King that will receive no counsel. When we may say of any, as
the Lord said of some ( Ezekiel. 23.43.) O ye that are old in adulteries; when any
are old in sin, woe to such an old age. Better to die young, than live to old
age, and then die in sin. To live to be old men, the old man not dying in us, O
how sad! To see sin young, when the man is old, how odious a sight is that!
Then only old age is good, when we are good in old age. They only die in a good
old age (as it is said of Abraham, Genesis 25.8.) who are good dying old. The
sinner of a hundred years old shall die accursed. (Isa. 65.20.) So then, it is
knowing, not ignorant old age; it is prudent, not foolish old age; it is
gracious, not vicious old age, which is indeed the blessing; and therefore,
though it be a blessing, look upon it as a common blessing. As riches are good
to us, our selves being good; so is old age, such is a life of many years in
this world, good only to those who are good, and do good.

Secondly, When it is said, Job lived an hundred and forty years, we are not to
take his living for a bare continuance or indurance in life, for so many years;
but we are to understand his life or living so long, Vivere est valere.
with the clothing of it, with the good of it: he lived, that is, he lived
comfortably, honorably, peaceably, this hundred and forty years. We commonly
say, To live is to be well; to live, is to flourish. Some live, whose life is a
kind of death. As they who live in (sinful) pleasure, are dead while they live,
so also are they who live in great worldly sorrow. Job lived comfortably and
contentedly all that long time of his latter life, even an hundred and forty
years.

Hence note, Secondly; Long life, in health, peace and prosperity, is a
blessing indeed.

To live long in the enjoyment of good, is very good. What man is he (says
David, Psalm. 34.12.) that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see
good? Keep thy tongue from evil, etc. To live long and see good, that is, enjoy
good, is the utmost that can be desired in this life. That Is the blessing, or
the good promised in the renewed state of Jerusalem (Isa. 65.) where, after the
Lord had spoken of new heavens and new earth, he adds, at the 22d verse, They
shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat;
for as the days of a tree, are the days of my people, and mine elect shall
long enjoy the work of their hands. He does not say, they shall live long, but
they shall enjoy long; that which they have built and planted, none shall
invade nor take away from them. Some conceive, this has reference to the
thousand years, prophesied of ( Rev. 20.) wherein the Church shall enjoy
perfect felicity in this world. To live long in the sweet enjoyments of health,
honor, peace and plenty, for soul and body, is a full blessing. I grant, some
good men live long, who yet do not always enjoy good; their old age especially
is accompanied and encumbered with many bodily distempers and grievous pains.
Though grace sets us above the decays of nature, and the troubles of this
life, yet grace does not exempt nor give us privilege from either; so that
greediness after many years, is commonly a greediness only after many
infirmities. Isaac was a good old man, yet it is said of him, that when he was
old, his eyes waxed dim, so that he could not see (Genesis 27.1.) Old age, and dim
eyes, and deaf ears, shaking hands, and palsied trembling joints, with manifold
diseases, are seldom found asunder: Therefore, Job had an extraordinary
blessing, to live long and free from all these evils, and so have any who do
so. Barzillay was a good old man, yet (2 Samuel 19.25.) he was so benumbed, and
his natural senses so enfeebled, that he did not enjoy his life; Can I (said he
to David, who invited him to a Court-life, Can I) any more taste what I eat or
drink? etc. That Is a blessed old age, when we live long, and enjoy comfort with
our lives, chiefly when we enjoy the comforts, and act the duties of a
spiritual life.

Thirdly, Consider, Job was afflicted but a few months we are sure, not many
years, but God gave him an hundred and forty years of prosperity in this world,
after his affliction.

Hence note; God sometimes does, and always can recompense our short
sufferings with long comfortable enjoyments, even in this life.

Joseph, for his thirteen or fourteen years slavery and imprisonment in Egypt,
had fourscore years liberty and high advancement there. And though the Lord
does nor always, nor often make such compensations in this world; yet he will
compensate all the sufferings of his faithful servants, with longer, not only
comfortable, but glorious enjoyments, yea, with an eternal enjoyment of glory
in the world to come (2 Cor. 4.17.)

Fourthly, Note; The Lord can make our old age, our extreme old age, even a
youth to us, or as comfortable to us as our youth.

He can give health and strength to the very last, he can give a spring in the
winter of our age. Thus it was with Job; he did not only live long, but
flourished in the health of his body, as much as in the plenty of his estate.
The Lord can forbid diseases, he can forbid the Gout, the Stone, or any other
pain, to touch the person of an old man, if he pleases. Some are even afraid
to be old, because of the infirmities of old age; but God, who continues life,
can prevent or preserve us from the natural, as well as the providencial evils
of it. Solomon (Eccl. 12.1.) calls old age, the evil day, and the years
wherein there is no pleasure; and he uses it as an argument to move those who
are young, to remember their Creator: yet God is able to make old age a good
day to us, and to lengthen out our pleasures (those pleasures that are suitable
to old age) as long as he is pleased to lengthen out our lives; so that, the
comforts and contentments of our lives, shall run parallel with the length of
our lives, to the end of our lives. Thus Job lived, he lived comfortably, he
lived healthfully, the Lord preventing the decays or usual dilapidations of his
house of clay, as will appear further in the next words. After this Job lived
an hundred and forty years, And saw his sons, and his sons sons, even four
generations.

That is, Job lived to be a great great Grandfather; he saw his sons, Quartam
generationem intelligo inclusive, ita ut intelligatur vidisse etiam abnepotes,
hi enim sunt in quarto gradu a progenitore scil. Abavo. Pisc.
and his Grandchildren, and his great Grandchildren, and his great great
Grandchildren, four generations. Joseph (Genesis 50.23.) lived to see but the
third generation, he was only a great Grandfather. Many among us live to be
great Grandfathers, and great Grand-mothers; but to be a great great
Grandfather, that is, to see the fourth generation, is very rare. This is
recorded of Job, not only to set forth the greatness of his age, but also to
show the greatness of his blessing, and the exceeding greatness of the mercy
and goodness of God to him, in multiplying his Family; he saw a numerous issue,
to take comfort in all that latter part of his life. He saw (says the Text)
his sons, and his sons sons, even four generations. The learned in that
Language, take notice, Verbo videndi pucundissimus filioram ac nopotum
conspectus significatur.
that the Hebrew word rendered, saw, implies delight; and doubtless, Job had a
most delightful sight of his sons, and his sons sons. It is no where said, that
Job saw his sheep, or his oxen, or any of his riches, to take delight in them;
but Job saw his sons, and his sons sons; this sight was thousand times more
pleasing to him, than the sight of his fourteen thousand sheep, or of his
thousand yoke of oxen.

Hence note; To have and enjoy a numerous family, is greatly contentful to man,
and a great blessing of God.

Job received a great blessing, when he had sons and daughters of his own, as
many as before; but when he saw his sons, and his sons sons, even to the fourth
generation, that was the crown of all his outward blessings. Eliphaz fore-spake
this of him, upon supposition of his repentance, and profiting under the
correcting hand of God (Chap. 5.25.) Thou shall know also that thy seed shall
be great, and thy offspring as the grass of the earth. The children of all
men, or all the children of men, are as grass for fadingness ( Isa. 40.6.) But
when Eliphaz said, Thy offspring shall be as the grass of the earth, his
meaning was, they shall flourish as the grass, and they shall be many, very
many, as the grass of the earth. David (Psalm. 127.3, 4, 5:) speaks of this
great blessing, the multiplying of the seed of the righteous, as their great
contentment; Lo, children are the heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the
womb is his reward. As arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are children of
the youth: happy is the man that has his quiver full of them; that is, he has
a great outward happiness. Many children may contribute to our happiness many
ways, though some have had many unhappinesses in one. The next Psalm insists
upon the same mercy, under other metaphors; Thy Wife shall be as the fruitful
Vine by the sides of thy house, thy children like Olive-plants round about thy
Table; Lo, thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord. And ( verse. 6.)
Yea, thou shall see thy childrens children, and peace upon Israel. It is a
great affliction, a grief of eyes, yea, a breaking of the heart, to behold bad
children; but how sweet a sight is it, to behold good and obedient children,
and them many! There are two conditions very grievous to see our children in.
First, to see them in misery. Rachel (Jer. 31.15. Mat. 2.) mourned for her
children, and would not be comforted, because they were not; she saw them
murdered before her eyes. Such a sight had Zedekiah (Jer. 50.10.) the King of
Babylon brought his children, and slew them before his eyes; he made him see
that horrid spectacle, and then put out his eyes ( verse. 11.) Secondly, to see
children sin, and going on in a course of sin; that is a greater, a far greater
affliction than the former. It is said ( Genesis 26.34.) When Esau was forty years
old, he took to wife Judeth, the daughter of Berith the Hittite, which was a
grief of mind to Isaac and Rebecca. To see their son match among the profane
and uncircumcised, both in heart and flesh, was a cut, a wound, a deep wound in
their spirits. Again (Chap. 27. ult.) Rebecca said to Isaac, I am weary of my
life, because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob take a wife of the daughters
of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the Land, what good shall
my life do me? Better be out of the world, than see my sons miscarry. These two
sights, to see children suffering, or to see them sinning, are a pain, not only
to the eyes, but to the hearts of parents. But to see them, First, Prosperous
in their way; Secondly, Pious, keeping the way of the Lord; to have and see
such children, and childrens Children, to the third and fourth generation, how
delightful is this! The Apostle John professed (3 Epist. ver. 4.) I have no
greater joy, than to hear that my children walk in the truth. He means his
spiritual children, those whom he had converted to the faith, and begotten to
Christ in the ministry of the Word. O what a joy was it to that holy Apostles
heart, to see them walk answerably to the profession of the Gospel, and his
expectation! Now as that was so great a joy to him, that he had no greater; so
it is an unspeakable joy when godly parents see their natural children
spiritual, and walking in the truth. To see children new born, to see them
gracious, and to see them prosperous also, what a blessed sight is this! And
this was the sight doubtless which Job had, he saw his children, His sons, and
his sons sons, to the fourth generation. His blessedness, as to all without him
in this life, was at the highest, when he saw the prosperity of his children,
both in soul and body. Thus Job was blessed every way, he was blessed with
riches, blessed with long life, blessed in the multiplication of his family; he
was blessed also in his death, as appears in the next and last words of this
Chapter and Book.

Verse. 17. So Job died being old and full of days. As Solomon said ( Eccles.
12.13.) Hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God and keep his
commandments. So I may say now, Hear the conclusion of all men. To fear God
and keep his commandments, is the consumating end of our lives; but to dye is
the consuming end of all our lives, and to a good man it is an entrance into
eternal life; Such, and so Job died. The Lord having spoken of his life, is not
silent about his death; The story, the holy story brings Job to his grave: and
that could not but be a blessed death, which was the close of a gracious life.
So Job died. Death is the separation of the soul from the body; it is the sleep
of the body in the grave, and the rest of their souls in heaven who dye in the
Lord. There is no difficulty in these words; take a note or two from them.

First, Death takes all sooner or latter.

Job lived a long time, but he did not outlive death; Mors ultima clausula
vitae. Mors ultima linea rerum.
he enjoyed an hundred and forty years prosperity in this world, yet he left
the world; He lived long, yet a day came when he could not live a day longer.
It Is said of all the long livers ( Genesis 5.) They died. Adam lived nine hundred
and thirty years, and he died. Seth lived nine hundred and twelve years, and he
died. Methuselah (the longest liver in this world) lived nine hundred sixty and
nine years, and he died. Here Job lived an hundred and forty, and so he dyed.
David put the question of all men ( Psalm. 89.48.) What man is he that lives
and shall not see death? How great or how good, how rich or how wise, how
strong or how valiant soever any man living is, he must dye. How long soever
any man has lived in this world, he must dye, for the world must dye; there
must be a dissolution of all things, and therefore a dissolution of all men
(Psalm. 82.6, 7.) I said, ye are gods, but ye shall dye like men. Kings and
Princes, who have the privilege to be called gods, have not the privilege of
God, not to dye like men. This is a common theme, I intend not to stay upon it;
only, let me tell you, death will overtake us all sooner or later, upon a
double account.

First, Because it is appointed.

Secondly, Because it is deserved. It is appointed unto men once to dye (Heb.
9.27.) and all men have deserved to dye, to dye eternally, and therefore much
more to dye naturally ( Romans 5.12.) As by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, and so death past upon all men for that all have sinned. Now
seeing the condition of all men is a dying condition, receive these four
cautions.

First, Prepare for death. There is no avoiding it at the long run, therefore
be ready to entertain it at last; and, because we may dye at any time, be
preparing for death at all times. How miserable are they who are so old that
they cannot live, and yet so unprepared that they are afraid to dye? Job died,
and we must: If so, Is it not our wisdom to prepare for death?

Secondly, Submit quietly to the arrest of death. There is no striving with the
decrees of God. Our death is under a divine appointment ( Eccles. 8.8.) There
is no discharge in that war, no privilege to be pleaded, no exemption, no
prescription. Your strength cannot stand against the assaults of death, your
prudence and policy cannot find any way of escape from it, nor can your piety
or godliness deliver you out of the hands of natural death. As there is no
work, nor devise, nor knowledge in the grave whither we are going (Eccles.
9.10.) so there is no knowledge, no device, no wisdom, can keep us from going
into the grave, no, not our graces. Grace is as salt to the soul, preserving it
from moral corruption for ever: But it cannot keep the body from natural
corruption in this world, Mors est nobis nimis domestica, utpote quam in
viscaribus nostris circumserim^. Plutarch. in Consol. ad Apoll.
because our graces in this world are mingled with corruption. Death is
domestical to us, that is, we have the seed of it within our selves, we carry
it daily in our bowels and in our bosoms; therefore submit quietly to it, for
there is no avoiding it.

Thirdly, Seeing all must dye, get that removed which is the troubler of a
deathbed, and the sting of death; get that removed which makes death bitter,
get that removed which makes death, the King of terrors, so terrible, that is,
sin. This should be our study all the days of our life, to get rid of sin, to
be dying to sin daily; because we must dye at last, and may dye, for all that
we know, or can assure our selves, any day we live (1 Cor. 13.56.) The sting of
death is sin. Whenever, or in what way soever we dye, it will be well with
us, if the sting of death be first pulled out; and whenever we dye, after
never so long a life, it will be miserable, if we dye in our sins; as Christ
told the Jews in the highest threat, I go away, and ye shall dye in your sins
(John 8.21.) They that dye in their sins, dye a double death at once, a
temporal and an eternal death together. And to those who have got the sting of
death pulled out, that is, the guilt of sin removed and washed off by the blood
of Christ, I would,

Fourthly, Take this caution. If you would have death easy to you, dye more
and more to sin daily. Some, who are dead to sin, may find much life of sin
remaining in them; and they who have much of the life of sin in them will never
dye easily, they will find strong bands in their death, which, in another
sense, some wicked men find not ( Psalm. 73.4.) While either sin, or self, or
the world are lively in us, death will be grievous to us: Therefore let them
who are dead to sin, never think themselves dead enough to it while they live;
they who are most dead to sin and the world, have the sweetest and most
comfortable passage out of the world. So Job dyed, Being old.

It must needs be that Job was an old man, when he had lived an hundred and
forty years after all his changes before this change came: Why then is it
added, he died being old, or being an old man? Surely, to teach us this lesson.

Old age and death cannot be far asunder. It Is a truth, young men and death are
not very far asunder, youth and death are at no great distance; but when we see
an old man, we may conclude, that death and he are very near neighbors. While
we see an old man with his staff in his hand, we may say, he carries a rapper
in his hand, by which at every step he knocks at the door of the grave. There
is no man, not the youngest man, that can reckon certainly upon one day beyond
what he has, and therefore Solomon admonishes us ( Prove. 27.1.) Beast not of
tomorrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. And the Apostle
James checks those, who would reckon upon a day, he tells them upon the matter,
That they reckon without their host (James 4.13.) Go to now, ye that say to
day, or tomorrow we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and
buy, and sell, and get gain: And then at the 14th verse, Whereas ye know not
what shall be on the morrow; for (says he) What is your life? it is even a
vapor that appears for a little while, and then vanishes away. They that
are youngest have not a day, nor an hour in their power to reckon upon; what
then have they that are old? We may say of them, They are even past their
reckoning. A woman near her time will sometimes say, she has but a day to
reckon; and some will say, they have never a day to reckon: old men may say so,
they have not a day to reckon. Young men may dye; old men must dye: Then let
old men be much in the meditation of death, let them be often looking into
their graves; their gray hairs that do so, are found in the way of wisdom. Job
dyed, being old: There was no longer staying for him in this world. Once more,

Job dyed being old, And full of days.

There is a twofold fullness.

First, A fullness of satiety.

Secondly, A fullness of satisfaction.

They are full in a way of satiety, who loath that which they are filled with,
it is burdensome to them. They are full in a way of satisfaction, who having
enough, are pleased, and desire no more. Some expound this Text of Job, in the
former sense, he was full of days, that is, he had a fullness of satiety upon
him, he had lived so long, that his life was a burden to him, he had lived till
he was weary of living, his life was tedious and grievous to him. It is said (
Revel. 9.6.) In those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and
shall desire to dye, and death shall flee from them. That which most flee from,
some pursue, and it flees from them. None are so unfit to dye, as they who
upon the account spoken of in that Text, seek death and desire to dye. I do not
conceive, that Job was full of days in the former notion, as the stomach may be
full of meat and loath it, or be burdened with it, but as having had enough of
it, though well liked to the last morsel. And I am sure he was not full of
days, when he dyed in the latter notion, as one wearied with the troubles of
his life; for all his latter days were a blessing to him, and he blessed in
them all: His last days in this world being his best days of worldly enjoyment,
he could have no reason upon any worldly account to desire a departure out of
the world.

I grant, a good man though he has not lived many days may be full of days,
even to weariness, by reason of his temptations, corruptions, and sins; of
which kind of weariness the Apostle speaks (2 Cor. 5.2.) In this (earthly house
of the body) we grown earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house,
which is from heaven. And upon this account possibly, Job himself might be
weary of his life, and desire the death of his body, that he might be delivered
from the body of that death. But Jobs worldly life was as sweet as it was long,
he was as full of blessings as he was of days; and therefore, doubtless, he was
only satisfied with living, not tired with it: He did not loath his natural
life, nor did he hunger after a longer life in this world; he hungered after
eternity, not time: He did not hunger after a longer life, as they do who have
their portion in this life, how long soever they have lived. A worldly man is
never satisfied with living in the world; he never has his belly full of
living here, while he sees he may (as Job might) fill his belly with the good
things of this life. But as Job had lived very long, and very well on earth, so
he knew there was a better life to be had in heaven; and therefore was full of
days, both as having had many, and as having no desire after more on earth. As
he was not (which David deprecated, Psalm. 102.24.) taken away in the midst of
his days; so he was willing to come to the end of his days; and for that
reason, might well be said to dye, being old and full of days.

Secondly, These words, so Job died, being old and full of days, may note as
his willingness to dye, so the easiness of his death; he was come to a full
ripeness for death. Fruit that is fully ripe is soon gathered, and sometimes
drops off alone from the tree. Job was every way ripe for death; his body was
ripe, he was full of days; his soul was ripe, he was full of grace: surely then
his was a spontaneous death, a very sweet way of dying. His natural strength
was not much (being old) to make resistance against death; and his spiritual
strength was so much, that it caused him to make no resistance against it, or
rather at once joyfully to embrace and overcome it.

Thirdly, These words, so Job dyed being full of days, may have this spiritual
meaning; His days were full. He did not live empty days, or void, blank days;
but as he was full of days, so his days were full, full of good works and holy
duties. That man's days are empty, though he be full of days, or how many days
soever he has lived, who has lived in vanity, and done little good with his
life. But we have reason to say, Job dyed full of days, because his days were
full of good done, as well as of good received; he had not a long being only,
but a long life in the world, living to good, yea, his best in duty both to God
and man. Thus Job dyed being old, and full of days. From this latter part of
the verse,

Observe; First, When a godly man dies, he is satisfied with the time he has
lived, he has his fill of days, he craves no more.

Though no length of this life can satisfy him, yet he is satisfied with the
length of his life. A godly man in some cases may crave a little more time; He
may say, as ( Psalm. 102.24.) O take me not away in the midst of my days, and
(as elsewhere) O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength, before I go
hence, and be no more (Psalm. 39.13.) Yet this is a truth specially as to good
old men (living as Job had done) when they dye, they have had their fill of
living. A Heathen said, and he spoke it after a heathenish manner; Si mihi quis
Deus largiatur ut ex hac aetate repuerascam, and in cunis vagiam valde recusem.
Cato.
If any God would give me the privilege to be young again, and to cry in a
Craile, I would not thank him for it, I have had living enough. If a virtuous
Heathen has said so by the light of reason and morality; then, doubtless, a
godly Christian may much more say so through the power of faith and grace. It
cannot be said of all men who dye (as Job did) being old, that they in this
notion dyed (as Job did) full of days: For as some godly young men have been
fully satisfied with a few days, and have said they have lived as long as they
desired, and could say with Paul, We desire to be desolved, and to be with
Christ, which is far better ( Phil. 1.23.) Yet some old men are very much
unsatisfied with their many days; some old men would be young again: This
argues they have made but little improvement of their days, or that they have
got little, if any thing, of that all their days, which should be the study of
every day, an interest in the death of Christ, and so a readiness for a better
life. For an old man to wish himself young again, is like one who with great
labor has clamber'd up a steep hill, and wishes he were at the foot or
bottom of it again; it is as if a man, who (having been long tossed in a storm,
between rocks and sands) is got near a safe harbor, should wish himself out at
sea again. They have not a true taste, much less, a lively hope of that life
which is to come, who would return to this upon such hazardous and uneasy
terms?

Secondly, As these words note a readiness or a willingness to dye,

Observe; A good man is willing to leave this world.

He is not thrust nor forced out of it, but departs; he is not plucked off, but
falls off like ripe fruit from the tree; His soul is not required of him (as
it is said of the rich man, Luke 12.20. (...).
) but given up, and resigned by him; he is not taken, but goes out of the
world. It is said indeed ( Psalm. 57.1.) Merciful men are taken away (by Gods
commission given to death) from the evil to come; but they are not taken away
from (as being unwilling to part with, and leave) any present good. A gracious
man has usually a readiness to dye, in a twofold notion. First, As readiness
signifies preparedness; Secondly, As readiness signifies a willingness to dye:
And always the first readiness promotes the second. The more prepared any one
is to dye, the more willing he is to dye. That man can say, Lord, now let thy
servant depart in peace, whose eye of faith has seen his salvation. We (says
the Apostle, speaking of believers, 2 Cor. 5.8.) are willing to be absent from
the body, that is, to dye. And the word there used signifies not only the
freest choice, but (if I may so speak) the good will or good pleasure of man's
will, as it often signifies God's. As a godly man has a peculiar way of
living, so of dying; and the reason of both, is, because he sees blessed
eternity beyond time, and himself, by a well-grounded (that is, a Scriptural)
hope, a partaker of the blessedness of it.

Thirdly, Note; They dye full of days, who fill their days, or whose days are
full.

That is, who fill their days with or whose days are full of the fruits of
righteousness, of faith and repentance, of love and charitableness. Stephen
(Acts 6.8.) was full of faith and power. They dye full of days in old age, who,
as it is said ( Psalm. 92.14.) bring forth (such) fruit in their old age; Nulla
dies sinelinea. Apelles. Diem perdidi. Vespatian.
who dye as Dorcas (Acts 9.36.) full of good works, and almsdeeds which they
have done. It was said of a famous Painter, No day past him without drawing a
line. A Roman Emperor said, I have lost a day, when he did no good that day.
We may well reckon those days lost in which we do no good, in which we draw not
some white line, some golden line of grace and holiness. Then what account will
their days come to, who pass not a day, but they draw black lines, filthy lines
of sin and wickedness, or whose days are all blotted with the worst
abominations of the day they live in? If those days are empty and lost, wherein
we do no good, and are not made better; what then becomes of their days, and
where will they be found, but in the Devils Almanac, who do nothing but evil,
and daily become worse and worse? So then, they only dye full of days, who live
doing the will of God, and denying their own; who live mortifying corruptions,
and resisting temptations; who live exercising their graces, and answering
their duties to God and man: This, this is to live our days, and to dye full of
days.

Again, as their days are full, who are full of grace in themselves, and of
good works toward men; so are theirs who are full of the mercies and blessings
of God, especially, theirs, whose days are full of soul mercies and blessings,
whose hearts are full of peace with God, full of joy in God, full of assurance
of the glory of God. They whose days are filled with these divine enjoyments,
dye full of days, how few days soever they have lived in this world: They who
live thus, live many days in one day; they who live thus, have the taste and
first fruits of eternity every day; and therefore cannot but be satisfied with
their days, be they many or be they few.

He that dwells in the secret place of the most high (Psalm. 91.1.) that is,
who trusts fully in God for safety by Christ in this world, and for salvation
in the next, stands under the shadow and sweet influences of many promises,
mentioned in that Psalm for the preservation and prolongation of his life, in
the midst of a thousand deaths and dangers; all which are summed up in that
promise given at the 16th or last verse of the Psalm, With long life will I
satisfy him, and show him my salvation. The Hebrew is, with length of days
will I satisfy him: Which as it is true, and firstly intended in that Psalm,
of a long life here, and has in that sense been often fulfilled ^o those who
trust in God fully: God gives to such not only a present escape from death in a
time of Pestilence, but gives them long life, or their fill of living
afterward even in this world; yet that which does chiefly satisfy them, is,
that long life, of which the longest life in this world is but a shadow, and to
which it is a very nothing. What is this long life? Surely, not a life of an
hundred and forty years long, as Job's was. Job was so satisfied with the
length of his life, that he was willing to the (as has been showed) but Job
was not so satisfied with it, as to take that for his long life. Every man
would be satisfied; but what does satisfy a godly man? what does he hunger
after for satisfaction? Is it after honors? No; Is it after riches? No; Is it
after pleasures? No; Is it after many days here? No; What is it then? Nothing
can satisfy the hunger of a gracious soul, but life after this life, the long
and blesed life of eternity; and that is chiefly intended him in that promise,
With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. No length of
life can satisfy us, but as in it we have the fore-sights and fore-tasts of
everlasting life, or of that long life, which is eternal salvation: With this
Job was satisfied, with this the old Patriarchs were satisfied. It is said of
Abraham (Genesis 25.8.) He died in a good old age, an old man and full (of years).
O^ Isaac also it is said ( Genesis 35.28, 29.) He died, being old and full of
days: both had their fill of time; but that which filled them both, and that
which only can fill any, whose lives are yet measured by time, is the hope of a
blessed eternity.

I shall close the Point with an answer to this question; why no more is said
of Job, but, That he died being old and full of days, whereas in both those
places last named, concerning Abraham and Isaac, it is not only said, that they
died being old and full of days, but this is added, And were gathered to their
people. Abraham died, and was gathered to his people: Isaac dyed, and was
gathered to his people: Why is it not also said of Job, so good a man, dying
full of days, and fuller of graces, that he was gathered to his people?

I answer, Abraham and Isaac lived and died among a people, who were (as
themselves were) in Covenant with God; whereas Job lived among the Idumeans,
some affirming him to be of the posterity of Esau, others, of Abraham, by his
second wife Keturah: Now all the sons which Abraham had by her, he sent away
from Isaac his son (while he yet lived) Eastward into the East Country (Genesis
25.6.) So that it being doubtful (at least) whether the people, among whom Job
lived, were a godly people or no, and that they were not, being more probable
(as was showed, if not concluded, in opening the first verse of the first
Chapter; for this reason I say) we may suppose (for the Scripture determines
nothing in this matter) that when the death of Job was spoken of, nothing was
spoken of his being gathered to his people. So Job died being old and full of
days.

This is that Job, who was, First, A sorrowful man, yea, even a man of sorrows
(for a time among men) as some expound his name.

Secondly, A man hated (by Satan at all times) as others expound his name.

Thirdly, A man highly approved and loved of God, as appears by the testimony
which he gave of him, both first and last.

This is that Job, who was, First, Famous for the afflictions with which God
exercised and tried him to the utmost.

Secondly, More famous for his patience and constancy under those afflictions
and trials.

Thirdly, Most famous for his wonderful deliverance out of those afflictions
and trials.

This is that Job, who was, First, Famous for his riches and prosperity.

Secondly, More famous for his virtues and integrity.

Thirdly, Most famous for his victory over Satan in his deepest adversity.

This is that Job, who was, First, Reviled by his Wife.

Secondly, Reproached by his Friends.

Thirdly, Deserted by his nearest Relations, in the day of his greatest need.

This is that Job, who was, First, Unjustly accused of, charged with, censured
for, the worst of iniquities.

Secondly, Who stoutly maintained his own innocence against all those censures
and charges.

Thirdly, Who was clearly acquitted from them all, by the testimony of his own
conscience always, and by the testimony of God himself in the end.

This is that Job, who was, First, Greatly distressed by the malice of the
devil, through the permission of God.

Secondly, Mightily supported against the malice of the devil, by the power of
God, in all his distresses.

Thirdly, Fully resolved to trust in God with all his heart, though he died
under his hand, in never so great distress.

This is that Job, who, First, In the greatness of his pain, expostulated
sometimes with God over-boldly; yet,

Secondly, At the last submitted and humbled himself at the foot of God meekly.

Thirdly, Was honored as a Mediator for his mistaken friends, and accepted in
it by God graciously.

Once more, This is that Job, who, First, After his restoring, was filled with
the blessings of this life.

Secondly, Lived long, even to fullness of days, in the full enjoyment of those
blessings.

Thirdly, Died peaceably, and passed sweetly into the enjoyment of a better, of
a longer, even an eternal life.

Thus I am come to the end of Job, and to the end of the Book of Job; yet
before I end let me leave these five words, as so many Uses of the whole Book
of Job.

First, While you live in this world, live in the expectation of, and
preparation for changes: Job met with them, and who may not?

Secondly, Be patient under all the troublesome changes which you meet with in
this world: Job is your pattern.

Thirdly, Never measure the heart of God toward you, by his hand upon you;
judge not of your spiritual estate, by what appears in your temporal. That was
the grand mistake of Jobs friends, and it was his honor to withstand them in
it, and to stand fast to his integrity, in the lowest fall of his estate in
this world.

Fourthly, Whatever God does to you, or with you, submit freely to him: So did
Job at first.

Fifthly, and lastly, How low soever you are brought, yet hope for a good
issue, possibly, in this life, assuredly in that life which is to come. Job
found both at last.

To close all, There are examples of two sorts recorded in the holy Scriptures.
First, for caution, To the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they
also lusted. Secondly, for imitation, To the intent we should do good things,
which they al^o did; and suffer evil things, with the same mind, and in the
same manner, as they likewise suffered. Holy Job may be to us an example of
caution in some things, for even he had (and who has not) his failings: He
al^o may be an example in many things, how both to do good, and suffer evil.
And among all imitable examples (except that of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom
in some respects, Job may be called a type, and the things which happened to him
in his sufferings, may be called (as the Apostle uses the word in another
case, 1 Cor. 10.11.) types of what happened to Christ in his; I say, among all
imitable examples, except his) this of Job is one of the most emi^^nt in doing,
and the most eminent of all in suffering. Let him therefore be our pattern to
do and suffer by, our copy in both to write by, our mirror or looking-glass to
observe the discomposures, and compose the features and motions, both of our
outward and inward man by; let us admire and follow his unspotted integrity in
morals, his servent zeal about spirituals, his unshaken faith, and hope for
eternals; let us admire and follow his moderation in a high estate, his
contentation in a low estate, his stedfastness with, and for God, in every
estate.

He that stays in the bare speculation of what is written by inspiration from
God in the Text, or of what is written through the help of God, by the study of
man in the Exposition of this Book, is like unto a man, beholding his natural
face in a glass ('it is the Apostle James his comparison, in the first Chapter of
his Epistle to the scattered Tribes) for he beholds himself, and goes his
way, and straightway forgets what manner of man he was, that is, he forgets
his own spots and defects, and suffers them to increase to more ungodliness:
But he that reduces or brings down his speculation to action at all times, and
to a preparation for suffering, and free s^bmission to the will of God, without
any hard thoughts of God, in hard times, and so conforming himself to what he
sees in this glass, continues in it; this man shall be blessed (as Job was,
though not in the same manner as Job was) both in doing and suffering; and
after he has suffered a while, shall be perfected and lifted up far above the
reach of suffering, and (which is far better) above the fear of sinning any
more for ever.

FINIS.
A TABLE Directing to some special Points noted in the precedent EXPOSITIONS.
A
ABhorring, what it imports, 829. Five effects of abhorring sinful self. 837.
four things cause an abhorrence of sinful self. 837. Two motives to
self-abhorrence. 840. Abortive, what. 248. In what sense the Apostle Paul calls
himself an Abortive, or one born out of due time. 248 Acceptance with God in
any service; two things required to it. 886. God accepts the persons of some,
yet is no accepter of persons. 895. It is a high privilege to be accepted with
God. 896. A twofold acceptance with God. 897. Three things show why it is a
great mercy to be accepted with God, and we should be so fearful of losing
acceptance with him. 898. Some godly men are more accepted, than others that
are godly. 899. Among godly men, four sorts are most accepted. 900. Seven acts
of a godly man, or ways of acting, very acceptable to God. 901. God accepts
some godly men for others. 902. To be accepted with God, is a full reward for
all our services, and an answer to all our prayers. 925. All our acceptance is
by Christ. 926 Account, vid. Judgment. Actions, good or bad, like seed sown.
379 Adonai, one of Gods Titles, the d^rivation of it, and how often given to
God in Scripture. 69 Aineas, why called Matutinus, or a morning man. 77
Affliction, like cold and frost, in four respects. 232 No unloosing our selves
from affliction, till God does it. 244, 245. Affliction increases knowledge.
794. God usually reveals himself much to us after great afflictions or
sufferi^gs. 827. In affliction friends are apt to forsake us. 959. Three things
may comfort us in affliction. 986. In affl^ction, grace is not only tried, but
increased. 995 Ah, ha, or Ha, ha, what it imports in the speaker. 459, 460
Alms, like seed sown. 379 Anchorers, see Hermites. Angels, how called Stars.
81. and morning stars, 82. Angels, how and why called sons of God. 83, 84.
Three things considerable in the Angels. 84. Angels are of one mind. 86
Answering, how taken in Scripture. 8. Two kinds of answering. 507. Answering in
Logic three ways. 508. Answering in Law, how. 508. Where God is opponent, no
man can answer. 520 Antelunares, why so called. 44 Apostasy of Angels. 88
Appetite, strong in young ones. 285 Arabia, why so called. 333 Archimedes, his
boast. 51 Arcturus, what. 249 Aristotle, why he cast himself into the Sea. 151
Arm notes strength. 140, 547. Arm of God, what. 547. Arm of God, spoken of in
Scripture for a fourfold use. 548 Arms or weapons, of two sorts. 761 Arnoldus
Bootius, his opinion about the beast commonly called the Unicorn. 348, 349
Arrows, why called children of the bow. 763 Ass, wild Ass, how said to be set
free, and loosed from bands. 326, 327 Assurance of what we would have, breeds
great joy. 459 Athanasius his Prophetical answer to those who jeered him with
the croaking of a Raven over his head. 296
B
Barrenness of any Land, whence. 335 Barren places have their use. 335 Beasts,
some beasts have a kind of willingness to serve man. 359. That any of the
beasts will not serve man, is to be ascribed to the sin of man, as the
procuring cause. 360, 361. Those beasts which will not serve man, have yet
their use, showed in three things. 362. Labor of beasts very profitable to
man. 377. Among beasts, some wiser than others; what their wisdom is. 414, 415.
A shame for man to be excelled in any good, by beasts. 631 Beauty, what. 570.
Two sorts of beauty. 1008. Beauty a gift of God. 1009. Three considerations
should keep them humble, who are most beautiful. 1009. Inward beauty most
desirable. 1010 Beginning, taken two ways. 623 Behemoth, described six ways,
606, 607. Behemoth may signify all the beasts of the field. 609. Why, though a
word of the plural number, applicable to one. 609. Behemoth, how the chief of
the ways of God. 624 Beholding of things or persons, twofold. 577 Believers,
why called the first fruits of Gods creatures. 221. A believer mounts high like
the Eagle, especially in two things. 478. Believers do not only mount high, but
abide on high. 480 Belief, that which is much desired, in some cases is hardly
believed. 454. Why the same word signifies to stand fast or steady, and to
believe. 456. Birth, new birth, three things in it. 322 Blessing, two ways of
blessing one. 977. The blessing of God effectual for the good of man. 978.
Seven characters of those whom the Lord will bless. 979, 980. They who are
blessed, are also loved of God. 981. Three things whence it is that many mind
not a blessing from God. 982. All successes are not from the blessing of God.
984. Temporal things are blessings, but spiritual things are the best
blessings. 989. How we may know when temporal things are a blessing, and come
to us in love. 990 Bochartus, his opinion, that Behemoth is not the Elephant,
but Hippopotame. 611, 612. Borrowing, fear not to lose what God borrows of us.
951 Brethren and sisters, two ways taken Scripture. 956 Building, two things
most considerable in it, both eminent in Gods building, the World. 59
C
Canutus his answer to his flattering Courtiers. 110 Captivity, how taken in
Scripture. 931 Any affliction is a kind of captivity. 932 Care to be cast upon
God. 177. Care of God over the beasts of the earth, and fowls of the air,
should convince man that God will take care of him. 279, 288. Care of God to
provide for the vilest creatures. 296. Care of God for his p ople seen in two
things. 643 Carefulness what to be avoided. 746 Carnal men judge of God by
themselves. 834 Causes, natural causes produce natural effects, and so do
spiritual causes spiritual effects. 214 Charity, a great trial of it. 880
Children, not to charge their parents, when able to help themselves. 324. They
who excel in any thing are elegantly called the children of it. 781 Children a
great blessing. 993. Parents duty in naming them. See names, how it is a
blessing to have many children. 1023. Good children a great joy. 1024 Christ
his eternity. 45. He is the cornerstone. 69, 70. Christ a light for two great
ends. 122. Christ compared to a Lion in four respects. 283. Christ resembled by
the Hind in three things. 312. Why Christ is called a horn of salvation. 381.
Christ like the Eagle showed in seven things. 489, 490. Christ a relief against
all evil. 648. Christ the best friend. 958 Church, a vain thing to oppose it.
685 Church set out by Christ in her spiritual excellencies. 721. God terrible
in the Church. 729 Clothed, to be clothed with any thing what it imports.
428, 429 Cloud, how a garment to the sea. 101. Clouds called the Arcenal of
heaven, why. 192. The wisest men can neither tell how many the clouds are, nor
fully what they are. 272 Cock, why crows at Midnight. 254. He is a natural
clock. 270 Cold, whether natural or spiritual, is a great binder. 243
Comforting the sorrowful a great duty. 967 Six cases which call us to comfort
others, together with so many ways of ministering comfort to them. 968. Four
considerations moving to this duty. 969 Command of God creating. 114, 115
Comeliness, it consists in three things. 717 Company, no company pleases,
but such as is suitable. 340 Compulsion grievous to beasts, much more to men.
341 Condemnation of self, what good. 545 Confession of sin, when right. 525
Contending, of two sorts. 497. How man contendeth with the word, how with the
works of God. 497, 498. There is a spirit in weak man, ready to contend with
the strong God. 499. In two cases we are apt to contend with God about his
works. 501. Four considerations moving us to beware of all contendings with
God. 502, 503. In what way we may contend with God. 503, 504. They who contend
with God would seem wiser than he. 505 Conversion, why so difficult a work. 360
Covenant, Hebrew word notes two things, and why. 670 Counsel, what it is. 25.
The word counsel, put absolutely or alone, notes Gods counsel. 25 Counsel of
God may soon be darkened by us. 30. Some do it intentionally, the greatness of
their sin. 30, 31 Courage, where God gives courage man cannot make afraid. 438.
True courage fears not present danger. 449 Craft, Some creatures full of it.
292. What some cannot do by strength they do by craft. 292, 293 Creation, that
work calls us to praise God. 89. Four things in creation move us to praise God.
90 Creatures, God can make any of them hurtful to us. 188. Two things show the
power of God in the creature. 189. Several degrees of excellency in the
creatures. 625. An inference from it. 626. God can easily subdue the strongest
creatures. 638. Two inferences from it. 638, 639. God to be magnified in the
qualities, and quantity, or bigness of his creatures. 663. All creatures made
serviceable to man. 672. Some creatures terrible to man. 690. An inference from
it. 690. God pleased in setting forth the natural excellencies of his
creatures. 718. The excellencies of the creature show the excellency of God.
722. God would have man know the excellencies of the creature. 723 Crocodile,
not tongueless. 662
D
Danger, to leave any thing in danger, and not provide against it, is great
folly. 402. Dangers put all creatures to their utmost shifts. 419. They who
think themselves out of danger despise danger. 420. Danger is the Element of
courage. 446. It is best not to do or quickly give over doing that which is
dangerous. 680. They are cruel to themselves, who run upon danger unadvisedly.
692. Great dangers may make the stoutest afraid. 753. Great dangers put bad men
upon repentance. 758 Darkness, what. 166 Day of Judgment like to be a terrible
day. 18. It will be a discovering day. 125. Days, when and whose days may be
said to be full. 1029, 1031.
Daylight never rises two days together exactly in the same place. 126 Death,
the Gates of it, what. 151, 152, 154. No man knows how or in what manner he
shall dye. 155. Death takes all, and that upon a twofold ground. 1025. Four
cautions from it. 1025. A good man willing to dye. 1031 Deering, his discourse
upon his deathbed. 168 Deliverance, out of trouble is Gods work. 933. He can
soon work it. 934 Demanding, of two sorts. 818 Desire, what we most desire, we
would fain be at. 441, 444, 457 Devil in bonds always. 111. Devil like the
Hawk. 473. With what weapons we may prevail against him. 766 Dew how caused.
222. Two things considerable in the falling of the dew. 222. God the Father of
it. 223. The great benefit of dew. 223, 224. A threefold allusion of the dew.
226 Disdain or despising, who most apt to do it. 780 Disposition, twofold. 717
Divisions among good men very bad. 736 Don, the Spanish word for a Lord, whence
derived. 68 Double, what it signifies in Scripture. 948 Drinking much in bruits
is from their constitution, not from their lusts. 653 Duty, God would have us
do our best in every duty. 38. Two things needful to it. 38. Better do duty
late than not at all. 961 Dwellings appointed by God to every creature, suitable
to his nature. 334
E
Eagle; what the Hebrew word imports. 474. Exceeds any Hawk in three things.
475. Two reasons why the Eagle mounts so high. 476. F^ur reasons why she makes
her nest on high. 480. What food she most delights in. 484. The quickness of
the Eagles eyesight. 485. How she tries her young ones. 486. Eagles presage,
or smell a battle long before. 488. The similitude between the Eagle and Christ
in seven particulars. 489, 490. The similitude between an Eagle and a true
Christian, ^pened in seven things. 491. Two wings of a greet Eagle, are said to
be given the Church. 493 Earth, how immovable, 51, 52. The earths foundations.
47, 52, God the maker of the earth, five inferences from it. 53, 54. Three
things in the making of the earth, should stir us up to praise God. 56, 57. The
form and firmness of the earth, set forth four ways. 59, 60. Measures of the
earth, different opinions about it. 61, 62. Five things admirable in the frame
of the earth. 65. Inferences from it to thankfulness, and an exact frame of
life on this earth, so exactly framed for us. 66, 67. What are the garments or
clothing of the earth. 137. Breadth of the earth. 157, 158. Two inferences from
the greatness of the earth. 158 Eastwind, much under the dominion of the Sun.
199, 200 Egypt why not looking to heaven for rain. 207 Election, of free grace,
not of foreseen works. 702 Elements, their natural order. 98 Elephant, the
manner of his eating grass described. 618. Twelve things for which the Elephant
is eminent above other beasts. 627, 628. Four inferences from it. 630 Increase
in the field, five things needful to produce it. 378 Enemy, no wisdom in
provoking one too strong for us. 691 Enemies, to be prayed for, and how. 941
Entreaty, the strong will not use entreaties. 669 Equinox, when. 127 Error,
wise and good men may err. 869 Eternity; three sorts of beings. 49. God only
absolutely eternal. 49. Eternity what. 50 Exacters of two sorts. 339, 340
Examples of two sorts recorded in Scripture. 1036 Experience; experimental
knowledge best. 793 Eye, has a great force upon the heart in three things.
688, 689. The Eye called the light of the body in two respects. 740
F
Face, binding of it in secret, what. 590 Failings, God overlooks them in his
upright servants. 178 Faith, the only way of understanding the worlds creation.
51. Faith is the eye of the soul. 689. Only faith keeps down the prevailings of
fear. 756. All must be done in a twofold faith. 918. Faith and repentance must
go together. 943 Fault, God will not charge any man beyond his fault. 33
Favorites; God shows favor to all good men, yet some only are his favorites.
891 Fear, of two sorts. 411. A due fear puts us upon the use of means for the
^reservation of our selves and others. 412. Fear put for the thing feared. 445.
That which is not feared is usually derided, 447. Fear, what it is. 733. Fear
disturbs reason. 755, 756. The less natural fear, the more perfection. 777
Feasting, moderate, lawful. 963. Seven cautions about it. 663 Feathers; goodly
feathers the gift of God to birds. 387. Three inferences from it. 388. All
birds are not of a feather. 389 Folly; sin is folly, showed four ways. 906, 907
Food, God gives food to all creatures convenient to their nature. 342, 641,
642. Forgetfulness, we may be said to forget that which we never had, as well
as that which once we had. 413 Forgiveness, God is ready to forgive. 882. We
should be ready to forgive one another. 887, 888 Foundation of a building four
Attributes of it. 46. What the foundations of the earth are. 47. Why the earth
is said to have foundations. 47. What the foundations of the earth are, showed
further. 52. A different word in the Hebrew signifying a foundation. 68.
Acclamations used at the laying of the foundation of great buildings. 74
Freedom, some creatures are free from, others bound to service by Gods
appointment. 328. Inference from it. 328. To be free from labor and service is
but a low privilege. 329. To desire freedom from duty and service is very
sinful. 330. A mercy to be free from three yoakes or bonds. 331. To be free to
serve is better than to be free from service. 332. To be forced is grievous.
341 Friends, their loss a great loss. 957. In times of affl^ction, worldly
friends will leave us, and godly friends may prove unkind to us. 957. Two
inferences from it. 958. Friends should be friendly. 961 Frost and Ice from
God. 228. Frost compared to ashes in three respects. 228. The force of frost.
229, 230. A twofold resemblance of frost and ice. 231, 232 Fruitfulness, how
the Wilderness will witness against unfruitful professors. 215. What spiritual
good fruits are. 215, 216 Fullness of two sorts. 1028
G
Garment natural, what. 725. Every creature has some kind of garment or other.
726. Christ and his graces the best garment. 726 Gates of death, what. vid.
death. Gifts or endowments; God gives not all to any one creature and why. 421
Gifts or presents, a duty to send them in some cases. 973. Six sorts of gifts
lawful, a seventh utterly unlawful. 973 Glory, that which any creature e^cels
in is his glory. 440, 567, 569. Glory of God twofold. 568 Goats, the
signification of the word both in the Hebrew and Latin. 307. Seven things
wherein wild goats resemble a godly man. 308, 309 God is present with his in
troblous dispensations. 20. The outward appearances of God very terrible, when
he intends nothing but mercy. 20 21. God is the first being. 49. God an eternal
being. 49. God is the fountain of all being. 50. None like God. 54. God the
proprietor and possessor of all things; Inferences from it. 55. All creatures
are at the command of God. 262. Contendings with God. See contending. God has
terrible ways of revealing himself. 530. God has a mighty power. 547. A
threefold gradation in expressing it. 547, 548. God is full of majesty,
beauty, and glory. 570. Inferences from it. 571. 573. God terrible to sinners,
690. No standing before God four ways. 694, 695. God is in no man's debt. 698.
God self-sufficient. 700. All things are his by a fourfold title. 705. The
excellencies of God must not be concealed. 722. God terrible. 728, 729 God is
good at any work that is good. 795. God is omnipotent. 796. God has right to
do whatsoever he does. 799. Not a thought of his can be disappointed. 800. Two
inferences from it. 802. How God may be seen showed four ways. 824 Godly man,
like the Hind in five things. 313, 314. The latter end of a godly man best. 985
Goodness of God, two things she^^ 882 Gospel, where it comes makes a great
change. 136, 137. Gospel-rain sent upon the Heathen, who are as a wilderness.
210. Why God takes away the rain of the Gospel from any place. 214. The Gospel
only gives both liberty and ability to repent of sin. 842 Grace, called glory.
568 Grace preventing; God is aforehand with us. 699. Grace received may
occasion pride. 734. Increase in grace, is the best increase. 995 Grass-hopper
his motion. 436. What the Hebrew word for a Grasshopper signifies, and why. 437
Great things cannot ordinarily be done by small means; God can. 665
H
Hail, what it is, 180. God has store of hail and snow. 180. Hail and snow
used by God, as his artillery, to fight against evil men. 190. Five Inferences
from it. 192, 193 Happiness of eternal life made up of three things. 161 Hard
dealing; they that deal hardly with others, are hardened against them. 406. They
are very hard-hearted, who deal hardly with those that are young and tender.
407. To be hard to near relations, is very unnatural. 408 Hardened sinner, how
like Leviathan. 767 Hardship, good for Christians to inure themselves to it.
769 Harmony, or music in the motion of the heavens, what. 273, 274 Harrow
spiritual, twofold. 368 Hawk, what the Hebrew word signifies. 468. Hawks fly
swiftly long. 468. The Hawk has her skill in flying from God. 470. Sun
represented by the Hawk. 472. A twofold resemblance of the Hawk. 473, 474
Health, twofold. 683 Heart hard power of God in softning it. 230. Why the same
word in Hebrew signifies the heart, and a Picture, as also a Cock. 270 Heart,
the flesh of it, harder than the flesh of any other part of the body. 751.
Hardness of heart, threefold. 751 Heaven, Ordinances of heaven of two sorts.
251. What Laws or Ordinances the heavens give the earth. 251. The heavens under
a Law, in three respects. 252. The Ordinances of heaven are a secret to man.
252. Inference from it. 253. What the dominion of heaven is in the earth. 253,
254. Opinion of some Astronomers about the dominion of the heavens. 255, 256.
Caution about this. 256, 257 Heaven, why called a City. 339 Heliogabalus, a
chief dish at one of his great suppers. 414 Heliotrope, a flower, why so
called. 254 Hermites, their way of life not approvable. 336. Two cases wherein
we may desire solitude. 336 Hind, what the Hebrew word signifies. 311. A
twofold allusion of the Hind. 312. How the number of their months is a secret.
317. Hindes have sore pain in bringing forth their young. 320, 321. The help
she has in that condition. 321. Inference from it, with respect to women in
travel. 322 Hope in vain, three ways. 682. Hope puts us upon action. 684. It
is vain to act, when we see no hope of success. 685. Two Inferences from it.
685. Lost hope is the greatest loss. 686 Horse, six sorts of Horses. 423. The
strength of a horse Gods gift. 424. The goodness of God in making so strong a
creature serviceable to man. 425. Five Inferences from the strength of the
horse. 425, 426. man very apt to trust in horses. 427. What meant by thunder,
with which his neck is said to be clothed. 429, 430. The horse in his rage is
terrible. 434. How the motion of a horse may be compared to that of a
Grasshopper. 436. Horse a valiant beast. 438. The Horse, how an emblem of a bold
and hardened sinner. 463. How the Horse is an emblem of a bold Saint or servant
of God. 464 Humble, A s^ul truly humbled and made sensible of sin, will do any
thing at the command of God. 920 921 Humility, the better we are, the lower
thoughts we have of our selves. 516. The dealings of God with man, aim much at
the humbling of him. 517. God shows most favor where he sees most humility.
519. Two things humble us. 835. A great trial of humility, what. 880 Hunger
makes industrious. 343, 484. Hunger after the Word, when sad. 485 Hypocrite,
like the Ostrich, in five particulars. 395, 396
I
Jackal, a little beast, that is said to hunt the prey for the Lion. 280 Ice,
see frost. Idolatry of the Jews, why worse than the idolatry of the Gentiles.
569 Jehovah, what it signifies, and why the Lord repeated himself to Job by
that name, in the latter part of this Book. 7, 8. Ignorance, our ignorances are
to be bewailed and confessed before God. 814 Impatience flows from ignorance.
811 Impunity present, no assurance of future indemnity. 186 Intercession of
Christ ever prevailing for us. 945, 946 Isaiah the Prophet, how and why put to
death. 823 Issue of actions to be remembered before we act. 679 Judge, two parts
of a Judges office. 868 Judgment, God will bring every one to a reckoning. 28.
Judgement-day will bring all things to light. 125. Judgment of God, why his
providential dealings are so called. 539. It is impossible to stop or reverse
the judgment of God. 539, 540. When we do not submit to the judgment of God,
we may be said to reverse it. 541. Man's pleas for his dissatisfaction with the
judgment of God. 541, 542 Justice, to be done speedily. 134 Justify, he that
is much in justifying himself under the afflicting hand of God, seems to
condemn God. 544. We should justify God in all things. 544, 545
K
Kings, resembled by the Lion in five things. 282 Knowledge, we know not the
all of any thing, or any thing fully. 159, 160. Perfect knowledge our happiness
in the next life. 161. How knowledge is said to vanish in the next life. 161,
162. Man by reason of his short life has little knowledge, 175. God has given
irrational creatures a knowledge of what is best for their own preservation.
472. God has not concealed the knowledge of himself, and of his will, from
man. 724. Knowledge, opp^sed not only to ignorance, but to lesser degrees of
knowledge. 791. Knowledge, a growing thing. 792. A twofold increase in
knowledge. 792. Experimental knowledge best. 793. Afflictions a means to
increase knowledge. 794. It Is a good degree of knowledge to confess we know
little. 815. O^r profiting in knowledge is according to the measure of Gods
revealing himself to us. 827. Knowledge of our selves humbles us. 834
L
Labor, food not to be had without labor. 366. Labor taken two ways in
Scripture. 373. Labor in vain, what and when. 410, 412 Laughing at any thing,
shows we slight it or fear it not. 765 Leviathan, what the word signifies. 668.
What Leviathan is. 668. Leviathans greatness. 664. None upon earth like him in
two things. 775. His pride. 781 Liberty. See Freedom. Liberty better than
plenty. 341 Life of man, shortness of it. 46. Man's life nothing comparatively.
48. Life short. 176. Two things as to our life, should humble us. 176. Long
life a blessing. 1017. Why they before the Flood lived so long. 1018. Six
considerations, showing, that long life is a blessing. 1018. Long life in
prosperity is a great blessing. 1020 Light, God the Author of it. 118. Light
wonderful, in five respects. 119, 120. What light is, hard to say. 120. Light,
how useful. 121. Light, how comfortable. 122. Eight Inferences from it. 122,
123. Light of the Gospel, how great a mercy. 125. Light swift, presently
spreads it self all over the face of the earth. 130, 131. Wicked men hate
light. 133. Light discovers. 133, 134. Light, how it makes a change in things.
136 Light, where it dwells, how answered by Geogra^hers, how by Astronomers.
164. Light and darkness have their bound, their appointed places. 167. What is
the place of spiritual light and darkness. 167, 168. Light and darkness,
whether natural or figurative, are at Gods dispose. 169, 170. The work of God
in ordering light and darkness is wonderful, showed several ways. 171, 172.
Four things considerable in the light. 196. Light, how parted. 197, 198. God
dispenceth light where he pleases. 198 Lightning at the command of God. 262
Limbus patrum, what. 152 Line, what the stretching of it forth signifies in
Scripture, showed in four things. 62, 63 Lion, he bears four resembla^ces in
Scripture. 282, 283. Lion is greedy of prey. 286. God provides prey for Lions.
287. Two Inferences from it. 288, 289 Locusts, why so called. 437 Love, it
arises from likeness. 301. Love, all duty must be done in love to God and man.
918, 919 Loins, girding of them, what it imports. 34. A fourfold use of girding
the loins. 34, 35 Lurdane, who, and why so called. 36^ Lusts of sinners stick
close together like Leviathans scales. 736
M
Majesty proper to Kings. 567. God is full of majesty. 570. What that should
work in man. 571, 573. The majesty of God is from himself; man's from God. 574.
Majesty of man little to Gods. 575 Maker, God loves to be owned as a Maker. 633
Man, to do a thing like a man, what it signifies. 36. Man is vile, and how.
See Vile. Masters, of two sorts. 16 Mazaroth, what. 247 Meats, several
forbidden the Jews, and why. 467, 468 Meekness in dealing with others, an
imitation of God. 872 Merchants in Hebrew called Canaanites, and why. 675 Mercy
prevails with sinners, more than wrath. 922 Mists always accompanied with
calms, why. 103 Money, why expressed in the Hebrew, by a word which signifies a
Lamb or Sheep. 971 Months, measured by the Moon or Sun, their difference. 316
Moon, the power of it upon earthly things. 254 Morning, God should have morning
or early praises and services. 88. Morning light, why the clearest light is
expressed by it, seeing noon light is clearer. 741 Mother-Father, by whom God
was so called, and why. 227 Mouth, what meant by laying the hand upon it. 521
Muscovia, the sudden change there in the Spring. 232 Musculus, a little fish,
the Whales guide. 676
N
Names, it is a duty to give names to our children. 999. Parents do well, when
they give names to their children, which may mind them of the providence of God
to them. 1003. It is good to give names exciting to duty and virtue. 1005
Nature, course of nature keeps time constantly. 117. Nature is content with a
little. 335, 336. It is hard to change nature. 360 Neck, stiff-neck, what it
signifies in Scripture. 745 Neesing, what, and how caused. 739. Neesing a good
sign of two things. 739
Neighing of a Horse, like thunder. 432 New Birth, see Birth.
O
Obedience, we should yield ready obedience to all the commands of God. 263.
Full and complete obedience, what. 913. We must obey without disputes or
delays, when God commands. 915. The manner, as well as the matter of obedience,
what, 918 Occasion, we should be watchful over that which has been an occasion
or instrument of sin. 521 Oecolampadius his dying speech about light. 168 Old
age when a blessing. 1019. Old age usually accompanied with many infirmities.
1021. God can make old age comfortable. 1021. Old age and death cannot be far
asunder. 1027. Some old men would be young again. 1030 Omnipotency of God, or
that he can do all things, how to be understood. 790. Gods omnipotency limited
by his will. Inference from it. 796. That God can do whatsoever he wills, a
twofold use of it. 797 Opportunity, a gate for action. 457 Orion, the nature
of that constellation. 241, 242 Ornaments and Jewels may be worn. 974. Four
cautions about wearing them. 974 Ostrich five ways described. 385. Ostrich why
expressed by a word which signifies a feather. 393. The eve^ness of her
feathers the emblem of justice. 395. The Ostrich resembles a hypocrite in five
things. 395, 396. That the Ostrich, a foolish bird, has such fine feathers,
three inferences from it. 398. Her eggs great and useful, yet she careless of
them. 400. Some give two reasons why she leaves her eggs in the dust, which
agree not to the text. 401. Her eggs many. 405. How she is hardened against, and
hardneth her young ones. 405. The Ostrich, how said to be without fear, though
a very fearful creature. 411. Ostrich has little brain, and is very deaf. 414,
415. Her swiftness in running, a Proverb. 419
P
Pagan may deny Christ, but cannot deny a God. 722 Pain and sorrow in the
creatures bringing forth young an effect of sin. 320 Pambo his confession about
keeping the tongue. 521 Patience of God. 185. Patience and quietness in every
condition, why. 170, 171. Peace; hasten to make peace with God. 194 Peacock,
beautiful and proud. 386. what the Hebrew word signifies. 387. Proud men like
the Peacock showed in six things. 391, 392 Pegasus, what. 423 Pity, should be
showed to the afflicted. 965 Place, a twofold place of every man decreed. 104.
Good for all to keep their places. 104, 105, 127 Play, A playing life, the life
of a beast. 644 Pleasure, God gives man some creatures for pleasure. 470. Some
displease God most when they are taking their pleasure, especially Falc^ners.
470 Pleiades, what. 236. Their sweet influence, what. 237 Pliny, his complaint
of intemperance and luxury. 183 Plowing before sowing, both in a natural and
spiritual sense. 367 Power of God mighty. 547. How far God shows or puts
forth his power. 550. Inferences from it. 552. The power of man is nothing to
the power of God. 554. Power of man not to be trusted for any good it can do
us, nor feared for any hurt it can do us. 555, 556. Power of God to be much
meditated upon in two cases. 557. Power, twofold. 717 Praise due to God for the
work of creation upon several accounts, 56, 57. Liveless creatures praise God
four ways. 79. Then men should much more. 80. God should be praised at the
first appearance of any great work. 88. Praise, angelical work. 89 Prayer
obtains rain. 260. We may pray for all that God has promised. 551. God gives
beyond our prayers. 551. The power of God should encourage us in prayer. 553.
Sense of wants, puts us upon prayer. 819. Prayer prevails much with God, not
only for our selves, but for others. 890. Prayers of others may prevail with
God for us, when our own cannot. 891. Prayers of good me; for us a great mercy.
892. How prayer for another does not profit, unless he be good. 893, 894.
Prayers of good men, though over-bold, yet graciously answered. 9. Necessity
puts mere Nature upon prayer. 302. If we would have, we must ask of, and pray
to God. 303. Prayer, what it is. 936. A godly man ready to pray for others, and
prays sometimes more for others than for himself. 937. Uneven walkings hinder
prayer in a twofold respect. 937, 938. Prayer for unkind friends, yea, for
enemies, a duty, and very pleasing to God. 938, 939, 941. What and whose prayer
pleasing to God. 942. Seven things in prayer make it so pleasing to God. 943
Preparation to duty needful, especially to great duties. 37, 536 Preservation;
God has given all creatures means to preserve themselves. 635 Pride; fine
feathers make proud birds, and men too. 390. See, Peacock. Much pride in the
heart of man. 506. Pride a very provoking sin, showed four ways. 585, 586. What
any one is proud of, may be called his pride. 731. There is a kind of pride in
bruites. 733. Great seize and enjoyments occasion pride. 733 P iestly
Office, two parts of it. 888 remises made by God shall surely be performed.
924. Promises of two sorts. 925 Proprietor, God is so of all things in the
world, by a fourfold title. 705. Thirteen inferences from it. 706, 707, 708
Prosperity of bad men should not offend good men. 398 Proud men, how Gods eye
upon them. 579. God casts down the proud. 579, 580. God can easily do it. 581.
Inferences from it. 582. Who may be called proud. 582, 583. Proud ones, why not
to be feared nor envied. 584, 585. What proud ones do. 585. Proud and wicked
the same. 588, 590. The true knowledge of God, and of our selves, will keep
down pride. 835 Providence of God governs all. 53. We should rest in his
disposal of things. 53. Providence of God cannot be altered by man. 214.
Providence extended to meanest creatures. 302, 314. Providence preserves that
which is left in danger. 403. Providence shall at last appear spotless. 505.
Providential works of God beautiful and orderly. 72 Purgatory, what. 152
Pythagoreans opinion of Music made by the motion of the heavens. 273
Q
Questions, which in Scripture signify rebuke and contempt. 22, 23. These
questions, what is man? and who art thou? what they import in Scripture. 29
R
Rain ordered and distributed by God. 203, 204. Rain sent to places
uninhabited. 206. And why. 207. God has rain enough in store for all places.
213. Who the father of rain? four reasons why God propounded that question to
Job. 217. God alone is the father of the rain. 218, 219. Four inferences from
it. 220, 221. Rain got by prayer. 260. God only stays the clouds from
raining. 274. He knows when the earth has had rain enough. 277 Ravens, why the
killing of them near Cities is prohibited. 294. The signification of Hebrew and
Greek words. 295. The raven provided for by God. 296. How their young ones cry
to God, showed three ways. 299. Whence it is that old ravens neglect to feed
their young ones. 300 Reason, man's natural reason is the gift of God. 267
Reconciliation to those whom we have wronged, necessary. 886. What we must do
for our reconciliation to God and man. 920 Rejoicing at the good of others very
good. 91. We are apt to rejoice in that wherein we excel. 443. We should
rejoice in nothing but God. 443. Relations; when nearest natural relations
leave us, God will not. 304. Not to take care of relations, how unnatural. 408,
409 Repentance, see sin. Bad men think of repentance in eminent dangers. 758.
it is a duty to repent in times of danger. 759. Repentance or repenting why
expressed in the Hebrew by a word signifying both grief and joy. 830, 831.
Repentance has a twofold change in it. 831. Repenting in dust and ashes, what
it implies. 832. True repentance is joined with self-abhorrence. 835. Five
inferences from it. 839. What repentance is, opened and described in four
things. 841. 842. New sins call for new repentings. 845. Open sins must have
open repentance. 847. True repentance ends in joy three ways. 849. Repentance
in God what. 929 Reproving implies two things. 507. There are two sorts of
reproving commendable, and a duty. 508. Reproof not to be deferred. 855 Reward,
of wrath. 950 Rewarder, God is a bountiful rewarder of his servants. 949. He
rewards both for doing and suffering. 958. Inferences from it. 951 Rhinoceros,
what kind of beast. 346. Two things noted of him. 347 Rhodians, how they
honored the Sun, and why. 123 Riches, why said to make themselves wings like
an Eagle. 475 Righteousness, no standing before God in our own righteousness.
695. How our righteousness is to be abhorred. 836. Why a repenting person
abhors it. 838
S
Sacrifice must be offered by a Priest. 881. Sacrifices for sin were appointed
by God, not devised by man, 883. Every sin must have a sacrifice. 884. Why the
sacrifice was called sin. 884. Why seven bullocks, etc. Sometime commanded for
sacrifice. 885 Safety to be sought on high* 419. Nature teaches us to provide
for it. 482 Salt land, the same with barren land in Scripture. 333 Salvation,
neither corporal nor spiritual by man. 598. God can save alone. 599. Three
inferences from it. 600. To save by a self-power the sole prerogative of God.
601. To imagine that we can save our selves, how sinful, showed in four things.
601, 602. Satisfaction, what it is. 211 Scriptures have dark places in them,
yet are not dark. 30 Sea, a twofold restraint of it. 93. Two sorts of
sea-doo^s. 96. What the womb is out of which the sea brake. 96. Sea, how it
resembles God in four things. 99. The world, in three things. 99. 100. The
heart of man in three things. 100. God rules the sea as easily as a Nurse the
Child. 102. The Lord has made a place for the sea. 104. Doors and bars of the
sea, what. 10^. The sea left to it self would overflow all. 107. God only
keeps the sea in compass. 108, 109. Infere^ces from it. 110. A fivefold
metaphorical sea, to which the Lord puts bounds. The sea exceeding deep. 148.
The sea an embleam of obscure and hidden things. 149. Three wonders in the fish
of the sea. 664 Season, the Lord appears in the fittest season. 6. We should do
all in season. 248, 855 Secrets, nothing a secret to God. 149. Secrets, some,
man must not search into. 156 Seed taken two ways. 376 Self-sufficiency of God.
700. Comfort and instruction flowing from it. 701, 702 Servant, honorable t^
be Gods servant. 873. Profitable and easy to be so. 873, 874. Six things
showing, who are Gods servants. 874, 875 Service should be done willingly both
to God and man. 358. Service should be rewarded. 363 Seven, a number of
perfection. 878 Sight spiritual of Divine truths, notes three things. 826.
Sight of any thing which we much desire pleases us much. 654. Sight of the eye
a clearer evidence than hearing. 822 Silence twofold. 754 Sin deprives us of
God. 140. Great sins hasten judgment. 141. A good man may sin often, but he
will not take leave to sin once. 524. Sin heartily repented of is not persisted
in. 525. Sin dangerous. 680. It is a vain thing to sin. 685. They who venture
upon sin are cruel to themselves. 692. No standing before God in sin. 696. Sin
makes God and many creatures terrible to us. 730. Two things show the greatness
of sin. 885. Sinners obstinate make war with God. 187. Sinners punished with
that which is most cross to their lusts. 592 Sinning with a high hand, what.
141 Singing a part of worship, an expression of joy. 78 Smoke, what it is. 742
Snow, by whom first used to cool his drink. 188 Solitude, or a solitary life,
when to be chosen. 336, 337 Solstices, when. 127 Soul, why man's glory. 569
South, why the Hawk stretches her wings to the South. 471. The Allegorical
sense of it. 471, 472 Speaker, two things the grace of a speaker. 31 Spears, of
two sorts. 762. Spirit, a threefold work of the Spirit upon the soul of man.
239 Stag or Heart, two things observed of him by Naturalists. 211, 212 Stars,
morning-stars, why so called. 76. In what sense stars may be said to sing. 78.
Three ways they sing. 79. God has planted a virtue in the stars. 238. No man
can stop the virtue or influences of the stars, from falling upon the earth.
239. Two Inferences from it. 239, 240. Influences of the stars, as beneficial
to man as their light. 240. The stars have their seasons of appearing,
appointed them by God. 247. An Inference from it. 248. The stars have a guide.
250 Stewards, how all are so. 28 Stork, good and full of pity, as her name in
the Hebrew signifies. 393 Strength, great strength needful for great work. 367.
Great strength may do great work. 367. Some have great strength, yet not to be
trusted with any work. 370. How strength may be trusted. 370. Three sorts of
men to be considered, with respect to strength. 370, 371. A willing mind better
than great strength. 375. Strength is of God. 424. Great strength makes us
joyful in sorrows. 748 Submission, twofold. 887. How we must submit even to
inferiors whom we have wronged. 887 Suffering, we have no cause to fear loss
by suffering for Christ. 952 Sun, the light of it wonderfully extensive and
diffusive. 130. Sun, why called the Father of the winds. 199. The power of the
Sun upon the earth. 254. Why the Egyptians pictured a Hawk to represent the
Sun, five reasons of it. 472 Sutableness of any thing to us, is the cause of
delight. 295. 340 Swadling-band of the Sea, what. 101 Sword has a terrible
face. 448. Sword of God, any thing that he uses to destroy by. 637
T
Teaching of God necessary, else man's profits not. 16, 820. Gods teaching is
effectual for all purposes, seven especially. 821 Temptation, Satan tempts us
much to two things. 509 Terror, good men may sometimes see the terrible
appearances of God. 532. God will not cease them, till he has brought man to
his purpose. 532. The terror of God against the wicked. 534, 728 Thoughts of
man all known to God. 803. Three Inferences from it. 804. Eight sorts of
thoughts to be taken heed of. 805 Thunder and lightning ordered by God. 205. To
thunder, what it signifies in Scripture. 558. A thunder or mighty power goes
out in a tenfold voice of God. 559, 560 Time, all creatures keep time better
than man. 118, 128. Time weakens the strongest earthly creatures. 291 Tongue,
why called the glory of man, 80, 569. Tongue hard to be ruled. 521, 522 Trees,
some love watery grounds, others dry. 645 Treasures or Treasuries of any thing,
what they import. 178, 179 Trouble has its time, 185. Times of trouble are
specially known to, and appointed by God. 185. God can make a time of trouble,
either terrible or comfortable. 189 Trust, what may be given to strength, what
not. 370. Three things required in those we trust with any business. 374. Trust
in man, or in any mere creature, a threefold evil issue of it. 555
V
Vile, to be vile, notes three things. 511. Man at his best estate is vile.
512. Man is vile in three respects. 513. Four Inferences from it. 513, 514. The
more God reveals himself to us, the more our vileness appears to us, 518
Visitation, twofold. 144 Understanding, to know i^ the work of it. 57. The
understanding is the master-wheel turning all the faculties of the soul. 57.
Understanding should go before speaking. 58. How irrational creatures may be
said to have understanding. 414 Unicorn, what the Hebrew word signifies. 346.
Some deny that there is any such beast in the world. 347. He is very strong.
367. Unicorn, by whom and in what resembled. 380, 381 Union, a threefold union
or joining together in one, very pleasing to God. 914 Unity among the Ministers
of the Gosspel, how desirable. 86, 87. Unity a great means of safety. 735 Voice
of God, a tenfold voice of God exceeding powerful. 559, 560
W
War, a day of battle and war, is eminently a day of trouble. 187 Water in the
clouds divided to the earth as God pleases. 203. The Lord orders the waters in
four respects. 204 Whales cast upon unusual coasts, are a warning to them. 783
Whirlwind, what. 11. Three opinions concerning the w^irlwind, out of which God
answered Job. 11. Why God answered Job out of a whirlwind. 12, 13. Wicked men
have a title to good things. 139. They shall be broken, though high and strong.
142. They are like the Hawk in three things. 474 Wicked, who in a large sense,
who in a strict sense. 587, 588. The wicked shall come to a sad conclusion.
593. God will at last rid the world of wicked men. 594. No outward advantage
shall secure the wicked from mischief. 595 Wilderness, of two sorts. 207 Will,
a kind of will in beasts. 358. Service should be done with the will. 358. A
willing mind does much. 375 Will of God, the foundation of the earth, and of
all things. 52, 53 Will of a godly man against all sin. 526 Winds under the c
mmand of God. 209. The way of the wind a secret. 201 Wings of the morning,
what. 129 Wisdom, where the seat of it in man. 267. Common wisdom is of God.
268. Six Inference^ from it. 268, 269. God makes one man differ from another in
wisdom and understanding. 416. A great mercy to have wisdom, in six things.
416, 417 Wolf, evening wolf, why so called. 77 Womb, what the womb is out of
which the Sea issued. 96, 97 Word of God is, and how it is the determiner of
controversies. 17. Word to be heard with reverence. 19. Word of God heard, a
great mercy. 825. Word to be heard with diligence. 825. A fourfold work of the
Word. 844. Word of God how powerful to effect what he wills. 115 Words, some
light, others weighty. 511 Words should give light to things spoken of. 27.
Darkning words very bad. 28. Words soft and hard. 670. A few words will please
God, where he sees much faith. 788. Our words and understandings should go
together. 812 Works of God, how dangerous to find fault with any of them. 508,
509. The works, especially the great works of God, are very much to be
considered. 607. Works of God, why called his ways. 624. They are wonderful.
316 World, the frame of it very beautiful. 64 65. Things of the world, how like
a Sea of glass. 231 Worship, outward and inward must be according to the
command of God. 918 Wrath of God. 578. Sin causes the kindlings and
discoveries of wrath. 860 God sometimes declares against those whom he loves.
861. God dedeclares the cause of his wrath. 861 Wrongs must be forgiven. 887. A
godly man is ready, both to give and take satisfaction in case of wrong. 8^8.
It is a duty to pray for those that have done us wrong. 889.
X
Xerxes his vanity in attempting to bind the Sea. 109
Y
Youth, What young ones are used to, they hold long. 487
A TABLE OF Those Scriptures which are occasionally cleared, and briefly
illustrated in the foregoing EXPOSITIONS. The First Number directs to the
Chapter, the Second to the Verse, the Third to the Page of the BOOK.
Chap. Verse. Page. Genesis. 2. 18. 726. 6. 5. 150. 6. 6. 929. 10. 10. 623. 11.
6. 801. 14. 22. 55. 16. 12. 330. 19. 14. 447. 22. 1. 264. 22. 2. 916. 29. 1.
314. 32. 24. 21. 41. 30. 413. 44. 16. 520. 49. 14. 623 49. 24. 552. Exodus. 1.
12. 977. 3. 2. 13. 3. 14. 49. 4. 11. 60. 8. 9. 547. 12. 41, 42. 318. 19. 5.
490. 26. 5. 735. 30. 23. 624. 32. 10. 504. Leviticus. 4. 3. 878. 19. 17. 855.
26. 11, 15, 30. 829. Numbers. 13. 32. 61. 14. 24. 919. 20. 14. 956. 23. 22.
380. 32. 23. 186. Deuteronomy. 28. 33. 373. 28. 59. 456. 32. 11, 12. 490. 32.
15. 905. 32. 36. 929. 33. 13, 14, 15. 240. 33. 17. 380, 348. 33. 28. 224.
Joshua. 1. 5. 694. 10. 11. 191. Judges. 5. 12. 931. 5. 20. 191. 6. 37, 40. 226.
7. 2. 600. 7. 21. 85. I. Samuel. 1. 6. 432. 2. 3. 745. 2. 31. 547. 12. 21. 685.
15. 11. 929. 17. 40. 637. 24. 2. 307. 24. 14. 665. II. Samuel. 6. 3. 918. 8. 2.
64. 17. 12. 223. I. Kings. 8. 11. 568. 12. 10. 548. 19. 11. 14. 20. 11. 35. II.
Kings. 4. 29. 34. 5. 7. 602. 6. 22. 962. 21. 13. 63. I. Chronicles. 15. 13.
918. Ezra. 9. 13. 538. Nehemiah. 4. 6. 364, 375. Psalms. 2. 4. 420. 8. 4. 23.
9. 9. 183. 9. 14. 723. 11. 3. 56. 14. 6. 669, 982. 18. 7, 8, 9. 14. 18. 21.
524. 18. 26. 904. 18. 33. 313. 19. 4. 167. 19. 12. 814. 22. Title. 312, 313.
22. 21. 382. 22. 27. 130. 23. 1, 2. 343. 24. 1. 54. 27. 8. 264. 27. 10. 403.
29. 8, 9. 315. 30. 5. 117. 31. 23. 950. 33. 9. 114. 33. 17. 426. 34. 10. 288.
35. 12, 13. 940. 35. 21. 460. 36. 6. 148. 36. 9. 50. 37. 6. 960. 39. 4. 316,
48. 40. 5. 802. 40. 15. 460. 46. 2. 52. 50. 3, 4. 18. 50. 21. 834. 51. 4. 499.
65. 1. 65. 65. 5. 20. 65. 8. 122. 66. 11, 12. 933. 68. 18. 931. 68. 20. 154,
934. 68. 35. 729. 69. 23. 619. 71. 1. 503. 73. 22. 610, 814. 74. 14. 678. 74.
20. 170. 75. 5. 433, 745. 77. 19. 149. 78. 72. 898. 80. 3, 7, 19. 581. 88. 13.
700. 90. 1, 2. 49. 91. 16. 213. 94. 12. 794. 97. 3. 744. 101. 8. 134. 102. 17.
947. 104. 4. 262. 104. 5. 51. 104. 19. 128, 248. 104. 21. 287. 105. 17, 18, 19.
244. 105. 25. 246. 105. 44. 373. 106. 20. 568. 107. 42. 522. 108. 1. 81. 109.
4. 938. 110. 3. 359. 111. 2. 151. 118. 22, 23, 24. 74. 118. 27. 122. 119. 17.
828, 794. 119. 21. 591. 119. 33, 34, 35. 820. 119. 126. 538. 119. 160. 624.
126. 1. 323. 126. 4. 934. 126. 6. 376. 127. 4. 763. 128. 2. 373. 133. 1. 914.
138. 6. 486. 139. 9. 131. 141. 5. 939. 141. 7. 154. 144. 3. 515. 145. 10. 79.
145. 11. 80. 146. 3. 555. 147. 16, 17. 228. Proverbs. 3. 20. 223. 6. 32. 692.
8. 36. 692. 9. 1. 610. 10. 32. 898. 14. 4. 362, 378. 14. 8. 810. 15. 15. 668.
17. 17. 958. 19. 2. 33. 19. 12. 225. 19. 21. 800. 21. 3. 901. 21. 5. 371. 23.
5. 475. 23. 31. 655. 24. 16. 310 25. 19. 374. 27. 22. 794. 29. 23. 581. 30. 1.
789. 30. 4. 200. 31. 17. 619. 31. 25. 338. Ecclesiastes. 1. 4. 52. 1. 15. 161.
7. 13, 14. 244. 8. 15. 963. 9. 7. 897. 9. 11. 287. Canticles. 1. 6. 779. 1. 9.
464. 2. 10, 11, 12. 232. 2. 12. 78. 2. 14. 944. Isaiah. 1. 31. 639. 2. 22. 439,
513. 2. 22. 958. 6. 5. 833. 8. 9. 595. 10. 13. 601. 11. 3. 461. 11. 9. 792. 14.
12. 82. 18. 2, 7 63. 20. 5. 555. 21. 10. 763. 22. 8, 9. 983. 27. 5. 195. 27. 8.
190. 27. 11. 415. 28. 16. 69. 28. 24. 366. 28. 29. 816. 31. 1. 427. 31. 4. 283.
32. 2. 189. 33. 17. 491. 34. 7. 382. 34. 11. 63. 35. 1, 2, 6, 7. 210. 40. 2.
940. 40. 26. 250. 40. 31. 492. 43. 4. 514. 44. 3, 4, 5. 210. 45. 5. 575. 45. 7.
169. 49. 4. 682. 49. 15. 403. 50. 4. 32. 51. 12. 29. 53. 1. 549. 54. 10. 52.
54. 16, 17. 766, 639. 56. 11. 285. 58. 5. 745. 58. 7. 409. 61. 7. 952. 63. 12.
548. 64. 2. 231. 64. 7. 536, 37. 64. 6, 7. 692. 65. 1. 551. 66. 2. 15.
Jeremiah. 1. 17. 35. 2. 24. 316. 2. 30. 683. 3. 5. 789. 4. 1. 844. 4. 14. 804.
4. 18. 908. 4. 30. 1001. 5. 5. 329. 8. 15. 683. 10. 11, 12. 54. 14. 11. 892.
14. 21. 905. 14. 22. 219. 18. 7, 8. 929. 21. 3. 134. 22. 14. 60. 22. 15, 23.
595. 25. 38. 290. 29. 11. 802. 29. 12. 946. 32. 15, 17, 27. 798. 51. 26. 71.
Lamentations. 1. 15. 263. 3. 13. 763. 3. 65. 737. 4. 3. 408. Ezekiel. 7. 17.
757. 21. 6. 619. 28. 2. 100. 30. 21. 556. 44. 5. 826. 47. 3, 4, 5. 792. Daniel.
1. 4. 442. 8. 16. 810. 9. 24. 884. Hosea. 1. 7. 702. 2. 21, 22. 212. 7. 16.
844. 8. 5. 329. 10. 11. 366. 14. 3. 702. Joel. 2. 13. 848. Amos. 4. 12. 194. 8.
11. 484. Jonah. 4. 8. 200. Micah. 5. 7. 225. 5. 8. 283. 6. 6. 900. 7. 6. 905.
7. 18. 882. Nahum. 1. 3. 20. Habakkuk. 1. 8. 77. 1. 11. 602. 3. 16. 833. 3. 17.
682. ^. 19. 313. Zephanie. 3. 3. 77. 3. 5. 112. 3. 9. 87. Haggai. 1. 9. 682. 2.
17. 194. Zecharie. 2. 13. 754. 3. 1. 696. 4. 7. 470. 4. 10. 63. 4. 14. 696. 8.
6. 798. 10. 1. 260. 10. 3. 465. 11. 17. 547. 12. 3. 686. 12. 10. 689. 12. 11,
12. 915. Matthew. 5. 44. 85. 5. 45. 210, 116. 6. 22. 740 6. 24. 874. 10. 13.
940. 11. 30. 917. 16. 18. 686. 16. 26. 683. 20. 6, 7. 731, 121. 23. 8. 16. 23.
23. 608. 24. 28. 488. Luke. 10. 15. 687. 84. 23. 341. 17. 37. 488. 19, 38, 39,
40. 79, 80. John. 1. 11, 408. 3. 8. 200, 201. 4. 24. 918. 6. 46. 827. 9. 4.
121. 15. 19. 408. 21. 17. 803. Acts. 2. 37. 921. 4. 32. 736. 6. 15. 81. 9. 11.
936. 10. 35. 899. 17. 26. 334. 17. 28. 220, 50. 20. 22. 241. Romans. 1. 20. 89,
90. 1. 23. 568. 3. 4. 499. 6. 19. 332. 6. 21. 685. 8. 22. 320. 8. 34. 946. 8.
38, 39. 420. 9. 20. 29. 10. 3. 838. 11. 35. 700. 14. 18. 901. 15. 3. 343. 16.
20. 587. 1 Corinthians. 4. 7. 390. 4. 6, 7. 734. 7. 21, 22, 24. 330. 8. 2. 813. 9.
9. 288. 10. 26, 28. 707. 13. 8. 161. 15. 8. 248. 2 Corinthians. 1. 20. 924. 3. 12.
31. 3. 18. 568. 5. 9. 896. 5. 10, 11. 18, 19. 5. 21. 884. 6. 1. 914, 86. 7. 1.
922. 8. 5. 371. 8. 12. 902. 10. 4, 5. 561. 10. 12. 564. 10. 8, 13. 62, 63.
Galathians. 1. 15, 16. 916. 1. 16. 264. 3. 10. 842. 4. 26. 332. 6. 2. 134.
Ephesians. 2. 9. 733. 2. 14. 70. 4. 8. 931. 5. 10. 901. 5. 29. 408.
Philippians. 2. 4. 341. 2. 15. 124. 2. 13. 412. 3. 7, 8. 836. 3. 21. 513. 1
Timothy. 1. 5. 92^. 2. 8. 886. 2. 9. 975. 5. 8. 409. 2 Timothy. 1. 6. 37. 2. 3.
407. 2. 3, 4, 5. 590. 2. 6. 769. 4. 15. 284. Titus. 2. 9. 917 Hebrews. 1. 5.
83. 1. 8. 263. 11. 3. 51. 11. 10. 47. 12. 17. 982. 12. 26. 51. 13. 14. 47.
James. 1. 6, 7. 942 1. 17. 268. 1. 18. 221. 4. 12. 598. 5. 11. 952. 5. 16. 942.
1 Peter. 1. 13. 37. 3. 3. 975. 3. 7. 937. 3. 13. 907. 4. 11. 31. 4. 17. 534. 5.
7. 7. 5. 8. 293. 2 Peter. 3. 16. 32. 3. 18. 792. 1 John. 3. 9. 525. 4. 12. 823.
4. 18. 756. 5. 3. 917. 5. 16. 892. 5. 19. 591. 3 John. 0 4. 1024. Jude. 0 6.
89, 186. 0 14, 15. 18. Revelation. 1. 18. 154. 4. 6. 231. 8. 3, 5. 945. 11. 2,
3. 318. 11. 3, 34. 12, 13, 14. 336. 12. 15. 493. 17. 12, 13. 736. 18. 6, 7.
950.

FINIS.

