GOSPEL-LOVE, HEART-PURITY* And the FLOURISHIN^ Of the Righteous.

BEING The last SERMON^ of the late Reverend Mr. Joseph Caryl.

London, Printed and are to be sold by (...) Hancock, Senior and Junior, at the
sign of the three Bibles in Pope's Head Ally, over against the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil. 1675.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THese Sermons were preached by the Reverend Author of them a little while
before his Entrance into ^^^st. I cannot learn that the oc^^^ions of them were
extraordinary, or that he had any design in them beyond that which accompanied
the ordinary course of his Ministry; much less a purpose to publish them, a^
conceiving them either more useful, or more needful, or more labored than the
rest of his constant and frequent Exercises in the same kind. Neither did he
leave any such Copy of them as might be helpful toward such an end. But they
were taken from his mouth by the diligence of a Dexterous Hand, who at first
designed nothing bu^ his own use and edification by them; until observing how
soon after the preaching of them, God was please^ to call him off from his
Painfu^ Labor in his Vineyard, and so t^ cut short all expectations of farthe^
administrations of Truth and Grace by the Trust and Dispensation committed unto
him; he resolved t^ make them public, for the good an^ benefits of others. And
as herei^ he followed his own Inclination and Judgment; So if any thing be
found in these Discourses as to Phrase of Speech, or manner of Expression, not
answering that Accuracy, which this Author was known to have used in all his
Writings published by himself; he alone must bear the blame of it, from them
who think such defects blame worthy. These things I could not but acquaint the
Reader withal, that he may look for no more in these Sermons, but what he might
have found in the Constant Ministry of the Reverend Author. But yet I must say,
upon their perusal, that take them under the Circumstances mentioned, they give
no ill or disadvantageous Account of the Ordinary Labors and Endeavors of
this Eminent Minister of the Gospel. Thus did Mr. Caryl use to preach,
sometimes twice, sometimes thrice in the Week, always showing himself a
Workman that needed not to be ashamed. And if I mistake not, whoever shall
consider these Sermons with Sobriety, Candor and Judgment, as part of his
Constant Labors, will readily acknowledge, what rich and excellent Talents he
was entrusted with, and how the great Reputation which his Ministry had for so
many years in the Church of God, was no way undeserved. For my Accession to
this Work in a Prefatory Discourse, it arose merely from the importunity of the
Publisher and Bookseller, as they both well know, and will acknowledge; wherein
I see nothing my self of use or advantage, but only that I may tender
satisfaction to the Reader, that he is not Imposed upon by any Spurious
Offspring fathered on so great and worthy a Name. Somewhat also I was inclined
unto a Compliance with their desires, that I might make use of this Advantage
dirty Rode, wherein there is not any thing of Christian Sobriety, or common
Ingenuity from first to last to be found. Yet what Violences have been offered
unto the Sacred Truths of the Gospel in Important Articles of Faith, and other
things scandalous to Christian Religion, will in another way be called to an
Account, as some of them have been already; whereunto a Return may be expected
of raging and bestial Calumnies, and no other. Here I shall not farther
Indispose the Reader unto the serious perusal and Improvement of the ensuing
Spiritual Discourses, wherein there is more Worth and Use, more that will turn
unto a Refreshing Account at the last day, than in a thousand Clamorous
Contests managed with Pride and Passion, what ever pretenses they may be gilded
withal.

That he who ministered this seed to the Sower, would multiply the seed sown,
and give it an Increase in the fruits of Righteousness among them that through
his Providence shall be made partakers of it, is the Prayer of

Thy Servant in the Work of the Gospel, John Owen.

Books Printed, and are to be sold by John Hancok, Senior and Junior, at the
first Shop in Popes-Head-Alley, at the Three Bibles; Who sells all sorts of
Divinity-Books, etc. to Chapmen, or others.
TWelve Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the
Gospel at Margarets New-Fish-street.

1. Precious Remedies against Satan's devices; Or, Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers sores; being a companion for those that are in Christ, or ^^^ of
Christ, that slight or neglect Ordinances, under a pretense of living above
them; that are growing in Spirituals, or decaying; that are tempted, or
deserted; afflicted, or opposed; that have assurance, or want it; on 2 Cor. 2.
11.

2. Heaven on Earth; Or, a serious Discourse touching a well-grounded Assurance
of man's everlasting happiness and blessedness, etc.

3. The Unsearchable Riches of Christ: Or Meat for strong Men, and Milk for
Babes, held forth in two and twenty Sermons, from Ephesians. 3. 8. Preached on his
Lecture-nights at Fish-street-hill.

4. His Apples of Gold for young Men and Women; etc.

With the Young Man's Objections answered, and the Old Man's Doubts resolved.

5. A String of Pearls: Or, The best things reserved till last; delivered in a
Sermon preached in London, June 8. 1657. at the Funeral of that Triumphant
Saint Mrs. Mary Blake, late Wife to his worthy Friend Mr. Nicholas Blake,
Merchant.

6. The Mute Christian; with Sovereign Antidotes against the most miserable
Exigents: Or, a Christian with an Olive-leaf in his mouth, when he is under the
greatest afflictions, the sharpest and sorest trials and troubles, the saddest
and darkest Providence and Changes.

7. An Ark for all Gods Noah's in a stormy day. Wherein is showed the
transcendent excellency of a Believers portion; on Lam. 3. 24.

8. The Crown and Glory of Christianity: Or, Holiness the only way to happiness
discovered in 48 Sermons on Heb. 12. 14.

9. The Privy Key of Heaven; Or, a Discourse of Closet-Prayer, twenty Arguments
for it, with the Resolution of several considerable Questions, etc.

10. A Heavenly Cordial for all that have had, or have escaped the Plague, etc.

11. There is now published an excellent new Book of Mr. Brooks, Entitled A
Cabinet of Choice Jewels, or a Box of Precious Ointment, Containing eighteen
special Maxims, Considerations, Rules and Directions, that are seriously to be
minded and observed in order to the clearing up a man's interest in Christ, the
saving-work of God upon his own soul, and his Title to all the glory of another
world.

Also declaring several Evidences and Marks of True saving Grace.

12. There is now printed Londons Lamentations: Or, a sober serious discourse
concerning the late fiery dispensation, wherein the procuring causes, and the
final causes of that dreadful dispensation are laid open, both upon those who
have been burnt up, and upon those who have escaped those consuming Flames.

Bridges Remains: being eight Sermons, viz. Of Man's Blessedness: 2. Affections
Rightly placed. 3. How to walk with God in our Calling. 4. O Good and Bad
Company. 5. The Carnality of Professors. 6. What our Work is and how to be
done. 7. Soul Resignation into the hands of God. 8. The Dignity and Duty of
Gods Called Ones Which was the last that ever wa^ preached by that Learned and
Judiciou^ Divine Mr. William Bridge, late Preache^ of the Word of God at
Yarmouth.

A Discourse of Christ's coming: And the Influence, which the Expectation there
of has on all manner of holy Conversation and Godliness. By Theophilus Gale*

There are some other Pieces of the Reverend Author of these Sermons preparing
for the Press.

1 TIMOTHY 1. 5. Now the end of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart,
and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned.
THE holy Apostle St. Paul, as appears in the beginning of the Chapter and
Epistle, finds some at Ephesus, who troubled the Church with needless, and with
fruitless Doctrine; and therefore if you consult the third and fourth Verses of
this Chapter, you will find he besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus, when he
went into Macedonia, that he might charge some, that they teach no other
Doctrine (...) Teach Doctrines contrary to what he had taught; or Doctrines
contrary to the General Tenor of the Gospel. Such Teachers he calls accursed,
Gal. 1. 8.

He would have him warn them at the fourth Verse, Not to give heed to Fables,
and endless Genealogies, which minister questions, rather than godly edifying,
which is in Faith, Timothy was besought by St. Paul, to give this charge to,
and concerning the Teachers at Ephesus.

And because those Fabulists and Genealogists, were great pretenders to the
Law, therefore the Apostle tells them, That the Law leads to the embracing of
one another in love; not to the imbroyling of one another in needless
questions, or in the venting of them: and this he speaks in the Verse now Read,
The end of the Commandment is Charity out of a pure heart, and of a good
Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. In which words we have two things.

First, An Assertion laid down.

Secondly, We have a limitation to the Assertion.

The Assertion is laid down in the beginning of the Verse. The end of the
Commandment is Charity.

The Assertion is limited in the close of the Verse, It Is Charity, not Charity
at large, but Charity thus qualified, or thus circumstantiated -- It Is Charity
out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned.

I shall first explicate the Assertion, and then show its Connection with the
limitation, and give at the present one General Point of Doctrine from the
whole Verse.

The end of the Commandment is Charity.

For the explication of this Assertion, I must show three things.

1. What Is meant here by the Commandment.

2. What Is meant by the end of the Commandment.

3. What that Charity in special is, which is the end of the Commandment. And
when I have briefly done these three things, we shall come to a Point.

The end of the Commandment is Charity, but what is this Commandment?

The word which we here translate Commandment, is (...), not the ordinary word
(...), which signifies a Commandment; but (...); and the word properly
signifies, as Critics tell us, A charge given by Judges or Superiors,
concerning somewhat to be done, or forborne; and thus it is used in Acts 5. 28.
where the High Priests tell the Apostles, Did not we straightly command you, that
you should not teach in thi^ Name? Did not we straightly Command you? The Greek
there is an Hebraism, in which St. Luke does there express the minds of the
Scribes and Pharisees, Did not we straightly command you? (...), Did not we
command you with a Command? which we very well render according to the sense of
the Idiom, Did not we strictly command you? Or as Mr. Beza renders it, Did not
we command you again and again? And in the very same sense does the Apostle use
the word (...) as the 18th Verse of the first of Timothy: This charge I commit
unto thee. Why now if we should take the word Commandment in this strict sense,
it may have a special reference to the third and fourth Verses going before the
Text, whereas I touched before, St. Paul besought Timothy to charge some, that
they teach no other Doctrine, To charge them, or to Command them. It Is (...),
which is the root of the word which we render Commandment. I charge thee to lay
this Commandment upon them. So we may well render it, I command they teach no
other Doctrine. As if he had said, the end why I besought thee to give that
charge, or Command, was to promote charity: whereas those other Doctrines, did
but breed questions, and those questions breed Contentions among the Churches,
and among the Brethren, the End of the Commandment, the reason why I gave them
that Commandment, was to maintain love among Brethren.

Yea for as much as the Apostle at the 7. verse. speaks of those who desire to
be Teachers of the Law, and in the 8. and 9. verses, proceeds to speak of the
nature and use of the Law, I conceive the Word Commandment may be extended to
the whole Law of God, or to the whole Revelation, or the mind of God concerning
things to be done, or forborne by us. And so here is a figure, here is a change
of number, the singular is put for the plural, Commandment, for Commandments,
and indeed, as the Doctrine of Grace is nothing else but a Collection of
promises, so the Law is nothing else, but a Collection of precepts, and in this
sense says Mr. Calvin here, by the word Commandment, we may take in all the
Commandments of God. Not only those that are expressed in the Decalogue, but
those which are scattered quite through the Holy Scriptures. The end of the
Commandment, or of the Commandments, the whole Revealed will of God, concerning
the Agenda, or things to be done, It is charity, or it is Love; and so much for
the first thing, what we are to understand by the Commandment.

Secondly, what is the end of the Commandment, the end of the Commandment is
charity. (...) end, may be taken in a threefold notion.

First, The end, it notes the conclusion, and Period of a thing, the conclusion
of all things; so the Apostle Peter in his 1 Epist. 4. 7. The end of all things
is at hand, and it is well for us to Remember that, If the end of all things
were at hand in the Apostles time, how near is the end now, the end, the Period
of all this visible world, it is at hand, Be ye therefore watchful, and sober.

Secondly, End, notes as much as the Aim, design, plot, scope of any Action,
what it is that we drive at; and in that sense it is well said, That the desire
of the end is endless, that is, men App^titus fi^is est infinicus.
will never end their desirings till they have attained their desired end,
namely, that which is the scope, and Aim, which they have set up to themselves
in any undertaking: the end of a thing is the Aim, or the scope of it.

Thirdly, End is taken in this notion, It notes the accomplishment, or the
fulfilling and Completing of a thing, and in that sense it is used in Romans 10.
4. Christ (says the Apostle,) is the end of the Law for Righteousness. The end
of the Law, he has brought the Law to its end -- what end? why to its
accomplishment, to its fulfilling, so that we are not to seek for righteousness
by the Law for our Justification, for Christ has made an end of the Law, or
accomplished the Law, as to that point, for righteousness, Christ has
fulfilled the Law, both in doing the precepts of it, and he has fulfilled the
Law by enduring the penalty of it, and so he is the end of the Law, the
fulfilling end of the Law; It has no more to require than that we obey the
precept, or endure the penalty of it, and both these Christ has fully done,
and so he has fulfilled the whole Law, and Indeed, Christ having done so in
his own person, having been the end of the Law in his obedience, both active
and passive, I may say, He is the Abolishing end of the Law, he has taken it
away as to that use, for Justification by our own works, the Law is quite out
of doors, as to that point, Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, and
no more are we to seek for righteousness by the Law.

Why now in the text, the word end, when it is said that the end of the
Commandment is charity, the word (end) is to be taken in the two latter senses.

First, charity is that which the Law aims at, it is the scope of the Law, to
bring us into a Love one to another, and that we may walk in Love, that is the
business of the Commandments of God, the Aim, the Scope of them.

And then secondly, charity is the end of the Law, that is, it is the fulfilling
of the Law, it is the accomplishing end of the Law, the Law is fulfilled in
Love, take it in two Scriptures -- Romans 13. 10. Love is the fulfilling of the
Law, Love it is the Accomplishing end of the Law, as in Gal. 5. 14. The whole
Law is fulfilled in one word, that is a good word Indeed -- what is that one
word, by which the whole Law is fulfilled? it is fulfilled in one word, even in
this, thou shall love they Neighbor as they self: to them, the end here, is to
be taken in that sense, charity it is the accomplishing, it is the fulfilling of
the Law.

Thirdly, One step farther, what is that charity which is the end of the
Commandment, both the Final end, and the fulfilling end of it? What is this
charity?

Charity is taken two ways in Scripture.

1. More strictly, as it consists in the relieving of those that are poor, and
in the comforting of those that are sorrowful, this is charity, to relieve the
poor, to comfort the sorrowful.

But secondly, charity, is taken in a more large sense, it is taken for Love in
General, and so some translate this text, the end of the Commandment, is Love.
For charity is a word of a narrower sense than Love is. The end of the
Commandment is Love, and the truth is, the word (...), which we rende^ in the
text, charity, does Indifferently signify, and is Indifferently translated
Love, or charity, all the New Testament over. I need not stay to quote places.
This word (...) signifies Love to God, Love to Man.

Q well but what is Indeed the Charity, or Love, here Intended in the Scripture?
A. I answer, first, I conceive the Love here Intended, Is not love to God,
though that is Love above all things, and the most excellent end of the
Commandment, yet I conceive in this place, it is Charity, or Love to Man, which
is here meant. And my Reason is this, why I restrain it here to the Love of
Man, because the Apostle speaks of charity in opposition to those Fables, and
questions which false teachers were like to raise up in the Church. The end of
the Commandment is charity, that all may be peaceable and quiet among the
Brethren: and he says at verse 7. From which some having swerved, (from
charity) shot quite beside it, says he, they are turned aside unto vain
Jangling, so that if we consider either the Antecedents of the text, or the
consequents, it seems he confines charity, or Love here spoken of to that love
or charity which is among men, among Brethren, that is one thing.

Secondly, Charity here with respect to Brethren, is not that charity which
does consist in opening our hand to relieve the poor, though that is a most
excellent piece of charity, (and I pray Remember it) to open your hand to the
relieving of the poor, yet I conceive that is not the charity here meant, but
the charity here meant, is charity in the uniting our hearts, and in the
closing of our affections one with another, and then,

Thirdly, The charity here intended, or the Love, is not a lazy habit, for one
to say, I have a love for God, I and there it lies and does nothing: I say, the
charity here intended, is not a lazy habit; but it is that which is put forth by
vigorous and lively actings, and so some expound this Text; Charity is to be
taken Metonymically, Charity, for all the offices and duties of charity, which
we owe one to another.

4. Lastly, As it is an Acting, and an active charity, which is here spoken of,
so it is not every kind of charity, how vigorously soever acted, which is the
end of the Commandment; but it is the charity that flows out from, and is fed by
those three springs spoken of in the close of the Verse: Namely, it is a charity
flowing out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.

I cannot stay now to discover those springs to you; for that would take up too
much of the time. Indeed it may take up all the time, to make a little
discovery of those springs: All that I shall say at present, is only this, That
the charity which issues out of these springs: that is the charity in the Text;
and that is the charity, which is the fulfilling of the Commandment. So that
here we have the Genealogy (as I may call it) the Pedigree, the Parentage of
Gospel charity. Or to keep to the former Metaphor, here we have the spring of
that blessed River called charity, the streams whereof (like the streams of the
River spoken of, in Psalm. 46. 4. which is the favor of God to his people) will
make glad the City of God, in all the Cities of men, where ever it has an open
chanel, and a free course. By what has been said (beloved) you may perceive,
what my work (the Lord assisting) is like to be in handling this Scripture;
namely, to discover to you that Love or Charity, which is the end of the
Commandment: and chiefly indeed to discover to you, those blessed springs, A
pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned* out of which that charity
flows, and by which it must be fed day by day. And this will I do, if God
permit.

But at the present I shall wave all these particulars, and speak to one
General Point (as I hinted before) raised from the whole Context, and of this
Verse, or from all the particulars of it laid together: and the Point of
Doctrine is this,

DOCT.
Those works of Love, of Love to man, much more of Love to God, which are the
end of the Commandment, must flow from a good spring, from a gracious
Principle, or a Principle of Grace.

This Point is very plain in the Text, plainly collected from it. For says the
Apostle, Love out of a pure heart (and the like). Now that pure heart, I shall
show clearly afterward (if the Lord bring me to it) that the pure heart, is a
gracious heart. So that the Love must flow from a principle of Grace.

There are three things especially in which the Completion, the full
Constitution and making up of a good work, whether toward God or man does
consist; and they must all three concur in the business. Evil arises out of any
single defect in that which is required: Bonum oritur ex i^te ra causa, malum
ex q^olibet defectu.
But a good action must have a concurrence of all things requisite thereunto. I
name only these three.

First, That the work may be good, we must What required to a good work.
be sure that the matter of it be good. It must be good in it self, as being
according to Rule. And

It must be good in the mind and in understanding of him that does it: for to
do that which is good, we not knowing and understanding it to be good, or not
being persuaded that it is good, that action is not good to us. Yea, the
Apostle tells you, It is sin, whatsoever is not of faith: and there he speaks
not of justifying faith, but of persuading faith: what ever is not of faith is
sin: And it is possible for one that is in a justified state, or one that has
justifying faith, yet not to do a thing with a persuading faith, and so it may
be sin to him. That Is one thing.

Secondly, The aim, or the end of the work, must be good; and among all ends
that are good, the chief, and that which can never be left out, is the glory of
God: Matthew. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your
good works (your works of Love) may glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
Not glorify your self, not set up self. 'Twas the setting up of self, or the
making self the end, which corrupted and poisoned all those materially good,
very good actions of the Pharisees, even their alms giving, their praying,
their fasting, as you may read at large in Mat. 6. 1, 5, 16. and those that
follow. The End does denominate the action. It must have a good end, else
though the matter be never so good, the work is not good.

Thirdly, (Which is the matter in hand:) The Principle, or spring of the work
must be good: It Is possible for one to do a work that is good for the matter of
it, and to have some good ends in it, and yet not to do it out of a right
principle: and this is it which the Text and Doctrine speaks, unless the
Principle be good, the work's not good. As the Fountain is, such are the
streams that come from it: As the Tree is, such is the fruit that grows upon
it. Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Eigs of Thistles? Matthew. 7. 16. Why, the
Thorn has not a Principle in Nature to put forth a Grape, the Thistle has not
a Principle in Nature to put forth a Figg; and therefore says Christ, A
corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Which words of Christ, as they are
primarily to be understood concerning false Prophets and their Doctrine, so
they may be truly applied to all false professors and their ends; they being
corrupt, they cannot bring forth good fruit. If you would draw out of a vessel
which is unseasoned, or ill scented, the liquor will taste of the Cask. Now we
all by nature are unseasoned; yea, we are ill scented vessels, therefore the
liquor, that which passes from us, considered so, must needs have an ill scent,
an ill taste. And hence that cutting question of Christ to the Pharisees,
Matthew. 12. 34. O Generation of Vipers, how can ye being evil, speak good
things? They might possibly speak good for the matter. Bad men will often tip
their tongues with good words, and appear Chrysostom's, Golden mouthed
speakers, when their hearts are nothing but brass and dross. But usually evil
men speak evil; that which is evil for the matter. Their throats are an open
sepulcher, the poison of Asps is under their lips, as the Apostle speaks,
quoting it from the Psalms, in Romans 3. 13.

And as they usually, and naturally, (for that is their natural Language) speak
evil, so they always mar the good they speak, either by their ill manner of
speaking it, or by their ill meaning in speaking it. As the Devil when he made
a confession of Christ, and said, he was the Son of the most high God, it was a
confession like that of St. Peter, which Christ calls the Rock upon which the
Church is built; the Devil spoke it out of a base intent, and therefore Christ
threw it away, and rebuked him for it. So evil men, they spoil good speaking
with their ill manner of speaking, or their ill meaning in speaking; and
therefore Solomon has that expression, in Prove. 26. 7. As the legs of the
lame are not equal: so is a Parable in the mouth of fools. A Parable there,
notes a Divine saying, a ruling word, a commanding word, that is a Parable, a
word that should reign over us, so says he, a Parable, a divine saying, in the
mouth of a fool, are like the legs of the lame. Good words do (as it were)
lisp in the mouth of a bad man, and his heart never keeps pace with his Tongue.
Thus you see, Christ says, evil men cannot speak that which is good, they
cannot speak to the purpose fully; now as they that are evil, cannot speak, so
neither can they do good things answerable to the rule, or pleasing unto God. I
do not say, they cannot do good things, but they cannot do good things,
answerable to the rule, or pleasing unto God. And that is the Apostles
conclusion, Romans 8. 8. after a further discourse, he comes with his so the^
here is the conclusion, so then, they that are in the flesh, they cannot please
God, every action which comes up to the fulfilling of the Commandment, is
pleasing to God, but says he, they that are in the flesh, they cannot please
God; -- they that are in the flesh -- what is that? surely not that which two
Popes (as Infallible as they Judge themselves to be,) thought to be the
meaning; they thought, that by being in the flesh, was meant being in a
marriage State. But by being in the flesh, the Apostle means, being in a
natural, that is, being in an unregenerate State, they cannot please God, and
such do not only not please God when they do that which is evil, but they do
not please God when they do that which is good, for the very Sacrifices of the
wicked are an abomination to him, Prove. 15. 8. and therefore the Apople says of
all men, in their natural capacity, or State, there is none that does good, no
not one, in Romans 3. 12. -- Why none do good? because none of them have a
principle, they have not a spring, though the matter they do may be good, and
though possibly they have some good end in doing it, yet they not having a
principle, there is none of them that does good, that is, a complete good, no
not one, there is no exceptions. I need not labor further in the proof of the
point, but I would make some use of it, and I would make a threefold use out.

Use. The first may be for our Information. If those good works, both to God
and Man, which are the fulfilling of the Commandment, must flow from a Gracious
principle, then we are Instructed by this truth, how to Judge of their best
works who still abide in the State of nature, having neither a pure heart, nor
a good Conscience, nor Faith unfeigned. -- Why what Judgment are we to make of
their works? why surely they are not the end of the Commandment, they are not
the fulfilling of the Commandment; the works of such, even their works of
charity, of love, of temperance, Patience, of Justice. were called by some of
the godly learned Ancients, shining sins, and why we may not call them so now,
I know no reason. That Is the Judgment they give of such men's good actions; for
as Christ tells the Pharisees, Luke 16. 15. that which is highly esteemed among
men, is an Abomination unto God. Why? because it wants this principle. And to
be sure, though their box of ointment, I mean the good things done by Persons
who have not these principles, I say though their box of ointment may have a
fragrant smell among many men, yet there are many dead flies in it, especially
one great one, called unbelief, which makes their whole box of ointment very
unsavory in the nostrils of God, for so says the Apostle, Heb. 11. 6. without
faith it is Impossible to please God. And that is one of the springs expressly
spoken of in the text; Gospel charity is of a nobler extract than to be found
in the whole compass of nature, and Godliness moves in a higher sphere than the
best dress that the gayest Moralist ever reached unto. In Matthew. 5. 20. Except
your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God. That Is a word for Information.

Use. 2. Now upon that, let me take up a second use by way of Lamentation. If
this be a truth, then it is to be Lamented that the Religious duties, and
charitable Acts of many who bear the name of Christ, flow merely from a natural
principle, and doing so, they are not the fulfilling of the Commandment. The
most of men Love one another with affection no more spiritual than Damon and
Pithius, and Pilades and Orestes, or any other who are most memorised, or
admired among the Heathens for Love. Yea I may say; they worship God and Jesus
Christ with a devotion no more raised, and spiritual, than the old Romans did
worship their Jupiter, or the Ephesians their great Godess Diana. And surely
this is to be Lamented, that Christian Acts should be done, and not from a
principle spiritual, or not from a Christian principle. It is very possible,
and very ordinary to follow Christ, yea to call upon Christ, merely with human
affections, with Carnal affections. Jesus Christ did find it so. In John 6. 26.
Ye seek me, says he, not because ye saw the Miracles, but because ye did eat
of the loves and were filled. To follow Christ, was an excellent work, but they
did it merely upon a humane principle. Yea, that prayer of theirs in Verse 34.
may well be Judged to come merely from a carnal spirit. When Christ had
discourse of the bread that came down from Heaven, and gives life into the
World, say they, Lord, evermore give us of this bread, and yet this was but
from a Carnal desire, not knowing what that bread meant spiritually. And it
appears clearly to be so, for in the close of the Chapter, many of his Hearers
went quite away, they forsook him. Now certainly to do these excellent things,
and to do them but with Carnal principles, this is a thing to be Lamented.
Solomon does report it as a thing to be lamented, that often in this world it
is done to good men according to the works of the wicked, and it is done to
wicked men, according to the works of the righteous: Eccles. 8. 14. This is a
thing to be lamented, but I now shall show you two sights more, much more to be
lamented.

First, It Is a very lamentable thing to see good men do according to the works
of the wicked. Thus did David in the matter of Uriah, 2 Samuel 11. Thus did
Solomon, when his heart went after strange Gods, and he built High Places to
their Abominations, 1 Kings 11. 4, 5. Thus did Asa, a good King, when he
imprisoned the Prophet, and in his disease sought to the Physicians, and not to
God, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10, 12. Yea, thus did St. Peter that holy Apostle, when he
denied, yea, forswore his Master, in Matthew. 26. 72, 74. And thus have many
other godly men done, under the pressures of Temptation and Corruption. And is
not this a sad sight, to see one professing Godliliness, yea, one that is
really godly, act thus like a wicked man? This is to act (as I have sometimes
expressed it) the old Creatures part, in the new Creatures state. This is a very
sad thing.

I, but now I have another sight to show you, according to the Tenure of this
Text and Doctrine, which is very sad also. And what is that? Why, to see bad men
do according to the works of good men, still continuing in their bad state.
They plod on, and go on doing good things, but never mind to become good
themselves: And so bad men do according to the works of the righteous: I say,
This is a sad sight. And thus did Saul, when he was among the Prophets: There
was a bad man doing good things, 1 Samuel 10. And thus did Ahab, when he humbled
himself; a wicked man doing a very good thing, 1 Kings 21. Thus did Jehu, when
he destroyed Idolatry: A very good work, but a very bad man, 2 Kings 10. 28.
Thus did Judas, when he preached the Gospel; a very good work, but himself a
Traitor. And thus did Demas, when he professed the Gospel, and followed the
Apostles: A very good work, but himself an hypocrite, and a lover of the world.
And thus indeed do all hypocrites, and mere formalists, in their performing of
Gospel worship. And thus Christ will tell them at the last day, as he says,
Matthew. 7. 22, 23. when they came upon him so to upbraid him (as it were) with
the good things which they had done. We have prophesied in thy name, we have
cast out Devils in thy Name; we have done many good and mighty works in thy
Name; Says Christ to them, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Though you
did these good things, yet you never did them from a sound principle, from a
principle of Grace: No, you your selves were secret workers, or lovers of
iniquity, while you did all these good things. Now is not this a sad sight? I
confess, it is a sad sight, to see a bad man do that which is bad, or a wicked
man to do that which is wicked; yet I say, it is a sadder sight to see a bad
man continuing in his state, having no spiritual principles, to go on doing
good: For what is this, but the just contrary to what I spoke before. This is
the acting of the new Creatures part in the old Creatures state; and what will
that avail?

And I would say these two things further.

God often declares himself very highly against such as do good, themselves
continuing evil. He declares himself weary of their services, especially when
there is hypocrisy in them. Isa. 1. 14. Prove. 21. 27. The sacrifice of the
wicked is abomination, how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind?
That is, when he brings it for base ends, hoping by his sacrifice to satisfy
God for his sin. Some hope by their good works to turn away the wrath of God;
and they hope to get Heaven by their good prayers, and by their alms (and the
like). I say, when a man does a good thing, with such an evil mind as this,
hoping to satisfy the Justice of God, and turn away his wrath by his doings;
this is now abomination to God. Or when he hopes that God will be well pleased
with him, in that he brings him a sacrifice, does him some outward service,
though he goes on in his sin. These are those the Lord does so often protest
against.

And I would say to them further: The good you do in that state, not having a
spiritual Principle, the good that you do will not profit you, 'twill not
advantage you; 'twill be no plea in the great day. All the profit you can have
by it at most, when you have had the utmost that it comes to, it is but some
external or outward mercy. As Ahab, he humbled himself: why, he had somewhat
for it; he had his penny: and therefore says the Lord, See thou how Ahab
humbles himself? The Judgment shall not come in his days. A deliverance from
an outward Judgment: but here was no delive^^nce from wrath, and from eternal
Judgment. And so Jehu, for the good works that he did, he had somewhat; but
alas, what was it? Indeed a great thing in the eyes of the world, a Kingdom;
and a Kingdom for several Generations. But the truth is, A poor thing, for that
was all indeed he had for his zeal in destroying Idolatry. He had the Kingdom
for four Generations; but he abiding a wicked man, while he did that good
thing, himself was cut off for ever. And you see the Ruler in Mark 10. 21. who
came to Christ, and told him, how he had done almost all the matters of the
Law: why, Jesus Christ saw indeed he had done them, but he knew he had not done
them from a right principle; and therefore what was it that Christ gave him?
Says he, he beheld him, and loved him. A love of pity, as some expound the
place. O it is a pity that such a person as thou art, that thou have been a
keeper of the Law, yet have not done it upon a right principle. And that he did
not, it is plain; for when Christ put him home he went away sorrowful. Now all
that he had for it, Christ gave him some approbation: and as he did to that
other in Mark 12. 34. Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. I, but he was
so far, as he should never come there, unless he changed his state. So that I
say, The Condition of those that do good things, not out of a good principle,
is indeed very lamentable, upon these and many other accounts.

But possibly you will say, If it be so, That they who do good, not out of a
right principle, their work will not turn to their profit, and therefore their
case is to be lamented. If it be so, Were it not best to advise those who yet
remain unconverted, to forbear doing good till themselves are better?

I answer, No, by no means. We give no such advice in the matter: but let all
men do all the good they can. And I would exhort the worst of men to do good:
To hear the Word preached, to pray, to give alms. Daniel gave that counsel to
Nebuchadnezzar a Heathen King, Dan. 4. 27. The Apostle Peter gave that counsel
to Simon Magus, whom he saw to be in the gaul of bitterness, and in the bonds
of iniquity. And that the good that he had done, his receiving Baptism, and
outward profession of faith, it was so far from coming from a good principle,
that he was in the very gall of bitterness; yet says he, pray, if it may be,
thy sins may be forgiven thee. Though men are evil, yet let them do good as far
as they can: and I would say these three things about it.

First, They are under an obligation to do good. For man's inability to perform
a duty rightly, does not take off the obligation which is upon him to perform
it. And though a bad man sins in his manner of doing it, yet his refusing to do
it, would be more sinful.

And I would say further, Though he please not God in doing it, yet he
displeases God in not doing it: So that indeed, man naturally considered, or in
his fallen state, is fallen into a very sad Dilemma. If he neglect to do good,
he sins. If he does good, he spoils it in the doing of it. But notwithstanding
all this (I say) I am far from discouraging the worst of men to do good, or to
advise any to forbear to do good. No, I would convince all, that their present
state is bad; and exhort all to apply themselves to all means whereby
themselves may be made better. And that is the third Use which I shall briefly
make of this point, and so I shall conclude.

Use 3. Is it so, That those good works that flow from a good Principle are
pleasing to God? Why then we see the necessity of Regeneration. Christ says in
3 John 3. Verily, verily. There Is a strong and a double asseveration: Verily,
verily, I say unto you, except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. We are not born with this pure heart, with this good
conscience, with this faith unfeigned, which are the requisites to a good work
in the Text. We are not born with these: for Who can bring a clean thing out of
an unclean? Not one. Not one among the sons of men. Job 14. 4. A pure heart, a
good conscience, faith unfeigned, are the issues of the new birth. Education
cannot make the heart pure; It must be Revelation which makes the heart pure.
Good Education it may change the Life and the Conversation. As they say, To
study Arts and Philosophy, it takes off the roughness that is in man's nature,
-- didicisse fideliter arts Emollit mores --
and does smooth them, and frame them very much for excellent uses. Good
literature and education, it may civilize, but it cannot spiritualize: It may
change a man's course, but it cannot change his nature, that is only done by
Regeneration. Now I say, a man's state, his nature must be changed; he must have
a pure heart, which we never have till our natures are changed. He must be good
before he can do good spiritually. Mark that word of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 10.
We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
before ordained that we should walk in them. Mark it, here are good works. But
how do we come to these good works? Why, we are his workmanship, says he, we
are his (...). God works us, before we can work for him: he makes us good,
before we can do good. Says he, We are his workmanship. And then, created, or
so created in Christ Jesus to good works. We by union to Jesus Christ, come to
have a spiritual principle to carry us out in the doing of all good works.
Here Is your way. You must be Gods workmanship, before you can do Gods work: You
must be new creatures, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, before you can
do them.

A Crab-tree will never yield pleasant fruit, until you change the nature of
it. Take a Crab-tree and plant it in the best soil that you have, and water it,
and dress it, and prune it as much as you can, yet this Crab-tree will bear
nothing but Crabs, sour fruit, till you come to graft it; and then your
grafting of it, does change the nature of the stock, and it has another
principle, and so then it brings forth good fruit. So it is in this case. Take
the best natured man in the world, plant him in the best soil, in the best
ground, in Church-ground, plant him in the house of God, and there let him be
watered by the rain of holy Doctrine, and let him be dressed and cultivated every
day, yet he will bring forth nothing but Crabs, nothing but unsavory fruit,
till he himself be changed. Though he be under all those spiritual means, yet
till those means have wrought effectually in him, his actions are all
unsavory. It Is only by our implantation into Jesus Christ, that we become fit
to do good, so as is acceptable unto God. It Is this that makes the change. For
as in nature, the graft does change the stock; so in grace, the stock does
change the grafted branch. As we are grafted into Christ, he changes the
branch; being planted into Christ, by the power of the Spirit, we are then made
like him; and then we bring forth fruits of righteousness, which are to the
glory of God by him. Mark the expression, Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Christ. That is, by virtue of union with Christ, of
implantation and ingrafture into Christ. When once it is thus, then all your
fruits are sweet fruit, and pleasant fruit, it is well tasted. Why, it is done
First, From a principle of life in Christ. And Secondly, It is done from a
principle of Love unto Christ: and then when your works, whether respecting God
or man are thus done, then they are the fulfilling, and the final end of the
Commandment. For then they come from the pure heart. Of which hereafter (if God
will, I may speak). And so much at the present of the point in General, That
until there be a good Principle, there cannot be a good work.

SERMON II.
Jan. 6. 1672.
1 TIMOTHY 1. 5. Now the end of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart,
and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned.
HAving showed that every good work which is to answer to the Commandment of
God, must flow from a good spring,

I shall now come to speak of the springs from whence they flow. Beginning with
that which is first in the Text, A pure heart. The end of the Commandment, is
charity, out of a pure heart. A pure heart is the point I am now to speak to,
and the matter I am to make discovery about. It being in order, in this Text,
the first of those three most blessed springs, out of which all duties well
pleasing unto God must proceed.

A pure heart. Two things are here to be spoken to.

First, What is meant by heart. And,

Secondly, What by purity of heart: And so put both together, A pure heart.

For the first I need not stay to spend time to show you, what is meant by the
heart: It being that which you have so often heard.

By heart, the Scripture often intends the whole inner man.

And sometimes it intends some special faculties of the inner man. The
understanding is noted by the heart; the will by the heart; the affections by
the heart; the conscience by the heart. And in this large sense we are to take
the word heart here: only bating the reference of it unto Conscience, which is
spoken of as the second distinct spring from whence good actions flow.

The heart then here, is the understanding, the will, the affections. Indeed
what ever lies in the bosom of man, you may call his heart. Yet I shall not
prosecute the point in this distinctness of these particular faculties of the
soul; showing how the understanding is pure, which is by its freedom from
error, and clear light in divine truths. How the Will is pure, which is, by its
freedom from the bondage, from the obstinacy and rebellion, which does
naturally, wholly possess it: and by having a freedom in choosing good, and
refusing that which is evil. Nor shall I stay strictly to show what the purity
of the affections is; namely, their freedom from all inordinacy and
irregularity, either as to the object upon which they are fixed; or as to the
measure and degree in which they are fixed upon those objects.

That which I shall do indeed, shall be to speak to the Heart, and so of the
purity of it in a general notion, as it concerns the whole inner man.

And the heart as to purity, may be considered two ways,

First, As Made,

Secondly, As Re-made.

The heart of man as made, was pure; I mean, in its primitive Constitution. So
Adam had a pure heart; his understanding pure, his will pure, his affections
pure. God made him upright; but he lost his pure heart, or the purity of his
heart. Sin did impure his whole inner man; and he being our Representative,
lost purity of heart, not only for himself, but for us. All mankind lost that
made purity of heart when Adam fell. And therefore the very first Complaint
which the Lord made of the Fallen World, was concerning the pravity and
impurity of their hearts, in Genesis 6. 5. God saw that the wickedness of man was
great in the earth, [that's wickedness of Life,] and that every imagination of
the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. By this we see to purpose,
That the first made purity of the heart was lost. Here are so many particulars
setting forth the evil of man's heart, as plainly shows, that it is nothing but
evil. Here Is the evil of his Imaginations, The Imagination of the Thoughts of
his heart. And not here and there one, but every imagination of the thoughts of
his heart, it was evil. And not evil with some mixture of good, but purely
evil. It was evil without any goodness in it: and therefore says he only evil.
Nor was it in this impure state, only for a fit, or now and then: but says the
Text, Continually evil; or as the Hebrew is, every day. Day by day, which we
render Continually. So that now the made pure heart was lost; and no man has a
pure heart by nature; nor has any man a heart less impure by nature, than
another man has. Our hearts in nature are all of a make; and that is stark
naught. So spoke the Prophet Jeremy likewise in Jer. 17. 10. The heart of man
is deceitful above all things. The heart of man is the greatest cheat in the
world, and the greatest Impostor in the world: and says he, it is desperately
wicked; and it is so wicked, that the wickedness of it is beyond Humane
Comprehension: The wickedness of it is beyond the knowledge of man* who knows
it? Neither he that has the heart, nor any other that se^ him that has it,
knows how wicked the heart of man is. And pray take notice, That the Prophet
does not speak there of some sort of vile, base, debauched, wicked men, whose
hearts were so deceitful and wicked; but he speaks of men in general, as they
are in nature: And much of that deceitfulness and wickedness remains, even when
they are in Grace. We may therefore conclude, (at least in this matter)
alluding to that of Solomon in the Proverbs, Chap. 37. 19. As in water, face
answers to face; so the heart of man to man. There are some that do trouble
the water in that Text, with various Interpretations, I shall not stay upon
them. But all that I allege the Text for, is to show, That look what there is
in one man's heart naturally, the same is in another. Just as he that looks
into the water; the face in the water upon which he looks, answers his own face
looking into it: So does the heart of man to man. The hearts of all good men,
of persons regenerate, do answer one another in the main. Look what the heart
of one godly man is, the same is the heart of another godly man in the main,
though there may be particular differences. And so, take all men in their
natural condition. Look what the heart of one man is, the same is the heart of
another; and all stark naught. So then, there is now no pure heart in nature.
Seeing the made pure heart is lost, we must then consider the heart as remade
pure.

Here is a pure heart in the Text: It Is a heart re-made pure. A heart made pure
by a gracious Restitution. And mark it, I say, it is a heart remade. It is not
a heart mended; that will not serve the turn. The heart of man received such a
crack in the fall, that there is no mending of it: It must be new made.
Therefore I say, the pure heart is a heart re-made, new made. As we commonly
say of a Bell, if a Bell receive a crack, there is no mending of it: You cannot
mend a Bell, as you may mend a Brass Pan, by putting a piece to it: There is no
way to mend a cracked Bell, but by new casting it; it must to the Founder. Truly
thus it is with man's heart; there is no mending it, no putting a patch to it;
no repairing it, as you may repair a house that is delapidated. No, it must be
new made: and therefore the pure heart which is here spoken of in the Text, in
other Texts is called a new heart, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. It is not a mended heart,
but it is a new heart. I will take away the heart of stone. The former heart is
an heart of stone; a heart that has no more of remorse in it; no more of
softness or tenderness in it, than a stone: I will take away the heart of
stone. He does not say, I will mend the heart of stone, but I will take it
away. That is, I will take away the heart, so far as it is stony; And I will
give you an heart of flesh: that is a new heart, an heart of flesh. The remade
heart is a heart made wholly new: It is made wholly new by the power of God;
and I may give it you in these four things.

This pure heart, of which I am speaking, is purified or made new.

First, Meritoriously by the blood of Christ. For it is by blood that things
are purified and purged; as the Author to the Hebrews does discourse at large,
especially in the ninth Chapter of the Epistle, Ver. 22. Almost all things are
by the Law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no Remission.
The heart is made pure,

First, By the blood of Christ, that cleansing blood: The blood of Christ
cleanses from all sin.

Secondly, It is purified or made pure, by the Spirit of Christ; therefore we
find these two put together, 1 Pet. 1. 2. Through sanctification of the Spirit
unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. As we are purified
through the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ; so through the
sanctification of the Spirit. The Spirit is pure, and the Spirit is a purifier.
The Spirit is compared to water: the Spirit is compared to fire, that purifies,
that fetches out the dross and the filth, and makes all pure. And indeed, the
impurity which is in the heart of man, is such, as nothing less than the blood
of Christ, and therefore of the Spirit can purge it out. The fire of
afflictions will not purge out the impurities of the heart. The fire of Hell
will not fetch out the dross that is in the hearts of the damned. Nothing but
the blood of Christ, nothing but the Spirit of Christ, are able to do it. The
blood of Christ meritoriously, the Spirit efficiently, and efficaciously And
then,

Thirdly, The heart re-made pure, is so made Instrumentally by the Word. The
Word of God is pure, it is as Silver purified in the fire seven times. And the
Word of God is a purifier instrumentally; and the usual way by which the heart
is re-made pure, is by the Word. Christ says, John 15. 3. Ye are clean: How?
Through the Word that I have spoken. And in general, the Apostle in Ephesians. 5.
22, 26. says That Jesus Christ does sanctify and cleanse his Church, with the
washing of water, by the Word With the washing of water, that is, with the
Spirit. But what is the instrument? By the Word. This way is purity of heart
commonly and usually wrought by the Word. And,

Fourthly, The heart is made pure applicatorily by Faith, Acts 15. 9. He put no
difference between us and them (says the Apostle) that is, between Jews and
Gentiles, having purified their hearts by faith. God works faith in the heart,
and then faith purifies the heart by applying the blood of Christ, and by
receiving the Spirit, and by working the soul to a submission to the holy Word
and Will of God. So that thus in these ways the heart is remade pure: and of
this re-made pure heart, it is that the Text speaks. That Is the spring out of
which holy and acceptable works to the Lord does flow.

Obj. But some may say, Is there any such thing as a pure heart? We find those
questions somewhat rife in the Book of Job, What is man, that he should be
clean? So in Chap. 15. 14. Or how can he be clean, that is born of a woman?
Chap. 25. 4. And Solomon says expressly, in Prove. 20. 9. Who can say, I have
made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? It is plain then by these
Scriptures, that there is no such thing as a pure heart.
Answ. I answer briefly, in three things to these Scriptures, and to all
Scriptures of a like Import. When the Scripture speaks thus, It does teach us,
either,

First, that no man is born with a pure heart; or it teaches us,

Secondly, That no man by his own power has made his heart pure; or,

Thirdly, it teaches us that no heart is made pure in this world with an
absolutely perfect purity. Indeed the best purity which the heart attains to in
this world, has a mixture of much impurity in it: so that thus indeed there is
no heart pure. That is, there is no heart Legally pure, strictly pure; but
there are thousands of hearts through Grace, that are sincerely pure, that are
Evangelically pure, and so esteemed in the thoughts of God, and so expressed in
his word.

If any shall say, you tell us there is an Evangelical purity, what mean you by
it? when may the heart be said to be Evangelically pure?

I answer thus, the heart is Evangelically When the heart may be said to be
Evangelically pure.
pure, though there be sin dwelling in us, or an in-dwelling sin, and though
sin is stirring, has strong motions in us, makes war in our souls from day to
day, though sin does some times prevail, and give us that foil; yet
notwithstanding all this, when,

First, the soul i^ free from the Command of every sin,

Secondly, When the soul is freed from the customary practice of every sin; and,

Thirdly, When the soul is free from the love of any sin, then the soul is
Evangelically pure. Indeed sin will hide, sin will stir, and I cannot warrant
any man in the world, that is a man of the purest heart in the world, but that
his sin may possibly give him a foil. But this is certain, he that has an
Evangelical purity, is free from the commanding power of sin, and from that
constant, and customary practice of sin; and from the love of sin. A man of a
pure heart, may have a special sin, that is, a sin to which he is more inclined
than to any other. Sometimes through the constitution of his body, sometimes
through his occasions, and in the way of his calling; there are many things
which do endanger men to some special sin, now though I say a good man may have
a special sin, a sin that he finds his heart most running out after, in which
sense David call's some iniquities, his Iniquity, Psalm. 111. 23. I have kept my
self (says he) from mine Iniquity, that is, from the Iniquity that did most
beset him. A good man then, may have a special sin, which haunts him, which
dogs him, and besets him, but yet he has not a beloved sin; Evangelical
purity, and the love of sin, cannot consist together, he that has a pure
heart, cannot play with his sin, cannot sport with his sin, cannot take content
in thinking of sin, either past, or what may be to come. As they in the
Prophet, this day is thus with us, and to morrow shall be more abundant. No, he
cannot please himself thus, in reference to any sin. So that I conclude it, the
pure heart is freed, (if he be Evangelically freed) from sin in all these
notions, and so he is the Person here meant in the text, from whom all holy
actions may proceed acceptably to the Lord; and that may serve for the opening
of this point, for I intend to dispatch it at this time.

I shall make some use of it.

Use. First, To stir up all to consider, whether they have this pure heart yea
or no. You see the importance of it, it is one of the springs out of which
every action that is pleasing to God, according to his appointmemt must flow,
therefore it stands us much upon, lest we loose all things that we work, To
have a good assurance in our own bosoms, that we have a pure heart in our
bosoms; and we had need consider it. For,

First, it is most sure that many think they have pure hearts, and have them
not. Solomon has an expression; says he, there are a Generation that are pure
in their own own eyes, and yet are not cleansed from their wickedness, Chap.
30. 12. It Is an easy matter to be pure in our own eyes, and yet remain
altogether unclean? A Generation pure in their own eyes. And St. Augustine
speaks of a sort of people; who would needs be called Cathorists, and (says
he) they do call themselves so, they most proudly, and odiously call
themselves, the pure ones. But according to his discovery of them, they were
not cleansed from their wickedness; and how many are thus indeed, clean in
their own eyes, and yet are unclean. And,

Secondly, There are many that are clean, not only in their own eyes, but in
the eyes of other men, yea possibly in very good men, Godly men, clean in their
eyes, and yet for all this, they are not cleansed from their filthness. Our
Lord Jesus Christ detecting the hypocrisy of the Pharisees, says, that they
were like whited sepulchers, which appear fair to men, but within are full of
dead men's bones, and rottenness. Thus it is with many, very many in the world,
they appear very beautiful, like a brave sepulcher, painted, and gilded, have
possibly a very pure hand, you can see no evil they do; they have possibly a
very pure Tongue, you can hear of no evil they speak. Speak even as they in
Deuteronomy. 5. 28, 29. of whom the Lord says, they have well said in all that they
have spoken, says God to Moses, they have well done indeed, in all that they
have spoken? I but they did little of that which they had spoken. Many are very
good in the sight of other Men, but not so in the sight of God, he does easily
discover their Impurities, and let me tell you, their are many that discover
their own Impurity, and of whom we may conclude, that they have no pure heart,
while we consider the gross Impurities of their lives. Indeed some carry it
closely, and others profainly, and as the Lord speaks in Jer. 2. 34. Their sin
is in their skirts, you need not dig for it, says, God; I have not found it by
secret searching, or by digging, their sin is in their skirts. It is so with
many, their sin is in their skirts, and you need not dig to find it out, the
impurities of their life do plainly show the impurity of their hearts. The
Prophet Micha puts the question, Chap. 6. 11. Shall I count them pure with the
wicked balances, and with the bag of deceithful weights? shall I count them
pure? do you think he has a good heart, who has such a life as this, willing
to deceive, and willing to wrong his Brethren, or those that he deals with? so
we may carry on the Prophets chiding question to many and many. Shall we count
them pure whose eyes are full of Adultery? Shall we count them pure whose hands
are full of blood? Shall we count them pure whose houses are full of
oppression? Shall we think them pure whose mouths are full of cursing and
oaths, of scurility? Shall we count them pure whose mouths and Tongues are
often tipped with scofs against purity? why the impurity of these men's hearts
breaks out, the show of their countenance does testify against them, that they
declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. You see then there are a number
that want this purity of heart. Consider them first, who are pure in their own
eyes, and have great thoughts of their own purity. Consider, secondly, those
that have a great opinion for purity among men, they appear to others so, and
yet the Lord sees they are not so. And then, if you go abroad to the profain
world, who proclaim their impurities, and glory in their impurity. And
therefore to urge that a little further,

How may we know where there is purity of heart, that Evangelical purity which
I spoke of before? In opening the words, take a few touches as to the discovery
of a pure heart.

First, he that Indeed has a pure heart, is very Discoveries of a pure heart.
sensible that once he had an impure heart, as David in Psalm. 51. In sin was I
conceived, and brought forth in Iniquity. David was a man of a pure heart. He
was very sensible that once his heart was very impure. And,

Secondly, He that has a pure heart is sensible that to this day there remains
much impurity in his heart, and the purer any ones heart is, the more does he
mourn under his heart impurities. And,

Thirdly, He that has a pure heart, loves every thing that is pure, and the
more pure it is, the more he loves it, the more he approves it. Here Is a pure
heart; Phil. 1. 10. He approves the things that are excellent. Things that
differ, so the word is. That is, things that differ in a way of excellency, not
only things that differ, as good, and bad differ, but things that differ as
good and good differ; for there is a gradual difference between good and good,
as there is a specifical difference between good and evil; as there is a
difference between wheat and cockle, so there is a difference between wheat and
wheat: As there is a difference between Gold and Copper, so there is a
difference between Gold and Gold. There Is the Gold of Ophyr, the most pure
Gold. Now I say, he that has a pure heart, he loves all that is pure, and the
more pure any thing is, the more he loves it. That Is the meaning of the
Apostle, he approves things that differ in a way of excellency, not only as
good differs from evil, but as one good differs from another. If there be any
thing which is more excellent than another, he is for that. Here Is your pure
heart then. And,

Fourthly, A pure heart will be full of pure thoughts, or you will be sure that
no impure thoughts shall have any welcome in you; a pure heart converses
chiefly with God in purity of thoughts, and good thoughts; as the wicked are
discribed, Psalm. 10. to be such as have not God in all their thoughts, they
have not the pure God, nor the holy God in all there thoughts, that is, God is
not at all in their thoughts to any purpose. So we may say of the pure heart,
God is in all his thoughts, or he would fain have his thoughts always upon God.
And so those that the Lord accounts his Jewels are discribed, Mal. 13. 16.
Says he, I will deal thus and thus with them that fear me, and that think upon
my name. Mark, that think upon my name. A great part of our spiritual purity,
is to ^he often thinking upon the pure God: The pure heart (I say) is often
full of pure thoughts, and you may take measure of the purity of your hearts
very much, by considering what your thoughts are. And,

Fifthly, your heart is full of pure and good desires, thoughts are single acts
and puttings forth of the soul upon such and such objects and subjects, but
desires they are wrought up into such or such a special point: a pure heart is
full of good desires, and especially he desires to be more good, to be better,
he desires to know more of God, and to honor God more, he desires to enjoy God
more, he hungers and thirsts after God. And what is the hunger and thirst of the
soul? It Is spiritual desire: desire is the hunger and thirst of the soul. Now a
pure heart is full of these desires, and these are the most spiritual
discoveries of him that has a pure heart. Let him consider what his desires
are, what he would have: Isa. 26. With my soul have I desired thee. Mark your
desires. And then,

Sixthly, If you you have this pure heart, you will not only have many pure
desires, but you will have purposes, pure resolves, you will be full of good
resolves, and by resolves the heart is fixed, fastened, settled, resolution is
the stablishment of the soul; now a pure heart is full of pure resolves, and
purposes. The resolves and purposes are of two kinds.

First, He purposes and resolves to adhere and cleave to that which is good.
Thus he does resolve with himself, fall back, fall edge, let the winds blow
high or low, this I am resolved, this is my purpose, to cleave to Christ, and
that which is good, as that good man Barnabas is said to exhort the people,
Acts. 11. 23. He exhorted them, that with purpose of heart they would cleave to
the Lord, with purpose of heart. Holy purposes they are are as the Glue, by
which our hearts are fastened to the Lord Jesus Christ, I exhort you with
purpose of heart that you would cleave to Christ.

And then there is a purpose in a pure heart, against all that is evil, against
all that is Impure: Daniel 1. That holy man Daniel, Verse 8. says the Text,
Daniel purposed in his heart, that he would not defile himself with the portion
of the Kings meat; he was resolved of that, now he has a pure heart, indeed,
who purposes that he will never defile himself, his heart, nor his life
neither. And indeed, such purposes have they that have pure hearts, of one kind
or of another. Yea sometimes we find holy ones heigthening their purposes to
vows, yea to oaths, I have sworn, says David, that I will keep thy righteous
Judgments; here were strong purposes indeed. And then,

Seventhly, He that has this pure heart, certainly has pure ends in all that
he does, He has a holy Aim, he has a single eye, this is a great evidence of
a pure heart, when we have pure Aims, Christ calls that the single eye, Matthew.
6. 23. If thine eye be single, that is, If thy ends, and Aims, that which thou
look at, If they are single, sincere, pu^e, the whole body shall be full of
light. A pure heart, the ends that he proposes, are not self, not selfprofit,
not self-applause, not pleasure; But he purposes the profit of many that they
may be saved, of the good of all with whom he converses. He proposes these
great ends, which he carries quite through all unto the end. And that is, that
he may exalt the name of the Lord by all. O look to your ends, the purity of
your hearts, will appear in the purity of your Aims, and of your ends: and so
much for that first thing, for conviction, and discovery about this purity of
heart.

Use. 2. Secondly, Let it be a word of exhortation, and that in two branches.

First, If there be such a thing as a pure heart, and that be of such
importance, then weigh it well, whether you have this pure heart, consider it
by all that has been forespoken concerning an Evangelical pure heart, and the
evidences thereof; and I would say this for the urging of it, that we all
should look to this matter, the purity of our hearts.

First, The hardest thing that we have to do, is the purifying of our hearts,
and the greatest kindness which God can do us, is to cleanse our hearts. The
cleansing of the heart is the hardest piece of work, it is comparatively an
easy thing to cleanse the hand, comparatively an easy thing to cleanse the
Tongue, and to have that pure, but to have the heart purified, there is the
great stick. And then,

Secondly, Look to the purity of your hearts, for they have certainly need of
purifying. They whose hearts are still in their first natural state, they have
need indeed, and they who are in a spiritual state, have need of daily
purifying, look (I say) therefore to the purifying of your hearts, for they
have need to be purified, they are the filthiest part of us: If there be
impurity in the hand, there is much more in the heart; and then,

It Is indeed a vain thing* to go about to purify the hand, or Tongue, or life,
if the heart be Impure. 'Twere a vain thing for any one to go and cleanse a
stream, while he know's that there is a Fountain above that sends forth filthy,
and unclean, and poisonous water. It Is just so in this case; till the heart be
made pure, nothing can be pure.

And the great esteem which God has of us, is with respect to this purity of
heart. He is a friend indeed to those who have a pure heart, he has a great
respect for them. There is an expression, in Prove. 22. 11. He that loves
pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the King shall be his friend, mark
there; the pureness of heart, and grace of lips. By grace of lips, he means,
not only graceful speech, but gracious speech. Now grace in the lips you see
has its dependence upon the pureness of the heart, and says he, he that has
such a pureness of heart, as that from it he has a^ graceful lip, the King
shall be his friend. Doubtless Solomon spoke this with reference to himself,
showing what a friend he would be to those that appeared before him in pureness
of heart, and this graciousness of their lips. But this is much more true in
reference to the King of Heaven. He that loves pureness of heart, for the
grace of of his lips, the King of Heaven shall be his friend, he shall be
accepted of God. And what grace soever that is, gracefulness of speech any one
has, if there be not pureness of heart, he shall have no favor with the King
of Heaven, what ever he may find among any of the Kings of the Earth. O this
therefore is the great thing, my Son faith Solomon, give me thy heart. That Is
it which the Lord does so much delight in, Prove. 23. 26. My Son, give me thy
heart. What heart must it be? Not an unclean heart, not a filthly heart, not a
proud heart, not a covetous heart, not a malicious heart, not an uncharitable
heart, but my Son give me thy heart, give me thy heart purified, purged,
cleansed. Or thus, give me thy heart, resign it up to me to be purified, to be
purged, to be cleansed, to be made holy. Indeed we may give our proud hearts up
to God, and beg of him that he would humble them, But we must not think to keep
our hearts proud, and give them up to God proud; and we may give our unclean
hearts to God, begging of him that he would cleanse them, but we must not keep
unclean hearts in our bosoms, and then say, we give up our hearts to God. The
heart in which God is pleased, and in with he takes delight, is the pure heart;
therefore upon all these Considerations, let us be much looking after the
purity of our hearts. And then.

Secondly, Do you find that according to Scripture rule, you have a pure heart,
Then I have a second word to say. Pray do what you can to keep your hearts
pure: For they who have pure hearts may quickly find their hearts very impure,
unless they look narrowly to it. A heart that is made pure, will be greatly
impured unless we watch, and keep it pure. Solomon has that expression, in
Prove. 4. 23. keep thy heart with all diligence, says he, For out of it are the
Issues of life: keep thy heart, keep it with all diligence, with all manner of
keeping; you see then, it is not enough to get a pure heart; but we must keep
our hearts, and keep them clean. As it is in this case with your houses, you do
not only make them clean, but you keep them clean: and if a house be made never
so clean, yet it will contract defilement. Dust will be upon it, unless it be
kept clean, unless it be watched that none throw dirt into it. Indeed we had
need in keeping our hearts, to watch them continually: and that is the great
business of keeping our hearts, for the Devil if we do not watch our hearts, he
will do one of these two things.

He will either steal away our heart: for the Devil comes a heart-stealing
continually; and especially when you are at a Sermon, or a holy duty; and if he
can but steal away your hearts, he cares not how many Bodies there are here.

Or he will be throwing dirt into your hearts, suggesting wickedness: He will
throw dirt into the inner closet of your hearts, by his Temptations, by his
Injections. Therefore if you would keep your hearts clean, you must watch them.

I, and you must often wash your hearts, if you would keep them clean; for your
hearts will contract filth, do what you can, unless they are daily washed, and
duly searched.

As it is with a Garden, let a Garden be dressed, and made very exact, so that
there is not any thing amiss, not a Weed to be seen in it: I, but the Garden
must be kept thus, or else in a little time it will be overrun with Weeds
again. It is so in our hearts: Suppose we have weeded out this, and that, and
the other evil, if we do not keep a continual care of our hearts, the Weeds
will grow again; and therefore our hearts must be continually weeding; and our
hearts must be continually washed. We must go daily to the Fountain opened for
sin and for uncleanness: We must wash our hearts by the renewed Acts of
Repentance, confessing our sins, bewailing our sins, mortifying our sins. This
is a great work for us. If you have pure hearts, look to it that you keep them
pure; you may quickly be defiled: David, a man that had a pure heart; yet got
so much defilement upon his heart, that he could not tell what to make of it,
but begs of God to create him a new heart, and all because he did not watch his
heart, but gave way to Temptation, and so was overtaken: then you will find if
you do not daily sweep your houses, they will defile; and the cob-webs they
will grow; the Spiders will be at work; and though your hearts be never so
pure, Spiders will creep into them, this Lust, and that Corruption, and they
will be weaving their Webs there. O what sad Webs we have in the hearts of men,
and all because they look not after them! You must sweep down the Cob-webs, and
throw out the dirt every day, if you would keep your hearts clean.

And I would press all I have said, by these four Considerations. Look to it
that you have pure hearts, and that you keep your hearts pure.

First, Upon this Consideration which you find in Psalm. 18. 26. With the pure,
thou will show thy self pure: with the merciful, thou will show thy self
merciful: with an upright man thou will show thy self upright. With the pure
thou will show thy self pure. I, but if a man be not pure, Will God show
himself impure toward him? No such thing. Let us be what we will, God is ever
the same. Nothing can turn him out of his purity. But the meaning is, If we are
pure, pure in heart, God will show himself pure to us: that is, he will perform
all things; he will be that to us which he has promised. He will be all that
to us which we can desire. With the pure, thou will show thy self pure. And he
says, With the froward, thou will show thy self froward. As God knows how to
deal with men in ways of evil, to hit them according to what they are: With
the froward thou will show thy self froward. Not that there is any frowardness
or passion in the Lord; but men shall be dealt with according to their way.
They that will wrestle with God, as the word there signifies, he will pay them
in their own coin: And so with the pure, thou will show thy self pure. And then,

Secondly, Look to this purity, for then all things are pure to you. As God
will show himself pure to you: So if you are pure, all things will be pure to
you, Titus 1. 15. Unto the pure, all things are pure; but unto them that are
defiled, and unbelieving, is nothing pure. Here is a very strong Argument to
press you to this purity of heart: To the pure, all things are pure. To the
impure, nothing is pure. Why is it that to the pure all things are pure? What
are evil actions pure to them? Is sin pure to them? No: God forbid that any
should have such a thought. This liberty have some taken to themselves, as if
there were no difference to be made in actions: But, to the pure, all things
are pure. They need not trouble themselves about sin, or this or that. No, but
to the pure all things are pure: that is, all things are blessed to them: All
their enjoyments, all the Ordinances of God, all their outward comforts, all
their relations, all their duties, all things are pure to them. Whereas, says
he, To them that are defiled, there is nothing pure. The very holy Ordinances
are not pure to them: Their Callings, though honest, are not pure to them:
their riches, their great possessions in the world, are not pure to them: They
have not a pure, nor a holy use of any of these things. This is an awakening
consideration, to look after a pure heart, To the pure, all things are pure;
but to the undefiled there is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience
is defiled. And then,

Thirdly, The pure in heart, are only fit for Communion with God, 2 Timothy 2. 22.
says he, With them that call on the Lord, out of a pure heart. They only are
fit to call upon God, who have a pure heart. The Apostle would have them lift
up clean hands, in 1 Timothy 2. 8. (much more then, pure hearts, who call upon God
out of a pure heart.) And when the Apostle James had exhorted them to draw nigh
to God, with this Promise of Assurance, that he would draw nigh to them,
presently he adds, Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye
double minded. You are no ways fit for Communion with God, for drawing near to
God, unless your hearts are thus purified, thus purged, thus cleansed. And then,

Fourthly, Lastly, The pure in heart are those that have that great promise,
the promise which concludes all good; namely, To see God. Matthew. 5. 8. Blessed
are the pure in heart. Why? Says he, They shall see God. God is a Spirit, God
is Invisible, How shall they see him? Him no man has seen, nor can see. How
shall the pure in heart see him? Why, they shall see him; that is, they shall
enjoy him, they shall have sweet communion with him; they shall ascend into the
Holy Hill, Psalm. 24. 3, 4. Who shall ascend into the Holy Hill? He that has
clean hands, and a pure heart. They shall be admitted nigh to God, they shall
see him, they shall enjoy him.

I may conclude with that of the Prophet, Hab. 1. 13. he says, that God is of
purer eyes than to behold iniquity. And the truth is, Impure eyes cannot behold
God: They cannot bear the Glory, the Excellency of his presence: They cannot
enjoy God. There is a stop in the very nature of the thing, as well as there is
a stop by a Divine Law. Thus the Imposture shall not come into the presence of
God; that is the Divine Law. And there is a stop in the very nature of the
thing: they cannot abide in the presence of God. As he is of purer eyes, than
to behold evil: so evil ones have such impure eyes, that they cannot behold
him, they cannot see God.

Now then, let this be considered, and lay it to heart, what reason you have to
look after this pure heart, which is the first of those three springs, out of
which says the Apostle, all those holy actions, which are the end, and the
fulfilling of the Commandment of God must flow, and with which only it is that
you may come to have acceptance. And so much now of the first of the Springs,
The Pure Heart. The second is, a Good Conscience.

FINIS.
PSALM. 92. 12. The righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree. He shall grow
like a Cedar in Lebanon.
WE see commonly that opposites, either persons or things, being laid
together, illustrate and set off one another. (To touch at no other things in
this Psalm) Here are two of the greatest opposites in this world laid together,
and they do wonderfully illustrate each other.

The opposites are, the Wicked and the Righteous. And indeed, those two divide
the whole world.

The state of the wicked, is set down at the seventh Verse, They may spring as
the Grass, they may flourish. But what is the issue of it? It is that they shall
be destroyed for ever. They shall spring, but they shall spring but like Grass,
which is Green for a while, and quickly withers.

Now the Righteous at this twelfth Verse, (For I shall not enlarge further upon
the state of the wicked; but only to set off the state of the Righteous.) The
Righteous shall flourish too. But how? Not like the Grass, but like the
Palm Tree. And indeed, they shall abide for ever: whereas the wicked, they
shall be destroyed for ever.

Who the Righteous are, I shall not stay to speak of at large.

They are such as are righteous in their state, being in the righteousness of
Jesus Christ.

And they are such as are righteous in their course, and in their life, walking
answerably to such a state.

These Righteous ones shall flourish. They shall not only Live and Continue,
but they shall have a flourishing life. David says, Mine enemies live, and are
mighty. It Is true, they do so for a time, many times. The Righteous live, and
they have a mightiness too. For they flourish.

And how do they flourish? Not as the Grass, but as the Palm Tree.

I shall only open that a little, and touch only upon one point, from the
Parallel. They shall flourish as the Palm Tree.

The Palm Tree is an excellent tree, and the praises of God are often resembled
by it: Nay, they are said in the Revelation to have Palms in their hands. And
they are shadowed by the Palm Tree, in the Prophecy of Ezekiel, Chap. 40. 31.
in the description of the New Jerusalem.

Now when it is said, They shall flourish like a Palm Tree: We must consider
how the Palm Tree flourishes.

The Palm tree, (only to touch that) is the Date-tree, that is the Palm Tree.
And so the Meeter, or Singing Psalms expresses it. There it is rendered thus,

The Just shall flourish up on high,
As Date-trees bud and blow.
Now there are five things which are observed in the Date-tree, I shall name
them all, but speak only a little to one to carry on this point of the
flourishing of the Righteous like the Palm Tree.

First, The Date, or the Palm Tree grows in the purest soil: it will not grow
in filthy places, in dungy places, but it loves a very pure soil. And thus the
Righteous flourish: They flourish in a very pure soil: for they are planted in
that which is the purest soil of all: They are planted in Christ: They grow in
Christ; and they grow in the Church, which is a pure soil. They are planted in
the house of God, as it follows in the Psalm. Not in the world, the unclean and
polluted world, which lies in wickedness, and smells like a dunghill, but in
the Garden of God. And,

Secondly, The Palm Tree is a Tree whose branches do shoot all upwards: there is
none grow out of the side, as other Trees have. And thus the Righteous flourish
as the Palm Tree: their affections are set upon things above: they grow up
Heavenward. They do not shoot out their branches this way, or that way to the
world, but all to Heaven. So it is while they act according to their state.

Thirdly, The Palm Trees are those Trees which are always green: Green in
Winter as well as in Summer. It does not cast its leaf, nor fade; as the
expression is in Psalm. 1. 3. The godly man is like a Tree planted by the Rivers
of Water, that brings forth his fruit in his season, His leaf also shall not
wither. They hold up their profession: they are green, not only in the Summer
of prospe^ity but in the very Winter of adversity; and maintain their verdure,
and their beauty in the hardest times.

Fourthly, The Palm Tree is a Tree that does not only keep its greenness, the
beauty of its leaves; but it is a Tree that is full of fruit; and that good
fruit, pleasant fruit, sweet fruit. a kind of Cordial fruit, which you know the
Date is. The Righteous have the greenness of a profession: and besides that,
they have the fruitfulness of their Conversation; and it is pleasant fruit,
fruits of Righteousness, fruits of Faith, fruits of Love, the fruits of the
Spirit. They are fruitful Trees, such a one as the Palm.

Fifthly, (Which I shall a little insist upon.) They flourish like the
Palm Tree. It is so far noted, that it is made an Emblem. The Palm Tree does
grow up, when it is most pressed down. When there are the heaviest weights hung
upon the Palm Tree, then the Palm Tree rises up highest. It grows highest, when
it is (as it were) kept down. Thus it is with the Righteous; they flourish like
the Palm Tree: And that is the Note that I shall give you, and speak a little to.

DOCT.
That Righteous persons, such as are righteous in their state, in a justified
state; and Righteous in their course, walking in holiness, they do improve and
grow under greatest pressures. When they meet with the greatest pressures in
the world, they thrive and grow Heavenward.

This only I shall speak a little to. When the world would crush the Righteous,
press them down to the earth, yea, press them down to Hell if they could, yet
like the Palm-teee, they grow up more and more.

It is said of the people of Israel, who were the Church of God in Exodus 1.
that when Pharaoh put weights upon them, the weights of very heavy oppression;
when he set over them Taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens at ver.
11. it is said ver. 12. But the more they afflicted them, the more they
multiplied and grew. This was just like the Palm Tree. Pharaoh burdened them,
but they multiplied and grew. And surely we are to understand this, not only of
their multiplyplying in number, but of their multiplying in goodness too, or
their increase in goodness: they multiplied and grew (Doubtless there is that
sense in it) not only that they had a greater company, and more fruitful as to
the production of persons, but that they were more fruitful in their lives. And
that is it which has been said of the Church at all times, when under pressures
and burdens. Says One, They were bound, they were beaten, they were burnt,
and yet they multiplied and increased. And doubtless, it was with the twofold
increase I spoke of before. The more persons were added to the Church; and
those persons that were added, advanced more in ways of Grace, in ways of
Holiness. And so that other saying of the Ancients upon this very point; That
the blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the Church. It was like seed indeed,
and it brought forth, as the seed spoken of in Matthew. 13. The good seed falling
upon good ground, brought forth, in some thirty, in some sixty, in some an
hundred fold. This is flourishing like the Palm Tree. And that we find in Dan.
11. 35. And some of them of understanding shall fall. Shall fall* How? Shall
fall into the hand, and under the hands of persecuting Tyrants; they shall fall
into trouble; like that in the Proverbs, The Righteous falls seven times a
day. That is, he falls often into trouble, yet God helps them up again. Now
says he, some of them of understanding; that is, of a spiritual understanding,
of a holy understanding: they shall fall into afflictions: for them of
understanding, we may explain it by Dan. 12. 10. None of the wicked shall
understand, but the wise shall understand. The godly wise, they shall
understand. Now of these men of understanding: Many shall fall: Well, what
shall be the effect of it? To try them. That Is the First.

And not only so, but to purge, and to make them white. To purge out their
corruptions, and to make their Graces very conspicuous. You see the improvement
they made of their afflictions and sufferings for the truths of God: and that
in Zach. 13. 9. teaches the same thing. I will bring the third part through the
fire: through the fire of persecution. And what, shall they be burnt there? No,
says he, I will refine them as Silver is refined, and will try them as Gold is
tried: and they shall call on my Name, and I will hear them, I will say, it is
my people; and they shall say, The Lord is my God. Thus they shall grow up in
the actings of their faith to an assurance. Faith shall come to an
appropriating act; they shall say, The Lord is my God. And when? Even when I
bring them through the fire. I will refine them so, that their faith shall be
exceeding transparent: and they shall say, The Lord is my God. And we know what
the Apostle Paul found by the sufferings which befell him; and in him the
Church of God, Phil. 1. 12. says he, I would you should understand, Brethren,
that the thing which happened unto me -- Why, what things were these that
happened to Paul? What was it some great preferment, (as we say) some great
Benefice, some great honor? No, the things that befell him, were troubles and
afflictions; Bonds, as he does express it in ver. 13. Now says he, These have
fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel. How, to the furtherance
of the Gospel? Why, because persons by this affliction upon me, which threatened
them also; and it is like took hold of some of them: why, says he, They waxed
confident by my bonds, and are much more bold to speak the Word without fear,
ver. 14. They grew up like the Palm tree; they grew to a confidence. They were
not only honest and faithful, but they were confident and bold. They had not
only integrity for Christ, but a great increase of strength for Christ; and all
upon his sufferings: They flourish like the Palm Tree. And that in Romans 5. will
reach it too: says he, We glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation
works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope. Why,
tribulation did not hinder their Graces, but did further them. Tribulation did
work patience. It seems to be a very strange sting. Tribulation does exercise
patience indeed: But how? It did work patience, or make them more patient: for
that is the meaning of it. Now it seems very strange, yet thus it does. And then
Patience experience, and experience hope. Here Is a flourishing, and a growing
up in all Graces, even in a time of tribulation. And it is the same thing that
we have too in 2 Cor. 4. 17. Our light affliction which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. That is, it
works us into a greater fitness for glory, the afflictions that are upon us. We
grow more up into Heaven, more into glory. Our hope does. (as it were) rise up
into glory by our affliction: And this is flourishing like the Palm Tree.
Affliction will make us the fitter for Heaven: they will make us better than we
were, and so fitter for Heaven, fitter for glory. Grace improved is very near
to glory. Thus we see how the Scripture holds out this thing, that the
righteous flourish as the Palm Tree. They are bettered, and made fitter by
their afflictions for glory.

I will give you an account in some grounds of it, why it is so, how it comes
to pass.

First, The pressures and weights that are upon the Righteous from the world,
do wean them from the world, takes them off from the world. Why now the love of
the world, and cleaving to the world, and desires going after the world, are a
mighty impediment to our growth in grace, to our flourishing in the world. You
see what is said in Matthew. 13. the cares of the world, the pleasures of the
world, the deceitfulness of riches, choke the Word, and make it become
altogether unfruitful. And truly the love of the world, and pursuit of worldly
things, do exceedingly hinder grace in the fourth Ground, in those that are
truly godly, it is a great hindrance to them till they get their hearts
mortified to the world, and weaned from the world. Now certainly the pressures
that we meet withal in the world, are an exceeding great means to take us off
from the pleasures of the world, and the profits of the world. We are mortified
to the world: as Paul says of the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that
I should glory in any thing save in the Cross of Christ. What Is the Cross of
Christ? Why, the sufferings which I have for Christ, the weights which are laid
upon me for Christ's sake. What was the effect of this? Why, whereby I am
crucified unto the world, and the world unto me. Now when the soul is delivered
from this world, this evil world, it must needs flourish up to the other world.

Secondly, By the afflictions and troubles we meet with in this world, we get
much light, and grow into a clearer knowledge of those things which makes for
our increases Heavenward. It has been anciently said, That affliction gives
understanding; and the School of the Cross, is the School of light. Light comes
in while we are in the School of the Cross. And indeed there is a foursold
light does come in to us while we are under the Cross, and under sufferings. A
light,

First, Which discovers more to us the vanity of the world, than ever we saw
before, and the baseness of the world, and the wickedness of the world: and
this is a great advantage to us. And,

Secondly, A light to see more of of the Mind of God, and of the Word of God.
So David in Psalm* 119. 71. It was good for me that I have been afflicted, for
thereby I have learned thy Statutes. Says he, learned them? I have more of thy
Statutes, and I have learned every Statute more. There has come in a clearer
light into my soul now by my afflictions. A state of affliction is in it self
called in Scripture, A state of Darkness: it is a time of darkness: and yet it
is wonderful, that out of this Darkness there comes a light; a spiritual light:
so that we see more of the Word of God, and of the wonderful things of the Law.

Thirdly, It must needs follow, that by affliction we have a clearer light to
see the worth of grace, and of an interest in Jesus Christ, what an excellent
thing that is. And then,

Fourthly, A clearer light to see the excellency of Jesus Christ himself. As of
an Interest in Christ, so of the person of Christ, how glorious, how choice a
one Jesus Christ is. I do but touch this now: By affliction a light comes into
the soul: Upon all these, or upon other accounts, we must needs improve
Heavenward, and grow up like the Palm Tree. In 2 Pet. 3. 18. says the
Apostle, Grow in Grace. Why how should we come to grow in grace? Why says he,
And in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In proportion to our
growth in the knowledge, in the true knowledge; I speak not of a notional
knowledge, a mere brain knowledge, but of an experimental knowledge of Jesus
Christ. As we increase in this knowledge, so we increase and grow in grace: and
so of the rest. As we grow in the knowledge of the vanity of the world: as we
grow in the knowledge of the Word of God; as we grow in the knowledge of the
worth of grace, and of an interest in Christ; as we grow in the knowledge of
the excellency of the knowledge of the Person of Christ, so we must needs grow
in grace. Now then, the Cross and affliction giving us an advantage for all
these things, you see the ground of it. And then,

Thirdly, The weights and pressures which are upon these Palm Trees, upon the
Righteous, they do draw them more into their own hearts; to converse more at
home, to search themselves more, to be acquainted more with their own bosoms,
and this will make us flourish, and grow upwards: for indeed the reason why we
grow up so little in acquaintance with Christ, lies much in this, because we
grow so little in acquaintance with our selves. Now in an afflicted condition
(if ever) the soul is upon its return to it self. In Lam. 3. when the whole
Church was in that sad condition, under those grievous weights of Captivity,
and all manner of trouble they were in: say they, Let us search and try our
selves. Come, now let us go in to our selves; let us search for our corruptions;
search for our lusts, which lie in the secret corners of our hearts; let us
search our selves, and let us search how it is with us as to Grace; what faith
we have, what love we have, what patience, and so of the rest. Indeed,
afflictions do put us upon this search of our selves, to find out the state of
our graces; how it is with us, what condition they are in, how they fare. Now
this the troubles we meet with in the world, give us an advantage for, and so
an advantage of spiritual growth, of growing Heavenward, as the Palm Tree. And
then,

Fourthly, These afflictions and pressures we have from the world, drive us
nearer to God. As to a more acquaintance with our selves, so to a more
acquaintance with God, and more communion with Christ. They do (as it were)
force us to Christ, when the world deals so unkindly with us. Many times when
the world is kind to us, fair with us, and flatters us, and huggs us, and
embraces us, we begin to forget, and to slight communion with Jesus Christ; and
to say as they in Jer. 2. We are Lords, we will come no more at thee. It is
spoken of the people of Israel, when they were in a very flourishing condition.
I, but when they were slaves, and in captivity, and in a sad condition, truly
then they saw reason to come to Christ, to come to him by prayer. The very
Mariners in Jonah, when they were in the storm, every one went to his God. Isa.
26. In their trouble they have visited me. To be sure I shall hear of them
then, In their affliction they will seek me early. It is so in evil men, much
more is it so in the righteous, and in those that have walked with God. If they
have had a constant communion with God and Jesus Christ in a time of peace and
prosperity, surely in a time of pressures they have much more communion with
him. Now this must needs cause the soul to increase and flourish. For the
nearer we are to God, the more we have of God, and receive impressions from
him; as Moses, when he was with God in the Mount, his face did shine. But in
times of outward peace, and when all is well, O we are very ready to neglect
communion with God.

Fifthly, Lastly, While the righteous are under weights and pressures, like a
Palm Tree, they have a special promise of the presence of God with them; and
this is that which makes them flourish indeed. It is not our being in
affliction, which will make us better, and make us grow Heavenward; but it is
Christ being with us in affliction. It is Gods manifesting himself to us in
affliction which makes us grow, and flourish like a Palm Tree. Now I need not
stay to tell you how many promises there are of the special presence of God to
his people while they are under the Cross; that in Isa. 43. 2. When thou
passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the Rivers, they
shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire thou shall not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. I will be with thee. And truly
the presence of God with us, it is not only for this end (Though that be there
expressed) that we shall not be quite swallowed up, that the water shall not
drown us, nor the fire consume us; but that the fire and water shall not
consume us as to our soul state. That we shall not suffer loss or detriment in
our spiritual state, by being in the fire or water; but that we shall increase
there, and grow there. So in 1 Pet. 4. 14. If ye be reproached for the Name of
Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests on you. It
does not only come to you, and visit you, but it rests upon you. Now when the
Spirit of God is, especially when the Spirit of God rests, and does abide,
there must needs be a growth, and an increase in our spiritual state. But so it
is, while we are under these afflicting dispensations, when the weights are
upon us, we have promises of more of the presence of God, and of the presence
of his Spirit, and of the resting of his Spirit; and therefore we shall
flourish, flourish spiritually, flourish in our inner man. That may serve for
the clearing of the Point, That the Righteous flourish as the Palm Tree, under
weights and pressures.

Application. First, This may confirm us in a twofold Scripture-truth.

First, That there is no wisdom, nor counsel against the Lord. That Is a
Scripture assertion, which receives a mighty confirmation by this point. Prove.
21. 30. This point does mightily confirm it. Why, what is the Counsel, what is
the purpose of the world, when they hang their weights upon the Palm Trees,
upon the righteous, what is the meaning? You shall understand their meaning:
when the first weights that we read of in the Scripture were ever hung upon
these Palm Trees, in the place before quoted, Exodus 1. 10. Come on, says he,
Let us deal wisely with them. The Wise man says in the Proverbs, There is no
wisdom, nor counsel against the Lord. Well, says he here, Let us deal wisely
with them. To what purpose? Why, says he, Lest they multiply. We will keep
them down; keep them down, that their persons multiply not; and we will keep
them down too, that their Graces multiply not. Truly this is the design of the
Counsels of men, in hanging their weights upon the Palm Trees; and so it has
been all along in the sufferings of the Church. What has been their wisdoms?
They thought by their sufferings to keep down those truths which they professed,
which it may be they called Heresy: As Paul says, After the way which you
call Heresy, so worship* I the God of my Fathers. Heresies, they thought to
suppress them as Errors and Heresies.

And they thought again to discourage the professors: yea, they thought not
only to discourage them in matters of truth, of faith and worship; but they
thought to turn them quite aside; to make them renounce it, to forsake it, to
apostatize, to backslide, to deny the faith. This is the thing which they have
had in their eye, in all the pressures which they have laid upon the people of
God from one time to another, to strip them of their faith, and to strip them
of the truth; to break them in the things of God. Now I say, this is their
Counsel. And mark what the Scripture says, There is no wisdom, nor counsel
against the Lord. They thought to hinder them in all these things, to suppress
the truth, to discourage the professors of the truth, and to cause them to turn
away, and to deny the truth. But they have failed in it: for they multiplied,
and the truth multiplied; and they flourisht more by the weights and burdens
that were upon their backs. So that we may say in this case, as the Prophet
Isaiah, Chap. 44. 25. That the Lord turns the Counsels of the wicked backward.
Turns wise men backward: that is, their wisdom which they have been
exercising, that has produced a quite contrary effect to what they intended:
they thought to hinder the truth; and they have been rather a furtherance to
it, as Paul's word is in the first of the Philippians. These things have happened
to the furtherance of the Gospel, which they thought should have ruined the
Gospel. And this indeed is so notorious, that the enemies of the Gospel have
been forced many times to acknowledge, and to confess it with grief, That the
righteous have flourisht like Palm Trees. In Exodus 1. 12. when it is said, the
more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew. And what follows?
And they, that is, the Egyptians, were grieved because of the children of
Israel. We see we cannot bring them down: their Counsels went quite backward.
And you have the like in John 12. 19. The Pharisees when they had done all that
they could to hinder the peoples receiving of Jesus Christ, they said among
themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? Behold, the world is gone after
him. You see they were fain to make an acknowledgement of this thing their own
selves. We have been laboring to stop the progress of this man, but we find it
quite otherwise; we prevail nothing at all. Not only, not much, but nothing.
And behold, the world is gone after him. He will get all the world shortly,
they multiply so fast. So that we see from this, the truth of the Scripture,
that there is no Counsel against the Lord.

And it may give you a further confirmation by way of Instruction, concerning
that great truth, in Romans 8. 28. All things shall work together for good to
them that serve God, and are the called according to his purpose. All things
work together for good. What things? Troubles, afflictions, pressures, burdens
which are laid upon them, they work for good. Why, this is one of the greatest
goods that can be, to have grace flourish and grow. Faith and Humility, and
Love to Jesus Christ, if one increase in these things. What is worthy the name
of good, in comparison of an increase of these things. That Is one thing we may
take notice of from it.

Secondly, We should be hence raised up in our hearts, to magnify the power,
wisdom and goodness of God, who does thus overruled these things for his
people: for certainly this does declare the wonderful work of God. In Isa. 28.
where he has a notable Allegory, and speaks of the troubles and sufferings of
the faithful people of God: For all that that is spoken of the Plowman, and of
the Thresher, and of the bruising of the Corn with threshing Instruments, they
do respect affliction and troubles which come upon the people of God, (as is
clear.) But now, says he, in the close of that Chapter, This also comes from
the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working. We
may wonder at the counsel and wisdom of God, who does his people good by
threshing them, and bringing the wheel over them. Here are several sorts of
afflictions and sufferings, some lesser, and some greater. Now all this is but
to separate the good seed from the chaff, and to make it more fit for use: for
while the Corn is in the ear, it is not fit for use, and we cannot make bread
of it until it be thresht. Now the Lord has several ways to do it. But says
he, This comes forth from the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in counsel,
and excellent in working. Truly we may say, How wonderful is the counsel of the
Lord! How excellent is his working, that he makes the Righteous to flourish
like the Palm Tree; to grow upwards, by that which one would think should bring
them down! As when we fee the Corn laid at, and thresht with a Flail, one would
think there were great hurt intended to the Corn; but it is only to separate it
from the chaff, that it may appear in its own beauty and usefulness. So the
Lord has a flail of tribulation, to separate the Chaff from the Wheat. Those
acts of Providence toward Gods people, which seem to be for their hurt and
undoing, when they are thresht as it were by the world, it is only to make them
appear what they are. That which we find in Psalm. 69. 22. concerning the
wicked, by that we may observe the wonderful difference, and dealings of God
with the wicked, who flourish as the Grass, and the righteous. David speaks
there of such, and says he, Let their table become a snare, and that which
should have been for their welfare, let it become a trap: that is, the Lord
does curse their Comforts. By Table, he means the good things upon their table:
when they have a full table, a plentiful table. And so all outward prosperity,
says he, it shall be a snare to them. And that which should have been for
their good: that is, that which in the nature of it is for their good, It shall
be an occasion for their falling: they shall grow more hardened by it, more
proud by it, and more impenitent by it, and more strangers to God by it. But
now when the Lord speaks of a righteous man, here the thing which was appointed
for his snare, as the troubles and persecutions which lie upon him in the
world, shall be a table to him; his very snares shall be a table to his inner
man, where his Graces shall come and feed, and grow fat, and flourish, and
increase. The things which the men of the world have devised for his falling,
they shall be to him an occasion of good. This is wonderful, and we are to
bless the Lord for it, when we find such effects of it: when we see it so in
others, or have any experience of it in our selves, that our afflictions do not
snare us, but are a table to our Graces. That Is another thing, to give God the
glory of it; for it is not in the nature of these things to do it. No, things
would work quite otherwise, but that God is wonderful in his Counsels, and
excellent in his workings toward his people: they would rather drive us from
God, and destroy our graces.

Thirdly, Seeing it is so, that righteous ones do flourish as the Palm Tree,
then when any weights of affliction, either personal or public, or
persecution, or whatsoever are upon any of us, let us mind the purpose of God
toward us. Let us not think that he comes to hurt us, but to make us grow and
flourish like a Palm Tree. Let us mind this, and join with God in this Counsel,
in laying such things upon his people: Let us join with God, and promote the
Counsel of God in our own hearts and lives, and in the hearts and lives of
others, that they may be bettered by their sufferings, and be encouraged by
their sufferings, to believe more in God, and more for God, than ever they
were. God does not intend us hurt, but good by it; and so we should find it, if
we were wise to join with him in his Purposes.

Fourthly, And then I would say yet further, This may be matter of Trial to us.
We may take a trial of our selves, both as to the state of our persons, and as
to the state of our graces.

First, As to the state of our persons: Why, how is it with us under
sufferings? Do we improve by them? Do we grow, do we flourish, though we have
these weights upon us? Why, truly it is an argument and evidence that our state
is good: for a bad man is not made the better by the evils that are upon him. I
know God may use afflictions to change a man; but unsound hearts, they that
have been unsound and false in the profession of the Gospel, they do discover
themselves in such a time, show their rottenness, and their naughtiness. And it
is a very great question, whether they that are not bettered by afflictions,
were ever good. Though I would not speak it to lay a trouble upon any. Our
betterings sometimes under afflictions, is not very discernable, at least at
present. But I say, it may put us much upon a doubt, whether we, or any were
ever really good, if we are not bettered by afflictions, and by trials, and by
the troubles that are upon us, and by our fears, and by our dangers.

And likewise, we may hence have a great trial, as to the state of our graces,
whether our graces are in good plight, yea, or no. For indeed, if faith be down
(and the like) we shall make little improvement of all our afflictions and
crosses. If love to Christ be down, we shall rather be upon the losing side.
But now if we find that we are increased, and are growing and flourishing in
spirituals, when the weight and pressure is upon us, it is an argument that our
graces are in a good state: and grace is in a good state when it thrives, and
thrives by such means, as seem rather for the quenching of grace, and the
hinderance of grace; and therefore truly we should consider our selves at this
day: for certainly the Palm Trees are now with their weights upon them, and
many have discovered themselves sadly as to their persons, states, and the
state of their graces, that they have very little love to, and faith in Jesus
Christ, because they have not flourisht in such a day; but rather have
declined, and withdrawn, and been ashamed of what they have formerly been. And
therefore let us remember that which the Apostle speaks in Heb. 12. speaking of
afflictions, which are sufferings for Christ, (that is taken in the Chapter) not
only those afflictions, which are fatherly chastisements from the hand of God;
but those which are from men, for righteousness sake. Certainly that is the
purpose of God; it is all for our profit. Therefore let us consider, whether we
profit, yea, or no. We have had Fathers of our flesh which corrected us; and we
gave them reverence: Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of
Spirits, and live? Submit to the will of God, if he will lay any tribulation
upon us for his Name sake; for he has done all for our profit. What profit?
For the profit of our purses, and estates in this world? No, for a better
profit than all that; for our profit, that we might be made partakers of his
holiness.

And truly that is another thing, with which I shall conclude. We say this,
That we have no reason to be impatient under afflictions and persecutions,
under the troubles we meet with in this world for the Name of Christ. Why? for
they are for our profit, for our growing; and that we may be made more
partakers of the holiness of God: That we may be better while we live, and
fitter to dye, and to glorify him both living and dying.

And thus I have only touched these things, That the Righteous do flourish like
the Palm Tree, with their weights and pressures upon them.

FINIS.

