SOME Animadversions Upon a CASE inserted in a BOOK lately Printed, Entitled
Modern Reports. OR SELECT CASES,

Adjudged in the Courts of King's Bench, Chancery, Common Pleas and Exchequer,
since the Restoration of His Majesty King CHARLES the Second.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1682.

THe Author of this Book, I believe, is a Gentleman and a Person, that did not
design the prejudice of any Gentleman, whose Case he has printed; But there
are so many Mistakes and Errors in the Case I have pitched upon, which is a
Case so remarkable and notorious for severity, and knowing not how far those
Errors and Mistakes might extend, to the farther Disadvantage of the Gentleman
concerned; I looked upon myself obliged in Charity to correct and amend, and as
I do it in Charity to the one, so in Civility and Respect I shall do it to the
other.

The Case I have singl'd out from the Herd, is the Case of Stephen Mosdel Esqr.
late Marshal of his Majesty's Court of King's Bench, who had Summum Jus, this
Gentleman the Reporter in his Book Fo. 116.
SEts out, that an action of debt was brought against Mr. Mosdel for the Escape
of Reynel, the Plaintiff said, that he could prove, that he was in London three
long Vacations: Whereas in truth the Plaintiff was a Lady of Quality, who never
endeavored to prove Reynel to be in London any one Vacation whatsoever, but
insisted on a habeas Corpus ad testificand. at the Assizes in Exeter; in the
same Fo. he says, that Mr. Justice Twisden said, the Marshal could not give in
Evidence a fresh pursuit, but it must be pleaded, the contrary whereof was very
well known to all the practicers of that Court, that that Reverend and Learned
Judge was never of that opinion, for he always declared that upon a Nil debet
pleaded a fresh pursuit, and a reprisal might be given in Evidence: And then he
says, that Hales said, that he always let them give a fresh pursuit in
Evidence upon a Nil debet, which is so notoriously untrue, that all persons of
business and practice know, that Hales would not allow of a fresh pursuit and a
reprisal, but when it was specially pleaded, then this Reporter falls off a
litttle abruptly, and says, so they gave Evidence of a habeas Corpus ad
testificand. and that the Prisoner went down too long before hand, and stayed
too long after the Assizes. Now it will clearly appear, that our Reporter was
mightily mistaken, for he says, that the Prisoner stayed too long after the
Assizes (hinc illae Lachrymae) indeed that is too true, for the Prisoner never
returned to the Prison, nor never will, for he died of the Smallpox in
Devonshire, some few miles beyond Exeter in the time of the Assizes. And then
he farther says that he went back threescore miles beyond Wells, I suppose he
means his Ghost, or some Demon in form or shape of the Prisoner traveled from
Assizes to Assizes, to lead the Witnesses into perjury; after some other remote
expressions he concludes, that Hales (as he calls him) said we are made Engines
of doing all the mischief, if this should go unpunished being by Color of a
habeas Corpus; so the Jury (says he) brought in a Verdict for the Plaintiff,
who declared in debt for six thousand and two hundred pounds; now to charge so
great a man as the Lord Chief Justice Hales with an expression of so great
uncharitableness, and so contrary to what he so publicly declared, makes this
Reporter to be more bold than modest, notwithstanding the fair pretenses in the
Exordium of his Book. For the Lord Chief Justice Hales, as will appear
hereafter by several depositions taken upon oath in the high Court of Chancery
declared, that if he had brought the action of debt against Mr. Mosdel as the
Lady Lutterel did and should recover, if he should take one six pence of it, he
believed it would be a Canker to his whole Estate, and farther declared that if
the Lady had brought an action on the case for damages, she had done well, for
he believed the Jury would have given very small damages in a case of that
nature, and as the proofs appeared on both sides to the Court.

That the world may be better informed, and may know that this Gentleman's
miseries sprang from another Sourse, the ensuing Narrative is truly and
faithfully penned.

Mr. Mosdel Marshal of his Majesty's Court of King's Bench, by habeas Corpus ad
testificand. at the the Assizes to be held at Exeter, which was granted and
signed by Mr. Justice Raynsford and Mr. Justice Morton, the tenor whereof
follows in haec verba.

Carolus Secundus Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hyberniae Rex
fidei Defensor etc.
Marischallo Maresc. nostrae coram nobis saltm.
percipimus tibi quod Corpus Georgij Reynel Ar. in persona nostra sub Custod.
tua vt dicitur detent. sub salvo and secur. conduct. habeas coram Justic.
nostris ad prox. Assias. tent. apud Exon in Com. devon. decimo octavo die
Martij prox. futur. ad testificand. ea omnia. and singla. juxta vetam scientiam
and notitiam suam quae sciverit in quadam materia Controversiae in Curia nostra
coram nobis jam penden. indeterminat. inter Johannem Trobridg quer. and Ursulam
Francis vid. defendt. and tunc ad redeund. prisonae perdict. sub salvo conduct.
imediate post testimon. pro perdict. Georgium Reynel perfat. Justic. ad tunc
and ibidem.

dat. and habeas ibi tunc hoc bre. T. Matheo Hale mil. apud Westminster. 12 Die Febr.
Was commanded as appears by the said writ to carry the said George Reynel to
Exeter, and he was carried thither, but a convenient time before the Assizes,
all accidents considered that might happen in so great a Journey, when he was
brought to Exeter by the Tipstaffs of Raynsford and Morton, who had the Charge
of him by the Command and Appointment of the said two Judges, as well as of Mr.
Mosdel, Reynel pretends that he must go to his own House, which was some few
miles beyond Exeter to peruse some writings to inform his memory, otherwise he
was not able to give Evidence in the Cause, the Tipstaffs told him that they
could not consent to any such thing, for their Authority was only to carry him
to Exeter, and if he went beyond Exeter it would be an Escape, but Reynel being
in his own Country and within the Ring of all his Friends and Relations makes
his Escape to his own House, the Tipstaffs immediately pursued him, and at his
House overtook him, but the same Night he came thither he fell sick of the
Smallpox, and thereof died in their Custody in three days time, which happened
to be in the time of the Assizes.

Whereupon, the Lady Lutterel as administratrix durante minor. aetate of Mr.
Alexander Lutterel her second Son brought an action of debt against Mr. Mosdel,
and by the strict and severe Rules of Law, the going of Reynel beyond Exeter
was declared to be an Escape, and accordingly the Jury so found it.

This severe and heavy Verdict being given against Mr. Mosdel, he was forced to
surrender his Office and to secure his Person in obscure places, whereby he
lost the benefit of an active Life whereunto he was always bred, to the loss of
above ten thousand pounds to himself and family, and still is kept under the
same Calamity.

Now certainly to all rational and charitable Persons the severity is clear and
evident, that a man by some small neglect or inadvertency of his servants
should himself and family be ruined and undone by his being made subject and
liable to pay 6200 pounds, when the Plaintiff received no damage, the Prisoner
would have died at the same time he did, if Mr. Mosdel had kept him in Ferris:
Mr. Mosdel at the same time was but a servant to the Court, and must give
obedience to their rules and habeas Corpus's, and when two Judges of the Court
shall command him to carry a Prisoner 140 miles from his Prison, it cannot be
presumed or intended, that Mr. Mosdel could have that care of him at so great a
distance as he could, when he had him always in his Eye.

How such cruel Carriage one toward another can accord with Christian
Religion, or with that natural pity which God has placed in the bowels of
mankind I know not? In the time of Augustus it was decreed, that the insolvent
debtor should quit all his goods, but not suffer chains, nor slavery, not do
labor for his Creditor, but the benefit of this Law extended not to prodigal
and vain Persons, but to those only qui vi majore aliqua fortunis evertebantur,
persons that were undone by any great violence, by shiprack or fire or any
accident unavoidable, or men who were per vim majorem eversi not poor by vice,
but by misfortune and the divine providence.

When mercy and Charity was so far extended before Christianity was established
and settled, what mercy and Justice ought to be shown by us that are
Christians, we know that cruelty, violence and injury is against natural
Justice and Humanity, and when we have or ought to have a prospect of another
and a better being, we ought to act and behave our selves here that we may not
fail of it hereafter.

Here is a Gentleman, his Wife and Children ruined and undone, and for what?
why, because his servants without his consent or knowledge, and contrary to his
order by some slender negligence or inadvertency, suffered the Prisoner to go a
few miles beyond the place where they were ordered and authorized to carry him,
and there the Prisoner died of the Smallpox, what damage happened to the
Creditor of this prisoner by this, even none at all; must a man, his wife,
children and family be utterly ruined and undone for this, by the strict and
severe rules of law, this is an Escape, and the Prisoner being in Execution the
Statute of Westminster. the 2 Ca. 11 gives an action of debt to the Creditor against
the Keeper or Marshal, but this is to be understood, when the Prisoner shall
run quite away, or shall not be retaken before a Declaration or an Original
filed against the Keeper or Marshal, the the Lord Coke says in his 3 Book fo.
44 that inasmuch as Escapes are so penal to Sheriffs and Bailiffs of Liberties,
the Judges of the Law have always made a favorable Construction, as much as the
Law will permit in favor of Sheriffs and Bailiffs of Liberties, who are
Officers and Ministers of Justice. But the chief Justice before whom this Cause
was tried was of opinion, that as he was a Judge of Law, he ought without
mixture of mercy to proceed according to the strict and severe rules of Law,
otherwise he thought he was guilty of the breach of his oath. But the saying
and advice of a great Chancellor to Sir H. Mountague, when he was sworn Chief
Justice of the King's Bench, was thus: As it is a fault says he in a Judge to
be too remiss, and too tender and soft in punishing offenses; so it is a fault
as great or greater to be too sharp or severe, for you know says he, who says
Noli esse nimis Justus, and Severitas strained too far, sometimes becomes Saeva
veritas, if not Saeva crudelitas, Moors Reports fo. 827.

Mercy is the greatest mark of the Elect and predestinate Persons in the world,
mercy is an Attribute, in the manifestation of which, as all our happiness
consists, so God takes greatest Complacency and Delights in it above all his
other works he punishes, to the third and 4th. Generation, but shows mercy unto
thousands we are called to our approximation to God by the practice of this
grace; cruelty and severity in men's actions runs counter and is opposite in all
its Analogies to this Cardinal virtue, and he that acts with a rigid and
inflexible severity, will certainly draw vengeance upon himself from the
tribunal of divine Justice, how can any man expect mercy from God, (whereof
every man every hour stands in need,) when he will show none to his Brother;
our Blessed Savior commands us to forgive our Brother Seventy times seven
times, which is four Hundred and Ninety times, when he asks our pardon and
implores our mercy, and since the divine mercy is or ought to be the pattern of
ours by way of precedent and by way of reward, God will certainly forgive us as
we forgive our Brother and no otherwise, which is proved by these four words
Dimitte nobis sicut dimittimus from whence it follows, that to pardon and
forgive is not so much an Election of Virtue, as an absolute Necessity of
Salvation.

But this being a discourse out of my Sphere (though not out of my practice) I
shall wave, and shall set out and declare the great care this Gentleman had in
the safe keeping of this Prisoner, as does appear by the following depositions
taken upon Oath in the High Court of Chancery.

William Hooper one of the Tipstaffs deposes, that he does know that George
Reynel was kept a Prisoner very strictly, and not suffered to go abroad but by
rule of Court or habeas Corpus; and farther he does know, that the said George
Reynel during the time of his Imprisonment was a necessitous person, and in
need of money, insomuch that he wanted money to maintain himself in Prison with
Necessaries, and the said Hooper farther deposes, that he does know that the
said George Reynel was carried down to the Assizes, held at the Castle in
Exeter by virtue of a habeas Corpus Test. the 12th. of Febr. in 24th. Year of
His now Majesty's Reign, and he this Deponent was ordered by the Marshal to
carry him down, and was charged by the Marshal to take great care, that the
said Reynel did not escape. And he farther deposes, that the said George
Reynel was not very well during his Journey to Exeter, and when he came to
Exeter being ill, he pretended that he had some Papers or Writings at his
House, which was some miles distant from Exeter, which he must needs go thither
to peruse, and this Deponent desiring him to forbear going thither, the said
George Reynel said he must go home to see some Writings for the helping of him
in the Testimony he was to give at the Assizes, for the days and times the
things were done, and this Deponent perceiving he was resolved to go to his
House, and this Deponent being not able to resist him nor to dissuade him from
it, was forced to give him good words for fear he should run quite away, but
notwithstanding, the said Reynel did depart from him toward his own House he
being then sick, and on the way several Pimples broak out upon his hands and
face, which he thought were some heats. And this Deponent upon his Oath
deposes, that upon his the said George Reynel departing from Exeter, he this
Deponent did immediately follow him, but when they came to the said George
Reynel his House, the said Reynel was their immediately taken very sick of the
Smallpox, insomuch that he could not be removed, and there in the time of the
Assizes died of the Smallpox in the Custody of this Deponent his Keeper; this
Deponent being in the House all the time he lay sick; and this Deponent farther
deposes, that the Judge of Assise at Exeter being informed of the death of the
said Reynel, did thereupon order the Body of the said Reynel to be brought up
to the King's Bench Prison, which was done accordingly, and there after an
Inquisition taken by the Coroner, he the said Reynel was buried in St. George
his Church in Southwark at the Charge of M. Mosdel.

The Depositions of Thomas Hodgkin, Gent.
Who deposes, that George Reynel was not suffered to go abroad but by rule of
Court or habeas Corpus, and this Deponent is well assured that the said George
Reynel was a true Prisoner, and that he did never to this Deponents knowledge
go abroad but by rule of Court or habeas Corpus, the which this Deponent is the
better able to depose, for that he this Deponent was a Prisoner in the Custody
of the Marshal at the same time, that he the said George Reynel was, and was
very much conversant with him; and this Deponent farther deposes, that the
said George Reynel during the time of his Imprisonment, was in want of money,
and knows that he did borrow money for Necessaries whilst he was in Prison of
one Mr. Marshal and Others; and this Deponent farther deposes, that he was
present at the Trial for the Escape of the said Reynel, and this Deponent did
conceive and apprehend that the Escape upon which the Verdict then passed
against the Marshal, was only upon the going of the said Reynel from the place
where the Assizes were to be kept, and his dying of the Smallpox, and this
Deponent does verily believe, that the Plaintiff (now defendant) as the Case
truly is could not be damnified a farthing by the Escape, this Deponent farther
says, that the Lord Chief Justice did declare openly in Court in regard it was
an action of debt, and could not be separated by the strict Rules of Law, that
it was a very hard Case on the Marshal, and very much pitied him, he the said
Lord Chief Justice declaring, that he would not be the better by six pence for
any such recovery if it were his Case, least it should prove a Canker to his
whole Estate, and the other Judges were much troubled for the Marshal by reason
it was a hard Case on him. And this Deponent farther says, that he does
remember that he heard Mr. Sergeant Maynard who was of Counsel for the
Plaintiff (now Defendant) declare, that he did not nor could not charge the
Marshal with any corruption in his Office.

The Depositions of John Marshal Merchant.
Who deposes, that he did know George Reynel of Malstone in the county of
Devon Esquire whilst he was a Prisoner in the custody of Mr. Mosdel, and this
Deponent does know that the said Reynel was kept a Prisoner very strictly, and
was not suffered to go abroad but by habeas Corpus or rule of court in Term
time, and he farther deposes, that the said Reynel during his Imprisonment was
a very necessitous Person, and in want of money to maintain himself with
Necessaries, and this Deponent farther says, that he was at the Trial of the
cause for the Escape of the said Reynel, and he does well remember that the
Lord Chief Justice did declare, and say it was a hard case upon the said Mr.
Mosdel, and afterward did declare, that it was so hard a case, that if it were
his own he would not be six pence the better by bringing such an action.

The Depositions of Joseph Stretch Clerk, aged Seven and Thirty Years or
thereabouts.
Who deposes, that he was present at the Trial of the Cause against Mr. Mosdel
for the Escape of Reynel, and did apprehend, that the Escape upon which the
Verdict passed against M. Mosdel, was only the going of the said Reynel out of
Exeter, and his dying of the Smallpox during the time of the Assizes, and this
Deponent does not believe that the Lady Lutterel as the case truly is could be
damnified by the said Escape, and this Deponent does remember that the Lord
Chief Justice did two or three times openly declare in Court at the Trial, that
it was a hard case, and also did declare and say, that if it were his debt he
would not receive six pence for fear it should canker his Estate or to that or
the like effect; and this Deponent farther deposes, that Mr. Sergeant Maynard
who was of Counsel with the Lady did declare in open Court, that he did not nor
could not charge the said Mr. Mosdel with any corruption in his Office, or to
that effect.

The Depositions of Tho. Chelsam Gent.
Who deposes, that he was present at the Trial of the Cause against Mr.
Mosdel, for the Escape of Reynel, and does remember that the Judges did
declare, that it was a hard case, and particularly the Lord Chief Justice did
declare, that it was a hard case, and said, that if it were his case and he
should recover a Verdict he would not be any thing the better for it or to that
effect, and this Deponent says, that several of the Jury, as this Deponent was
informed by them, were much troubled and did weep when they concluded to give
in their Verdict against Mr. Mosdel, by reason the case was so hard upon him,
and to consider that a man should be ruined upon so great a strictness in the
Law, and that they hoped the Plaintiff would not be extreme with the Defendant
Mr. Mosdel, but would accept of some small matter from him.

There are several other Depositions made by several other Persons in the High
Court of Chancery to the same purpose and effect, which would be too tedious to
insert. I hope these will be sufficient to satisfy any charitable person of
the unparalled severity of this case, I shall only here insert his own
Affidavit made before one of the Judges of His Majesty's Court of King's Bench,
and in a few words more shall conclude without any farther trouble to the
courteous Reader.

Stephen Mosdel of the Inner Temple London Esquire makes oath, that during the
time of the Imprisonment of George Reynel, he the said George Reynel seemed to
be very poor, and oftentimes declared that he wanted money to supply his
necessary Occasions, and this Deponent upon oath farther deposes, that he
never had or received from the said George Reynel, or of any other Person or
persons by his Order during his Imprisonment, or at any time before or after,
the sum of forty Shillings in money, nor never had any thing whatsoever to
his knowledge for a year and an halfs Diet, Lodging, Chamber rent and fees,
other then a Horse and a Dog, which were valued at Twenty pounds or
thereabouts, which never were worth to him this Deponent ten pounds, which is
all that he this Deponent ever had of the said George Reynel directly or
indirectly, and this Deponent farther deposes, that he never had any
acquaintance or intercourse with the said George Reynel, till he the said
George Reynel was committed a Prisoner in Execution to him this Deponent.

It may be asked why Mr. Mosdel having so charitable and so commiserative a
case, and a Case that justly lays claim to a relief in Equity, did not exhibit
his Bill in the High Court of Chancery to be relieved? It is answered, that Mr.
Mosdel did bring his Bill in Chancery, but the Defendant by the cruel (I will
not say unjust and unchristian-like advice of her Counsel) pleaded in Bar to
his relief the Statute of 4 H. 4, by which it is enacted, that no Judgment
given in any of the Kings Courts shall be called in question, till that
Judgment be reverst by Writ of Error or Attaint, by pleading and insisting upon
this Anti-equitable Plea, the hands of the Right honorable the Lord Chancellor
were restrained from giving any manner of relief, to his most humble and
immense oppressed Orator.

It may be then farther asked, why Mr. Mosdel did not exhibit his Bill in
Chancery before the Verdict was given against him at common Law? I shall
answer, that his Counsel were of opinion, that the immediate pursuit of the
Prisoner from Exeter to his House, and his dying there in the Custody of his
Keepers would have excused the Escape, and that he had no reason to seek a
Remedy in Equity, when the Law would help him, and properly a man is to seek
his Salve when he has received his wound.

The reporter may say, that here are not only Animadversions, but here is also
a Sermon of Mercy and Charity, if that be his opinion I would have him to
consider, that when a man and his Family shall for a Trifle be ruined and
undone by the Rasour metled cutting rigorous, proceeding upon that penal
Statute of Westminster. 2 Ca. 11, and by the Statute of 4 H. 4 Ca. 23 and the Statute
of Praemunire, which is the Statute of 27 Ed. 3 Ca. 1. the Olive Doors of
Mercy, Equity, and good Conscience shall be looked up and no relief to be had,
there is no remedy left but an Appeal to the great Tribunal of divine Justice,
where every man's merits and demerits shall have a plenitude of rewards and
punishments.

I have been oftentimes in the Company of this unhappy Gentleman Mr. Mosdel,
since and before this severe thing happened upon him, and when we have
discoursed of this matter and of this severe prosecution, he never would speak
a word that might reflect upon the Lady, but would always say she was put upon
it by her Attorney, not out of kindness to her or malice to him but for his own
interest, and to get money to himself, how he has prospered with it since is
well known, he has also often declared that although the Lady was severe and hard
in the prosecution, yet she was not so in the Execution of that sharp and cruel
Verdict, for he could never find or discover that she did ever endeavor to
arrest him. But he complained that she kept him in fear, and he dare not follow
any public employment for the support of himself and family, which was as bad
or rather worse then an Imprisonment, which he thought the Lady did not
understand or else might be misinformed, that which supported him in all these
difficulties and obscurities of life for almost these Nine years last past, was
the great hopes he had in the young Gentleman, to whom the Lady was during his
Minority Administratrix, that he, when he came of age would take this
melancholy and cruel Case into his charitable and merciful consideration, and
not suffer a calamity of such a nature, and for so trivial a matter to remain
and continue on a Man and his Family to their ruin and destruction, when he
never by any single act of his suffered the loss of Six pence; neither had Mr.
Mosdel as he has often declared to me, any reason to show any kindness to
Reynel, whereby to expose himself to any danger or to do any ill thing to the
Lady, for he never had any manner of acquaintance with or knowledge of Reynel,
till he was committed to him a Prisoner, and after he was committed he was so
poor and necessitous, that he wanted necessaries, as does appear by the
Depositions and Affidavit before mentioned.

But now the Gentleman is come of age, and Mr. Mosdels hopes will have their
determination, either by the discharging him of this heavy burden, where under
he has groaned almost these Nine years, or by the continuance of the Weight
sink him and his Family into greater miseries. He that has been in the Company
of this Gentleman must acknowledge, that nature has been very prodigal in her
favors to him in all respects, from whence Mr. Mosdel may almost assure himself
of his Equity, and that after so long continued a storm and tempest, by the
sweet gales of a merciful and a charitable Breath, he may arrive into a quiet
and peaceable Harbor. It is never seen, that dirt and trash is lodged and
placed in rare and curious Cabinets, but Jewels of great value, and certainly
there are Jewels of great value lodged in the Breast of this worthy Gentleman,
such as will lead him into an Enquiry into this matter, and to do and to act
therein as every Christian and Gentleman ought to do, and to act one toward
the other, which are the hearty wishes of

L. C. Philalothis.

ERRATA.
In page 3. lin. 25. instead of or put and, p. 4. l. 10. r. only one the, idem
at the end of the Habeas Corpus add Anno Regui nostri xxiiijo.

FINIS.

