THE HISTORY OF THE House of Orange; OR, A Brief Relation of the Glorious and
Magnanimous Achievements of His Majesty's Renowned Predecessors, and likewise
of His own Heroic Actions till the Late Wonderful Revolution.

Together with The HISTORY of William and Mary King and Queen of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.

Being an Impartial Account of the most Remarkable Passages and Transactions in
these Kingdoms from Their Majesty's Happy Accession to the Throne to this time.

By R. B.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1693.

TO THE READER.
I Am very sensible that the greatness of the Subject is a sufficient reason to
deter me from adventuring to publish my mean endeavors in Relating the
Glorious and Magnanimous Achievements of His Majesty's Renowned Ancestors as
well as His own; Or of the excellent Conduct of Their Majesty's since Their
happy Accession to the Throne. But because we have such a furious Generation of
Murmurers, who if they had their desires would ruin both themselves and their
Country, and reduce us to French Popery and Slavery: It may seem to be the
Interest of every man to strive to undeceive those whom these Miscreants would
delude, since both our Eternal and Temporal happiness very much depends upon
the supporting the present Government against all its Foreign and Domestic
Enemies. A Government founded upon Law and Justice; A Government calculated for
the support of the Protestant Interest throughout the World; wherein we have a
King and Queen of the same excellent Religion with our selves, a happiness
which we have been deprived of for almost an Age past; Princes of such
exemplary Virtue and Piety, that they discourage Vice and Profaneness, and
constantly endeavor to support Goodness and Modesty, which seemed lately
designed to be hissed out of the Nation.

God grant that our ingratitude and impenitence may never deprive us of such
inestimable blessings, and that we do not fall a Sacrifice to our stupendous
folly and discontents.

THE HISTORY OF THE House of Orange.
THE Family of Nassau, from whom our Gracious Sovereign is descended, is not
undeservedly accounted one of the most Ancient and Honorable in Europe, not
only for its great Alliance^ and Branches, but also by the Advancement of one
of this House to the Empire of Germany, Adolphus Nassau by name about the Year
1200, and that there has been a Succession of the Family in a direct Line for
above a thousand years past, and among them.

OTHO Count of Nassau, who lived about six hundred years since, and had two
Wives; with the first of whom he had the Province of Gueldres, and with the
other that of Zutphen. About three hundred years after a second Count

OTHO of Nassau married the Countess of Vranden, whereby he became possessed of
several other Territories in the Netherlands. In the Year 1404.

Engilbert who was his Grandchild married the Heiress of the Town of Breda and
Loeke, and was Grandfather to

Engilbert 2d Earl of Nassau, who in 1491. was by Maximilian King of the
Romans, going into Hungary, made Governor, Lieutenant and Captain General of
Flanders, and afterward in 1501. Archduke Philip going into Spain,
constituted him Governor General of the Netherlands, an experienced Prince
both in War and Peace, but dying Childless, left his Brother

John his large Territories; this John had two Sons, upon Henry the eldest he
bestowed all his Possessions in the Low Countries, and to his youngest Son
William he bequeathed all his Inheritance in Germany; By the earnest Endeavors
of Henry Nassau, Charles the 5th was advanced to the Empire, against the
pretensions of Francis I. the French King, and at his Coronation placed the
Crown on his Head; And yet when upon concluding Peace between these two
Monarchs, Henry was sent by the Emperor to do Homage to King Francis for the
County of Flanders and Artois, that Prince forgetting former differences, and
being fully sensible of his extraordinary Merits, married him to Claudia, only
Sister to Philibert Chalon Prince of Orange, by which Marriage his only Son
Revens of Orange and Chalons, became Prince of Orange.

William Earl of Nassau Brother to Prince Henry prof^ssed the Protestant
Religion, and expelled Popery out of his Territories, and was Father to the
great William of Nassau, who attained to be Prince of Orange, and Lord of all
the Possessions of the House of Chalens by the Last Will of Revens de Nassau
who died Childless.

The Emperor Charles the 5th having a favor for the House of Orange, and
received great services from them, was concerned that the young Prince William
should be educated in the Reformed Religion, and therefore took him, with much
regret from his Father, and endeavored to instruct him in the Romish Faith,
but afterward the former Opinions, which he had sucked in with his Mothers Milk,
prevailed upon him, so that he became an earnest Professor of Protestantism.

William Count of Nassau his Father had five Sons and seven Daughters by
Juliana Countess of Stolberg.

WILLIAM the eldest was born in 1533. at the Castle of Dillemberg in the County
of Nassau, and being taken from his Father by the Emperor Charles, as we said,
he became a great Favorite by his extraordinary Wisdom and Modesty, so that
the Emperor confessed this young Prince often furnished him with notions and hints
he should else never have thought of, and upon giving of private Audiences to
Ambassadors when the Prince would discreetly offer to withdraw, the Emperor
mildly remanded him, saving, Stay Prince, and it was admired by the whole
Court, that a Prince not above twenty years old, should be entrusted with all
the Secrets of the Empire, and carry the Imperial Crown upon his resignation,
to his Brother Ferdinand, though the Prince with some reluctance seemed to
refuse the Employment, by alleging, That it was no ways proper for him to
carry to another that Crown which his Uncle Henry of Nassau had set upon his
Head. Yea the Emperor had so much confidence in his Conduct, that in the
absence of the D. of Savoy his General of the Low Countries, though the Prince
were not above 22 years old, yet contrary to the Advice of all his Council,
rejecting all other experienced Generals, he constituted him Generalissimo, who
managed that great Employ with such discretion and courage, that he caused
Philipville and Charlemont to be built in the fight of the French Army, which
was then commanded by Admiral Castillon that great Captain.

These Magnanimous actions caused the Emperor to recommend the Prince of Orage
to Philip II. his Son, but his Virtue and Courage were so emulated by the
Spaniards, that all his most innocent words and actions were misinterpreted,
and the opposition that the Provinces made to the Kings Will and Pleasure in
defense of their Privileges were attributed to his contrivance; which King
Philip made him sensible of when he was imbarking from Flushing for Spain,
charging him with preventing all his private Intrigues, with a furious
countenance; And when the Prince mildly replied, that all had been done by the
motion of the States themselves; the King shaking him by the wrist replied? No,
not the States, but You, You, You, are the Occasion of it; Which severe
reproach in public, so disgusted the Prince that he suddenly left the King
without further Ceremony, only wishing him a good Voyage, and so left him in
the middle of Flushing, which he knew had much respect for him. And that which
increased the Princes indignation against the Spanish Government, was that he
saw himself deprived of the Government of the Netherlands which his
Predecessors always enjoyed, and Cardinal Granville his inplacable Adversary
put in his place, which proceedings of King Philip disobliged both the Nobility
and People, who hated the pride of Philip as much as they admired the
affability of his Father Charles, which was much increased when the States (who
much dreaded the Spanish insolency,) in a full Assembly at Gaunt, desiring the
King to withdraw his Foreign Troops out of the Provinces, and entrust the
Natives with the Fortified places; and not advance Foreign Ministers to the
Government. The King was so far incensed thereat that he ordered his Sister
Margaret of Austria, to set up the Spanish Inquisition; and to make Diverse new
Bishops.

And these were the principal causes of the defection and terrible disorders
that followed: For the People abhorring the name of the Inquisition, and the
new Bishops as members of it; and the Nobility being highly incensed at the
imperious temper of Granville, after having long suffered under his Arrogance,
at length the Prince of Orange, Count Horn and Count Egmont sent King Philip
word, That unless he recalled the Cardinal out of the Low Countries, his
violent Counsels which were so much abhorred by all, would certainly occasion a
Revolt in those Provinces. This with much regret was done, but another worse
than he was designed in his room, the Bloody Duke of Alva, with an Army of
Spaniards and Italians, which the Prince and Nobility being sensible was to
take revenge for the affront to Granville; the Prince desired the Governess to
be dismissed from his Governments of Holland, Zealand, Utrecht and Burgundy,
which the Duchess refused, but desired him to remove his brother Count
Lodowick from his Person, as being suspected to give him bad Council, and
likewise to take a new Oath of Allegiance to King Philip; both which he denied;
and as to the last alleged, That such an Oath would oblige him to extirpate
Heretics, and might compel him to put his own Wife to Death who was a
Protestant, and that if he should take another Oath, it might be thought he had
broken the first.

But the Governess being very zealous for settling the Inquisition and the new
Bishops, about 400 Gentlemen with Prince Lewis of Nassaw in the head of them,
and several other Nobles; presented a Petition against it, and were those, who
were afterward called Guese or Beggars, so Nicknamed for their plain apparel
by Count Barlemont a Favorite to the Duchess; which though given in scorn,
did much advance the Confederacy that followed and strengthened he Prince of
Oranges Party: For their Petition being absolutely rejected, these Gentlemen
caused Medals to be made with the Kings Pi^ture on one side, and a Beggars Dish
and Wallet on the other; with this inscription? Faithful to God and the King
even to the carrying of the Wallet; intimating they were better Subjects in the
King than Barlemont and his Adherents. And the Prince of Orange with the other
Lords perceiving their Petition slighted, consulted their own safety, most of
them were for taking Arms to oppose the Landing of the Spaniards in the
Neitherlands, since by intercepted Letters they plainly discovered the design
was to ruin and destroy them. But Count Egmont Governor of Flanders and
Artois opposed it, and being confident of his own good services, advised them
to rely upon the Kings Clemency and Mercy; To which the Prince of Ornge
replied, That the Kings Mercy upon which he trusted would be his ruin, and
that the Spaniards would make a Bridge of him to come into the Low Countries,
and then break him. At which words embracing the Count as as if foreseeing they
should never meet again, they parted with Tears in their Eyes: The Prince
instantly went with his Family to his Town of Breda, only he left his Eldest
Son Philip to Study in Lovain, and after that to Dillemberg the Ancient seat of
the Nassaws.

Soon after the Duke of Alva with an Army of old Spanish and Italian Soldiers
came into the Netherlands, and Count Egmont waiting upon him, he said aloud;
Behold the great Lutheran: Yet the Count took no notice of it, but presented
him with two fine Horses. The Duke being arrived at Brussels produced his
Commission, whereby he was made absolute Governor in all Causes whatsoever: He
then dismissed the Assembly of the States, and constituted a Court of Twelve Men,
who were to inspect into the Troubles, They soon imprisoned a great number of
People of all Degrees and Qualities, and 18. Lords and Gentlemen were put to
death at Brussels, and the Counts Egmont and Horn imprisoned, and soon after
beheaded in the Market place of that City; the first being much pitied by the
people for his fond credulity, who rejoiced at the safety of the Prince of
Orange: And Cardinal Granville who was then at Rome, hearing of these
proceedings, asked the Messenger, whether the Duke had taken Silence, which was
a name given to the Prince for secrecy and few words; Who replying no; Nay says
Granville, if that Fish has escapt the Net, The Duke of Alva's draught is
nothing worth.

The Cruel and Barbarous proceedings of this new Governor caused a great many
to leave the Country, who were summoned to appear before the bloody Council of
Twelve at a certain day, and upon their refusal all their Estates were
Confiscated; Among others the Prince of Orange, Count Culenburgh and other
Lords were cited; The Prince refused, alleging, That being of the Order of the
Golden Fleece, he could not be judged by any but the King and the Companions of
that Order. He likewise appealed to the Emperor Maximilian, brother to King
Philip, and other German Princes, imploring their aid, who approved of his
reasons, and declared their dislike of the proceedings of the Duke of Alva: The
time for the Princes appearing being expired, his Principalities were all
declared to be forfeited, a Spanish Garrison was put into Breda, and his Eldest
Son Philip William was sent to Spain to be educated in the Roman Religion, and
also for an Hostage for his Father.

And thus King Philip by these cursed Counsels, and the Rigorous usage of his
Subjects, was himself the occasion of the loss of the United Netherlands; who
finding all their Privileges violated and their utter extirpation determined,
they resolved to throw off this intolerable yoke and afterward in some of
their Ensigns had this Motto; We will either recover our Liberties or perish in
tht Attempt. And the Prince of Orange observing himself so roughly and unjustly
used, being reproached as a public Enemy, and exposed to the malice of his
implacable Adversaries, having his innocent Son, and his great Estate ravished
from him, he thought it high time to defend his Honor and his Life, by force
of Arms; and to engage for Religion and Liberty in the Common quarrel of his
Country. And thereupon he raised an Army in Germany which he sent unto Friz
and under his brother Lewis and Adolphus of Nassaw; and being met by Count
Aremburgh with a considerable Force, a battle followed, wherein the Nassovians
gained a considerable Victory, the Spanish Army being totally routed, and
Arembergh himself with the principal Commanders slain, and all their Cannon,
Baggage, and a great sum of Money sent to pay the Soldiers taken. This defeat
happened in 1568. But Count Lowis enjoyed this Victory very little, for the
Duke of Alva pursuing him, fell upon him just at the time when the Germans were
all in a mutiny for their pay who rather chose to be miserably slain than to
defend themselves, so that six thousand were killed or drowned, Adolphus hardly
making his escape.

The Prince nothing discouraged at this misfortune, raised another Army of
Twenty eight thousand French and Germans, and published a Declaration wherein
he cleared his Innocence of those crimes objected against him, charging the
Duke and the Council of Blood with the Causes of the War, and then passing the
Rhyne by tying his Horses together to break the force of the River, the Foot
arrived silently in the night to the other Shore, which so surprised that Duke
of Alva, that he would not believe it at first, saying, Sure yo do not think
them an Army of Birds. Arriving thus into Brabant, he offered Alva Battle,
which the other declined; so that after 29 several attempts to engage him to a
Combat, and the City's not revolting to the Prince as he expected, and the
Germans being again ready to mutiny for want of Pay, it was thought advisable
to dismiss his Army, paying part of their Arreas by the sale of his Plate,
Artillery and Baggage, and engaging his Principality of Orange to his chief
Officers for the remainder; yet before their disbanding he routed eighteen
Companies of the Enemies Foot, and three hundred Horse of the Spaniards near
Cambray, most of the Commanders being taken Prisoners, and the Duke of Alva's
Son slain.

After this with only 1200 Horse the Prince and his two Brothers went into
France to the Assistance of the Protestants against the Duke of Guize and his
Partisans, where he was very successful in several Encounters, and at length by
the Advice of the great Admiral Coligni he gave out Commissions to several
Persons of Quality, Fugitives of the Low Countries to infest the Spaniards by
Sea, by which means he soon became Master of all Holland and Zealand. The
Germans being driven out of the Netherlands, the D. of Alva, as if he had
conspired to lose these Countries, instantly levied new Taxes, even the Tenths
of all Goods and Estates, which so enraged the People that were already near
ruined by the War, that upon the Privateers (who were sent abroad by the
Princes Commission) taking the Town of Brill, a Port in Zealand, eight Cities
in Holland, and all the Cities in Zealand except Middleburgh, declared for the
Prince of Orange, and Flushing, a considerable City, being animated by the
Priest at Mass on Easter day in the Morning, turned out the Spanish Garrisons
in such fury that they hanged Alvarez Kinsman to the Duke of Alva. And William
Count of Bergen at the same time took several other Towns in Friezeland, and
which most astonished Alva, Lewis of Nassau, by the Assistance of the French,
took Mons the chief City of Heynault.

Mean while the Prince of Orange with an Army of 11000 Foot, and 6000 Horse
marches to Lovain, which presented him with 16000 Crowns, and was received into
Mechlin, and from thence comes within fight of Alva's Army, which was strongly
fortified, yet the Prince resolved to force his Intrenchments, or oblige him to
a Battle, which whilst he was consulting he received Advice of the horrid
Massacre at Paris, whereby he lost the Admiral Chastillon, and many other of
his dearest Friends, together with all hopes of any more Relief from France, so
that not being able to oblige the Duke to a Battle, and doubting the French
Commanders manders who were his chief strength should desert him upon News of
the bloody Massacre, he writ to his Brother Lewis to make Terms for delivering
up Mons then besieged by Alva; and then with slow Marches retreated to the
Rhyne, yet with some loss and danger, for a Detatchment of Spanish Horse and
Foot, breaking into his Camp in the night, killed and burnt all before them as
far as his own Tent where he was fast asleep; but a little Dog which used to
lie on his Bed, never left barking and scratching his face till he had waked
him, so that leaping out of his Bed, and perceiving the peril he was in, he
hastened to his Men, who were now coming to his Rescue, and fell upon the
Spaniards so furiously, that most of the Party, which were about a thousand
Horse and Foot were cut off in their retreat.

After which the Prince dismissed his Army and came into Holland; these States
with those of Zealand having already acknowledged him for their Governor, and
taken an Oath to stand by him with their Lives and Fortunes.

But though the Prince had the full power of the Government in his own hands,
yet he acted all matters in the name of the States, and by his extreme
diligence in four months time he had provided a Fleet of 150 Sail well Rigged
and Manned in the Port of Flushing; who for ten years after did unspeakable
damage to the Spaniards, and were never but once worsted by them. He likewise
banished all Romish superstitions out of the Churches, that difference in
Religion might render them more irreconcilable to their old Adversary.

But the Duke of Alva having retaken Mons, sent his Son to reduce some other
Cities in Holland, and Guelderland, and because the Town of Haerlem had
formerly received the Prince of Orange after the Duke had reduced it by Famine
whereof near thirteen thousand died, he made a dreadful example of this place,
the Spaniards first hanging the Governor, and for several days together
hanging and drowning the Ministers, Magistrates, and People of the City, to the
number of near two thousand, which butcheries made the Hollanders to be still
more resolved and obstinate against them; so that the other Towns made a more
Vigorous defense, for fear of falling into the hands of such cruel blood
hounds. Soon after the Duke of Alva was recalled out of the Netherlands, and
Lowis Requiesens of a milder temper was sent to succeed him. King Philip now
finding that Rigor and Barbarity did but inrage the Netherlanders, and made
them more averse to his Government: This new Governor had the fortune at his
arrival to be an eyewitness of the deseat of his Masters Fleet, by that of the
Prince of Orange; but yet was more fortunate by Land, for Prince Lowis of
Nassaw having brought a fourth Army out of Germany of seven thousand Foot and
four thousand Horse, was defeated by the Spaniards near Nimmeguen, the Germans
according to their usual custom calling for their pay just as the battle began,
and thereby were the ruin of themselves, as well as of their Generals honor;
Prince Lowis with his brother Prince Henry and the Count Palatine being all
three killed in this fight. Upon which Victory the Spaniards besieged Leyden,
and reduced it to very great extremity, so that they were ready to Capitulate:
But the Prince having an account of their condition, by Letters tied to Pigeons
and sent into the Town: Resolved to make the utmost effort possible to relieve
it; and having provided two hundred Flat bottom Boats of fourteen or sixteen
Oars, and two Guns a piece, which he filled with Seamen and Provisions, when
all things were prepared the Hollanders broke down the Damm that kept out the
Sea, which thereupon entered with such fury into the Country, that it was
overwhelmed with water, and and the Camp of the Spaniards was overflowed, so
that the City received supplies forty mile off by water, and the Spaniards
having sunk their Cannon after four months fruitless labor, were forced to
raise the Seige, being pursued by the Dutch in their Boats with long grapling
Irons, wherewith they drowned and destroyed a great number of their enemies.
This deliverance from a Barbarous and Inhumane Enemy endeared the Prince of
Orange to those of Leyden, who to recompense their losses by the inundation,
erected a University there, which he endowed with ample Revenues and
Privileges.

But to recompense this loss, Requesones reduced Zurich-zee; but the Spaniards
and Germans falling at variance, about their pay, and Requesones dying at the
same time, the unruly Soldiers fell upon Mastriccht and Antwerp, both which
Towns they plundered and ransackt of an immense Treasure, rated at above Twenty
Millions. The Robberies of those Foreign Mutineers caused such an abhorrence
and detestation of the Government in the People, that those which had hitherto
continued obedient to the Spanish Government, now declared the Spaniards
enemies to their King and Country, and called in the Prince of Orange to their
assistance: All the Provinces, except Luxemburg entering into an Association,
and Solemnly Swearing to assist each other in delivering their Country from
Spanish Slavery. This happened in 1576. when King Philip to remedy these
disorders sent Don John of Austria, to be Governor of the Netherlands, who by
his Mild and Affable behavior wheedled the Provinces for a time to desist from
their gallant resolution; and though the Prince of Orange, who saw the bottom
of the Spaniards designs, continually forewarned them not to be deluded with
gilded promises, yet Don John having solemnly agreed That the States General
should assemble, and that the Spaniards and Germans should depart out of the
Netherlands, several of the Provinces again submitted to King Philip; the
Prince of Orange with the States of Holland and Zealand protesting against
their proceedings, especially as to the Articles about Religion: But Don John
was no sooner settled in his Government, being received with much magnificence
at Brussels, but he quickly made good the Princes Premonitions, for he seized
upon Namur and Charlemont, and sent for the Foreign Troops. Whereupon the
States finding themselves deluded, they resolved to oppose him by Arms, and
having demolished the Castle of Antwerp, they joined with the Prince of Orange,
and sent to desire his presence at Brussels, where he was received with all
kinds of Joy, and the Acclamations of the People, and declared Governor of
Brabant, and Super-Intendant of the Revenues of the Provinces.

The States General having declared Don John of Austria the public Enemy of
their Country, he thereupon recalled the Italians and other Foreigners, who
were banished by the perpetual Edict, as it was called, and with them defeated
the Army of the States at Gemblours, though this loss was recompensed by the
surrender of the famous City of Amsterdam eight days after, which was then
united to the Body of Holland.

In the year 1579. the Prince of Orange laid the Foundation of the Republic of
the Low Countries by the strict Union he made between the Provinces of
Gueldres, Zutphen, Holland, Zealand, Friezeland, and the Ommelands, consisting
of 25 Articles, the chief whereof was, That these Provinces should mutually
assist each other against the common Enemy, and not treat of War or Peace
without general consent: This was called, The Treaty of Vtrecht, because signed
in that City; and to show that Union was absolutely necessary for their
preservation, the States took this for their Motto, Concordia parvae res
crescunt; By Concord little things grow great. But the Prince finding the power
of these few Provinces not sufficient to defend themselves against the other
Provinces that had reconciled themselves to Spain, nor against that potent
Crown he thought it advisable to choose some Neighbor Prince to be their
Protector, and judged none more proper than the Duke of Anjou and Alenson, the
only Brother of Henry III. King of France, and Commissioners being sent to him,
it was soon agreed that these six Provinces of Holland, Zealand, Brabant,
Flanders. Utrecht and Friezeland, should acknowledge him for their Sovereign,
upon condition, That he should maintain them in their present Privileges and
Religion, that he should assemble the States General once a year or oftener, if
they thought fit, That he should not dispose of any Offices or Preferments
without the consent of the States. Lastly, That if he should endeavor to
infringe or violate this Treaty, he should immediately forfeit his Sovereignty,
and they be fully absolved from any Allegiance to him, and be at liberty to
choose another Sovereign.

This Agreement being made, Archduke Matthias Brother to Rodolphus Emperor of
Germany, who had been sent for, some time before by some factious Lords, (who
envied the Virtue and Glory of the Prince of Orange) finding that the States
sought for a more powerful Protector, took his leave and retired into Germany,
though not without large Acknowledgment and Presents from the States General.
The Prince of Orange hastened the March of the Duke of Alenson, whose presence
he knew was very considerable, especially since in this year 1580, the King of
Spain had published a most bloody Proscription against him, Reproaching him
with the favors bestowed on him by his Father Charles the V, and declaring him
to be a Rebel, Heretic, Hypocrite, like to Cain and Judas, of an obdurate
Conscience, a Villain, the Head of the Netherland Troubles, a Plague to
Christendom, and an Enemy to all Mankind; Declaring further, That he did
prosecute and banish him out of his Countries and Estates, forbidding any of
his Subjects to converse with, or relieve him, giving all his Estate to those
that would take it, promising upon the word of a King, and as the Minister of
Almighty God, That if any would deliver him alive or dead, or else take away
his Life, he would give to him or his Heirs Five thousand Crowns of Gold, and
the free pardon of all the Crimes that he had been before guilty of, and if
they were not Noble, to make them so, and to reward all that shall assist them
therein; and likewise that all his Adherents should be banished, and their Lives
and Estates given for a prey to any that would take them.

The Prince of Orange made a very smart Apology in answer hereunto, wherein he
fully vindicates himself from all the Crimes objected against him, proving at
large, That all the Miseries of the Netherlands ought to be imputed to the
Council of Spain, who endeavored to reduce those Countries to absolute
Slavery, both as to Religion and Civil Liberties, and acting more like Madmen
than Politicians, and like that foolish King Rehoboam, following the silly
Advice of a weak Woman, and Cardinal Granval the Pope's Creature telling the
King, That his Father had chastized the People with Whips, but the Son ought to
whip them with Scorpions, and therefore they endeavored to bring in the
Inquisition, and the new Bishops which were the occasion of all these
commotions. And as to his taking Arms against his Sovereign, he shows, that
Henry Bastard of Castile, the King's great Grandfather, had with his own hands
slain the King Don Pedro the Cruel, his lawful Brother, and possessed his
Kingdom, whose Successor King Philip was, and enjoyed it to this day. And that
there was a Reciprocal Bond between a Prince and a Subject, and if the Prince
infringes his Oath, the Subject is freed from his Allegiance, that the King of
Spain was admitted to be Duke of Brabant upon certain conditions which he had
sworn to maintain, and yet had notoriously violated; and if the Nobility did
not endeavor by Arms (since no other means was to be found) to preserve and
defend their Liberties, they ought to be accounted guilty of Perjury, Treachery
and Rebellion to the States of the Country. And whereas the King had offered
Money to take away his Life, he did not doubt of God's protection, yet
certainly he could never be accounted a Gentleman by Persons of Honor, who
would be so wicked and infamous to murder a Man for Money, except they were
such Spaniards, who being descended from the Mores and Jews, might retain that
quality from their Ancestors who offered Money to Judas to betray our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ into their hands, that they might crucify him.

The Prince concluded his Apology by telling the States General, That since
their peace and quiet seemed to depend upon his death, he was willing to lay
down his life to free them from the Calamities under which they suffered,
having already for their sakes lost his Estate, his Brethren, yea and his own
Son, and that his Head, over which no Prince or Potentate on Earth had any
power, was yet at their command, and that he would be a willing Sacrifice to
procure their Tranquillity: But if they thought fit still to use his Service,
he would employ his Life, Counsel, and all he had in the World for the defense
and preservation of the Netherlands.

In answer to this the States declare, That they are fully satisfied that the
Crimes and Slanders charged upon the Prince are altogether false and malicious,
and that all the Honors that had been conferred on him were so far from being
sought for or desired by him, that he only accepted them at their earnest
request and entreaty, with the full consent, and by the free Election of the
Country, and therefore they humbly entreated him still to continue his
Administration, and likewise to accept of a Guard for his Person against any
villainous attempts upon his Life.

The States General of he United Provinces perceiving that notwithstanding the
Intercession both of the Emperor, the French King, the Queen of England, and
other Princes and States of Christendom to King Philip on their behalf, yet he
still continued obstinately resolved to yield to nothing but what might reduce
their Country absolutely to Popery and Slavery, thereupon in 1581. they
published an Edict of Renunciation against him, wherein they declare, That it
being acknowledged by all Mankind that a Prince is ordained of God to preserve
his Subjects from all Injuries and Violence, even as a Shepherd defends his
Sheep, and that the people were never created to be Bondmen and Slaves to his
will and pleasure whether his Commands are right or wrong, but that he is
advanced to that dignity to govern them by equity and reason, and to cherish
them as a Father does his Children, even with the peril of his life. If a King
therefore fail herein, and instead of protecting his Subjects, shall strive to
destroy them, and deprive them of their Ancient Laws and Privileges, and
endeavor to make them Bondslaves; His Subjects are thereupon discharged from
all Subjection and Obedience to such a Sovereign, and are to reckon and esteem
him a Tyrant, and that he is absolutely fallen from his former Dignity and
Sovereignty, and the Estates of the Country may lawfully and freely abandon
him, and Elect another Prince to protect and defend them in his place,
especially when his Subjects neither by Prayers nor Petitions can mollify his
heart, nor divert him from his Tyrannical and Arbitrary courses: Since they
have then no other way to preserve their Ancient Liberties, Lives, Wives,
Children and Estates, which according to the Laws of God and Nature they are
bound to defend, and which has been practisied in diverse Countries, especially
in those where the King was obliged by Oath to govern according to Law, and was
admitted to the Sovereignty upon certain conditions and special contracts.

Now it being apparent to all the World that Philip King of Spain, giving ear
to certain wicked Counselors, has in every particular broken all the Oaths
and Obligations which he had entered into for the defense of those Provinces,
and has determined to enslave, ruin and destroy them, and all their Interests
therein, etc. We the States General being pressed by extreme necessities, do by a
general resolution and consent declare the King of Spain to be fallen from the
Government, Dominion and Jurisdiction of these Countries, and we are resolved
never hereafter to acknowledge him for our Prince and Sovereign Lord, but do
hereby declare our selves and all the Inhabitants of these Provinces, to be for
ever discharged from all manner of Oaths, and Allegiance to the said King, etc.
In witness whereof we have caused our our Seals to be hereunto annexed, July
26. 1581.

The Duke of Anjou having been in England to make a Visit to Q. Elizabeth,
returned again to Antwerp, after three months splendid Entertainment in the
English Court, the Queen at his departure earnestly recommending to him to
govern the People with mildness, and to endeavor to gain their Affections,
which would be the most durable Foundation that he could lay for the security
of his Government. The Duke was received at Antwerp with all kind of
Magnificence, being made Duke of Brabant with much solemnity, and having taken
an Oath to protect and defend them in all their Rights, afterward the Nobility
and Gentry swore Allegiance to him as their Prince and Governor.

Soon after a Plot was laid to kill the Prince of Orange, which was thus
managed; Gaspar de Anastro a Spanish Merchant living in Antwerp, finding his
Affairs in a very low condition by reason of the many Debts he had contracted,
and was not able to pay, he bethought himself of the great Reward promised by
the King of Spain to the Murderers of the Prince of Orange, and being greedy
of this prey which he thought might again retrieve his credit, he consulted
with the Governor of Gravelin how to put this Fact in execution, and at length
concluded to employ a wicked Boy he had called Joanille to perpetrate it, who
no sooner was acquainted with it, but he readily undertook it. The day
appointed for this execrable deed was on a Sunday, when the Duke of Anjou
making a great Feast, the Prince of Orange was present, the Boy accordingly
came to the house, where he was confessed by a Jacobin Fyrer, and promised the
pardon of all his sins, the Priest likewise deluding him, and saying, that he
should go invisible, having given him some Characters in Papers with Frogs
Bones and other Trifles that were found in his pocket. Being thus strengthened
in his Resolution, he drank a Glass or two of Wine, and the Ghostly Father
having given him his Blessing at the stairs foot, left him; Joanille comes into
the Room where the Prince and several Lords were at Dinner, clad like a
Frenchman, and was thought a Servant to one of the French Noblemen, he
endeavored to come near the Prince, having charged his Pistol with two
Bullets, designing to shoot him behind as he had been instructed, but was still
hindered: The Prince having dined, went toward his Withdrawing Room, showing by
the way, to a Nobleman the Cruelties of the Spaniards in the Netherlands,
wrought in Tapestry, when the Murderer having placed himself in a Window of
the Hall, discharged his Pistol against the hinder part of his head, but the
Prince turning his face, at the same instant the Bullet entered in at the
throat, it being so near that the fire entered with the wound, burning his Ruff
and his Beard, and breaking one of his Teeth, the Bullet coming out at the left
Cheek near his Nose without hurting his Tongue: This terrible blow being given,
all present were amazed, and one of the Halberdiers in a rage thrust the
Villain through, and a Page presently after dispatched him. The Boy was quickly
known to belong to Anastro, who was imprisoned, together with the Monk, the
first was released, but the Friar, together with the Carcass of the Murderer
were both hanged, and after quartered. The Princes wound was somewhat
dangerous, for the bleeding of the Jugular Vein could by no art nor means be
stopped, till they contrived, that for nine days together several persons
appointed should hold their Thumbs upon the wound night and day, so that at
length it closed, and the danger was over. At first the French were thought to
have committed the Fact, but the Prince of Orange, though weak, writing with
his own hands to the Magistrates of Antwerp to let them know it was a Spaniard,
they at length were satisfied. The grief of that great City was extraordinary
upon the Princes being wounded, the Magistrates commanding Fasts to be kept, to
pray for his Recovery, and their Joy was as great when they heard he was out of
danger. The Prince of Parma Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, concluded him
dead, and sent mild Letters to several Cities to surrender to him.

After this the Duke of Anjou envying the Power of the Prince of Orange, which
he thought eclipsed his own, and not enduring to be a Sovereign only in name
with such a limited Authority, by the Advice of some of his young Councillors,
he resolved to seize upon the principal Places in the Netherlands, that is,
Antwerp, Bruges, Dunkirk and Dendermond, upon pretense that the People of
Antwerp had encompassed his Palace with design to murder him. The two last he
took possession of, but the Citizens of Bruges and Antwerp defended themselves
with so much courage, that the French were killed in such heaps before the
Gates as prevented those without from enering in to their Relief. The Flemmings
had some suspicions, the Prince was concerned in the attempt; which was
somewhat occasioned by his fourth Marriage with Lovise de Coligny a French
Lady: But he perceiving it, and that the States party grew every day weaker in
the Walloon Provinces, retired into Holland where he thought himself more
secure, and his Life less exposed to the Bigoted Papists; and settled at the
City of Delph, where Henry Frederick Grandfather to our present Gracious
Sovereign was born.

The Duke of Anjous Party being defeated he was obliged to restore those places
of which he had made himself Master. And returning into France dyed soon after,
some say of poison, others of mere vexation for this inglorious enterprise.

The Spaniards thinking they had no greater Enemy in the World than the Prince
of Orange; and that he being gone they should attain their full purposes for
inslaving the Netherlands, they used all manner of base and treacherous
practices to murder and destroy him, which they too succes-fully effected in
the manner following. In May 1584. A Young man of above twenty seven coming to
the Princes Court at Delph, delivered him a Letter as he passed along, the
Prince demanding whence it came, the Youth being of a seeming innocent
countenance replied, that it was his own Letter, and contained matter of
concernment for the service of the Country; It was subscribed Francis Guyon.
The Prince went away, and the next day the fellow desiring a Councellor of the
Princes that he might be heard and receive an Auswer of his Letter, and that he
had several other things of importance to discover both concerning the Country
and Religion. The Prince having notice of it, commanded one of his Council to
examine him; to whom he gave a large account of his pretended adventures, and
that he had procured several blanks (which he produced) with Count Mansfields
Seal, which were given him for the use of Pass-ports for Victualers, but might
be serviceable to the Prince upon other occasions. The Prince recovered the
blank Pass-ports, intending to try some experiment with them: And by this means
he became so familiar at Court, that the Prince some days after having an
account of the death of the Duke of Anjou, he sent for this Villain into his
chamber to inquire something of him while he was in bed, and the wretch
afterward confessed in Prison that if he had then had a Dagger or Penknise he
would have certainly slain him then: After this he came constantly to Prayers
and Sermons, and was observed to read Du Bartas Works, particularly the History
of Judith and Holofernes, where there are certain persuasions and
encouragements to cut off Tyrants; Sometimes he borrowed a Bible of the Porter
upon pretense of Religion; so that at length he went about the Court without
suspicion. A while after the Prince ordered him to be sent to Count Biron into
France, to try if he could make any advantage of the Pass-ports, upon which he
desired money to buy Shoes and Stockings, being in an ill condition; The Prince
ordered him ten or twelve Crowns. Next day he bought a Pistol of one of the
Guard, but finding it did not shoot true he bought two more which were
according to his mind: After this he watched when the Prince went down to the
Hall to Dinner, and demanded a Passport of him, but in such a hollow and
contused Voice that the Princess asked what he was, for she did not like his
countenance; the Prince told ber his business: After Dinner the Prince going
out of the Hall, the Villain stood behind a Pillar in the Gallery with his
Cloak on one Shoulder, having two Pistols under his left Arm, holding in his
right hand a paper like a Passport as it to have the Prince sign it; As the
Prince passed along having one foot upon the first step of the Stairs, the
Traitor advanceing drew forth one of his pistols so suddenly that he was not
perceived till the blow was given; the three builets wherewith the pistol was
charged, entering in at his left side, and coming out on the right through the
Stomach and Vital parts: The Prince feeling himself hurt said only thus, O my
God take pity of my Soul, I am sore wounded: My God, take pity of my Soul and
of this poor People. After which he began to stagger but his Gentleman Usher
supported him, and set him upon the Stairs, the Countess of Swartsenburg his
Sister asked him if he did not recommend his Soul to Jesus Christ? he answered
Yes, and never spoke a word more, dying in a few minutes after: The Murderer
endeavored to escape, but being taken and told he was a wicked Traitor, to
endeavor to kill the Prince; I am no Yraytor, said he, but have done what the
King of Spain commanded me, and if I have not slain him cursed be my ill
Fortune: After this he freely consessed the whole matter, and that he had done
it by the instigation of the Jesuits, and the encouragement of the Prince of
Parma who assured him of the reward promised to the Assassinate by the King of
Spain.

For this horrid Crime a particular and tremendous sentence was pronounced
against him by the Judges That Baltazar Gerrard (which he confessed was his true
name) should be la'id upon a Scaffold in the Market place of Delft, to have his
right hand wherewith he committed that execrable deed, torn with two burning
hot pincers, and the like to be done in six several parts of his Body, as his
Arms, Thight and several other Fleshly parts; his privy Members to be cut off,
and he to be Quartered alive to have his Heart plackt our and thrown in his
Face, and lastly his Head to be cut off, and to be set upon a Pole upon the
watch Tower behind the Princes lodgings; His four Quarters to be hanged upon
Gibbets upon the four Bulwarks of the Town. This Sentence, said the Judges, we
think fit to pronounce against this wicked Murderer, for having (to the great
grief and sorrow of all good men) committed a most execrable Crime, and
abominable Treason, upon the Person of so Famous and Renowned a Prince as the
Prince of Orange was; for which he ought in no wise to remain unpunished, but
rather with all rigor and severity to be made an Example to future Ages.

Having notice of his Death he was at first astonished, cursing the hour of his
birth, and wishing he had never learned the wicked Principles of the Jesuits at
Dole, but had been still a mean Tradesman, and not fallen into this folly; But
since it is done, said he, there is no remedy, and I must now suffer for it.
This dreadful Sentence was fully executed, and yet in all his torments he never
cried out, nor seemed to be in any pain; Yea smiled at an accident that
happened in the midst of his Tortures. Having often boasted that he would not
show the least sign of fear,

Thus died the renowned William Prince of Orange at fifty one Years of Age. He
was of an active Spirit and a strong memory; and his Wisdom, Constancy,
Magnanimity, his Courage, Patience, and Labors were all so extraordinary, that
they are rather to be admired than described. A Person in whom concurred a
solid Judgment to undertake so great and difficult an Enterprise, and an
unparallelled Courage to carry it on; and a very great Constancy to finish the
Freedom of his Country against the mighty power of Spain, and the Treacheries
of many of his own Countrymen. So that the States and People of the
Netherlands who had so often experienced his Conduct and Magnanimity in their
most pressing extremities, admired his Virtues which scarce ever m^t before in
one Person, bewailing him as if no greater loss could have befallen them in
this World, and solemnized his Funeral with all imaginable magnificence, that
being the last Honor they could pay to his glorious memory. He had four Wives
by whom he had four Sons and eight Daughters.

Phillip William of Nassaw,
Was Eldest Son to the Great W. P. of Orange; Philip II. K. of Spain being his
Godfather; who when his Father was compelled to take Arms in his own defense,
was a Student at the University of Lovain, and was taken thence by force, to
the Infringement of the Liberties of the Place, notwithstanding all the
Protestations of the Rector to the contrary, and the Complaints of the Prince
his Father, who publicly exclaimed against the Cruelty of the Spaniards, since
no Privilege nor Innocence of Age could secure any from their Tyranny and
Injustice. He was carried from thence into Spain at 13 Years of Age, and
educated in the Roman Catholic Religion, where he continued a Prisoner above
30 Years; during which, his Jailor presuming to speak abusively of the
Proceedings of his Father, the Prince who inherited his gallant temper, not
enduring his insolent discourse, took him about the middle and throwing him out
of the Window broke his Neck; The K. of Spain consulted with his Council what
Punishment to inflict for this great Action; but at length, by the interposing
of a generous young Spaniard who was present, and affirmed that the Captain's
ill carriage was the occasion of his Death, it was passed over.

But at length, in hope to create some Jealousies between his Brother Maurice
and himself, K. Philip released him and sent him into Flanders, where he lived
in great State with the Spanish Governor of the Netherlands at Brussels, and
was employed by that King to conduct into the Netherlands his Bride and Spouse
that was to be, the Infanta Isabella, to whom K. Philip had given in Dowry the
Sovereignty of the 17 Provinces; This was a very astonishing Policy to all the
Netherlands, that the Son of a Prince who was so abhorred by the Spaniards,
should be chosen for this honorable Employment, and caused such a Jealousy in
the States of the United Provinces toward him (the King of Spain having
likewise restored to him all his Estate in the Spanish Low Countries, and the
French Comte) that they would not allow him to make any Visit, much less to
reside in any of their Provinces, though he was very desirous so to do: And
though his younger Brother Prince Maurice, out of his generous temper
surrendered up all the great Estate that belonged to Philip his older Brother,
as Breda, and other places; yet to prevent his being suspected by the States
General, he declined seeing him in Person, rendering his Respects to him
constantly by Persons deputed thereunto. He married Eleonora Burbon Sister to
the Prince of Conde, and by marching with a Princess of the Blood, he was
reinstated in his Principality of Orange and died without Children at Brussels
in 1618. leaving his Inheritance and Title to his Brother.

Maurice of Nassaw, Prince of Orange.
Successor to his Father both in Conduct, Courage, and Success, who being but
17 years old at the Death of his Father was yet called to the Government, and
was no ways discouraged at the great Successes of Alexander Famese Duke of
Parma who in a very short time had reduced several Cities and Towns to the
Crown of Spain; Nor with the insolence of the Earl of Leicester, who at the
desire of the State General was sent by Q. Elizabeth to be their Governor,
though by his insupportable Pride and Ambition he more endamaged the Low
Countries, than the Succors he brought relieved them, so that for 4 years
together that Commonwealth labored under dreadful Convulsions, occassion'd by
the Intrigues of the Earl of Leicester, and the Policies of the Spaniards, till
at length by the fortunate and total destruction of the Nicknamed, Invincible
Spanish Armada, designed to have devoured all England, the Prince of Parma lost
all his reputation at once. Prince Maurice about the same time obliging him to
his everlasting shame, to rise and run away from the Siege of Bergen (...)
Zoom, And for Twenty Years after, even till the time of the Truce, Fortune was
so favorable to the Prince, that Victory seemed to attend him; insomuch that
he recovered near 40 Cities, and many more Fortresses, and in three pitched
Battles defeated the Forces of the K. of Spain; besides the Victories his
Admirals obtained at Sea upon the Coasts of Flanders and Spain: The Stratagem
by which he surprised Breda was very remarkable; For the Garrison of that Town
being Italians, and greedy of Fuel in that cold Country, they very readily
assisted the Boatman to draw his Bark of Turffs over the Ice within the Castle
Walls, under which the Prince had laid several armed Soldiers, who suddenly
starting up, surprised, and soon seized the Guards, taking Possession of the
Castle with the loss only of one Man, though it were an Action of such Danger
and Importance: Soon after the Town of Gertrudenburg was surrendered to the
Prince in View of the Spanish Army consisting of 30000 Men commanded by Count
Mansfield an experienced General who could not force the Prince out of his
Trenches though he daily provoked him; so that Prince Maurice having sent a
Trumpeter to the Count, he asked him, How his Master, being a young and fiery
Prince could contain himself within his Trenches after such fair Provocations.
The Trumpeter replied, That the Prince of Nassaw was a Young Prince, but as old
and experienced a General as his Excellency.

The next Year the Prince took Groaning, the Capital City of that province; also
Rhineburg, Meurs, and Grave, and gained great Reputation by the defense of
Ostend; for the Spaniards having made themselves Masters of it, after a Siege
of three Years, with the loss of Sixty thousand Men, and the expense of above a
Hundred Millions of Treasure, they were possessed of nothing but a heap of
Ruins, more like a Burying place than a City; And the Prince soon after gained
Sluice, a place of far greater Importance. And at the Battle of Newport he had
so great Success against far more numerous Forces than his own; That the
Archduke Albert, with several other Persons of Quality were wounded: All the
Spaniards Cannon with above 100 Cornets and Ensigns falling into the Victor's
hands, with the slaughter of 6000 of the Enemy upon the place; the Prince
having before the Fight sent away all the Ships that Transported his Men into
Flanders, telling them, That now there was no way to escape, but they must
either march over the Bellies of their Enemies, or else drink Salt Water: After
several other successes against the Prince of Parma and other Spanish Generals,
whereby he raised up the sinking Republic of the United Netherlands, he died
in 1625. He was never Married, and left his Titles and large Possessions to his
younger Brother.

Henry Frederick of Nassaw Prince of Orange.
Who was third Son to the renowned W. P. of Orange; He was born in 1584. and
was an excellent General, not in the least degenerating from the Courage and
Gallantry of that Heroic Family, being every way equal in Fame to his Brother
Prince Maurice, taking the famous Cities of Odousel and Groll in despite of the
Spanish General, who with a numerous Army was not able to relieve it; Nor was
he less successful at Sea, his Vice Admiral Hein taking a Fleet of the
Spaniards near Cuba in the West Indies, valued at above twenty Millions. After
this he took Bois le Duc which had withstood all the attempts of his Brother
Maurice, and would not be drawn away till he had reduced it, though Count Henry
of Bergnes the Spanish General made an Incursion into the Province of Utrecht
to divert him; And afterward happily surprised the City of Wessel, where the
Magazine of Provisions and all the great Artillery of the Spanish Army were
laid up.

About this time Count John of Nassaw his Kinsman upon some discontent
revolting to the Spaniards, was defeated by one of the Princes Captains near
the Rhyne in the open Field, with half his number of men, himself being carried
Prisoner to Wessel, from whence he could not be redeemed without the payment of
18000 Rix Dollars; To revenge which dishonor, Count John when at liberty
endeavored with a strong Navy of Ships to seize the Town of Williamstadt, but
was totally defeated by the Hollanders, and 4000 Prisoners taken, and the rest
either killed or drowned; He himself and the Prince of Brabancon hardly
escaping.

The States General to testify their gratitude to Henry Prince of Orange for
the great services he had performed; About this time by a public Edict
declared, That all the Dignities, Honors, and Employments which he then
enjoyed shall descend to his Eldest Son Prince William, the Instruments whereof
being drawn up and sealed by the States, were presented to the young Prince in
a Box of Gold. After this Prince Henry continued still more successful, taking
the Towns of Ru^emond, Veulo and Strall, and lastly undertaking the Seige of
Mastricht, where he surrounded his Trenches with such strong circumvallations
that both the Spanish and German Forces were obliged to march away with
dishonor and leave him the honor of reducing so important a place.

Diverse other prosperous attempts he made, as his retaking the Fort of Skink
Scans, and regaining the Castle and City of Breda, which the Marquess Spinola
had been a whole year in taking, with vast loss and expense, and yet the Prince
now reduced it to his Immortal honor in four months, and answerable was his
Fortune at Sea, where Admiral Trump falling upon a numerous Fleet of the
Spaniards in the Downs, of 67 Men of War destroyed the greatest part of them to
the number of 40 Ships sunk, wherein above 7000 men were lost and 2000 carried
Prisoners into Holland, amongst whom was the great Gallion of Portugal called
Maria Teresa, carrying 800 men, whereof not one escaped.

In 1641. Prince William only Son of the Prince of Orange married the Princess
Mary Eldest Daughter to King Charles I. And soon after Prince Henry gained the
strong Fort of Hulst in Flanders, which the Spaniards were not able to relieve.
Thus it may be observed, That William Prince of Orange laid the Foundations of
the Commonwealth of Holland, Prince Maurice his Son fixed and strengthened them
by his Victories, and Henry Frederick the Younger Brother by continuing his
Conquests and enlarging their Territories, at length compelled the Spaniard, to
renounce his pretended right over them, and to acknowledge them an Independent
State, treating with them by the title of The High and Mighty States General of
the United Provinces; So that by the Swords of the Illustrious House of Orange,
this Potent Republic was first founded, which is now arrived to that Grandeur
as to send Ambassadors upon equal terms with the most Potent Princes of
Christendom, even to the K. of Spain himself whose Subjects they were, not
above 100 years, and whose revolt has proved a great advantage to that Crown,
they having been so many years a Barrier to the Spanish Netherlands against the
excessive power and ambition of France, which without their assistance had long
since swallowed them up.

Prince Henry Married the Daughter of John Albert Count of Solms, who came with
the Queen of Bohemia into Holland, a Lady of excellent Beauty, Modesty and
Prudence, by whom he had one Son and four Daughters; The Eldest named Lovison,
was Married to Frederick William Prince Elector of Brandenburg by whom he had
several Children; The second Henrietia was Married to the Count of Nassaw, the
third Catharina was espoused to John George Duke of Anhalt; The fourth was
Married to the Duke of Simeren; Prince Henry died March 1^, 1647. and was
succeeded by

William of Nassaw Prince of Orange.
Who was born in 1626. A Prince of worthy Hopes and Courage, but was suddenly
taken away by Death in the 24 year of his Age, having been Married nine years
to the Princess Mary Daughter to K. Charles the First, by whom he had Prince
William Henry, who was born Nov. 4. 1650. some few days after his Fathers
Death, the Lords States General of Holland and Zealand, and of the Cities of
Dei^e, Leyden and Amsterdam being his God fathers.

William Henry of Nassaw Prince of Orange.
THIS excellent Prince, our present Gracious ^overeign (...) endowed with all
the Noble and Virtuous Qualities of his Ancestors of the Illustrious House of
Orange which seemed designed by Heaven to be the Protectors of Religion and
Liberty for several Ages, his Majesty's glorious Predecessors being the
Founders and Establishers, and himself the Restorer of the half ruined Batavian
Republic as well as the Deliverer of these three Kingdoms from the utmost
danger of Popery and Slavery; This excellent Prince suffered many affronts by
Barnevels Party, revived in the Persons of the De Wits, expecting with
inimitable patience the advancement to those Honors and Dignities which of
right belonged to his Family, and which by the Decree of a prevailing Faction
he was deprived of, presently after the Death of his Father.

But King Lewis his inveterate Enemy, did accidentally very much contribute to
his Exaltation, for having in 1672. like a rapid Torrent overrun the
flourishing Batavian Republic, he thereby gave opportunity to the Prince to
discover to the World, the Spirit of his Ancestors, in recovering the United
Provinces from the ruin which seemed to attend them by the success of that
King, even beyond his hopes, nay almost his wishes, which put that People into
such a consternation as occasioned them to complain of the unhappy Conduct of
Cornelius and John De Wit, who had then the sole management of all affairs, and
to believe that none but the glorious House of Nassaw was capable to support
their tottering State in this Age against their Potent French Enemies, as they
had formerly rescued them from the Tyranny of Spain.

Neither was the Grandmother of the Prince wanting to engage the favorers of
that Family to endeavor to remove that Eclipse under which it had so long
sustered, which Her Highness managed with a courage and magnanimity above her
Sex, so that being awakened by Her Remonstrances, they began to consider how
they themselves had of late been slighted and neglected, whilst all the great
Employments of the Commonwealth were bestowed upon the Sons of Burgomasters,
and being seconded by the rage of the Commonalty, who were dreadfully terrified
to see a Victorious Army in the very bowels of their Country, they obliged the
States General in the beginning of 1672. to depute Monsieur Beverning, John De
Wit, and Jasper Fagel to invest His Highness the Prince of Orange in the
Dignities belonging to his Ancestors, of Captain and Admiral General of the
United Provinces, who having accepted the same, and taken his Oath, presently
went upon action against the French: But the Province of Holland still
suspected the fidelity of their Magistrates, seeing their Frontier Towns and
Garrisons fall daily into the hands of their Victorious Enemies, and at Dort
they raised a dangerous Mutiny, and resolved that His Highness should be
advanced to the Stadt-Holdership also, as judging it absolutely necessary for
the public good: Upon which an Act was instantly drawn up, and read in the
public Hall by the Secretary, wherein the Magistrates declared His Highness
the Prince of Orange Stadtholder, Captain and Admiral General of all their
Forces by Sea and Land, with the same Power and Authority that His Ancestors of
glorious Memory had formerly enjoyed; which occasioned great rejoicing in that
City.

But Cornelius De Wit, an Ancient Burgomaster of the Town, returning at the
same time indisposed from the Fleet, and being desired to sign the said Act,
replied, He would never do it, nor could all the persuasions of his Friends,
nor the menaces of the multitude, who were ready to break into his house, nor
the tears of his Wife, who was sensible of his danger, prevail upon his
obstinate temper, till she threatened to show her self to the People, and
declare her own and Childrens Innocence, and abandon him to the fury of the
ungoverned Populace; which soon after occasioned his Tragical Death, for they
being fully persuaded that he and his Brother John were real Enemies to the
Prince, and a certain Surgeon having charged Cornelius that he had made a
private Proposal to him to take away His Highness Life, he was thereupon
imprisoned and upon Trial was sentenced to forfeit all his Dignities and
Employments, and to be for ever banished out of the Territories of Holland and
Westfriezeland.

The People who accounted the Prince to be their Protector and Deliverer,
believed his Judges to be partial in punishing so great a Crime with so easy a
Judgment, and the Trained Bands at the Hague being in Arms, they presently ran
to the Prison, where while they were got together, it happened that John de
Wit came in his Coach to fetch his Brother out of Prison: Upon which one of
the Burgesses cried out, Now the two Traitors are got together, and it is our
fault if they escape us. This had been enough to inflame the multitude, but a
greater motive happened; for while they were all expecting the coming down of
the two De Wits, an unhappy report was raised, that above a thousand Peasants
and Fishermen were upon their March to plunder the Hague, upon which another
Burger cried out, Come Gentlemen, let us pull these Traitors out by the Ears,
do but follow me and I will lead the way. These words, with their great
affection to the Prince, and the ruin of their Country, to both which they
accounted the De Wits to be the greatest Enemies completed their Rage, so
that they Immediately broke open the Prison doors, and sorced down the two
Brothers into the Street, where they were soon dispatched by the multitude, who
after they had laid the Pensionary John De Wit sprawling on the ground, cried
out, See there the Traitor that has betrayed his Country. Thus fell John and
Cornelius de Wit, two violent Enemies to the House of Orange. It is said, that
John was the Contriver of those Acts whereby His Highness was secluded from all
the Great Employments which were due to him from his Predecessors, and that a
certain Ambassador being in private discourse with him, said, Most Illustrious
Sir, I have heard much of your singular prudence, and unwearied diligence, but
far less than what I now observe, from whence I dare assuredly pronounce, that
either you will be the ruin of the Prince, or else that one day for his sake
you will come to destruction. It is likewise reported, that when he was a Youth
of about eighteen years old, a certain Advocate being desired by his Father to
examine him, gave this account of him; That he found in him those great Parts
and that ripeness of Wit, which was rarely to be seen in others: And afterward
when he was made Pensioner of Holland and Dort the same Advocate presaged of
him, That he would never die a natural death. Thus (says a worthy Person)
ended one of the greatest Lives of any Subject of our Times in the 47th year of
his Age, after having administered in that State as Pensioner of Holland for
about eighteen years with great Honor to his Country and himself.

It must be remarked that the present War with the States General was commenced
in concert between the French King and Charles II. in a time of the greatest
peace and security on the Dutch side, so that when the English fell upon their
Smyrna Fleet, no clap of Thunder in a Frosty morning could be more surprising,
both to the Hollanders, and the rest of Christendom; Yea the Court of France it
self could scarce believe that we would run so great an Adventure, though our
Court had obliged themselves thereto; And though in the Declaration of War
which the King published, the Dutch are charged with making abusive Pictures
and denying the right of the Flag, which was an undoubted Prerogative of the
Crown of England, yet the Parliament and People were of opinion that this War
was made in pursuance of the Instructions of the French King, sent over to
Dover by the Duchess of Orleance; whereby the destruction of the Commonwealth
of Holland is declared to be the only means to settle Arbitrary Government and
Popery in these three Nations.

Upon our Declaration of War, the French King began to march with his Vast Army
into the Netherlands which he overran with such a rapid motion that the People
were astonished, and the States knew not what course to take to prevent it,
which occasioned those Commotions aforementioned; But his Highness the Prince
of Orange being advanced to the Stadtholdership, the face of affairs began to
alter, and their Courage was revived: Monsieur Fagel succeeded De Wit as
Pensioner, and the Prince presently resolved to be upon action, rejecting all
the applications made to him by the two Kings, of making him Sovereign of the
Provinces with such disdain and greatness of Soul as is scarce to be matched,
always declaring, That he would never betray a Trust that was given him, nor
ever sell the Liberties of his Country that his Ancestors had so long defended.

In pursuance of this generous Resolution his Highness took the Command of the
Army upon him, who were more animated at the thoughts of being under the
Conduct of so gallant a General. So that at Bodegrave an handful of men twice
repulsed above five thousand of the French from the Walls of Ardenburg, and
besides the slain took five hundred Prisoners with several Commanders, and
Persons of Quality, through the extraordinary valor of no more than two
hundred Burgers and one hundred Garrison Soldiers only that they were affisted
by the Women and Children, the Women filling the Bandilcers, and the Children
brought Bullets to their Parents.

Soon after the Seige of Groningen which had been beseigned with near three
thousand men by the Bishop of Munster; was by the Courage of the Citizens
raised with the loss of half the Enemies Army, and a prodigious quantity of
Ammunition spent in vain in reduceing thereof, to which his Highness care in
furnishing them with all necessaries for desence was highly contributing.

About the same time the Prince resolving to dislodge the Outguards of the
French, gave a strong Alarm to them, and without moving from his Saddle all
night, drove them to their Trenches before Utrecht, and cartied several Lords
Prisoners to Amsterdam. His Highness then resolved to attempt the reducing of
Woerden, and after a bloody and obstinate Fight wherein above two thousand of
the French were slain and not above seven hundred of the Dutch. His Highness
finding the Garrison relieved with such a numerous supply, drew off his men and
retreated to his Quarters. After which was held a Council of War of the
Principal Officers of the Army, which being ended a certain Colonel would needs
be impertinently inquisitive of the Prince to know what was his great design
against the French at that time; His Highness demanded of him, whether he would
discover to any other what he should declare to him; The Colonel said, No, he
would not; Then said the Prince, my Tongue is also endued from Heaven with the
same Grace, An answer becoming the wisdom of a Prince and the reservedness of a
Great Commander.

His Highness being with the Army at Mastricht, sent out a Party to reduce the
strong Castle of Valcheren which was soon surrendered with a great quantity of
Wheat and other Provisions. During this time the Dake of Luxemburg with
fourteen thousand Horse and Foot resolved to Invade the Province of Holland, in
hope to plunder Leyden and the Hague, and marched from Woerden over the Ice with
3500 of the lightest of the Infantry of whith attempt his Highness having
notice marched with all speed toward the French, who in the mean time had taken
Swamerdam, and by the retiring of Colonel Pain Vin from his Post at
Niewerbrong had a free passage opened for their retreat, who must also have
perished in the waters, or surrendered by reason of the sudden thaw; The Duke
himself was like to have been lost by a fall into the thawed water, losing in
this shippery expedition above six hundred of his best Soldiers The French
committed horrid ravages at Swammerdam; Ravishing Women, Stripping and Wounding
the Aged and Decrepit, and throwing infants that smiled in their Faces into the
fire

And now the strong City of Coverden the Key of the Provinces of Frizeland and
Groaning, which in that fatal year 1672. fell into the hands of the Bishop of
Munster with great loss of men and a long Seige, was retaken in an hour and not
above sixty men slain, and of the Enemy a hundred and fifty killed and 430
Prisoners; It was furnished by the Bishop with a predigious quantity of warlike
Ammubition. This success highly encouraged the Dutch, and so furprized the
Enemy that they instantly quitred several other Garrisons, and much advanced
the Honor of the Prince, to whose prudent mannagement of affairs they
attributed this happy alteration in the Fortune of their Country; Which his
Highness likewise extended to pacify the Dissentions between the Old and New
Magistrates of Frizeland who acted contrary to each other, but upon his
Highness appearing in their Assembly, all discords vanished, and all things were
settled for the defense of the Netherlands by his visiting the Frontier
Fortifications of Flushing, Sluice, Ardenburg, (where the Keys of the Town were
delivered him in a Silver Basin by the Young Virgins of that City, decked with
Garlands of several Flowers) and several other strong places.

In 1673. the Dutch were hetly assailed, on the one side by the French King
with a puissant Army, while Conde and Luxemburg lay at Utrecht with powerful
Forces to watch an opportunity to invade the very Center of their Territories,
and by Sea the King of England vigorously attackt them with his own and the
French Fleet, so that the Prince of Orange was obliged not to stir abroad but
to observe their designs, and prevent the threatened Descent of the English. In
May the King of France with an Army of 42000 men sat down before Mastricht,
the Garrison consisted of about 4000 Foot, and 900 Horse under Monsieur Farieux
a resolute and experienced Commander, as appeared by the stout resistance he
made against this mighty Force, so that though the French gained the place, yet
it was with such a deluge of Blood, no less than 9000 of their bravest
Soldiers being Slain in the Seige with an incredible number of his choicest
Officers, that the purchase was sufficiently dear; And after three weeks
valiant defense, with the loss of half the Garrison by innumerable essaults,
Batteries and Storming of fresh Assailants night and day; The Courageous
Governor would still have held it out, had not the Petitions of the
Magistrates and Ecclesiastics obliged him to surrender, of whose worthy
conduct the Prince of Orange was so well satisfied that he instantly preferred
him to be Major General of the Army. And the French King was so mortified that
when he had taken the Town he broke up his Army, and returned to Paris, sending
part of them to Turrenne, to enable him to harrass the Country of Treves,
because that Elector had assisted the Emperor against him.

The French Army being thus dispersed, and the Engish Fleet since the Engagement
of May 28. (wherein both sides claimed the Victory) being retired from the
Coast of Holland, His Highness now more at liberty, resolved not to lie still,
so that calling off his Forces which lay for the defense of Zealand to join
with the rest of the Army, he sat down before Naerden with 20000 Men, upon
which the Duke of Luxemburg with 10000, and four Reigments of Munster Horse,
advanced within view of the Princes Intrenchments, but not daring to attempt
the Relief of the Town, the Prince after three hours resistance beat the French
from their Works, and forced them to retire in great confasion into the City,
and the next day they furtendred it up. The Garrison marching out, the
Governor made a profound Reverence to the Prince, and it is said assured him.
That he had Reasons sufficient to surrender the Town so soon: But it seems the
King did not think them so, for he was condemned to perpetual imprisonment, and
had his Sword broken over his head at Utrecht: For the Garrison consisted in
near Three thousand Men and wanted neither Ammunition nor Provisions, and the
French had much strengthened the Fortifications, yet the Prince took it in four
days, and lost not above a hundred Men, and two hundred wounded.

And now His Highness to avoid so many Sieges as the Towns they had lost would
cost to recover, resolved upon a gallant Action, the boldness of which amazed
all Men, but the success extolked the prudence as well as the bravery of it.
For the King of Spain and the Emperor having joined in a Confederacy with the
States General for mutual defense against the French as the common Enemy of
both; The Prince, that he might perform something remarkable before the
approaching Winter, marched directly with his Army out of the Netherlands, and
joining with the Confederates, he resolved to besiege Bonne, which had been put
into the hands of the French the beginning of the War, wherein the Elector of
Cologne, and the Bishop of Munster had entered jointly with France: It had a
Garrison of Two thousand Men and was well furnished with all provisions; and
Eighty great Guns mounted on their Walls and Bulwarks. The Marshal D'Humieres,
with Seven thousand Horse, faced the Leaguer, but durst not venture to succor
it, so that the Confederates having finished their Batteries, and brought three
Mines to perfection, prepared for a general Storm, but willing to save their
Men, sent a Summons to the Governor to surrender the Town, since they were
without Relief, and if they pleased might send out some to see what Mines were
ready to play upon their refusal, which would be followed by putting to the
Sword all in Arms if taken by Storm. This so affrighted them, that the next day
they capitulated, and 1500 French marched out of the Town, the rest being
either dead or wounded.

This successful Expedition of His Highness put the French into such a
Consternation to see the reverse of their Fortune, that they who lately with
insulting Pride threatened the ruin of others, were now at their wits end to
save themselves; so that upon the loss of so many Men as had lately died by
Sickness and the Sword, they were compelled to abandon all their Conquests in
the Netherlands in less time than they gained them, retaining only Mastricht
and the Grave of all they lately possessed belonging to this Republic. Woerden
was the first that felt their Tyranny, and was first evacuated, but the Duke of
Luxemburg extorted 16000 Livers of them, to save the Town from burning, by the
King's Order. Harderwick paid 12000 Livers; Creveceur 3000 Pistols; Bommel a
strong Fortress on which the King of France had bestowed 60000 Livers, gave
Hostages to pay 36000 Livers to spare their Houses. Utrecht was obliged to give
an hundred thousand Crowns; and the French all departing in one day, the
Burgomasters absolved each other from their Oaths which they had taken against
the Restoration of His Highness the Prince of Orange, to whom they sent their
Deputies to acknowledge him their Stadtholder in the name of the whole Province
of Utrecht. Thus His Highness may in some sense seem to have outdone Caesar
himself, for he vanquished even where he neither saw nor came, but only by the
Tertour of his Arms and Victories. In consideration of this happy Turn of
Affairs occasioned by the prudence and conduct of His Highness, the States
General in February following published a Decree to declare their Gratitude,
confirming the charge of Stad tholder of the Province of Holland and
West-Friezeland on the Person of His Highness during Life, and also on the
Heirs Males of his Body, as a standing Monument of his surpassing Merits. And
that very day the States of Zealand likewise conferred the same Dignities upon
His Highness, and made him withal Hereditary Noble of their Province.

In the beginning of the year 1674. the Parliament and People of England being
weary of the War with Holland, which was entered into without their consent or
liking, were very desirous of a Peace; so that the French-Court-party having
little hope of wheedling the House of Commons to give any more Money to carry
on their black designs against the Religion and Liberties of the Nation under
the pretense of this War, they were obliged to make a separate Peace with the
Dutch exclusive of the French King, though to their great regret, that they
were forced to abandon their dear Ally, from whom they had drawn such great
sums of Money for secret service upon the strength and heart of this Peace, His
Highness the Prince of Orange concerted with the German and Spanish Troops to
begin an Offensive War, and in the head of an Army of 40000 Men to march into
France: In pursuance hereof the three Armies being joined, arrived at Nivelle
the beginning of August 1674. where they continued for some days, but finding
the Prince of Conde who lay not far off encamped with an Army of Fifty
thousand, unwilling to come forth and hazard a Battle in the open Field, they
endeavored by all ways imaginable to provoke and draw him out of his Trenches,
but all proving ineffectual, they resolved to besiege some place of importance,
believing that Conde would endeavor to relieve it: Whereupon His Highness
marched from Seneffe toward Brinch, General Souches with the Imperial Forces
leading the Van: Count Waldeck commanded the main Battle with the Holland Army,
and Count de Monterey the Rear with the Spaniards, the Prince of Orange
commanding the whole Confederate Army.

The Prince of Conde having notice of their movement, and being sensible of the
difficulty and straitness of the passages, put his Men in order, and letting
the Vanguard pass, and the greatest part of the main Body some Leagues before,
he then fell in upon the Rere-Guard of the Spanish Horse and Dragoons
consifting of Four thousand, commanded by the Prince de Vaudemont, and broke
them with great flaughter, and not much resistance, taking several Prisoners of
Quality, with the Baggage, which the Prince of Orange having notice of, he sent
three Battalions of Infantry to their Relief. Conde warmed with success, drew
his whole Army out of their Trenches, and fell with much fury upon the Dutch
Squadron, breaking them to pieces, killing or taking all their Commanders, and
gaining several Standards: And here His Highness the Prince of Orange gave
particular Testimonies of his undaunted Bravery, throwing himself with his
Sword in his hand before the daunted Fugitives, endeavoring by all means
imaginable to stop their flight, and by his own example encouraged them to
renew the Battle, so that he was often in danger either of being slain or taken
Prisoner? But at length His Highness joining the rest of the Dutch who stood
firm, whom he made the Right Wing, with the Imperialists and Spaniards in the
Left, the Fight was renewed with more fury and vigor than ever, both Armies
being animated with hope of Victory, and seeming equally resolved rather to die
than be overcome. His Highness omitted no pains upon this important occasion;
so animating his Soldiers, that they strove with emulation to outdo one
another, and both Armies fought till night with an obstinacy on both sides
hardly to be paralleled, though the Fields were all strown over with the Bodies
of the slain and wounded, while the Combatants covered with Blood and Sweat,
encouraged each other the more by that dismal spectacle. Thus the fury of the
French, which at first carried all before them, about Ten a Clock at night
began to abate, the French Infantry, of which they had lost a considerable
part, drawing off at a distance, notwithstanding all the endeavors of the
Prince of Conde to have brought them back again, who thereupon fearing some
farther mischief might befall his Army, ordered the Horse also to retire,
leaving the Victory by this means to His Highness the Prince of Orange, who two
hours after the Retreat of the French, drew off his Army likewise to their
appointed Quarters.

Thus ended this bloody Battle, wherein at first the French prevailed but at
length lost the Victory, having 7000 men slain outright, besides the wounded,
of whom the P. of Conde left above 1500 in the Villages about his Quarters at
Pieton; On the Confederates side the Slain, Wounded, and Deserters, amounted to
about 6500 in all. It was said that a Letter was intercepted from the Prince of
Conde to the French King, giving him an account, That upon a General review of
his Army he found himself but in an ill condition, having lost the flower of
his Infantry, and the best part of his Horse; and therefore did not think
himself strong enough to venture a second Battle. Having likewise lost a great
number of Officers and Persons of Quality; and several Standards, among which
was one called, the White Standard of France, (which was afterward hung up with
great solemnity in the Church of the Carmelites at Brussels) richly imbroidered
with Gold and Silver with a Sun in the middle passing through the Zodiac, with
this Haughty Motto, Nilobstabit Eunti; Nothing can stop his Course. But the
principal honor of this Victory ought, next under God, to be ascribed to his
Highness the Prince of Orange, of whom General Souches gives the following
account in a Letter to the States General.

I have endeavored to discharge my Duty in attending his Highness the Prince
of Orange, during the Bloody and Famous Battle between the Confederate Army and
that of the Christian King, the happy Issue of which has proved so much to the
Glory of the Prince of Orange, who showed upon that occasion the prudence of an
Aged Captain, the Courage of a Caesar, and the Undaunted Bravery of a Marius,
all which my Lords I speak without flattery, as being contrary to my Nature.
And as the Friends so the Enemies of his Highness agreed to give him equal
Glory for this Adventure, the Prince of Conde himself declaring, That he had
done in all things like an old Captain, but only in venturing himself too much
like a Young man; Though this old General had done the same in this days
action, charging into the thickest Troops like a Young Cavaleer.

The next day after the fight his Highness marched with his whole Army near
Mons, and took up his head Quarters at St. Gilaine till they had recovered
their disorders in the late battle, and then began to think of further action;
At length it was concluded to beseige Oudenard, to draw the Prince of Conde out
of his cautious marches to relieve it; The Confederates made their approches to
the Town, and were already Masters of the Counterscarp, when Conde decamped
from Beumont with his whole Army of Forty thousand men either to relieve or
give the Confederates Battle; His Highness advised that they should immediately
fall upon the enemy weary and tired with a long March, but General Souches
prevented the execution of this magnanimous resolution, for instead of ranging
his men in Battalia, he crossed the River in so much haste that he left some
Pieces of Cannon behind him, and thereby left a way open for the Prince of
Conde to enter the Town with part of his Army, who thinking he had done enough
in relieving it avoided coming to a Battle. So that his Highness finding no
more good to be done, resolved to march back to Grave, where his presence would
be more necessary, leaving Count Waldeck the command of the Army in his
Absence. The Seige of this place had been undertaken sometime before by General
Rabenhaupt, the Garrison consisted of 4000 Foot and 900 Horse, of which the
Marquis of Chamilly a valiant and expert Captain was Governor, wherein were
450 pieces of Cannon, of which 100 were mounted upon the Bulwarks, besides a
vast quantity of Powder, Corn, Grenades, and all manner of Warlike Ammunition,
for the French had made a Magazine there of all that they had brought away from
their deserted Conquests. Rabenhaupt sat down before it with about twenty
Regiments of Foot and some Horse, and was after reinforced by the Troops of the
Prince of Courland and the Elector of Brandenbourg, who Summoned the City on
every side, assaulting it with much violence, but was as vigorously defended by
those within, though they were reduced to drink water; His Highness arrived
there, Oct. 9. with 60 Cornets of Horse whose presence revived the Courage of
the Besiegers; Yet the French held out till the twenty fifth, when Chamilly
finding such large breaches made in the Fortifications, much widened by the
fortunate blowing up of a Mine which almost destroyed a Covert way, so that it
was impossible for him to hold out against the general Storm designed the next
day, he surrendered the Town upon Honorable Articles.

The following Winter was spent in preparing for an early Campaign, the next
year 1675, in the beginning whereof the Hollanders made grateful
acknowledgements to His Highness the Prince of Orange for his signal conduct
and Services in redeeming them from the Calamities which they had suffered
under a Cruel Foreign Enemy, offering him the Title of Duke of Guelderland,
but to convince the World of the sincerity of his intentions, and how little
ambitious he was to agggrandize himself by the War, His Highness refused those
Honors, but being at the same time offered the command of Governor Hereditary
of the same Province he readily accepted it, and in the management thereof
discovered his excellent prudence in Civil as well as Military Affairs.

But whilst His Highness was intent to oppose the designs of the French for the
ruin of his Country, he was visited with the Small Pox, which struck a great
damp to the proggress of Affairs, and was the more lamented, as having proved
satal to his Family in the Persons of his Father, Mother, and his Uncle the D.
of Gloucester, but it pleased God that by the care and skill of an able
Physician, and certain peculiar Remedies sent him by the Duke of Brandenburg
his Highness recovered, and within 20 days was abroad again, and hastened to the
General Rendesvouze of his Army at Rosendael, in order to the relief of Limburg
then besieged by the Marquess of Rochefort, the King of France with an Army
under the Prince of Conde posting himself advantagiously for covering the
Siege; But such was the slowness of the Germans, and the weakness and disorder
of the Spanish Troops that the Besieged having little hopes of relief and
unable to oppose the great numbers of the French Troops surrendered sooner than
was expected. After which having wasted a great part of the adjoining Country
the King returned to Paris, being prevented from doing farther mischief by the
diligence of his Highness, and the D. de Villa Hermosa.

Soon after the great General Tureine being killed by a Cannon Bullet in
Alsatia, the Prince of Conde was sent thither as General, and the Count de
Montmorency was left to command the French Army, who though a Captain no less
wary than his Predecessor, yet his Highness kept him so upon his guard that he
could not disturb the Siege of Treves, which after the fatal overthrow of
Monsieur Crequi fell into the hands of the Imperialists; So that Montmorency
was unwilling to hazard a Battle with the Prince after two such great losses,
for fear of a third, insomuch that he suffered Binch to surrender to his
Highness at discretion, it being a Garrison of 350 men, and had great
quantities of Provisions, even in the sight of his Army; But it appeared
afterward the Count had positive Orders not to engage the Confederates, so that
his Highness finding Winter approaching broke up his Army and returned to the
Hague.

The King of France at this time seemed very desirous of Peace, his Subjects
being wearied and ruined with the charge of the War, and several Princes
offered to interpose in the matter, and the King of England continuing still in
the French Interests, seemed very zealous therein, and took upon him to be a
Mediator between that King and his Enemies; At length in 1676 a Treaty was
begun at Nimegen, whither the Pleinpotentiaries from all parts repaired as to
the General Rendesvouz; But the preparations for War went on as vigorously as
ever, and his Highness was thoroughly employed to get his Army ready early in
the Spring, considering the formidable Musters the French made under Marshal
Crequi, near Charleville, and Marshal d' Humieres having got together a Body of
15000 Men, fell into the Country of Alost, and the Spaniards being too weak to
resist him, put all the Country under Contribution. Hereupon His Highness
marched with all speed to join the D. of Villa Hermosa at Cambron, which he did
April. 26. But before this Marshal Crequi had surrounded the City of Conde with
16000 men, and the K. of France and D. of Orleans upon notice thereof joined
him with 10000 more, who incessantly battered the Town four days together with
much fury, insomuch that they were forced to surrender at Discretion, though
his Highness was marched as far as Granville for their Relief. After this the
King of France sent the D. of Orleans to besiege Bouchain with some of his
Troops, it being a strong Fortress of considerable consequence, the K. posting
his Army so as to hinder the Prince from relieving it, but his Highness
struggling through all difficulties of the Season, and want of Provisions and
Magazines in Flanders marched with his Army in view of the French King, facing
him several days together, and at length was resolved to have attackt him with
a Detachment of 12000 Men, and to endeavor to have relieved the Town, but
understanding the place was taken, he altered his resolution; Nor would his
Highness stir till the French K. first decamped, leaving to the Prince the
honor of having dared the whole Power and Fortune of France, so that if the
Confederates lost a small Town, the French lost the greater Honor, of
accepting so brave a challenge.

The K. of France returning home and leaving his Army under the Command of
Marshal Schomberg; His Highness concluded with the Spaniards and the German
Princes of the Lower Rhyne, to set down before Mastricht, which though strong
before, yet had been extremely Fortified since possessed by the French, and had
now a Garrison of 8000 choice men under Calvo a resolute Catalonian; To divert
this Siege Schomberg sends the Marshal de Humieres with 15000 men to besiege
Air a City in the Province of Artois, and strongly incompast on three sides by
a Marsh, the only way to approach it being defended by a strong Fort, with five
Bastions and a Mote, but the Fort not having men sufficient to defend it
against the great numbers of the French, who likewise threw Bombs incessantly
into the Town, and fired the Houses, the Townsmen grew so impatient that they
beat a Parley, and the Articles were soon agreed by the French, because they
heard the D. of Villa Hermosa was coming to relieve it, and the Governor was
forced to surrender the Town.

His Highness continued the Siege of Mastricht all this while with much vigor,
and the latter end of July the Trenches were opened, his Highness assigning to
every one their Quarters; and among the rest the English under three Colonels,
Fenwick, Widdrington and Ashly consisting in 2500 men besides Reformades and
Volunteers; who presented a Petition to his Highness, wherein they humbly
desired, That all of their Nation might be assigned a particular Quarter, and
be commanded apart, that if they behaved themselves like Men they might have
the honor due to their Courage, but if they did ill that they only might bear
the disgrace of their Cowardice, there being no reason they should suffer for
the miscarriages of others. The Prince readily granted their request, and
ordered them a separate Post under Fenwick the Eldest Colonel, and they
accordingly signalized their valor during the Siege; Which was carried on with
the utmost Conduct and Resolution, his Highness continually animating his
Soldiers by his Presence, and teaching them by his example to contemn danger;
Many of the Outworks were taken with great slaughter on either side, but were
again supplied by the unwearied industry of the Besieged; In one of these
Assaults his Highness, who continually exposed his Person, received a Musket
Shot in the Arm, but to prevent his Men from being discouraged he plucked off
his Hat with the same Arm, and waved it about his head. But the Confederate
Army being weakened both by sickness and the many Attacks against the Town, and
the Germans not bringing in their promised supplies, a Council of War was
called, in the Princes Camp, and there being advice, that Monsieur Schomberg
was coming with all the French Forces for the relief of the Town, it was
concluded to raise the Siege, and so this Campaign ended without success,
occasioned by the weakness of the Spaniards, and the uncertainty of the German
Councils, and soon after his Highness finding that Schomberg was satisfied with
relieving Mastricht, and not to be brought to a Battle, He returned back to the
Hague, where in a General Assembly of the States he gave an account of the
Summers Expedition, so much to their satisfaction, that he received their
Congratulations and new returns of thanks for the many toils, hardships, and
dangers, to which he had exposed his Person for the preservation of his
Country; In September following his Highness received an account that the
Imperial Army had taken Philipsburg, for want of being well provided, which was
as unexpected as the raising the Siege of Mastricht.

The following Winter was spent in Treating the Peace at Nimegen, which the
Common People of Holland were very desirous of, the War being a great hindrance
to their Trade, but the French insisted upon such high Terms that his Highness
opposed it to the utmost, though K. Charles II. was still very earnest to bring
his dear Ally out of his Troubles; But still the French pursued the War with
their usual application, for in February 1677. though it were in the depth of
Winter, their Forces marched into the Spanish Netherlands, and having provided
sufficient Magazines, they in a manner blockt up Valenciennes, Cambray and St.
Omers at a distance, giving out they would be Masters of two, if not of three
places before the Confederates could take the Field. The French at the same
time broke into Germany on the other side the Rhyne, ravaging, burning, and
ruining these Countries with a barbarity peculiar to the most Christian King;
Soon after the City of Valenciennes was surrounded with an Army of 40 or 50000
men, under the D. of Luxemburg, wherein was a Garrison of 2000 Foot, and about
1000 Horse and Dragoons, and the French King being arrived in the Camp,
commanded that the Besieged should be kept awake all night by flinging Bombs,
Grenades and Fire pots into the Town, and the next morning when they were
tired with the nights Toil, and gone to their repose, so that few were left to
guard the Works, the Assailants carried all before them and turned the great
Guns upon the Town, which so terrified the Besieged that they presently
surrendered at discretion.

Animated with this success the French King immediately sat down before
Cambray a Town of great Trade and had been in the Spaniards hands about 80
years; It had a Garrison of 1400 Horse, and four Regiments of Foot, and after a
few days Siege this City was, like the other Spanish Towns, surrendered upon
Articles; And at the same time St. Omers was besieged by the Duke of Orleans
with a very great Army; The news of this sudden progress of the French so
alarmed all the Netherlands that his Highness the Prince of Orange was resolved
to take the Field, the Dutch having reseived their payments from Spain, and
concluded to continue the War another Campaign, being brought to this
resolution by the vigor and courage of his Highness, who had begun to prepare
his Troops to march upon the first motion of the French; But by the usual
delays and neglects of the Spaniards, though the Prince used the utmost
diligence and application, yet he could not arrive soon enough to succor
Valenciennes and Cambray; But was now resolved to venture a Battle to endeavor
the relief of St. Omers; At Mount Cassal both Armies met, where after a sharp
encounter, wherein his Highness showed the utmost bravery, the French
themselves confessing, That the Prince that day withstood no less than thirty
nine Battalions of Foot, and an hundred equadrons of Horse, he made such an
honorable retreat as wanted little of a Victory, which was occasioned by the
plain Flight of his men, whom he was forced to resist like Enemies; Of which
the States General were so sensible that in answer to his Letter wherein his
Highness gave them an account of what had passed, they sent him another,
returning their unfeigned thanks to his Highness for his indefatigable pains
and care, not sparing his own Person; Of which they besought him to be more
tender for the future, considering the great importance thereof for the
preservation of his Country. After this followed the Surrender of the Citadel
of Cambray which had held out till now, though the Town was taken; And likewise
St. Omers, which after a vigorous resistance wherein the French lost many
considerable Officers, was surrendered upon Articles.

After this the French King returned to Paris, leaving Crequi to oppose the
Duke of Lorrain; and Luxemburg to observe the motions of the Prince of Orange,
who July 23. 1677, having recruited his own Army, and received several
Auxiliary supplies from the German Princes, marched in the Head of them (for
the Confederates had all submitted to his Conduct) from Aloft to attack the
French lying under the Walls of Aeth, but finding Luxemburg so advantagiously
posted between two Rivers that he could not be forced to a Battle, He marched
to Charleroy, and instantly Beleaguered that Town, which had a Garrison of 4 or
5000 French under the command of Count Montal, who mistrusting the design had
furnished it with all manner of Ammunition and Provision, and such a number of
great Guns that he had sent away a good part of them; The D. of Luxemburg
hearing his Highness was sat down before the City, drained all the Garrisons
of the French Conquests, and having made up a Body of 40000 men, posted himself
so strongly, having a Wood upon his right Wing, and a River before him, that
there was no forcing his Trenches, neither could the Confederates fetch any
Forage from the Country beyond the Sambre, from whence they used to be
supplied; All which his Highness considering, drew off and marched to Sembreef,
thereby to preserve his Army wherein consisted the safety of his Country;
though no man was ever more daring when there was any probability of
prevailing. His Highness finding the French were resolved not to come to a
Battle, but to be upon the defensive, and secure what they had gotten, leaving
the Army near Brussels under Count Waldeck, returned to the Hague, and had the
thanks of the States returned him a second time for his wary and prudent
Conduct.

In October this year, his Highness went over into England, at the invitation
of King Charles, in hopes that his presence would much contribute to a general
Peace between France and the Confederates, which the King seemed very
sollicitous to have concluded, by the instigation as it was thought of the
French Court, who were willing to put an end to the War for the present; The
Prince Oct. 19. arrived at Harwich, and went Post to Newmarket where the Court
then was, which in two or three days returned to Whitehall, where his Highness
having a sight of the Princess was so pleased therewith, that he immediately
made suit to the King and Duke that she might be his Bride, which they seemed
well pleased with, if a Peace were first concluded; But his Highness absolutely
resusing that condition, the King being very well satisfied of his Highness
excellent Merits resolved to grant his request, and the next day declared in
Council his design of marrying the Prince of Orange with the Princess Mary;
Upon which the whole Council went in a body to complement the Prince and
Princess; and the news was received both in City and Country with Bells,
Bonfires and other signs of extraordinary joy and satisfaction, and they were
married accordingly, Nov. 4. 1677. being his Highness Birthday.

Yet amidst these Nuptial Joys and Caresses his Highness knowing how necessary
his presence was in Holland made haste to return; So that he departed from
London Nov. 29. with his Princess, and arriving at Homslaer dyke staid there
till they made their public entry at the Hague, which they did in a few days,
in as magnificent a manner, as both the Magistrates and People could express to
declare their joy and satisfaction for these happy Nuptials.

In 1678. even in January the French King made such mighty Preparations for the
ensuing Campaign, as alarmed all Europe, but more especially the Dutch and
their Allies: So that the King of England sent the Earl of Feversham with a
Project of Peace to the French King, consisting of several heads, which if
should resuse to accept of that, then King Charles and the States General would
unite their Forces to compel him to reason; The French rejected the King's
Propositions, continuing his mighty Warlike Preparations; Upon which King
Charles recalled his Forces out of the French Service, who had often occasioned
his gaining many considerable Victories, and the Parliament meeting soon after
the King acquainted them, That he had made an Alliance with Holland to compel
the King of France to a reasonable Peace; Upon which the Commons gave Money for
raising 30000 Land Soldiers, and a Fleet of 90 Men of War; Though it appeared
afterward the Court never intended any War, but to have used these Forces to
far worse purposes, even to the advancing Arbitrary Government and Popery in
these Kingdoms, of which the Dutch were so sensible that much doubting the
sincerity of K. Charles his Negotiations, they were at last constrained to make
Peace with the French upon disadvantagious Terms to pacify the Factions and
Discontents of the People.

The French King in March, this year came before Gaunt with an Army of 80000
Men, and by inceslant Batteries and Stormings took it in nine days time; having
drawn the Spanish Forces toward Mons under pretense of Besieging it; And then
fell upon Ipre with such rapid violence that he soon reduced that likewise,
though with such loss of Officers and Soldiers that he put his Army into
Garrisons, and then returned to Paris; This gave such a mighty Alarm to the
Hollanders, that all things drove on violently for a Peace; Which the French
King being sensible of, and having now gained his point in Flanders, to prevent
the English from being in earnest against him, He sends an Imperious Project of
a Peace declaring he would admit of these conditions and no other, which the
Dutch were obliged to accept of, since they could obtain no better; But before
the Peace was ratified the French made several Pretensions and Delays in
performing even what themselves had agreed to, as his Highness the P. of Orange
foresaw and foretold they would do, insomuch that they blockt up the City of
Mons a chief Frontier of Flanders; Upon which his Highness resolved to march to
the relief of it, great preparations being made to that purpose, and
understanding that the Confederates had joined the Holland and Spanish Forces
that lay near the Canal of Brussels, he departed by Night from the Hague, and
marching toward Mons with his Armv, being accompanied with the Duke of
Monmouth, he fell upon the Duke of Luxemburg with such fury that he forced him
to retire, and animating his Soldiers, with his Eyes sparkling like Fire, they
despised all danger by their gallant Generals example, who in the midst of
Fire, and Smoke, and Bullets flying thick as Hail, adventured so far that he
had been in eminent danger had not Monsieur Overkirk opposed himself against a
daring Captain that was just ready to charge the Prince with a full Career,
laying him dead on the place. The Horse all this while were lookers on, not
being able to advance into the the narrow Passages and steep Descents, so that
all the weight lay on the Foot and Dragoons; Night coming on, the Duke of
Luxemburg drew off in great silence and confusion, leaving to his Highness, as
certain marks of Victory, the Field of Battle, his Tents, Baggage, wounded Men,
store of Powder and other Ammunition; The States General appointed
Commissioners to congratulate his Highness for this Victory gained, with so
much reputation and glory, beseeching him withal to be careful of his
Illustrious Person, considering the Tranquillity of his Country, and the
repose of the Church and Protestant Religion depended so much thereon.

The very day this memorable Battle was fought the Peace between the Dutch and
French was signed at Nimegen, of which intelligence was brought to his Highness
the next morning, who would else have pursued the advantages he had gained to
the full relief of the Town, having already in spite of so many disadvantages,
from an Army so suddenly drawn together, and so hasty a march as that of the
Dutch, taken diverse Posts fortified with so much skill and industry by the
French, and attacqued them with a resolution and vigor that at first surprised
them, and after an obstinate and bloody Fight so disordered them, that though
the night prevented the end of the action, yet it was verily believed, that if
the Prince had been at liberty next day to pursue it with 7 or 8000 English,
which were ready to join his Army, he must in all appearance not only have
relieved Mous, but made such an impression into France as had been often
designed but never attempted since the War began; Upon which a French Officer
present said, That he esteemed this the only Heroic Action that had been done
in the whole course and progress of it. The Prince having received advice of
the Peace sent a Deputy with the News to the Duke of Luxemburg, who desired to
see the Prince, and accordingly met him in the Field in the Head of his Chief
Officers, where all Civilities passed between them proper for the occasion; and
the French with great cariosity crowded about this young Prince, who had the
day before engaged in such a desperate Action as that of St. Dennis was
esteemed to be; So that his Highness could not have ended the War with greater
Glory, nor with greater spite to see such a great occasion wrested out of his
hand by the sudden and unexpected signing of the Peace, which he had assured
himself the States General would not have consented to without the Spaniards;
Yet upon the certain News of it, he drew back his Army, returned to the Hague,
and left the States to pursue their own measures in order to finish the Treaty
betwixt France and Spain.

During which the King of England sent over a Perfon of Honor to the States
General, to acquaint them how much he was surprised at the news of their
signing a particular Treaty with France, even without the inclusion of Spain,
declaring that if they would refuse to ratify what their Ministers had signed
at Nimegen, His Majesty would immediately declare War against France, and carry
it on with all vigor pursuant to the Treaty lately entered into with them. All
men were much amazed at this sudden Turn of the Court of England, and the
Prince complained, That nothing was ever more hot and cold, nor any Councils
ever more unsteady than those of England, since if this Dispatch had come
twenty days before, it might have changed the face of Affairs in Christendom,
and have obliged the French to such Terms of Peace as should have left the
World in quiet for many years to come, but would now have no effect at all;
Which happened accordingly, for at last it appeared to proceed only from the
discovery of the Popish Plot, which extremely alarmed the People and Parliament
who were much disturbed at the Treacherous Designs of our Court, in promoting
the Popish and French Interest, and thereby forcing the Dutch to comply with
that King almost upon his own Terms, and therefore to divert the humor, King
Charles pretended to be in earnest for engaging in a War against France; which
for some time hindered the Ratification of the Treaty, and English Forces were
daily transported into Flanders, as if the War were really to have been carried
on, which encouraged those that were against the Peace in Holland, and
occasioned the Spaniards to use their utmost endeavors to prevent the
concluding it.

But the French King being unwilling to lose the great Advantages he had
obtained by this Treaty, resolved to remove all difficulties, and satisfy the
States in their demands: Yea he dispatched Ambassadors to the Hague with full
Authority to remit all the differences about the Treaty with Spain and himself
to their Determination, which raised in the States such a good Opinion of the
sincerity of that Kings proceedings, that they quickly adjusted all matters in
contest between the two Crowns, so that the Treaty was signed September 20.
1678. The other Confederates as the Emperor the King of Denmark, the Duke of
Brandenburg, etc. were very much enraged that they were left to treat singly
with their potent Enemy, who demanded very severe Conditions from them, so that
the Ratification of the Treaty with Spain being hereby delayed, the French King
to quicken it, sent Marshal de Humieres with a great Army into Fianders,
plundering and burning all before them, and putting these Countries under
Contribution with so much fury and insolence, that the common people complained
heavily of the Calamities and Miseries which they undeservedly suffered by the
flowness of the Spanish Conncils; so that at length both the Spaniard and
Emperor were obliged to comply with the offers of France, who else threatened in
a few days to make the Terms much higher. The other Princes, though they very
much resented this sudden Conclusion of a Peace at such disadvantage, yet
knowing their own inability, were forced to be contented to make a separate
Peace for themselves. The King of England observing that he could not hinder
it, sent his Plenipotentiaries again to Nimegen to sign the General Treaty; but
in the interval some new pretenses arising between the Spaniards and French,
the States General were very diligent to compose them, the Transactions being
seldom managed by them but in the presence of His Highness the Prince of
Orange, whose prudence was still consulted in matters of gre atest difficulty;
he himself discovering an extraordinary Generosity, that while others preferred
Points of Honor before the public Peace, His Highness quitted his own
Interest in post-poning his demands for Reparation of the devastations in his
own Estates and Territories, so as not to impede the Tranquillity of his
Country, many of his Lands being ruined and destroyed in the Spanish
Netherlands and other adjacent parts; Of which and several other injustices in
seizing upon His large possessions in other places, though the Provinces of
Guelderland, Zealand, and Utrecht, made loud complaints against the French in
his Highness behalf, yet could the Prince obtain no satisfaction; But the
States and their Subjects being quite tired out out with the War, the General
Peace was signed in January 1678. And the English Mediators were called home by
that King, who was fully employed at home about the matter of the Popish Plot,
which both Houses of Parliament and the generality of the Nation believed to be
real, though the King and some of the Court credited no more of it than what
themselves were concerned in, and the Prince of Orange at that time told a
public Minister, That He had reason to be confident that the King was a Roman
Catholic though he durst not profess it.

Thus Europe for the present was left in a General Peace, though the French
King soon after made such shameful pretenses to the Dependancies upon his late
Conquests both in Flandets and Germany, that he gained more after the Peace,
than by his Arms in the War, no Prince nor State being either willing or able
to oppose him therein; These disputes began in 1681 and continued some years,
at which time that King likewise began to raise a violent Persecution against
his own Protestant Subjects, proceeding from the Perfidiousness and ingratitude
peculiar to Lewis the XIV. For it is well known that for the signal Services
which they performed to Henry IV. His Grandfather in asserting the Rights of
the Crown against the Papists who were then in rebellion against him, that
great Prince in acknowledgment thereof confirmed to them an Edict for the free
exercise of their Religion, which was called the Edict of Nants, whereby they
were to enjoy all Liberties and Privileges, both in Religious and Civil
matters, and to be as capable of all Offices and Employments as his other
Subjects. This he declared should be inviolable, and it was accordingly
confirmed both by his Son Lewis XIII. and likewise by the present King upon a
very remarkable occasion; For he being very Young when he ascended the Throne,
the Prince of Conde soon after raised a Civil War in the Kingdom against him,
but the Protestants by their unshaken Loyalty to him, defeated the designs of
his enemies, and settled that Crown upon His Head which he wears this day, of
which eminent Service he seemed to be so sensible that in 1652. he made a
public Declaration of it at St. Germans, and every one endeavored to exceed
in proclaiming the merits of the Protestants, the Queen Mother her self
acknowledging that they had preserved the State; But since by the Maxims of the
Roman Religion, No Faith is to be kept with Heretics; the Jesuits and
Ministers of State endeavored to instill into the Kings mind this Treacherous
Notion, That since the Protestants were so potent to advance the King, they
might likewise upon another occasion remove him again, from this infernal
reasoning, without their having given the least umbrage or suspicion of
disloyalty, it was resolved they must be suppressed and ruined.

Therefore so soon as the Kingdom was settled in Peace the Protestant Towns of
Rochel, Montauban, etc. Which had showed the greatest Zeal for the Kings
service, were plundered by the Soldiers and otherwise impoverisht; Then their
Churches and Exercises of Religion were prohibited them, under false pretenses
that they exceeded the Grants allowed them; Yea in matters of Law, Religion was
urged by the Advocates at the instigation of the Priests, so that they cried
out, I plead against a Heretic, an enemy to the State and to the Kings
Religion, whom he would have to be destroyed. So that the Judge durst not do
them justice for fear of being counted a Favourer of Heretics, and upon
complaint they were told, You have your remedy in your own hands, why do not
you turn Catholics. This was succeeded by Processes throughout the Kingdom, to
inquire what the Protestants had said or done for twenty years past about
Religion or other matters, and there being no want of perjured Villains to
swear what was absolutely false, the Judges, though sensible of it, encouraging
them therein, the Prisons were soon filled, and many innocent and virtuous
Persons were whipped and sent to the Galleys for Slaves. Next they were deprived
of all public Offices and employments, contrary to an express Article in the
Edict of Nants, yea were forbid to exercise several Arts and Trades for
maintaining their Families.

This was in 1669. and in 1680. all Lords and Gentlemen were commanded to
discharge their Protestant Officers and Servants, Nay they would not suffer
Protestant Midwives to do their Office, but expressly ordained, That no Woman
should receive any assistance in that condition but from Popish Midwives; And
to consummate their miseries, they were forbid under severe penalties to go out
of France to get their bread in other Countries, whereby they were under the
horrible necessity of perishing for hunger in their own; They laid severe Taxes
upon them raising the sum from forty or fifty Livers to seven or eight
hundred, and Quartered Dragoons upon them till it was paid; Then an Edict was
published that Children of seven years old should abjure their Religion,
forcing their Parents to give them allowances beyond their abilities, taking
them away, and suffering them to see them no more; even Persons of the best
Quality were thus used; Protestant Schoolmasters were prohibited, and three
Universities suppressed, though absolutely granted by the Edict of Nants; Papists
were forbid to marry Protestants or Ministers to hinder People directly or
indirectly from turning Papists. These and a multitude of other cruel and
barbarous oppressions they greaned under, when the Elector of Brandenburg being
pleased to interceed on their behalf the King assured him, He was very well
satisfied with the behavior of his Protestant Subjects and that so long as he
lived no wrong should be done them; And yet at the same instant, with his usual
sincerity, he gave order for demolishing several of their Churches, and
shutting up others, imprisoning their Ministers, and using diverse manifest
injustices against those he pretended to protect.

At this time some of the Persecuted People sent their Children to Orange as
being a Sovereign Principality to finish the course of their Studies in
security. But this so displeased the King that He sent a Body of two thousand
men under his Lieutenant General in Languedock, who positively commanded the
Prince of Oranges Magistrates to send away all the Children home again, and not
to receive any more for the future into their University or Schools, which
though it appeared very unreasonable, yet the magistrates to prevent further
mischief complied therewith, and thought they had thereby given full
satisfaction to his demands, but were strangely surprised to hear that during
the Capitulation the Lieutenant General still approached with his forces nearer
the City, and that he had absolute Orders to demolish their Walls; In short he
advanced, and Quartered eight Companies of Dragoons in the Citizens Houses
where they committed many disorders, constraining as well the Inhabitants as
the other Subjects of His Highness in the Villages round about to assist at the
ruin of their own Walls and Towers, which were blown up; At which the People
labored the more earnestly to be the sooner rid of those Arbitrary Guests, who
were said to have already vitiated several Virgins. The Prince having news
hereof, represented their Case to the States General, as a breach of the last
Peace, desiring them to signify their just resentment of these unreasonable
proceedings of the French King, and to demand reparations for such horrid
violations instantly upon concluding a General Peace, and without the least
provocation given.

The States accordingly by their Ambassador represented it as an Infraction of
the Peace of Nimegen, and required satisfaction for the damages which the
Prince and his Subjects had so Illegally and contrary to the Faith of Treaties
and Leagues sustained. But could have only this answer from the French Court,
That as to the money extorted from the Inhabitants it was done without the
Kings Order, and he had commanded restitution to be made; That upon the
submission of the People to his will and pleasure he had withdrawn his Forces
out of the Principality and restored free commerce to the Inhabitants according
to their desires; And for the rest he had reason for what he had done.

After the Peace was concluded his Highness applied himself to reform the
Government of Utrecht, and other Towns, and likewise to concert matters with
the States General for the future security of his Country against the
Treacheries and false pretentions of France; The Prince being usually present
in the Principal Debates of the Assembly both as to Peace and War, who always
appeared no less prudent and vigilant to prevent disorders at home than to
repel Foreign Hostility: In July 1681. His Highness came over into England,
and arriving at Whitehall Dined at Sir Stephen Foxes, and then went to Windsor
where the Court then was, and having continued here about Ten Days returned
back to Holland,

In the Interval of Affairs his Highness retired to Dieren or Soestdyke to
divert himself, and at other times made progresses to take a review of the
Frontier Towns belonging to the State, who in 1682. had ordered the Towns of
Breda, Grave, and Naerden to be strongly fortified, and it was proposed in the
Assembly of the States to raise 16000 men, and incorporate them with the Old
Regiments and to add a New Squadron of twenty four Men of War, both to prevent
any sudden Insults of the French upon their Territories, and to assist the
Spaniards if they should commit any Acts of Hostility which was much to be
suspected, considering the shameful pretensions that King set up of
Dependancies in the Spanish Netherlands.

In 1682. the Marquess of Grana was made Governor of Flanders of which he gave
notice to the States General and the Prince, and soon after His Highness had an
Interview with the Marquess between Breda and Antwerp, where they entered into
Conferences about their future managements of Affairs; His Highness likewise
visiting the Fortified Places in Flanders belonging to the States, being
accompanied with the Princess, who was received with all kind of Respect and
Splendour by the Cities of Brussels, Antwerp, etc. About this time the Count de
Avaux the French Ambassador arriving at the Hague put in a Memorial to the
Assembly of the manner how he expected to receive Audience; But the States
replied, That the things which he desired were wholly new and never practiced
before, and therefore they can in no wise comply with them; Whereupon his
Audience was put off till he was willing to receive it upon the former Terms.
In November this year the Envoy of Moscovy came to wait upon the Prince then at
Soestdyke to give an account that the great Czar was dead, and that the two
Princes now reigning were advanced to the Throne.

In the end of 1683. The K. of Spain being no longer able to suffer the
continual Invasions of the French upon his Cities and Towns in Flanders, and
his cruel Treatment of his Subjects for not paying unjust and unreasonable
Contributions, he proclaimed War against him both by Sea and Land, and ordered
all the Effects of the French Merchants in his Dominions to be seized; And sent
to the States General to assist him in this just defensive War, who thereupon
concluded to raise a considerable Force, both for his aid and their own
security, and accordingly his Highness gave out several Commissions, and sent
8000 men toward Flanders. In the mean time the French King according to his
usual method, having ordered great Detachments to be sent from all the
Conquered Places toward Valenciennes, in April 1684. he himself accompanied
with the Dauphin and Dauphiness came from Paris thither. The P. was very
desirous to have perfected the new Levies and to have marched at the Head of
them to oppose him, but the obstinacy of Amsterdam and some other Towns which
refused to allow their Quota for maintaining them, prevented his Highness
worthy designs; The French King having mustred his Army between Conde and
Valenciennes, he immediately inrested the City of Luxemburg, and though the
Governor made a very notable defense, and the French lost a considerable number
of Men, yet the greatness of their Army, which was posted so as to prevent any
relief, at length obliged the Town to Capitulate, and June 7. following it was
surrendered upon Articles, and soon after a Trace being made with Spain they
were forced to suffer the loss of this City with the same temper as they had
done many before.

And as the French King continued thus Tyrannically to injure his Neighbors so
he Treacherously proceeded to exercise horrid cruelties upon his own Protestant
Subjects, for though he had resolved upon their destruction, yet at the same
time he declared, That he had not the least intention to infringe the Edict of
Nants, and accordingly in 1684. he absolutely concluded to cancel and make void
that Edict, and to banish all the Ministers out of the Kingdom, and several
young Priests were sent about the Country to inflame the Mobile against the
Protestants; and it was declared in Print, That the Catholic Faith must be
planted by Fire and Sword, alleging the example of a King of Norway who
converted the Nobles of his Country by threatening them to slay their Children
before their Eyes, if they would not consent to have them Baptized, and to be
Baptized themselves. The Protestants were very sensible of the mischiefs
designed against them, and exposed their grievances to the K. with all humility
and submission, which produced no other effect upon his Tyrannical Temper than
to hasten their destruction by open force and violence, in so terrible a manner
as is scarce to be paralleled, At first they quartered Troops of bloody and
desperate Dragoons upon them, who loudly bellowed, That the K. would no longer
suffer any Protestants in his Kingdom, and that they must resolve to change
their Religion or else to suffer the utmost cruelty that could be inflicted
upon them, To which these innocent Souls, replied, That they were ready to
Sacrifice their Lives and Estates for the Kings Service, but their Consciences
being Gods, they could not in the same manner dispose of them; This answer did
but inrage their hellish Adversaries, so that they first seized their goods,
and then fell on their Persons inflicting all the Barbarities imaginable to
induce them to renounce their Religion; They hung up Men and Women by the Hair
of the Head, or by the Feet within their Chimneys smoking them with wisps of
wet Straw; They threw them into great fires and plucked them thence half
roasted; They tied them on the Rack, and poured wine down their Throats till
the fame had deprived them of their reason; and then made them say they would
be Catholics; They stripped them stark naked and larded them all over with Pins
from head to foot; They kept them from sleeping 7 or 8 days and nights
together; They tied Parents to Bed posts and ravished their Daughters before
their eyes; They plucked off the Nails from the Hands and Toes of others with
most intolerable pain, and after these and a thousand other horrid indignities,
if they refused to abjure their Religion, they threw them into close dark and
stinking Dungeons exercising upon them all manner of inhumanity; And yet after
all these barbarous usages they compelled those wretched People who had not
courage and constancy enough to persist in the Faith, and therefore turned
Catholics, or new Converts, as they called them, to acknowledge, That they had
embraced the Roman Religion of their own accord; And had the impudence to
declare even against the evidence of Millions of Witnesses; That force and
violence had no share in the Conversions, but that they were soft, calm and
voluntary, and that if there were any Dragoons concerned therein, it was
because the Protestants themselves, desired them that they might have a
handsome pretense to change their Religion. In the mean time their Houses were
demolished, their Lands destroyed, their Woods cut down, and their Wives and
Children seized, and put into Monasteries; and an Edict was published for
plucking down all the Protestant Churches in the Kingdom; and all for promoting
the Catholic Peligion; Yea the mischief did not terminate here, for the French
King being too potent to be resisted by the Duke of Savoy, He compelled that
Prince to publish an Edict for prohibiting the poor Waldenses and Vaudois to
exercise their Religion upon pain of death, and being assisted with a great
number of French Troops under Monsieur Catinat, the Soldiers committed the
like Violences and Barbarities against them as they had done in France.

His Highness the Prince of Orange highly disapproved of these Proceedings, and
was a silent Mourner for the miseries of the Protestant Church, which now
seemed to be threatened more than ever, for King Charles II. dying in February
1685. the D. of York succeeded him, who instantly declared himself a Roman
Catholic. And June 10 following the Duke of Monmouth landed with 150 Men at
Lime in Dorsetshire, declaring, That he had taken Arms for the defense and
vindication of the Protestant Religion, and of the Laws, Rights, and
Privileges of England, from the Invasion made upon them, and for delivering
the Kingdom from the Tyranny of James Duke of York; About the same time the
Earl of Argile setting sail from the Vlye in Holland landed in the West of
Scotland, publishing a Declaration to the same purpose, but either by weakness
or treachery they were both soon defeated, and both beheaded, and a multitude
of their followers executed; For which great success King James published a
Proclamation for a Thanksgiving, and among other expressions says; That nothing
now remained which could possibly disturb the future quiet of his Reign; In
confidence whereof he with the advice of his Popish Counselors and their
Adherents, proceeded to commit several open violations upon the Laws of the
Land and the Properties of his Subjects.

Some time before, his Highness returning from Hounsleyrdike to the Hague, gave
audience to several Foreign Ministers, and parted thence to visit the
Garrisons of Maestricht, Boisleduck and other Places, and in his return was met
by the Princess at Loo, having in his progress given all necessary Orders for
the well governing and strengthening of those Places. In December 1687. the
Marquess de Albeville Envoy Extraordinary from the King of England had Audience
of his Highness and the States of Holland, and about the same time the States
considering the danger that might arise from the great number of Foreign
Popish Priests (notwithstanding the intercession of the Envoy of the Emperor of
Germany on their behalf) they made a Decree commanding them to retire out of
the Netherlands, and never to return again, promising a reward of 100 Ducatoons
to any that should make discovery, and laying a penalty of 600 Florins upon
those that should harbor or conceal any of them, for the first offense, 1200
for the second, and corporeal punishment for the third, whereupon many of them
went over into England, where their hopes and expectations of having their
Religion settled daily increased.

The King of England being unwilling to afford any assistance to the Heretical
States against his dear Ally the French King, published a Proclamation in March
1687. commanding the return of all Subjects then in the Service of the States
General either by Sea or Land, with no other Allegation but that the King
thought it fit for his service. The States raised some dispute with the
Marquess de Albeville about this matter, refusing to let them return into
England, insomuch that the Marquess soon after delivered in a Memorial to the
States by express Orders from the King, signifying, That his Master was much
surprised to find that their Lordships persisted in their Resolution, in
refusing leave to his Subjects to return into England, and that whereas their
Lordships alleged that there was nothing so agreeable to nature, as that he
who was born free should have the right and liberty to settle himself wherever
he should think it most advantageous to him, and that it was in his power to be
Naturalized and become a Subject to them under whose Sovereignty he submits his
Person, and that the Government receiving him, thereby acquire over him the
same Right it has over its own proper and natural Subjects. The Marquess
replied, That this pretended Natural Liberty could not subsist after Obedience
and Dominion had been introduced, so that the Rights of Sovereignty and
Obedience were now only to be considered, and that in virtue of those Rights it
had been the common opinion in all times, that no natural subject could
withdraw himself from the Obedience he owed to his Lawful Prince, from whence
it was that the Kings of Great Britain had in all times prohibited their
Subjects to engage in any Foreign service, and had recalled them from it,
when, and as often as they thought fit. The Marquess further instanced a
Capitulation made between the Earl of Ossory and his Highness the Prince of
Orange, That in case the King of Great Britain should recall his Subjects in the
Service of the States, they should be permitted to retire, by Virtue of which
Capitulation, and his Reasons alleged, the Marquess demanded their dismission,
from which the King would never depart, neither was he willing to doubt of
their Lordships compliance with it. But it seems few or none were willing, for
very few returned, judging it may be, that they might do more service where
they were for the interest of their Country than in fighting at home against
their own Countrymen and Fellow Protestants, and as their unwillingness
justified the resolution of the States General so it rendered the endeavors of
the Marquess ineflectual; For the States having disbanded them, the greatest
part listed themselves again under their Command as well Officers as Soldiers,
though the King had ordered the Masters and Captains of Ships and Vessels, to
give such as would return free passage with promise of advancement when they
came to England.

In May 1688. The Prince Elector of Saxony was splendidly entertained by his
Highness the Prince of Orange at Homslaer Dyke, and the next day his Highness
accompanied him to Scheveling, where they went on board a small Vessel that
carried them to a squadron of 17 Men of War, which arrived from Schonvelt under
the command of Vice Admiral Allemond, who upon their approach sent two light
Frigates and a Shallop to meet them, and they were saluted with the Cannon of
all the Ships, when having dined aboard the Vice Admiral they returned to
Scheveling, and from thence his Electoral Highness went to visit Delft,
Rotterdam, Dort, Maestricht, Liege, Aix and Cologne, and so returned home by
the way of Franckfort; About which time the Envoy of Brandenburg acquainted the
Prince of Orange and the States with the Death of the Elector his Master, a
Prince extreme firm to the Protestant Interest, and whose Death was much
regretted by the Protestant Princes and States; The Prince and States sending a
Gentleman with Complements of Condoleance to his Son and Successor.

The King of England having obtained the opinion of his Judges for the
Dispensing Power soon made use of it; For first he employed Popish Officers,
and put them into chief Command, the Earl of Clarendon being recalled from the
Government of Ireland, and the Earl of Tyrconnel a Papist sent to succeed him,
to the great terror of the Protestants of that Kingdom. The Earl of Castlemain
was sent Ambassador to Rome; An Army was raised and Mustred at Hunslow Heath;
The Lord Bishop of London was convented before a New and Illegal Court of
Judicature for Ecclesiastical Affairs, and suspended from his Office for
refusing to suspend the Reverend Dr. Sharp, under pretense that he had uttered
seditious words in his Sermons; Then a Declaration is published for Liberty of
Conscience, and suspending all the Penal Laws in matters of Religion, and
acquitting all Persons from taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, both
in England, Scotland and Ireland, The Popes Nuncio arrived in England being
received with much respect by the King, and Dined with the King and the Lord
Maver at Guildhall, Popish Chapels were erected in several places in London,
and other Cities and Towns in England; The Charters of several Corporations
that were yet unseized were now taken away; These and diverse other Illegal
proceedings put the Nation into a ferment, and they were enraged at the Authors
of them; Nay, they do not stop here, for after this the King again renewed his
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, with a peremptory Order, to command all
the Clergy to read it in their several Churches and Chapels throughout the
Kingdom, and that the Bishops should distribute them through their several
Diocesses; But the rigorous proceedings against the Lord Bishop of London the
last year, and against the Vice Chancellor of Cambridge and the Follows of
Magdalen College in Oxford this year were such evident breaches of his
Indulgence to Tender Consciences that it gave still greater dissatisfaction to
the Nation, and portended some sudden alteration; The Vice Chancellor of
Cambridge being deprived of his Office, and suspended of his Headship, or
refusing to admit one Alban Francis a Benedictine Monk to be Master of Arts
without taking the Oaths, by virtue of the Dispensing power, though contrary to
the Statutes which he was sworn to maintain; And the fellows of Magdalen
College in Oxford being 26 in number for refusing to admit one Farmer a
scandalous Popish Priest to the Presidentship of that College, and Electing
Dr. Hough, were pronourced guilty of disobedience to his Majesty's Commands and
deprived and expelled from their respective Fellowships; And the Bishops
judging that their distributing the Declaration would be an owning and
asserting the Kings assumed Dispensing Power, and foreseeing the pernicious
consequences thereof, the Archbishop of Canterbury and six others drew up a
Petition in behalf of themselves and their Brethren setting forth the Reasons
why they could not comply therewith; This was so ill resented by the King and
his Popish Counselors that the Petition was judged Tumultuary, and all the
seven Bishops were committed Prisoners to the Tower; And now the Jesnits acted
their Master piece of Policy, as they imagined, though it proved very fural to
them; For knowing that the King grew old, and that on his life the hopes of
Restoring their Religion depended, since the Heir Apparent was a Protestant who
would soon ruin all their Machinations. They resolved if possible to advance a
Popish Successor, and thereby ensure Popery and Slavery to the Nation; Hereupon
they raised a report sometime before that the Queen was with Child though the
People did not believe it, and several Lampoons were made upon that Subject;
And the Bishops being now secured, this was thought the proper time for the
Queen to fall in Labor, and accordingly June 10. 1683. It was published that
she was Delivered of a Frince, for which the King ordered all signs of
rejoicing to be made, and a day of Thanksgiving was appointed; as being a thing
of mighty consequence for advancing the Catholic Cause; though the joy was
somewhat abated by the Acquittal of the seven Bishops five days after, who
being Tried at the Kings Bench Bar were brought in Not Guilty, at which the
People, yea the Kings own Army at Hounslow Heath, shouted for joy, to the
severe mortification of the Court.

The King having declared that he intended to call a Parliament to turn his
Declaration of Liberty of Conscience into a Law, and likewise to abrogate all
the Penal Laws and Tests both against the Dissenters and the Roman Catholics,
the Jesuits had a great desire to sound the intentions and thoughts of their
Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange, upon that Subject; To which
purpose Mr. James Steward undertook to write a Letter to Pensionary Fagell not
without the knowledge and approbation of the King, which occasioned Minheer
Fagels answer, to this effect.

That Their Highnesses had often declared, as they did more particularly to the
Marquess Albeville His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the States; That it is
their Opinion that no Christian ought to be persecuted for his Conscience, or
be ill used because he dissers from the Public and Established Religion; and
therefore they could be content that even the Papists in England, Scotland, and
Ireland might be suffered to continue to their Religion with as much Liberty as
is allowed the by the States of the United Provinces; And as for the Protestant
Dissenters Their Highnesses did not only consent, but heartily approve of their
having an Entire Liberty, for the full exercise of their Religion without any
trouble or hindrance. That Their Highnesses, were ready in case His Majesty of
England should desire it, to declare their willingness to concur in the settling
and confirming this Liberty as far as it lay in them, and were ready if desired
to concur in Repealing the Laws, provided always that those Laws remain still
in their full force and vigor whereby the Roman Catholics are excluded out of
both Houses of Parliament, and out of all public Employments Ecclesiastical,
Civil, and Military, as likewise all those other Laws which confirm the
Protestant Religion, and which secure it against all the attempts of the Roman
Catholics. But that Their Highnesses could not agree to the Repealing of the
Tests, or those Penal Laws that tend to the security of the Protestant
Religion, since the Roman Catholics receive no other prejudice from these than
the being excluded from Parliaments or from Public Employments, and that by
them the Protestant Religion is covered from all the designs of the Roman
Catholics against it, or against the public safety, and neither the Tests nor
those other Laws can be said to carry in them any severity against the Roman
Catholics upon account of their Consciences, they being only Provisions
Qualifying men to be Members of Parliament or to be capable of bearing Offices,
by which they must declare before God and Men that they are for the Protestant
Religion, so that all this amounts to no more than a securing the Protestant
Religion from any prejudice that it may receive from the Roman Catholics. That
Their Highnesses have thought and do still think that more than this ought not
be asked nor expected from them, since by this means the Roman Catholics, and
their Posterity would be for ever secured from all Troubles in their Persons
and Estates, or in the Exercise of their Religion, and that the Roman
Catholics ought to be satisfied with this, and not to disquiet the Kingdom
because they cannot be admitted to sit in Parliament, or to be in employment;
or because those Laws wherein the security of the Protestant Religion chiefly
consists are not repealed, by which they may be in a condition to overturn it;
That their Highnesses also believed, that the Dissenters would be for ever
satisfied when they should be for ever covered from all danger of being
disturbed or punished for the free Exercise of their Religion upon any pretense
whatsoever.

This was the substance of the Letter written by that Great Minister of State
as discovering the just sentiments of Their Highnesses, which did no ways
please the Papists who had high expectations of carrying all before them, and
therefore Mr. Steward in his second Letter to the Pensioner a while after says,
That the Court was quite beyond it, and had taken other measures; And what they
were soon after appeared, namely to defeat their Royal Highnesses of their just
Interest and Right to the Succession of the Crown, by pretending that the Queen
was delivered of a Prince of Wales.

But the Nobility and Gentry of England beholding the deplorable State of the
Nation, and foreseeing the subversion of their Ancient Laws, and Established
Religion to be designed by him who had largely promised the Protection of both;
And at the same time seeing Popery and Arbitrary Power hovering over their
Heads, and ready to seize on their Liberties and Properties, and that both were
designed to be perpetuated and en^ailed upon them and their Posterity by a
succession of Popish Princes, Mrs. Cellier having declared in Print before the
pretended Birth, That it would be a Prince, and that the Queen would likewise
bring forth a Duke of York and a Duke of Gloucester; After several consultations
whither to fly for succor, at length they resolved to apply themselves to His
Highness the Prince of Orange, to whose Illustrious Family it had been an
Inherent Glory for some Ages to relieve the Distressed, and support the
Protestant Cause; His Highness they saw inherited all the surpassing Qualities
of his Ancestors, Their matchless Prudence, Justice, Courage, their Truth, and
Magnanimity, and besides all these excellent Endowments they were well assured
of the fair Title he had to the Crown it self: To him therefore the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal with a great number of the Chiefest Gentry of the
Kingdom make their application, and in an humble Memorial represent their
Grievances to their Highnesses, to this effect.

That their Highnesses cannot be ignorant, that the Protestants of England, who
continue True to the Government and Religion, have been many ways troubled and
vexed by many Devices and Machinations of the Papists, carried on under
pretense of Royal Authority, and things required of them unanswerable before
God and Man; Several Ecclesiastical Benefices of Churches taken from them,
without any other Reason given than the Kings Pleasure; themselves Summoned and
Sentenced by Commissioners appointed contrary to express Law, deprived of their
free choice of Magistrates, diverse Corporations dissolved; The Legal Security
of their Religion and Liberty established by King and Parliament abolished and
taken away by a pretended Dispensing Power; New and unheard of Maxims broached,
That Subjects have no Right, but what is founded and derived from the Kings
Will and Pleasure; the Militia put into the Hands of Persons unqualified by
Law, and a Popish Mercenary Army maintained in the Kingdom in times of Peace,
directly contrary to Law; executing of ancient Laws against several Crimes and
Misdemeanors obstructed and prohibited, and the Statutes against corresponding
with the Court of Rome, against Papal Jurisdictions, and Popish Priests
suspended in the Courts of Justice; those Judges displaced, who acquit any whom
the Court would have condemned, as happened to the Judges Holloway and Powel
for acquitting the seven Bishops; the free choice of Members of Parliament
wholly taken away, notwithstanding all the Care and Provision made by the Law
in that behalf, by the Quo Warranto's against Charters, and proposing ensnaring
Questions; all things levelled at the Propagation of Popery, for which the
Courts of England and France have now for a long time so strenously bestirred
themselves; Endeavors and Practices used to persuade their Highnesses to
Consent to the abolishing the Penal Laws and Tests, (though herein
disappointed.) The Queens being with Child first Proclaimed, and Divulged by
Popish Priests, and in the Sequel thereof, a Child produced without any clear
Proof or Evidence of sufficient and unsuspected Witnesses, besides that it
cannot be believed that the said Child was ever born of the Queen, by Reason of
her known Sickness and Indisposition, and many other Arguments, as not being
confirmed by any certain foregoing Signs of Conception, the place of her lying
in being often changed, and her pretended Delivery Celebrated in the absence of
the Princess of Denmark, and while the English Ladies were at Church, in a
Bedstead which was provided with a Convenient Passage in the side of it, by
which means the Child was conveyed to the Queen by the Ladies L' Abadie and
Teurarier; that these be matters left to the Discretion of a Free Parliament,
and that in the Name of your Highnesses and the whole Nation the Queen may be
desired to prove the real Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales by a competent
number of credible Witnesses of both Sexes, or in Case of a failure herein,
that the reports of any such Birth may be suppressed for the time to come. That
they humbly crave the Protection of their Highnesses in this matter as well as
with respect to the Abolition and Suspension of the Laws made to maintain the
Protestant Religion, their Civil Rights, Fundamental Liberties, and Free
Government, and that their Highnesses would be pleased to insist that (besides
the business of the Child) the Government of England according to Law may be
restored; the Laws against Papal Jurisdiction, Priests, etc. be put in
Execution, the Suspending and Dispensing Power be declared Null and Void, and
the Privileges of the City of London, Free Choice of Magistrates, and all the
other Liberties, as well of that as other Corporations be restored and
maintained.

Their Highnesses with no less Willingness than Generosity, and out of their
Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and Compassion of the Oppressed, listened to
their Complaints. And his Highness well weighing the justness of their
Requests, and the Reality of their Grievances, instantly began to take Measures
in Order to their Deliverance. And soon after his Highness went to meet the
Elector of Brandenburgh and some other Princes and Noblemen of Germany at
Minden, which so alarmed the French King, that Monsieur D' Avaux his
Ambassador presented a Memorial to the States General intimating, that the
King his Master being informed of the Motions and Conferences, that were made
and held toward the Frontiers of Cologne against the Cardinal of Furstemburgh
and the Chapter, He was resolved to maintain the Cardinal and their
Privileges, against all those who should go about to trouble them; but herein,
the Politics of King Lewis failed him, his Highness the Prince of Orange
managing his Affairs with such an exact Secrecy, that neither that King nor his
Sagacious Council could penetrate into the Design, till it was upon the Point
of Execution, and out of danger of being Defeated. For upon his Highness return
from that Conference to Lo, Orders were given for drawing the Forces the
States had raised for his Highness Assistance, and incamping them upon the
Mocker Hyde, and the Forces of those other Princes, whom his Highness had
engaged to aid him in this Glorious Expedition, had Orders to be upon their
March, as those of Brandenburgh, Hesse-Cassel, etc. And the States General
assembled at the Hague, where his Highness was present, and their Debates and
Consultations having been kept very Private for some days, at length they
published the following Manifesto.

That the States had resolved with their Ships and Men to assist the Prince of
Orange, who being invited by the Reiterated Importunities of the Nobility, and
Gentry of England, to oppose that Arbitrary Government, which His Britannick
Majesty is designing to introduce into that Kingdom, has fully determined to go
over to that Country, as well for that Reason, as to save the English
Religion, which his Majesty has also resolved to destroy; Both which
enterprises being so contrary to the Laws of God and Man, and particularly of
those of the Kingdom of which they threaten the utter Subversion; the Prince of
Orange, instigated by the Motives of his own innate Piety, which will not
permit him to suffer the ruin of Religion, nor the overturning of so fair a
Kingdom, has resolved to call a Free Parliament, etc. For which Reasons, and
because the Design of the King of England is manifestly apparent by the stri^t
Alliance which he has Contracted with the most Christian King, who bears no
good will to the United Provinces, and whose Proceedings are justly therefore
by them to be suspected; so that if His Brit^^niek Majesty should be suffered
to become Absolute in his Dominions, the United Provinces could no longer be in
Security, and therefore it being their Interest that the Fundamental Laws of
that Kingdom, and the English Religion should be preserved, they hoped that God
would bless the Prince of Orange with Happy Success.

King James though at first, he would not believe that the Vast Preparations in
Holland concerned him, though the French King had given him notice of them some
time before, was now fully convinced thereof by this M^nifesto, and all of a
sudden the Bells (...) to ring (...) at White Hall, and the first N^^^ we
heard, of th^^^ disturbance was a Proclamati^n (...) 28, 1688, by which it was
intimated, That the King had received undoubted Intelligence, that a great and
sudden Invasion from Holland was to be speedily made in an Hostile manner upon
this Kingdom, under the false pretenses of Liberty, Prop my and Religion, but
that an absolute Conquest of his Kingdoms, and the subduing him and his
Dominions to a Foreign Power, etc. However relying upon the Ancient Courage,
Faith and Allegiance of his People, as he had formerly ventured his Life, for
she Honor and Safety of the Nation, so he was now resolved to Live and Dye in
Defense thereof against all Enemies whatsoever, etc. After this, the King
published a Proclamation of General Pardon, with some few Exceptions; Restored
the injured Gentlemen of Oxford and Cambridge to their Rights; Dissolved the
Ecclesiastical Commissions, Vacated the Quo Warranto against the City of
London, and issued forth a Proclamation for restoring all Corporations to their
Ancient Charters, Liberties, Rights and Franchises; In short, He undid almost
in one day all that he had been doing since his first coming to the Crown.

Yet such was the Folly of the Romish Party in the midst of this Consternation,
that the show of the Prince of Wales, still went on, and Oct. 15 the ^hild was
Christened, the Pope represented by his Nuncio being Godfather, and the Queen
(...) on^ger God-mother, and two days after the King to secure his Territories,
commanded his Lord and Deputy-Leiutenants, and all other Officers concerned, to
cause the Coasts to be strictly Guarded, and that upon the first approach of
the Enemy, all the Ox^n, Horses and Cattle, which might be fit for Draught
should be driven twenty Miles from the Place where the Enemy should attempt to
Land.

Oct. 22. The King commanded a particular Ass^mbly of his Privy Council, and
sent for all such Peers, Spiritual and Temporal, as were in Town, together with
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, the Judges and several of
his Council Learned in the Law, telling them, That he had called them together
upon a very extraordinary Occasion, but that extraordinary Diseases must have
extraordinary Remedies, that the Malicious Endeavors of his Adversaries had so
poisoned the Minds of some of his Subjects, that very many of them did not
believe that the Child wherewith God had blessed him was his, but a supposed
Child; However he could say that by a particular Providence scarce ever any
Prince was born, where there were so many Persons present; that he had taken
time to have the matter heard and examined, expecting that the Prince of Orange
with the first Easterly Wind would Invade the Kingdom, and therefore as he had
often ventured his Life for the Nation, before he came to the Crown, so he
thought himself more obliged to do the same being King, and did intend to go
against him in Person, by which in regard he might be exposed to various
Accidents, he therefore thought it necessary to have this done first, to
satisfy his Subjects, and prevent the Kingdoms being engaged in Blood and
Confusion after his Death.

After this the Affidavits of several Ladies were produced, of which some swore
that they saw Milk upon her Majesty's Smock (for they did not think fit to
mince the matter;) others, that they saw the Midwife take the Child out of the
Bed; another that she stood by the Bedside, when her Majesty was delivered of
the Prince; another swore, that having had the Honor to put on her Majesty's
Smock she saw the Queens Milk; another deposed, that she saw the Queen in
Labor, and heard her cry out much; another, that she saw the Midwife give the
Prince three drops of the Blood of the Navel-string mixed with Black
Cherry-water, with a great deal of other Nauseous stuff. Then the Affidavits of
the Lords were produced, among whom, one swore, that he saw Mistress Labadie
carry the Child into another Room, whither he followed her, and saw the Child,
when she first opened it, and that it was Black and Reeking; another swore,
that he saw the Child, and that it had the Marks of being new Born; another,
that he heard the Queen make three Groans, or Squeeks, and that at the last of
the three, the Queen was delivered of a Child; the Physicians swore, what was
proper, but not fit to be repeated; However the whole was at length published
to the shame and scandal of all modest Eyes and Ears.

And now my Lords, said the King, after all the the Depositions were read,
although I did not Question, but that every Person here present was satisfied
before, yet by what you have heard, you will be the better able to satisfy
others; Besides could I and the Queen have been thought so wicked as to impose
a Child upon the Nation, we saw how impossible it would have been; neither
could I my self have been imposed upon, having constantly been with the Queen
during her being with Child, and the whole time of her Labor, and therefore
there is none of you but will easily believe that I who have suffered so much
for Conscience Sake, cannot be capable of so great a Viliany, to the prejudice
of my own Children; I thank God that those that know me know well, that it is
my Principle to do as I would be done by, and that I would rather die a
thousand Deaths, than do the least wrong to any of my Children.

Yet this Zealous Harangue had but little Influence upon the Generality of the
People (with whom the King by his late Actions had wholly forfeited his
Reputation) who daily discovered, as far as they durst, their longing desires
for the Arrival of his Highness the Prince of Orange to deliver them from the
apparent Mischiefs that impended over the Nation.

His Highness Preparations for his Expedition went on apace, and the Marquess
of Albeville King James his Ambassador at the Hague, presented a Memorial to
the Deputies of the States General upon that Subject, but while he expected an
Answer, the Troops Embarked, and his Highness and the Marshal Schomberg came
to the Hague, and on Friday, Oct. 16. The Fleet cons^^^ing of 635 Men of War,
Fireships, Tenders, etc. For the carriage of Horse, Foot, Arms and Ammunition,
sailed about four Afternoon from the Flats near the Brill with the Wind at S.
W. and by S. The Prince Embarked on a Vessel of between 28 and 30. Guns, with
Count Solmes, Count Stirum, the Sieur Bentwick, the Sieur Overkirk, Marshal
Schomberg, Count Charles his Son, with several others, as well English Noblemen
as Strangers who were in the Fleet; next day they came in sight of Schevelinge,
but meeting with a very terrible Storm, which continued for two days and nights
together, was forced to put into Harbor again, some Ships and small Vessels on
which the Horse were aboard suffering some prejudice; upon their return the
Prince immediately gave an account to the States General of the Condition of
the Fleet, which was not so much damaged as was published in the English
Gazette, but rather turned to the Advantage of his Highness as the Affair was
managed; for to make the English Court more remiss in their Preparations the
Haarlem and Amsterdam Gazettes told a most lamentable Story of what had
happened, As that the Prince was returned with his Fleet so miserably Torn and
Shattered that he had lost nine of his Men of War and several lesser Vessels;
That 1000 of his Horse were utterly lost; that a Calenture was got among the
Seamen; that Dr. Butner and several of the Princes chief Ministers were drowned
and that the States had an ill opinion of the Expedition in General, so that it
was a thing almost impossible that the Prince should be in a Condition to
pursue his Design till the next Spring.

This Stratagem had some effect upon the Court, for the Papists hopes hereupon
began so to revive, that the King Ordered the Restoring the Charters, and the
Fellows of Magdalen Colled; the Vacaring the Ecclesiastical Commission and the
other Grants which he had newly made, to be suspended till he heard the Prince
was again put to Sea, and thereby made the whole Nation sensible how little
Trust or Credit was to be given to his most solemn Promises and Declarations;
but all hands being at work the damage that had been sustained, was repaired in
eight days time, so that Nov. 3. about ten in the Morning upon a signal given
the whole Fleet once more set Sail; about Midnight an Advice Boat brought
Intelligence, that the English Fleet consisting of thirty three Sail lay to the
Westward of the Princes; upon which the Prince fired a Gun which caused a great
Consternation through the whole Fleet; but the small Advice Boats Cruising for
more certain Intelligence brought news, that instead of the English Fleet which
had given the Alarm, it was only Admiral Herbert with a part of the Dutch Fleet
which had been for some hours separated from the main Body; in the Morning the
Prince gave a Signal for the Admirals to come aboard of him, and soon after the
Fleet was got into the North Forelands, at what time the Fleet was Order^d to
close up in a Body fourteen or fifteen Foot deep, his Highness leading the Van
in the Ship called the Brill, carrying a Flag with English Colors with this
Motto, The Prote^tant Religion and Liberties of England; and underneath, I will
maintain it, in the mean time the Council of War sent three small Frigates into
the Mouth of the Thames who returning brought news, that the English Fleet lay
at the B^oy in the Oar about thirty four Sail, the Wind centrary at E. N. E.
Upon which the Prince gave Order for stretching the whole Fleet between Dover
and Calice seventy five deep, which extended in breadth within a League of each
Place, the Flanks and Rear being guarded by Men of War, the Trumpet; founding
and Drums beating at least three hours together; after which the Prince giving
the Signal for the Eleet to close, they sailed that night as far as Beachy, and
the next Morning came within view of the Isle of Wight, and then Order was
given to extend the Fleet in a Line as before; the next Morning they made
directly for To^^ay; upon his Highness Arrival, the People flocking in great
numbers to the Shore signified their welcomes in loud Acclamations of Joy; soon
after the Prince gave two signals for the Admirals to come aboard, and then the
whole Fleet cast Anchor and Preparation was made for Landing whilst the
Admirals stood out to Sea as a Guard, and the small Men of War at ended, for
the Defense of those that Landed, besides six men of War that were Ordered to
run in and guard the Bay it self. It is remarkable that his Highness had a
brisk East and North Easterly Wind for two days which brought them directly
toward Torbay, and the Wind then turning Westerly carried them into the Bay,
which otherwise might have been very troublesome and dangerous.

The Prince now displayed a Red Flag at the Mizen yards Arm, while General
Mackay with six Regiments of Foot was the first that set Foot on Shore, under
the Protection of the little Porpoise which was ordered to run her self aground
to secure their Landing; this was upon Nov. 5. a day memorable to the English
before, but now doubly remarkable for a second Deliverance from the Bloody
Designs of the Papists. But the People were so far from making Opposition, that
they only stood there to welcome their Guests with all manner of Provisions and
Refreshments. So that his Highness safely Landed his whole Army consisting in
10692 Foot, and 3660 Horse, in all 14352.

The News of the Princes being Landed was carried to the Earl of Bath at
Exeter, and Captain Hicks going thither, the People flocked to him in great
numbers to List themselves in the Service of the Prince of Orange, for which
the Mayor of the City would have sent him to Prison, but was prevented by the
People, the next day the Lord Mordaunt with Dr. Burnet came thither, with three
or four Troops of Horse, and commanding the Gates to be opened, released the
Captain, and going to the Mayor asked him, if he would wait upon the Prince at
his Entrance, who pleading his Obligation of an Oath to King James, and
desiring that his Conscience might not be imposed on, he was excused. The next
day the Prince with his Guards marched into the City, and went to the Deans
House where he resided during his stay at Exeter; after whom followed the whole
Body of his Army, who were quartered about Tiverton, Culhampton, Honyton, and
other places. The Sunday following his Highness went to the Cathedral, where
his Highness Declaration of the Reasons inducing him to appear in Arms in the
Kingdom of England, for preserving the Protestant Religion, and for restoring
the Liberties of England, Scotland, and Ireland, was read by Dr. Burnet before
a numerous Auditory, the Substance whereof was.

That 'it was certain and evident to all men, that the public Peace and
Happiness of any Kingdom and State could not be preserved, where the Laws,
Liberties and Customs, established by the lawful Authority in it, were openly
transgrest and annulled, more especially where the Alteration of Religion was
endeavored, and a Religion contrary to the Law Designed to be introduced,
whereas they who were most immediately concerned therein, were indispensibly
bound to preserve the established Laws, Liberties and Customs, and above all,
the Religion and Worship of God established among them, and to take effectual
Care that the Inhabitant of such State or Kingdom might neither be deprived of
their Religion, nor outed of their Civil Rights; more especially since the
greatness of Kings, Royal Families, and all in Authority, as well as the
Happiness of their Subjects and People depended in a more especial manner upon
an exact Observation of those their Laws, Liberties and Customs; upon which
ground his Highness further declared, That he could no longer forbear to let
the World know how apparently he saw with regret, that they who had then the
chief Credit with the King had overturned the Religion, Laws and Liberties of
these Realms, and subjected them in all things relating to their Consciences,
Liberties and Properties to Arbitrary Government, and that not only by secret
and indirect ways, but in an open and undisguised manner; that those Evil
Counselors, for advancing and coloring this with some plausible pretenses,
did invent and set on foot the Kings Dispensing Power, by virtue of which they
pretend that according to Law he can suspend and dispense with the Execution of
the Laws that have been enacted by the Authority of King and Parliament for the
Security and Happiness of the Subject, and to render these Laws of no effect,
though it is most certain that they cannot be suspended, but by the same
Authority that made them; for though the King may pardon the punishment of a
Transgressor in Cases of Treason and Felony, yet it cannot with any color of
Reason be thence inferred, that he can entirely suspend the Execution of those
Laws, unless he has such an Arbitrary Power that the Laws, Liberties, Honors
and Estates of the Subjects depend wholly upon his good Will and Pleasure; and
though they have obtained a Sentence for asserting this Dispensing Power to be
a Right depending on the Crown, yet it cannot be imagined that it should be put
in the Power of twelve Judges to offer up the Laws, Rights and Liberties of the
whole Nation to the Arbitrary Will of the King, especially such as are first
advanced, and then threatened to be turned out, if they do not comply therein,
and some Papists who are incapable by Law are made Judges.

That the King, though known to be a Papist, was yet received and acknowledged
by the People to be their King, and did solemnly Swear and Promise at his
Coronation, that he would maintain their Laws and Liberties, and the Church of
England, as it was established by Law, and though several Laws have been lately
made for preserving their Liberties, and the Protestant Religion, and to
prevent all Papists from being put into any Employment, yet these evil
Councillors have in effect Annulled and Abolished all those Laws, and in direct
Opposition thereto, have set up as Illegal Commission for Ecclesiastical
Affairs, in which one of the Kings Ministers, who is a Papist sits and Acts,
though by Law incapable of any public Employment, that these Commissioners
have suspended the Bishop of London, only for refusing to obey an Order to
suspend a Worthy Divine without Citation or Process; they have turned out the
President and Fellows of Hagdalen College without citing them before any Legal
Court or Comperent Judge, only for refusing to choose for their President a
Person recommended by these Evil Councillors, contrary to the Right of Free
Election, and contrary to Magna Charta, That no man shall lose Life or Goods,
but by the Law of the Land; and afterward put the College wholly into the
hands of Papists. They have cited before them all the Chancellors and
Archdeacons of England, to certify the Names of the Clergy, who did not read
the Kings Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, though the reading of it was
not enjoined them by the Bishops, who are their Ordinaries. These Evil
Councillors have procured Orders for building several Popish Churches,
Chapels, Monasteries, Colleges of Jesuits for corrupting of youth, and raised
one to be a Privy Councillor and Minister of State, contrary to several express
Laws, by the Rules of which they evidently show they are no way restrained, and
wherein they are served and seconded by these Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

They have also followed the same Methods in Civil Affairs, by procuring Orders
to examine all Lord Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Sheriffs, Justices of
Peace, and all others that were in any public Employment, whether they were
for taking away the Penal Laws and Tests, and those who in Conscience could not
comply were turned out, and diverse unqualified Persons put in their Rooms; they
have seized upon the Charters of several Towns, and procured the surrender of
others, which Elect Parliament men, and placed new Magistrates, many of them
Papists, in diverse Corporations. They have removed such Judges, as would not in
all things Conform to their Designs, and put in others, whose Compliance they
disowned beforehand, whereby much Blood has been shed in many places of the
Kingdom against all the Forms and Rules of Law, without Suffering the Persons
accused to plead in their own Defense. They have put the Administration of
Justice into the Hands of Papists, though all their Sentences are Null and Void
in Law, and have disposed of all Military Employments in the same manner both
by Sea and Land, to Strangers as well as Natives; and Irish as well as English,
to maintain and execute their wicked Designs of inslaving the Nation by their
Assistance. In Ireland the whole Government is put into the Hands of Papists,
so that the Protestants through terror have in great numbers left that Kingdom,
and abandoned their Estates in it, remembering well that Cruel and Bloody
Massacre in 1641. In Scotland the King has declared himself clothed with such
an Absolute Power, as to be obeyed without Reserve.

These great Oppressions, and open Contempts of all Laws, being insufferable,
have put the Subjects under great Fears, and to look out for such Lawful
Remedies as are allowed of in all Nations; but to deter them from endeavoring
to preserve their Lives and Estates by Petition, or other means Authorized by
Law, these Evil Councillors proceeded with all Rigor against those that used
those Methods, particularly the Archbishop of Canterbury and others, who
humbly offering their Reasons, why they could not Order the Declaration of
Liberty of Conscience to be read in the Churches, were sent to Prison, and
after Tried as if guilty of some enormous Crime, and obliged to appear before
professed Papists, and those Judges that gave their Opinion in their favor were
turned out. They have also Treated a Peer of the Realm, as a Criminal for
saying, that the Subjects were not bound to obey the Orders of a Popish Justice
of Peace, because they are put into Employments contrary to Law.

That his Highness, and his Dearest and most Beloved Consort the Princess have
signified to the King in Terms full of respect, the just and deep Regret these
Proceedings have given them, and in compliance with His desires have declared
their Thoughts about Repealing the Penal Laws and Tests, whereby they hoped
there might have been an happy agreement among the Subjects of all Persuasions,
which yet these Evil Councillors have so misrepresented as to endeavor to
alienate the King more and more from them, as if they designed to disturb the
Quiet and Happiness of the Kingdom; and the last and great Remedy for all these
Evils being the calling of a Parliament, for securing the Nation against the
Practices of these Evil Councillors, cannot be easily brought about, since by a
Parliament duly chosen, they doubt to be called to account, for all their open
Violations of the Laws, their Plots and Conspiracies against the Protestant
Religion, and the Lives and Liberties of the Subjects, their designing under
the specious pretense of Liberty of Conscience, to sow Divisions among
Protestants, and from their mutual quarrels to carry on their own Designs, to
prevent which the Electors and Elected for Parliament men are to be beforehand
engaged to comply with their wicked Desires, and the returns are to be made by
Popish Sheriffs and Mayors of Towns, so that this only remedy of a Free
Parliament is hereby made impracticable.

And to Crown all, There are great and violent Presumptions inducing their
Highnesses to believe that these Evil Councillors to gain more time to carry on
their ill Designs, for encouraging their Accomplices and discouraging all good
Subjects they have published, that the Queen has brought forth a Son, though
there appeared both during the Queens pretended bigness, and in the manner in
which the Birth was managed, so many just and visible grounds of Suspicion,
that not only their Highnesses, but all the good Subjects of this Kingdom,
vehemently suspect that the pretended Prince of Wales was not born of the
Queen; and since their Highnesles have both so great an Interest in this
matter, and such a Right as all the World knows to the Succession of the Crown,
and since the English Nation had ever testified a most particular Affection and
Esteem to them both; their Highnesses cannot excuse themselves from espousing
their Interests in a matter of such high consequence, and from contributing all
that in them lies, for the maintaining both of the Protestant Religion, and of
the Laws and Liberties of those Kingdoms, and for securing to them the
continual Enjoyment of all their just Rights. To the doing of which his
Highness is most earnestly solicited by a great many Lords both Spiritual and
Temporal, and by many Gentlemen, and other Subjects of all Ranks.

Therefore it is, that his Highness has thought fit to go over into England,
and to carry over a Force sufficient by the Blessing of God to defend him from
the Violence of those Evil Councillors; His Highness declaring, that this
Expedition is intended for ^o other design, but to have a Free and Lawful
Parliament Assembled as soon as is possible, and that in Order thereto, all the
late Charters limiting of Elections contrary to Ancient Custom shall be
considered as null and of no force, and all Magistrates to return to their
former Employments, and particularly the Ancient Charter of London to be again
in force; and none to be suffered to choose or be chosen Parliament men, but
those qualified by Law, and that the Members of Parliament so chosen, shall sit
in full Freedom, for making Laws to secure the Protestant Religion, and to
establish a good Agreement between the Church of England, and all Protestant
Dissenters, as also for the securing, and covering of Papists, and all others,
who will live peaceably from all Persecution for Religion, and for doing all
other things, which the two Houses of Parliament shall find necessary for the
Peace, Honor, and Safety of the Nation, so that there may be no more danger of
the Nations falling at any time hereafter under Arbutrary Government; to which
Parliament his Highness will also refer the Inquiry into the Birth of the
pretended Prince of Wales, and of all things relating to it, and to the Right
of Succession.

And his Highness declares, That for his Part be will concur in every thing,
that may produce the Peace and Happiness of the Nation, which a Free and Lawful
Parliament shall determine, since his Highness has nothing before his Eyes in
this His Undertaking, but the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the
covering of all men from Persecution (...) their Consciences, and the securing
to the whole Nat^on the Free Enjoyment of all their Laws, Rights, an^ Liberties
under a Just and Legal Government.

His Highness further declares, that this is the Design, he has proposed in
appearing upon this occasion in Arms; in the Conduct of which, his Highne^
would keep the Forces under his Command under all the strictness of Martial
Discipline, and take a special care that the People of the Countries, through
which He shall March, shall not suffer by their mean^ and as soon as the State
of the Nation will permit i^ his Highness promises, that he will send back all
tho^ Foreign Troops, that He has brought along wit^ him; his Highness does
therefore hope, that all People will judge rightly of his Proceedings; though
(...) does chiefly rely on the Blessing of God, for the s^^cess of this his
Undertaking, in which he places (...) whole and only Confidence.

Lastly, his Highness does invite and require all Persons whatsoever, all the
Peers of the Realm both Sp^ritual and Temporal, all Lords, Lieutenants, Dep^^
Lieutenants, and all Gentlemen Citizens, and other Commons of all Ranks to come
and assist him in Order to the executing of this His Design against all su^^ as
shall endeavor to oppose Him, that so all tho^^ Miseries which must needs
follow upon the Nation being kept under Arbitrary Government and Slave^ may be
prevented, and that all the Violences, an^ Disorders, which have overturned the
whole Cons;t^tution of the English Government may be fully Redressed in a Free
and Legal Parliament, his Highness likewise Resolving, that as soon as the
Nations are brought to a State of Quiet, He will take care that a Parliament
shall be called in Scotland, for restoring the ancient Constitution of that
Kingdom, and for bringing the Matters of Religion to such a settlement, that
the People may be Easy and Happy, and for putting an end to all the unjust
Violences, that have been in a course of so many Years committed there; and
that his Highness will also Study to bring the Kingdom of Ireland to such a
State, that the Settlement there may be Religiously observed, and that the
Protestant and British Interest may be secured, and will endeavor by all
possible means to procure such an Establishment in all the three Kingdoms that
they may all live in a Happy Union and Correspondence together, and that the
Protestant Religion, and the Peace, and Happiness of these Nations may be
established upon Lasting Foundations.

Soon after his Highness published an Additional Declaration to this Effect.

That after He had prepared and Printed the former Declaration, his Highness
understood that the Subverters of the Religion and Laws of the Kingdom, hearing
of his Preparations to assist the People against them, had began to Retract
some of their Arbitrary and Des;potick Powers, and vacated some unjust
Judgments and Decrees, occasioned by the Sense of their Guilt, and the distrust
of their Force, hoping thereby to quiet the People and divert them from
demanding the re-establishment of their Religion and Laws, under the shelter of
his Highness Arms; and do also give out that his Highness intended to Conquer
and Inslave the Nation; though his Highness is Confident that no Persons can
have such hard thoughts of Him, as to imagine that He has any other Design in
this Undertaking than to procure a Settlement of Religion and of the Liberties
and Properties of the Subject upon so sure a Foundation, that there may be no
danger of the Nations relapsing into the like Miseries at any time hereafter,
and as the Forces that his Highness brought along with Him are utterly
Disproportioned to that wicked Design of Conquering the Nation, if he were
capable of Intending it; so the great numbers of the Principal Nobility and
Gentry that are men of eminent Quality and Estates, and of known Integrity and
Zeal for the Religion and Government of England who do accompany, and have
earnestly solicited his Highness to this Expedition, will cover him from all
such malicious Insinuations; since it cannot be imagined that these should join
in a wicked attempt of Conquest to make void their own Lawful Titles to their
Honors, Estates and Interests. His Highness is likewise Confident that all men
see how little weight is to be laid on all the Promises and Engagements that
can be now made, since there has been so little Regard had to them in times
past; and the imperfect Redress that is now offered, as it is a plain
Confession of the Violations of the Government, which his Highness has set
forth, so the defect thereof appears, since they lay down nothing, but what
they can can take up at Pleasure, still reserving entire their Claims and
Pretenses to that Absolute Power, which has been the root of all their
Oppression, and the Subversion of the Government; and it is plain, there can be
no remedy, no Redress but in Parliament, by a Declaration of the Rights of the
Subjects that have been Invaded, and not by any pretended Acts of Grace, to
which the Extremity of their Affairs has driven them; therefore it is that his
Highness has thought fit to declare, that he will refer all to a Free Assembly
of this Nation in a Lawful Parliament.

His Highness likewise sent the following Letter, to all the Officers and
Seamen of the English Fleet; Gentlemen and Friends, We have published a
Declaration, containing a full and true Account of our Intentions in this
Expedition; since it is evident that the Papists have resolved the total
Extirpation of the Protestant Religion in Great Britain, and will infallibly
reduce you to the same Condition in which you see France, if they can once get
the upper hand. You are now at last sensible, that you are made use of only as
Instruments to bring this Nation under Popery and Slavery, by means of the
Irish, and other Foreigners, that are assembling for your Destruction.
Therefore we hope that Almighty God will inspire you with such Thoughts as may
facilitate your Deliverance, and preserve you, your Country and Religion from
all these impending Miscries. And whereas (in all probability) this can never
be effected, unless You join with Us (who labor for your Deliverance,) we do
expect your Assistance herein: And shall always remember, etc.

The Prince sent a Letter also to the Kings Army to the same purpose,
intimating to them, What they might expect both from the Cashiering of all the
Protestant and English Officers and Soldiers in Ireland, and by the Irish
being brought over to be put in their places, when it should be thought
convenient for themselves to be turned out; Hoping withal that they would not
be abused by a false Notion of Honor, but would consider what they owed to
God, their Religion and their Country, Themselves and their Posterity, which
were to be preferred before all Private Considerations and Engagements
whatsoever.

Whilst his Highness continued at Exeter, the King seemed very resolute at
London to oppose him in Person, mustering his Army at Hounslow Heath, and
beating up for Volunteers in the Streets, though with little Success; He then
sent for the Bishops, whom he had lately so contemptuously used, to advise him
what measures to take in this Exigency, who accordingly came in a Body, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury in the Name of the rest delivered himself to this
Effect. That it was necessary for him to restore all things to the State
wherein he found them, when he came to the Crown, by committing all Offices of
Trust to those qualified by Law, and to redress such Grievances as were
generally complained of; to put an effectual stop to all Dispensations, and
recall and cancel those which had been obtained of him. To Dissolve the
Ecclesiastical Commission, and Promise the People never to erect the like for
the future. To restore the Universities to their Legal State, particularly both
the Magdalen Colleges, and not permit any to enjoy Preferment, but those
qualified by the Statutes of the University and Laws of the Land. To suppress
the Jesuits Schools, and grant no more Licenses to such, being apparently
against Law, and his own Interest. To send Inhibitions after those four Romish
Bishops, who under the Title of Apostolic Vicars, presumed to exercise Illegal
Jurisdiction within the Bingdom; to suffer no more Quo Warra^o's against
Corporations, and to restore those Charters, which had been taken away. To fill
up the vacant Bishoprics with Persons qualified by Law. To Act no more by
Virtue of a Dispenting Power, but permit it to be settled by Act of Parliament.
That upon the Restoration of Corporations, he would call a Free Parliament and
suffer them to sit, to redress Grievances. Lastly, to permit the Bishops to lay
such Motives and Arguments before him, as by the Blessing of God might bring
him back to the Communion of the Church of England, into whose Catholic Faith,
he had been Baptized. Not long after the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
presented the King the following Petition.

WE your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, in a deep Sense of the Miseries of a
War now breaking forth in the Bowels of this your Kingdom, and of the Danger to
which your Majesty's Sacred Person is thereby like to be Exposed, and also of
the Distractions of your People, by Reason of their present Grievances, do
think our selves bound in Conscience of the Duty we owe to God, and our Holy
Religion, to your Majesty, and our Country, most humbly to offer to your
Majesty; That in our Opinion, the only visible way to preserve your Majesty,
and this your Kingdom, would be the Calling of a Parliament, Regular and Free
in all its Circumstances. We therefore do most earnestly beseech your Majesty,
that you would be graciously pleased with all speed to Call such a Parliament,
wherein we shall be most ready to promote such Counsels, and Resolutions of
Peace and Settlement in Church and State, as may conduce to your Majesty's
Honor and Safety, and to the quieting the Minds of your People.

We do likewise Humbly beseech your Majesty, in the mean time, to use such
means for the preventing the Effusion of Christian Blood, as to your Majesty
shall seem most meet.

And your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc. W. Cant. Grafton. Ormond. Dorset.
Clare. Clarendon. Burlington. Anglesey. Rochester. Newport. Nom. Ebor. W.
Asaph. Fran. Ely. Tho. Roffen. Th. Petriburg. T. Oxon. Paget. Chandois.
Osulston.

Presented by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York Elect, the
Bishop of Ely, and the Bishop of Rochester, the 17th. of November, 1688.

To which the King returned the following Answer.

My Lords,
What You ask of Me, I most passionately desire: And I Promise You, UPON THE
FAITH OF A KING, That I will have a Parliament, and such an One as You ask for,
as soon as ever the Prince of Orange has Quitted this Realm: For, How is it
possible a Parliament should be Free in all its Circumstances, as You Petition
for, whilst an Enemy is in the Kingdom, and can make a Return of near an
Hundred Voices?


His Highness lay some days at Exeter, expecting that such Gentlemen as resided
nearest his Court should have come to him sooner than those at a Distance, but
finding something of an unexpected slowness, he could not forbear to signify
some little Resentment to some of the Principal Gentlemen of Somersetshire and
Devonshire, that came to join him, Nov. 15. 1688. in the following Speech.

Though we know not all your Persons, yet we have a Catalogue of your Names, and
remember the Character of your Worth and Interest in your Country. You see we
are come according to your Invitation and our Promise. Our Duty to God obliges
us to Protect the Protestant Religion, and our Love to Mankind, your Liberties
and Properties. We expected you that dwells so near the Place of our Landing,
would have joined us sooner, not that it is now too late; nor that we want your
Military Assistance so much as your Countenance and Presence, to justify our
Declared Pretensions; rather than accomplish our good and gracious Designs.
Though we have brought both a good Fleet, and a good Army, to render these
Kingdoms Happy, by Rescuing all Protestants from Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary
Power, by Restoring them to their Rights and Properties Established by Law, and
by Promoting of Peace and Trade, which is the Soul of Government, and the very
Lifeblood of a Nation; yet we rely more on the Goodness of God, and the
Justice of our Cause, than on any Humane Force and Power whatever. Yet since
God is pleased, we shall make use of Humane means, and not expect Miracles, for
our Preservation and Happiness. Let us not neglect making use of this Gracious
Opportunity, but with Prudence and Courage, put in Execution our so honorable
purposes. Therefore Gentlemen, Friends and Fellow-Protestants, we bid you and
all your Followers most heartily Welcome to our Court and Camp. Let the whole
World now Judge, if our Pretentions are not Just, Generous, Sincere, and above
Price, since we might have even a Bridge of Gold to Return back: But it is our
Principle and Resolution rather to die in a Good Cause, than live in a Bad one,
well knowing, That Virtue and True Honor is its own Reward, and the Happiness
of Mankind our Great and Only Design.

But quickly after his Highness found the English Nobility and Gentry no less
faithful to him, than he had been to them, and that His several Declarations
had the wished Effect; the Lord Wharton and the Lord Colchester with a strong
Party, marched through Oxford to his Highnesses Camp without Opposition. The
Lord Lovelace with another Party out of Oxfordshire got as far as Cirencester,
but were opposed and himself taken Prisoner by the County Militia, yet his
whole Party, except four or five that were slain or maimed in the Skirmish,
broke there way through, and his Lordship was soon after released out of
Gloucester Prison, by a Young Gentleman of that County, who took up arms for the
Prince, and drove out all the Popish Cr^^^ that were settled in that City; the
Lord Delamere having raised a Considerable Force in Cheshire, advanced to
Nottingham to join the Gentlemen of that County, who were ready to receive him;
And Nov. 22. at the Rendezvous there the following Declaration was published.

WE the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of these Northern Counties Assembled
together at Nottingham, for the defense of the Laws, Religion, and Properties,
according to those Freeborn Liberties and Privileges, descended to us from
our Ancestors, as the undoubted Birthright of the Subjects of this Kingdom of
England, (not doubting but the Infringers and Invaders of our Rights will
represent us to the rest of the Nation in the most malicious dress they can put
upon us) do here unanimously think it our Duty to declare to the rest of our
Protestant Fellow Subjects the Grounds of our present Undertaking.

We are by innumerable Grievances made sensible, that the very Fundamentals of
our Religion, Liberties, and Properties are about to be rooted out by our late
Jesuitical Privy Council, as has been of late too apparent, 1. By the Kings
Dispensing with all the Established Laws at his Pleasure. 2. By displacing all
Officers out of all Offices of Trust and Advantage, and placing others in their
room that are known Papists, deservedly made incapable by the Established Laws
of our Land. 3. By destroying the Charters of most Corporations in the Land. 4.
By discouraging all Persons that are not Papists, preferring such as turn to
Popery. 5. By displacing all honest and conscientious Judges, unless they
would, contrary to their Consciences, declare that to be Law which was merely
Arbitrary. 6. By branding all men with the Name of Rebels that but offered to
justify the Laws in a legal Course against the Arbitrary Proceedings of the
King, or any of his corrupt Ministers. 7. By Burthening the Nation with an
Army, to maintain the Violation of the Rights of the Subjects. 8. By
discountenancing the Established Reformed Religion. 9. By forbidding the
Subjects the Benefit of Petitioning, and Construing them Libellers; so rendering
the Laws a Nose of Wax, to serve their Arbitrary Ends. And many more such like,
too long here to enumerate.

We being thus made sadly sensible of the Arbitrary, and Tyrannical Government
that is by the Influence of Jesuitical Councels coming upon us, do unanimously
declare, That not being willing to deliver our Posterity over to such a
Condition of Popery and Slavery, as the aforesaid Oppressions inevitably
threaten; we will, to the utmost of our Power, oppose the same, by joining with
the Prince of Orange, (whom we Hope God Almighty has sent to rescue us from
the Oppressions aforesaid) will use our utmost Endeavors for the recovery of
our almost ruined Laws, Liberties, and Religion; and herein we Hope all good
Protestant Subjects will with their Lives and Fortunes be assistant to us, and
not be bugbear'd with the Opprobrious Terms of Rebels, by which they would
fright us, to become perfect Slaves to their Tyrannical Insolences and
Usurpations; for we assure our selves, that no rational and unbyassed Person
will Judge it Rebellion to defend our Laws and Religion, which all our Princes
have Sworn at their Coronations; which Oath, how well it has been observed of
late, we desire a Free Parliament may have the Consideration of.

We own it Rebellion to resist a King that governs by Law; but he was always
accounted a Tyrant that made his Will the Law; and to resist such an one, we
justly esteem no Rebellion, but a necessary Defense; and in this Consideration
we doubt not of all Honest Men's Assistance, and humbly hope for, and implore
the great God's Protection, that turns the Hearts of his People as pleases
him best, it having been observed, That People can never be of one Mind without
his Inspiration, which has in all Ages Confirmed that Observation, Vox Populi
est Vox Dei.

The present restoring of Charters, and reversing the oppressing and unjust
Judgment given on Magdalen College Fellows, is plain, are but to still the
People, li^e Plums to Children, by deceiving them for a while; but it they
shall by this Stratagem be fooled, till this present storm that threatens the
Papists he past, affoon as they shall be resetled, the former Oppression will
be put on with greater vigor; but we hope in vain is the Ne^ spread in the
sight of the Birds: For (1.) The Papists old Rule is, That Faith is not to be
kept with Heretics, as they term Protestants, though the Popish Religion is the
greatest Heresy. And (2.) Queen Mary's so ill observing her Promises to the
Suffolk-men that helped her to her Throne. And above all, (3) The Popes
Dispensing with the breach of Oaths, Treaties, or Promises, at his Pleasure,
when it makes for the Service of Holy Church, as they term it. These, we say,
are such convincing Reas^ns to hinder us from giving Credit to the aforesaid
Mock-Shews of Redress that we think our selves bound in Conscience to rest on
no Security that shall not be approved by a freely Elected Parliament, to whom,
under God, we refer our Cause.

The Lord Delamere being assured of the Resolution and Courageous Zeal of all
his Followers, continued a while in those Parts to watch the Morions of the
Papists in Lancashire, who began to take Arms under the Lord Molineux, and for
a time assisted to Guard Chester for the King, but upon the surprizal of that
Garrison for the Prince were soon after beaten or rather run away out of the
Town, and disbanded of themselves. In the North the Earl of Danby, the Lord
Fairfax, and other Persons of Quality seized upon the City of York, and turned
out the Lord Mayor, and other Magistrates that were Papists or ill-affected.
Colonel Copley the Deputy Governor of Hull, seized upon all the Guards of
that Garrison, and with the Assistance of some of the Townsmen, and some Seamen
made the Lord Langdale the Governor, and the Lord Montgomery, the Marquess of
Powis his Sons Prisoners, till he had secured the Citadel wherein was a
plentiful Magazine of Powder, and all sorts of Provisions with a Train of
Artillery ready fixed to be drawn out into the Field. Plymouth also with the
Earl of Huntington and all the Popish Officers and Soldiers was seized by the
Earl of Bath for his. Highness, and at the same time all the chief Seaport
Towns in Cornwall declared for the Prince; so that there was no Enemy behind him
to disturb the R^re of his advancing Army.

But the King being as yet in hopes to force his way, through all the great
Opposition made him by the whole Kingdom, having sent his Army before to
Salisbury, goes thither to them; yet before he went, he thought it requisite to
provide for the Safety of the pretended Prince of Wales, and not daring to
trust to the Validity of the forementioned Affidavits, for more Security, he
sent him away with a strong Guard to Portsmouth, that if things went ill, he
should be conveyed over to France; when the King came to Salisbury, he began to
bleed at the Nose; and was observed to continue bleeding for some time, which
seened at that time Ominous to him; But in the midst of these sarprizes, more
ill News arrives to increase his Astonishment, for besides the Lord Cornbury,
who had carried off a considera^^^ Party of Horse to the Prince some time
before, several other Regiments of Foot had now Deserted, and were gone the
same way; upon His arrival near to Salisbury, he was met by the Duke of
Berwick, the Earl of Feversham, and several other Officers on Horseback, and by
them attended to the Gates of the Town, being met by the Mayor and Aldermen in
their Formalities and Conducted to the Bishops Palace, but these flatte^ing
appearances soon vanished, He quickly perceiving that his English Forces were
generally dissatisfied, and seemed unwilling to engage in Civil Bloodshed
against their own Countrymen and of their own Religion, which was to Fight
with their Bodies against their Consciences, and likewise discovered the
Discontents of the People, who supplied the Machels very sparingly for his
Army, so that not judging himself safe among them, and upon a false Alarm that
Marshal Schomberg was within thirty or twenty Miles of him, he returned back in
all haste to Windsor, and from thence to London, being extremely discouraged
that Prince George, and the Lord Churchil were gone both to the Prince, and
that the Princess Ann of Denmark was also retired from the Court. The Prince of
Denmark, and the Lord Churchil left each of them, the following Letters behind
them, directed to the King.

SIR, with a Heart full of Grief am I forced to write, that Prudence will not
permit me to say to your Face. And may I e're find Credit with your Majesty,
and Protection from Heaven, as what I now do is free from Passion, Vanity, or
Design, with which, Actions of this Nature, are too often accompanied. I am not
ignorant of the frequent Mischiefs wrought in the World by Factious Pretenses
of Religion; but were not Religion the most justifiable Cause, it would not be
made the most specious Pretense. And your Majesty has always shown too
uninterested a Sense of Religion, to doubt the just Effects of it in one whose
Practices have, I hope, never given the World cause to censure his real
Conviction of it; or his backwardness to perform what his Honor and Conscience
prompt him to; how then can I longer disguise my just concern for that
Religion, in which I have been so happily Educated, which my Judgment thoroughly
convinces me to be the best; and for the Support of which I am so highly
interested in my Native Country; and is not England now, by the most endearing
Tie become so?

Whilst the restless Spirits of the Enemies of the REFORMED RELIGION, backed
by the Cruel Zeal of France, justly Alarm and Unite all the Protestant Princes
of Christendom, and engage them in so vast an Expense for the Support of it,
can I Act so Degenerous and mean a part, as to deny my Concurrence to such
worthy Endeavors for disabusing of your Majesty by the Re-inforcement of those
Laws, and Establishment of that Government, on which alone depends the
Well-being of your Majesty, and of the PROTESTANT RELIGION in Europe. This Sir
is that irresistible and only Cause that could come in Competition with my Duty
and Obligations with your Majesty, and be able to tear me from you, whilst the
same Affectionate Desire of serving you continues in me. Could I secure your
Person by the Hazard of my Life, I should think it could not be better
employed: And would to God, these your distracted Kingdoms might yet receive
that satisfactory Compliance from your Majesty in all their justifiable
Pretentions, as might upon the only sure Foundation, that of the Love and
Interest of your Subjects, establish your Government, and as strongly unite the
Hearts of all your Subjects to you, as is that of, Sir, Your Majesty's most
Humble, and most Obedient Son and Servant.

The Lord Churchil's Le^ter, ran thus, Sir, Men are seldom suspected of
Sincerity when they Act contrary to their Interests; and though my dutiful
Behavior to your Majesty in the worst of times, (for which I acknowledge my
Poor Services much over paid) may not be sufficient so incline You to a
Charitable Interpretation of my Actions yet I hope, the great Advantage I enjoy
under Your Majesty, which I can never expect in any other Change of Government,
may reasonably convince Your Majesty and the World, that I am acted by a higher
Principle, when I offer that Violence to my Inclination, and Interest, as to
desert Your Majesty at a time when your Affairs seem to challenge the strictest
Obedience from all Your Subjects, much more from one who lies under the
greatest personal Obligations imaginable to Your Majesty. Thi^, Sir, could
proceed from nothing but the inviolable Dictates of my CONSCIENCE, and
necessary concern for my RELIGION (which no good Man can oppose) and wi^h which
I am instructed, nothing ought to come in Competition; Heaven knows with what
Partiality my dutiful Opinion of Your Majesty has hitherto represented those
unhappy Designs, which inconsiderate and self interested Men have framed
against Your Majesty's true Interest and the Protestant Religion. But as I can
no longer join with such to give a pretense by Conquest to bring them to
effect, so will I always with the hazard of my Life and Fortune (so much Your
Majesty's due) endeavor to preserve Your Royal Person and Lawful Rights with
all the tender Concern and dutiful Respect, that becomes, Sir, Your Majesty's
most dutiful and most obliged Subject and Servant.

The Princess Ann of Denmark, likewise directed the following Letter to the
Queen upon her withdrawing.

Madam, I beg your Pardon if I am so deeply affected with the surprising News
of the Princes being gone, as not to be able to see You, but to leave this
Paper to Express my humble Duty to the King and your Self; and to let You know
that I am gone to Absent my self to avoid the Kings Displeasure, which I am not
able to bear either against the Prince or my Self: And I shall stay at so great
a distance, as not to return before I hear the Happy News of a Reconcilement:
And as I am Confident the Prince did not leave the KING with any other design
than to use all possible means for his Preservation; so I hope You will do me
the Justice to believe that I am incapable of following him for any other End.
Never was any one in such an unhappy Condition, so divided between Duty and
Affect on to a Father, and a Husband; and therefore I know not what to do but
to follow one to preserve the other. I see the general falling off of the the
Nobility and Gentry, who avow to have no other end, than to prevail with the
King to secure their Religion, which they saw in so much danger by the Violent
Counsels of the Priests; who to promote their own Religion did not care to what
dangers they exposed the King. I am fully persuaded that the Prince of Orange
designs the King's Safety and Preservation, and hope all things may be Comp^s^d
without more Bloodshed, by the Calling a Parliament: God grant a Happy end to
these Troubles, that the King's Reign may be prosperous, and that I may shortly
meet You in perfect Peace and Safety; till when, let me beg You to continue the
same favorable Opinion that You have hitherto had of, Your most Obedient
Daughter and Servant Ann. The King now issued out a Proclamation of Pardon to
all his Subjects, that had taken up Arms under the Prince, if they returned in
twenty days; but very few or none came back, and about the same time a Party of
the Princes Men being abroad, and advancing beyond their Strength, were pursued
and charged by Colonel Sarsfield with seventy horse, and thirty Dragoons, and
Granadiers, who overtaking them at Wincanton, they posted themselves behind the
Hedges. Whereupon the Kings Party dismounted, and marched up to them, and they
began to Fire ^riskly, several being killed and wounded, But ^olonel Sarsfield
getting into the Field with his Horse, and Charging them in the Rear, they were
most of them killed or taken Prisoners, Lieutenant Cambel, who commanded them
being slain, and of the Kings Party four were killed, and Cornet Web mortally
wounded. This slender success was soon damped, by an Address from the Fleet,
for a Free Parliament; which now began to grow Cold in his Service, and the
continual Desertions of his Army; So that the King not thinking it Convenient
to hazard a Battle with them, upon the approach of the Princes Forces, with
whom now were a great part of the Nobility, He recalled his Remainder of them,
with the Train of Artillery; and upon his return to White Hall, he appointed
Colonel Beril Skeleton to be Lieutenant of the Tower, in the place of Sir Edward
Hales, and in pursuance of the Advice of the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal,
Ordered the Chancellor Jefferies to issue out writs for summoning a Parliament
to sit, Jan. 15. following; the Bishop of Exeter, who left that City upon the
approach of the Prince, was likewise nominated Archbishop of York, which had
been vacant for some time, and was thought to have been designed for Father
Peter's, if things had gone on. But the King Affairs growing daily more
desperate, and the Prince of Orange marching forward with his Army; and being
advanced to Hungerford, after a Consultation with the Queen, and the Jesuits,
it was resolved to send the following Proposals of Accommodation to his
Highness, which were soon after published with the Princes Answer thereto.

WHEREAS on the 8th. of December 1688. at Hungerford, a PAPER Signed by the
Marquess of Hallifax, the Earl of Nottingham, and the Lord Godolphin,
Commissioners sent unto US from his Majesty, was Delivered to US in these Words
following, viz.

SIR, The King Commands us to acquaint You, That he observes all the
Differences, and Causes of Complaint, alleged by Your Highness, seem to be
referred to a Free-Parliament. His Majesty as He has already Declared, was
Resolved before this to call one, but thought that in the present State of
Affairs, it was advisable to defer it till things were more Composed. Yet
seeing that His People still continue to desire it; He has put forth His
Proclamation in order to it, and has Issued forth His Writs for the calling of
it. And to prevent any Cause of Interruption in it, He will consent to every
thing that can be reasonably required for the Security of all those that shall
come to it. His Majesty has therefore sent Us to attend Your Highness for the
adjusting of all Matters that shall be agreed to be necessary to the Freedom of
Elections, and the Security of Sitting, and is ready immediately to enter into
a Treaty in Order to it. His Majesty proposes, that in the mean time the
Respective Armies may be Restrained within such Limits, and at such a Distance
from London, as may prevent the Apprehensions that the Parliament may in any
kind be disturbed, being desirous that the Meeting of it may be no longer
delayed than it must be by the usual and necessary Forms, Signed, Hallifax,
Nottingham, Godolphin.

WE with the Advice of the Lords and Gentlemen Assembled with US, have in
Answer to the same, made those following PROPOSALS. 1. That all Papists, and
such Persons as are not qualified by Law, be Disarmed, Disbanded, and Removed
from all Employments, Civil and Military. 2. That all Proclamations which
Reflect upon Us, or any that have come to Us, or declared for Us, be recalled;
and that if any Persons for having so Assisted, have been committed, that they
be forthwith set at Liberty. 3. That for the Security and Safety of the City of
London, the Custody and Government of the Tower be immediately put into the
hands of the said City. 4. That if His Majesty shall think fit to be at London,
during the Sitting of the Parliament, that we may be there also, with an equal
Number of Our Guards. Or if his Majesty shall please to be in any place from
London, at whatever distance he thinks fits that We may be at a place of the
same distance. And that the respective Armies do remove from London Thirty
Miles, and that no more Foreign Forces be brought into the Kingdom. 5. That for
the Security of the City of London and their Trade, Tilbury Fort be put into
the hands of the said City. 6. That to prevent the Landing of French or other
Foreign Troops, Port mouth may be put into such hands, as by Your Majesty and
Us shall be agreed upon. 7. That some sufficient part of the Public Revenue be
Assigned Us, for the Maintaining of our Forces, until the Meeting of a Free
Parliament.

But these Proposals of the Prince, proving of too hard Digestion at
White Hall, the Offer of Accommodation was thought to be Designed only to gain
time, and the Romish Counselors perceiving that this would not obtain, began
to think of other measures; So that the Child being sent for back from
Portsmouth to White Hall in great haste, the Queen having made up her Equipage
Dec. 10. took her Solemn Leave of the King, and with the pretended Prince of
Wales, and her Attendants (whereof it is said, Father Peter's was one) but it
was thought with a large proportion of Treasure and Jewels: She Crossed the
Water at Lambeth, where three Coaches with Six Horses awaited them, and with a
Strong Guard went to Greenwich, and so to Graves-End; where she and her Retinue
Embarked in a Yatch for France, and Landed the next Day about four a Clock in
the Afternoon; the Queen and several Courtiers being gone, the Popish Priests
began to shift for themselves; and the same Night, the King called an
Extraordinary Council, and sent for the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London,
Charging them to preserve the Peace and Quiet of the City, as much as in them
lay, after which they were Dismissed; But the Council continued their Debates
upon the present Exigency of Affairs a great while longer, and were ordered to
meet again the next Morning, when to the Surprise of the City and Kingdom:
About three a Clock in the Morning, the King took Barge at the Privy Stairs,
with a small Equipage, and went down the River, without being so much as known
to many of the Officers of his Household, who were then in wa^ing; whose sudden
Departure, may be supposed to be occasioned by the News that Alarmed the Court
the Day before, that the Princes Forces had made their way through Beading, and
gained the Pass of Twyford-Bridg, without any Considerable Resistance; for
about 1500 Horse, and three Troops of Dragoons being Quartered in the Town of
Reading, they had notice that a Detatchment of the Princes Army were Marching
up toward them, which put them into such a Consternation, that not finding
themselves strong enough to maintain the Town, the Officers upon Consultation,
Concluded to draw off and make good their Post at Twyford-Bridge; out their
Scouts coming in with News, that the Roads were clear, the Commander ordered a
Scoten Regiment of Horse, and the Irish Dragoons to march back, and Repossess
themselves of Reading, which they did, and were placed in the Marketplace, and
other Posts, continuing on Horseback most part of the Night, to prevent
Surprise; yet hearing no more of the Princes Advanced Party, their Officers
ordered them to alight and refresh themselves and their Horses; But about ten
in the Morning, the Trumpet Sounded to Horse, the Princes Forces being at the
Towns-end, almost before they were Discovered; and thereupon sharp Firing began
on both sides, the Irish Dragoons bearing the Brunt of the Encounter, and
though the Scotch Horse in small Detached Bodies, made some Fire; yet they were
over-poured, driven out of Town, and obliged to Retreat to Twyford-Bridge; and
at length, many of the Kings Party Deserted, and the rest were Constrained to
quit the Pass, and make the best of their Retreat, there being about thirty
killed, and several wounded in this Skirmish.

Upon this ill Success, and the King having no Considerable Forces left, the
Day before his going away, he sent a Letter to his General, the Earl of
Feversham to this Effect; That things being come to that Extremity, that he had
been forced to send away the Queen and his Son, the Prince of Wales, lest they
should fall into his Enemies Hands: He was resolved to secure himself the best
he could; that if he could have relied on all his Troops, he was resolved to
have had at least one Blow for it; But that his Lordship knew, that both his
Lordship, and several of the General Officers of the Army had told him, that it
was not safe to venture himself at the Head of his Troops, or to think to fight
the Prince of Orange with them; and therefore it only remained for him, to
thank those Officers and Soldiers that had been truly Loyal to him; not
expecting they sheuld farther expose themselves in resisting a Foreign Enemy,
and a Poisoned Nation. In pursuance of this Letter, the Earl of Feversham sent
another to his Highness the Prince of Orange, to let him understand, That he
had received a Letter from the King, with the unfortunate News of his
Resolution, to go out of England, and he was actually gone, with Orders to make
no Opposition against any Body; which he thought Convenient to let his Highness
know, so soon as it was possible, to hinder the effusion of Blood, having
already given Order to that purpose, to all the Troops under his Command, which
would be the last Order they should receive from him, etc.

The Kings Departure being publicly known, the Multitude got together in
diverse places, as is usual in such Disturbances and Dissolutions of Government,
Spoiling and Demolishing the new erected Mass-Houses and Chapels, pulling
down, Burning and Destroying all before them; they plucked down the New Convent
for Monks at St. John's, which had been two years in Building, at vast Expense,
and burnt the greatest part of the Timber and Materials in Smithfield, having
before Seized upon the Goods, as they were Removing, and burnt them in Holborn;
they likewise Defaced the Chapels in Limestreet, and Lincolns Inn Fields, with
that of the Spanish Ambassadors at Wild-House, where some common Thieves mixing
with the more harmless Boys, they got great store of Plunder in Plate, Money,
and Rich Goods; They likewise committed Violences at the Lodgings of the
Resident of the Duke of Florence, and much Defaced the Dwelling-Houses of
several Eminent Papists, who were fled for fear of being Secured, and though
the Magistrates Labored to quiet these Tumults and Disorders: Yet they found
their Authority too weak, till the Mobile had in some measure vented their
Rage, they being grown so Numerous, that neither the Watches nor Trained Bands,
thought it safe to oppose their Fury.

Therefore for Redress of these Mischiefs, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
then in Town Repaired to Guild Hall and sending for Colonel Skeleton, then
Lieutenant of the Tower, Demanded the Keys, which being by him readily
Resigned, they committed the Charge of that Important Place, to the Lord Lucas,
a Person of known Honor and Integrity to his Country; Nor were they less
Active, in Suppressing those Lawless Rioters: So that in a short time, they
were all Dispersed and Quelled, and some of the Principal committed to Prison;
and then taking into Consideration, the Great and Dangerous Conjuncture of the
Time, in regard of the Kings having withdrawn himself, they drew up a
Declaration to this Effect: That they did Reasonably hope, that the King having
Issued out his Proclamation, and Writs for Calling a Free Parliament, they
might have rested securely under the Expectation of that Meeting; but that the
King having withdrawn himself, as they apprehended, in Order to his Departure
out of the Kingdom, by the Pernicious Councils of Persons ill Affected to the
Nation, they cannot without being wanting to their Duty, be silent under the
Calamities, wherein the Popish Councils which have so long prevailed, had
miserably involved them; and therefore unanimously resolved to apply themselves
to his Highness the Prince of Orange, who with so great Kindness to these
Kingdoms, so vast Expense, and so much Hazard to his own Person, had undertaken
(by endeavoring to procure a Free Parliament) to Rescue them with as little
Effusion of Christian Blood, as possible from the Imminent Dangers of Popery
and Slavery; Declaring further, that they would with their utmost Endeavors,
Assist his Highness in the Obtaining of such a Parliament with all Speed;
wherein their Laws, Liberties, and Properties might be secured, the Church of
England in particular, with a due Liberty to Protestant Dissenters; and in
General, the Protestant Religion and Interest, over the whole World, might be
Supported and Encouraged, to the Glory of God, the Happiness of the Established
Government, and the Advantage of all Princes and States in Christendom, that
may be therein Concerned.

This was Signed by the Archbishops of York and Canterbury, 22 Temporal Lords,
and 5 Bishops; and the Earl of Pembroke, Lord Weymouth, Lord Bishop of Ely, and
the Dord Culpeper were Ordered to Attend his Highness with the said
Declaration, at Henley upon Thames; the same Day the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council, Assembled in the same place, and Drew up an Humble Address to
be Presented to his Highness in their Names, on the behalf of the City; of like
Effect with the Declaration, four Aldermen being appointed to Wait upon the
Prince therewith and the Lieutenancy of London meeting that Day also, Drew up
an Address to his Highness, on the behalf of themselves and the rest of the
Militia, to the like purpose, which were accordingly Presented to the Prince,
and very favorably Received, Imploring his Highness Protection, and beseeching
him to Repair to the City; where he would be received with Universal
Satisfaction.

The next day the Tumults being somewhat allayed, search was made in diverse
places, for such as were fled from Justice; and among others, to the great
Rejoicing of the People, the Lord Chancellor Jeffery's, was taken in an obscure
House at Wapping, Disguised like a Saylor, and endeavoring to make his Escape
in a Vessel that lay there for Hamburg; who being brought before the Lord Mayor
with a Numerous and enraged Guard of Attendants, his Lordship was suddenly
Seized with such a frightful Indisposition, that he was incapable of examining
the Matter: So that the Chancellor was carried to the Tower by his own Consent,
to preserve himself from the Fury of the Rabble.

Dec. 14. His Highness by easy Marches came to Windsor, where he was received
with all kind of Respect and Submission by the Mayor and Aldermen in their
Formalities, and Congratulated in an Elegant Speech, the Prince of Denmarks
Lodgings being provided for his Reception; whilst his Highness was preparing
for London, he had notice that the King designing to pass the Seas in Disguise,
having betaken himself (accompanied only by two or three Persons) in a small
Vessel to Sea, was forced by foul Weather, upon the Coast of Kent, near
Feversham, and as soon as he came to that Town, was seized upon by the
Multitude, there being a Report at that time, that several Persons were making
their Escapes out of the Land, and being ignorant who he was, they carried him
to a House in the Town, rifling him of some Jewels, a considerable quantity of
Gold, and his Crucifix which he very much valued; but at last, the King being
known by a Gentleman who came to see the Prisoners they had taken, and fell on
his Knees to pay him Duty the Common People were strangely Surprised, a great
number instantly retiring, and others begged his Pardon, offering to restore
what they had taken from him; but the King refused to take his Gold again,
giving it them freely: However his Person was detained till the News of his
being there could be carried to London.

The Lords who first Assembled in the City, being then at White Hall, and
having notice of it, sent the Lords, Feversham, Alesbury, Yarmouth and
Middleton to the King, with their earnest Desires, that he would be pleased to
return to his Royal Palace at London, to which, though at first he showed some
unwillingness, yet being pressed thereto, he at length Condescended, the
Servants of his Household, who went along with the Lords, having brought him
Money and Clothes, those he had being Old, and rent in the Searching him before
he was known; But His Highness the Prince of Orange, being fully Determined to
come to London with all speed, it was upon Consultation thought very
inconvenient, in regard it might Create daily Disputes and Quarrels between the
Soldiers of both Parties, and in diverse other Respects for the King and
himself, to be there at one and the same time, therefore upon notice of the
Kings returning, Monfr. Zalestein was sent to meet him on the way, and to
entreat him to return to Rochester, which the King would certainly have done,
had not Mounsieur Zulestein missed him, by taking another Road: So that the
King Arrived at White Hall on Sunday, Dec. 16. in the Evening, attended by
three Troops of the Lifeguard, and a Troop of Granadeers, a Set of Boys
following him through the City, and making some Huzza's, while the rest of the
People silently looked on; From thence the King sent the Earl of Feversham to
the Prince then at Windsor, to invite his Highness to come to St. James's, and
take that Palace as his Residence, with what number of Troops he thought
Convenient; The Prince Deliberating with the Lords about this Message, was
advised by no means to accept of this Invitation, and there being a necessity
his Highness should be in Town the next Day, the following Paper Signed by the
Prince, was ordered to be carried the King the next day by the Lords therein
mentioned.

We Desire you, the Lord Marquess of Hallifax, the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the
Lord Delamer, to tell the King that it is thought Convenient for the greater
Safety of his Person, that he do remove to Ham, where he shall be Attended by
Guards, who will be ready to preserve him from any Disturbance. Given at
Windsor, Dec. 17. 1688.

And further to prevent the possibility of any disturbance, it was resolved,
that his Highnesses Guards should be possessed of all the Posts and Avenues about
White Hall before the Paper was delivered, and it was Computed that these
Guards might have reached White Hall by eight a Clock at Night, but they were
so hindered by the foulness of the ways, that it was past ten before they
arrived, and there being difficulty made of withdrawing the Kings Guards, so
much time was spent that the Lords could not proceed in their Message till past
twelve, so that the King was in bed; but to preserve Decency and Respect, and
not break hastily in upon him, they sent the Lord Middleton, his Principil
Secretary of State, the following Letter.

My Lord, There is a Message to be delivered to his Majesty from the Prince,
which is of so great importance, that we who are charged with it, desire we may
be immedlately admitted, and therefore desire to know where we may find your
Lordship, that you may introduce, My Lord, your Lordships most humble Servants,
etc.

The Lord Middleton upon the Receipt hereof, came and introduced them to the
King, and their Lordships having made an Apology, for coming at a time that
might disturb him, the Princes Message was delivered to the King, who reading
it said, that he would readily comply; the Lords as they were directed humbly
desired, that if it might be with his Majesty's Convenience, he would be
pleased to remove so early, as to be at Ham by Noon, thereby to prevent his
meeting the Prince in his way to London; to this the King readily agreed, and
asked if he might not ^ppoint what Servants should attend him; The Lords
replied, it was wholly left to his Majesty. The Lords then took their leaves,
but were instantly sent for back by the King, who told them, He had forgot to
acquaint them with his Resolution before the Message came, to send the Lord
Godolphin the next Morning to the Prince, to propose his going back to
Rochester, he finding by the Message Monsieur Zulestein was charged with, that
the Prince had no Mind he should be at London, and therefore he now desired
that he might rather return to Rochester; The Lords replied, that they would
immediately send an account to the Prince, and doubted not of an Answer to his
Satisfaction, and accordingly disparching a Messonger to the Prince, who was
then at Ston House, the Sieur Benting by eight next Morning, sent a Letter by
the Princes Order, agreeing to the Kings Proposal, and the Guards and Barges
being prepared to attend him, and his Coaches and Sumpters to follow, he
reached Gravesend on the eighteenth in the Evening, and passed over Land in his
Coach attended by the Earl of Arran and several others, and made his Residence
in Sir Richard Heads House.

In the Afternoon of the same day, his Highness with a very splendid Equipage,
and a numerous attendance arrived at St. Jameses, and received the
Congratulations of all the Nobility, and Persons of Chiefest Quality in the
Town; the People crowding to see their Deliverer, and expressing their
Satisfaction at so Happy a Revolution, by Ringing of Bells, Bonfires and all
the public Demonstrations of joy imaginable.

A Remarkable Accident happened between the Kings first going to Rochester, and
his return to London, a general Alarm being given one Night about Midnight, at
almost one and the same time in the most considerable Cities and Towns in
England, upon pretense that the Irish were Killing, Burning and Destroying all
before them, which seemed to be carried on industriously by Persons set on
purpose to spread that false Report, or else it can hardly be imagined, how it
should have been done at so many distant places at once, which threw the People
into a great Surprise, and Consternation, till the day appeared and Convinced
them of the Fallacy; But the real occasion hereof was never yet generally
understood.

Upon the Arrival of his Highness, the Common Council of London assembled, and
unanimously agreed, that the Sheriffs and all the Aldermen of the City with
their Deputies, and two Common Council Men for each Ward, should wait on and
Congratulate his Highness, upon his Happy Arrival in the Name of the City of
London, and accordingly Dec. 20, the Lord Mayor being indisposed by Sickness,
Sir George Treby the Recorder, in a most Elegant Speech, thus Addressed his
Highness.

MAy it please your Highness; The Lord Mayor being disabled by Sickness, your
Highness is attended by the Aldermen and Commons of the Capital City of this
Kingdom, Deputed to Congratulate your Highness upon this Great and Glorious
Occasion, in which laboring for Words, we cannot but come short in Expression,
Reviewing our late Danger; we remember our Church and State overrun by Popery
and Arbitrary Power, and brought to a point of Destruction, by the Conduct of
men that were our true Invaders, that broke the Sacred Fences of our Laws, and
which was worse the very Constitution of our Legislature, so that there was no
Remedy left us; The only Person under Heaven that could apply this Remedy was
your Highness; You are of a Nation, whose Alliance in all times has been
agreeable and prosperous to us; You are of a Family most Illustrious
Benefactors to Mankind; To have the Title of Sovereign Prince; Stadt-holder,
and to have worn the Imperial Crown are among their lesser Dignities; they have
long enjoyed a Dignity Singular and Transcendent, that is, To be Champions of
Almighty God sent forth in several Ages, to vindicate his Cause against the
greatest Oppressions; To this Divine Commission our Nobles, our Gentry, and
amongst them, our brave English Soldiers render themselves, and their Arms
upon your appearing.

Great Sir! when we look back the last Month and Contemplate the Swiftness and
Fullness of our Deliverance, Astonished, we think it Miraculous; Your Highness
led by the hand of Heaven, and called by the Voice of the People has preserved
our dearest Interest, the Protestant Religion, which is Primitive
Christianbity; Restored our Laws, which are our Ancieut Title to our Lives,
Liberties, and Estates, and without which the World were a Wilderness; but what
Retribution can we make to Your Highness? our Thoughts are full charged with
Gratitude; Your Highness has a lasting Monument in the Hearts, in the Prayers,
in the Praises of all good men amongst us, and late Posterity will celebrate
your ever Glorious. Name, till time shall be no more.

At the same time, the High Sheriff, Nobility, and Gentry of the County of
Cambridge, presented another Address to his Highness; wherein they implored his
Protection and aid to rescue the Nation from Popery and Slavery, and assared
him; they would Contribute their utmost endeavors, for perfecting so glorious
a work, returning his Highness their unfeigned Thanks, for the progress he had
made therein with so much cost, labor, and hazard both by Sea and Land.

But in the midst of these Transactions, the King having continued some days at
Rochester, Dec. 23. between two and three in the Morning, going a back way with
great Secrecy and Caution hastened to the Seaside, taking only with him, Mr.
Ralf Sheldon, and Mr. Delabody with whom he imbarqued in a vessel that lay for
his Transportation to France, to follow his Queen as had been agreed betwixt
them leaving the following Paper of Reasons behind him, for withdrawing himself
from Rochester, said to be written by his own hand, and ordered by him to be
Published.

THe World cannot wonder, at My withdrawing My Self now this Second Time. I
might have expected somewhat better Usage after what I writ to the Prince of
Orange by my Lord Feversham, and the Instructions I gave him; but instead of an
Answer, such as I might have hoped for, What was I to expect after the Usage I
received by the making the said Earl a Prisoner, against the Practice and Law
of Nations; The sending his own Guards at Eleven at Night to take Possession of
the Posts at Whitehall, without advertising Me in the least manner of it; The
sending to Me at One a Clock, after Midnight, when I was in Bed, a kind of an
Order by Three Lords, to be gone out of Mine Own Palace before Twelve that same
Morning? After all this, How could I hope to be safe, so long as I was in the
Power of one, who had not only done this to Me, and Invaded My Kingdoms without
any just Occasion given him for it, but that did by his first Declaration lay
the greatest Aspersion upon Me that Malice could invent, in that Clause of it
which concerns My Son? I appeal to all that know Me, nay, even to himself, that
in their Consciences, neither he nor they can believe Me in the least capable
of so unnatural a Villainy, nor of so little common Sense, to be imposed on in a
thing of such a Nature as that. What had I then to expect from one who by all
Arts has taken such pains to make Me appear as black as Hell to My Own People,
as well as to all the World besides? What Effect that has had at Home all
Mankind have seen, by so general a Defection in My Army, as well as in the
Nation amongst all sorts of People.

I was both Free, and desire to continue so; and tho I have ventured My Life
very frankly, on several Occasions, for the Good and Honor of My Country, and
am as free to do it again, (and which I hope I shall yet do, as Old as I am, to
redeem it from the Slavery it is like to fall under;) yet I think it not
convenlent to expose My Self to be Secured, as not to be at Liberty to effect
it; and for that Reason do withdraw, but so as to be within Call whenever the
Nations Eyes shall be opened, so as to see how they have been abused and
imposed upon by the specious Pretenses of Religion and Property. I hope it will
please God to touch their Hearts, out of his Infinite Mercy, and to make them
sensible of the ill Condition they are in, and bring them to such a Temper,
that a Legal Parliament may be called; and that amongst other things which may
be necessary to be done, they will agree to Liberty of Conscience for all
Protestant Dissenters; and that those of my own Persuasion may be so far
considered, and have such a share of it, as they may live Peaceably and
Quietly, as English Men and Chrissians ought to do, and not to be obliged to
Transplant themselves, which would be very grievous, especially to such as love
their own Country; and I appeal to all Men, who are considering Men, and have
had Experience, Whether any thing can make this Nation so great and flourishing
as Liberty of Conscience? Some of our Neighbors dread it. I could add much
more to confirm all I have said, but now is not the proper time.

Rochester, December. 22. 1688.

Upon these Reasons, we may make these few Cursory Remarks; That as to the
detaining of the Earl of Feversham, who was sent without a Pass in a time of
open War, it may be very well justified; He having likewise disbanded the Army,
and left them at large to lie upon the Country; The Message for his removal
from Whitehall was managed, as we have heard, with all the respect and decency
imaginable, and absolutely necessary upon several accounts, as well as for the
preservation of his own Person, whose late Actions especially his extraordinary
Severity in the West, had raised him many inveterate Enemies, who now might
have taken the opportunity of offering Violence to him; that his Highness had
sufficient Reason for this Glorious Expedition, the King had made the Nation
too sensible of; and as to the business of the Child, it is well known that his
Zeal for the Catholic Cause made him shut his Eyes to all other Considerations
whatsoever, and besides it was managed with such a number of Suspicious
Circumstances, that we are told one of his own Commanders in Ireland should
say, That the Prince of Orange had one plausible pretense for his Invasion,
namely that of the Prince of Wales, since if it was a real Birth, the Court
managed the matter so, as if they had Industriously contrived the Nation should
give no Credit to it; as to his Hopes of Conquering is, we have as great Hopes
and better Reason to believe the contrary, since the People will scarce be ever
fond of giving up their Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Estates to the Will of
an Arbitrary Prince, or ever submit to a French Government; as to a Parhament,
we may think he did not design to call any, since some time before his
departure, he ordered all the Writs that were not sent out to be burnt, and a
Caveat to be entered against the making use of such as were already sent into
the Countries; as to Liberty of Conscience, which he seems so much to value,
his Proceedings in freland, and against the Universities, together with his
recalling the Protestant Ministers from Preaching to the English Merchants in
Popish Countries, with many other Instances that might be given, are sufficient
Demonstrations of the reality of his Intentions therein.

Soon after we had an account, that the King was arrived in France, and gone to
the Court, where his Queen came some time before, having as soon as she landed
sent, as it is said, the following Letter to that King.

An unfortunate Queen all bathed in Tears, has Deemed it no trouble to expose
her self to the greatest Perils of the Sea, on purpose to seek an Asy lum and
Protection in the Dominions of the greatest and most Glorious Monarch in the
World; Her bad Fortune has procured her a Happiness, which far distant Nations
have sought with eagerness; nor does the necessity lessen the value, while she
makes choice of this same Sanctuary before any other, that she might have found
in any other place; She is persuaded his Majesty will look upon it, as a
Demonstration of the singular Esteem she has of his Great and Royal Qualities,
that she intrusts him with the Prince of Wales, who is all she has most dear,
and precious in the World; He is too Young to partake with her in the
acknowledgments due for his Protection; that acknowledgment is entirely in the
Heart of his Mother, who in the midst of all her sorrows enjoys this
Consolation, to live sheltred under the Laurels of a Prince, who surpasses all
that ever was of most Exalted, and Mighty upon Earth.

These fulsom Flatteries, which are so admired by that King, doubtless moved
him to entertain her with great Tenderness, and made way for the Reception of
the King her Husband; who soon after Arrived there, and had St. Germains
allowed for their Residence, with such a Revenue, as that King can spare from
his other mighty Expenses, for their Subsistence; though it is a question,
whether King James consulted his own Interest, in Flying to the French King;
for certainly after all that he had done at home, to see him Harbor himself
with the Enemy of the English Name, the Contriver and Adviser of all the
Mischiefs for several years, perpetrated in the Kingdom, what could more
Convict him of the Oppressions of his Reign, or more Inveterately Alienate the
Peoples Affections from him? Upon the Kings second withdrawing, Portsmouth that
held out with some Obstinacy under the D. of Berwick, and Sir Edward Scot
Deputy Governor, submitted and Received a Garrison sent thither by the Princes
Order.

And now to fill up this Breach and Rupture in the Government, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal immediately met in the House of Peers at Westminster,
where they drew up an Humble Address, which they presented to his Highness,
Requesting him in this Conjuncture, to take upon him the Administration of
Public Affairs, both Civil and Military; and the Disposal of the Public
Revenue, for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, Rights, Laws,
Liberties, Properties, and the Peace of the Nation, and to take into his
particular Care, the present Condition of Ireland, and to use Speedy and
Effectual means to prevent the danger threatening that Kingdom.

At the same time, these Honorable Lords further Humbly Requested; That His
Highness would please to cause Letters to be Written, Subseribed by himself,
and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being Protestants, to the several
Counties, Universities, Cities and Boroughs, etc. directed to the Chief
Magistrates of each, within Ten Days after the Receipt thereof, to choose such a
Number of Persons to Represent them, as are of Right to be sent to Parliament.
Both which Addresses were Presented to the Prince at St. Jamese's, who
answered, that he had considered their Advice, and that he would endeavor to
secure the Peace of the Nation till the meeting of the Convention, Jan. 22.
next, and that he would forthwith Issue out Letters to that purpose; and that
he would apply the Public Revenues to their proper use, and likewise Endeavor
to put Ireland into such a Condition, as that the Protestant Religion, and the
English Interest, might be maintained in that Kingdom; Further assuring them,
that as he came hither for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the
Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, so he should always be ready to Expose
himself in any Hazard for the Defense of the same.

His Highness likewise sent for all such as had been Members of Parliament, in
the Reign of Charles the II. together with the Aldermen and Common Council of
the City of London, to meet him at St James's, to advise the best manner how to
pursue the ends of his Declaration, in Calling a Free Parliament, for the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the Restoring of the Rights and
Liberties of the Kingdom, and Settling the same, that they may not be in Danger
of being again Subverted. Upon which, they met accordingly, and after his
Highness had thus Graciously expressed himself to them, they instantly Concluded
to go to the House of Commons, where being Sat, they chose Henry Powle Esquire;
their Chairman, and then drew up an Address to the Prince, returning his
Highness their hearty Thanks, and expressing their Extraordinary
Acknowledgment; for the Care he had taken of their Religion, Laws and
Liberties, Humbly Entreating him to take upon him the Administration of the
Government, etc. which being presented to his Highness at St. James's, he
returned the same answer, as he had done to the Lords.

The News of his Highness Snccess, and Prosperous proceedings Arriving in
Holland, all the Persons of Quality that were at the Hague, appeared at Court
to Complement Her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange thereupon, and soon
after their Electoral Highnesses of Brandenburg arrived there, and were
Entertained very Splendidly upon that Occasion; And the States General, sent
three Deputies to England, to Congratulate his Highness, who Landing at the
Tower, were received with the Discharge of the Cannon, and Conducted to the
Lodgings appointed for them, with a very Spleudid Equipage.

Dec. 30. His Highness Issued out a Declaration, to Authorize Sheriffs,
Justices of Peace, and all other Officers, except Papists, to Continue and Act
in their Respective Places, till further Order; And a second Declaration, for
the better Quartering of Soldiers: That none should be Quartered upon Private
Houses, without the free and voluntary Consent of the Owner; And a while after,
the following Association for the Preservation of his Highnesses Person, which
had been promoted, and Signed through most Counties of England, with great
Cheerfulness and Alacrity, was Signed also by several Noblemen and others, at
St. James's.

We whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, who have Joined with the Prince of
Orange, for the Defense of the Protestant Religion; and for maintaining the
Ancient Government, and the Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland and
Ireland: Do engage to Almighty God, to his Highness the Prince of Orange, and
to one another, to stick firm to this Cause, and to one another in Defense of
it; and never to depart from it till our Religion, our Laws and Liberties are
so far secured to us in a Free Parliament, that we shall be no more in Danger
of Falling under Popery and Slavery; And whereas we are engaged in this Common
Cause, under the Protection of the Prince of Orange; by which means his Person
may be exposed to Dangers, and to the Desperate and Cursed Attempts of the
Papists, and other Bloody Men: We do therefore Solemnly engage, both to God and
to one another, that if any such Attempts are made upon him, we will pursue not
only those that make them, but all their Adherents, and all that we find in
Arms against us, with the utmost Severities of a just Revenge to their Ruin,
and final Destruction; and that the Execution of any such Attempt (which God of
his Mercy forbid) shall not divert us from prosecuting this Cause, which we do
now undertake; but that it shall engage us to carry it on with all the vigor
that so Barbarous a Practice shall deserve.

After this, His Highness published a Declaration, to Command all Papists to
depart within three Days out of London and Westminster, and Ten Miles about,
under penalty of Suffering, the utmost Severity of the Law, and about the same
time, the Country People Seized a great number of Persons in Kent and other
places, endeavoring to make their escape beyond Sea, who were committed to
several Prisons, till further Order. And to show the readiness and zeal of the
People to Support his Highness: He had no sooner signified to the City of
London, that the necessary Expenses he had been at, had near exhausted the
public Revenues; but that they instantly ordered a Committee to attend him, to
know what Sum might be necessary, and 100000 l. being Named, the Generous
Citizens immediately came to Guild Hall, and made Subscriptions for 300000 l.
which was paid in to Admiration, within a very few days.

Affairs being now in a promising way of settlement in England, let us take a
brief view of Scotland, to whom his Highness before his arrival had likewise
sent a Declaration to the same effect with that sent to England, some
Expressions only being varied according to the different Circumstances of both
Nations; his Highness declaring, That by the influence of those evil
Counselors, who designed to render themselves the absolute Masters of the
Lives, Honors, and Estates of the Subjects without being restrained by any
Rule or Law, a most exorbliant Power had been exercised in imposing Bonds and
Oaths upon whole Shires; In permitting Free Quarters to Soldiers; In
imprisoning Gentlemen without any Reason, forcing them to accuse and witness
against themselves; In imposing Arbitrary Fines, frighting and haressing many
parts of the Country, with intercommuning, making some incur the forfeiture of
Life and Fortune for the most general and harmless converse even with their
nearest Relations Outlawed; Impowering Officers and Soldiers to act upon the
Subjects, living in quiet, and full Peace the greatest Barbarities, in
destroying them by Hanging, Shooting, and drowning them without any Form of
Law, or respect to Age or Sex, not giving some of them time to pray to God for
Mercy; and this for no other Reason, but because they would not answer or
satisfy them in such Questions, as they proposed to them, without any warrant
of Law, and against the common Interest of mankind, which frees all men from
being obliged to discover their secret Thoughts, besides a great many other
Violences and Oppressions, to which that poor Nation has been exposed, without
any hope of having any end put to them, or to have relief from them. And that
the Arbitrary and illegal Proceedings of there Evil Counselors might be
justified, such a Declaration has been procured by them, as strikes at the
root of the Government, and overturns the most Sacred Rights of it; in making
all Parliaments unncressary, and taking away all Defenses of Religion, Liberty,
and Property. (...) assumed and asserted Absolute Power, to which Obedience is
required without reserve, Which every good Christian is persuaded is due to God
Almighty alone, all whose Commandments are always Just and Good, etc.

Upon his Highness Arrival, and Happy Progress in England, the Terror thereof
wrought so effectually upon those Popish and Arbitrary Ministers of State in
Scotland, who were sensible of their own guilt, that they thought of nothing,
but to make their escape from Justice, which some had the luck to do, others
were seized, and the Multitude rising in diverse places, demolished the Mass
Houses, and burnt the Popish Trinkets, yea proceeded to several Violences and
Disorders, which occasioned the Death and Wounding of many Persons, even in
Edenburg it self; of which the Scots Noblemen and Gentlemen in London, having
notice, they resolved to attend his Highness the Prince of Orange, and lay
before him the willingness of the People of Scotland to submit to his
Protection, and his Highness having notice of their Intentions caused such of
them, as were in Town to be advertised to meet him at St. Jameses, Jan. 7. to
whom he made the following Speech.

MY Lords and Gentlemen, the only Reason that Induced me to undergo so great an
undertaking was, that I saw the Laws, and Liberties of these Kingdoms
overturned, and the Protestant Religion in imminent Danger, and seeing you are
so many Noblemen and Gentlemen, I have called you together, that I may have
your Advice what is to be done, for the securing of the Protestant Religion,
and restoring your Laws, and Liberties, according to my Declaration.

After which, the Lords and Gentlemen went to the Council Chamger at Whitehall,
and choosing Duke Hamilton their President, they drew up an Address, which they
presented to the Prince to this Effect, That they rendered his Highness their
humble Thanks, for his pious and generous Undertaking, etc. Desiring him to
take upon him the Administration of Affairs, Civil and Military in Scotland,
till the general Meeting of the Estates, which they humbly prayed his Highness
to call to be held at Edenburg. March 14. following. This Address was
subscribed by thirty Lords, and eighty Gentlemen; his Highness assured them,
that He would do all that they required, and the news thereof coming to
Edinburgh was received with the utmost Demonstrations of Joy and Satisfaction.

The Elections for the Convention at Westminster, had in some places been
generally made without those strivings and hears that are usual upon such
Occasions, and seemed to be a good Prognostic, that their Debates would be
calm, and tend to a speedy Settlement, and accordingly the (...) of January
being come, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons Assembled at
Westminster, the Lord Marquess of Hallifax Officiated as Speaker in the House
of Lords, and the Commons chose Henry Poule Esquire, to be their Speaker, after
which a Letter from his Highness the Prince of Orange was read in both Houses
on the Occasion of their Meeting, wherein his Highness declared, That he had
endeavored to the utmost of his Power to perform what was dented of him in
Order to the Public Peace, and Safety, and that he did not know any thing,
which had been omitted, that might tend to the Preservation of them, since the
Administration of Affairs was put into his hands, and that it now lay upon them
to lay the Foundation of a firm Security for their Religion, Laws, and
Liberties; That he did not doubt, but that by such a full and free
Representative of the Nation as was then met, the ends of his Declaration would
be attained, and since it had pleased God hitherto to bless his good Intentions
with so great Success He trusted in Him that he would Comple^^ his own work by
sending a Spirit of Peace and Union to influence their Councils, that no
interruption might be given to a Happy and lasting Settlement; He then
represented to them the dangerous Condition of the Protestants in Ireland, and
the present State of things abroad, which required their early Assistance
against a Powerful Enemy, who had declared War against them, and which he did
not doubt but without any unseasonable Divisions among themselves, they would
take that Effectual care about.

This Letter being read and approved of the Lords and Commons presented an
Address to his Highness; That being highly sensible of the great Deliverance of
this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power and that their Preservation next
under God was oweing to his Highness, they returned Him their humble Thanks as
the glorious Instrument of so great a blessing, and did further acknowledge the
great care he had taken in the administering the public Affairs to that time,
humbly desiring that his Highness would continue the Administration thereof,
till further Application should be made by them, which should be expedited with
all convenient speed. This Address being presented, Jan. 23. 1688. His Highness
returned them this Answer.

MY Lords and Gentlemen, I am glad that what I have done has pleased you, and
since you desire me to continue the Administration of Affairs, I am willing to
accept it, I must recommend to you the Consideration of Affairs abroad, which
makes it fit for you to expedite your business, not only for making a
Settlement at home upon a good Foundation, but for the Safety of all Europe.
After this the Lords and Commons Ordered a day of public Thanksgiving, to be
kept throughout the Kingdom, to render Praise to Almighty God, for having made
his Highness the Prince of Orange, the glorious Instrument of the great
Deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power.

As to the Condition of Ireland, the Earl of Tyrconnel a violent Papist, being
made Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom by King James, as a fit Instrument to
carry on his Designs, gave the Irish great Hopes of Subduing the English, by
his first Cashiering the Protestant Officers and Soldiers that were in Arms,
and then by turning out the Officers and Ministers of Justice; and though
Complaints were made against his proceedings in the Court of England; yet they
were not regarded, but he rather encouraged in his Enterprises, which
occasioned such Dread of future Mischiefs, that diverse left the Kingdom, some
going for Holland, others for Scotland and England; things continued in this
Dangerous posture, till the News of the intended Enterprise of the Prince of
Orange Arrived there, upon which Tyrconnel was very active to secure the Roman
Catholic Interest in Ireland, Imprisoning and Disarming the Protestants, and
sending over 3000 of the Choicest Irish Soldiers to Assist King James. But
upon notice of his Flight into France, he called his Popish Council together,
and told them, That now was the time for their standing up for their Country,
to secure it against all their Enemies; and as for his part, if his Master
himself, should command him to deliver up the Sword, he should think it his
Duty to refuse it in this Juncture; and thereupon spreading the News all over
the Country, he caused the Irish every where to Arm themselves with such
Weapons as they could get; This Tumultuous Rabble Herding together, plundered
the Protestants Houses, drove away their Cattle, fired their Stack; of Corn and
Hay, Murdered some, and Barbarously used others; insomuch, that the
Protestants being extremely affrighted, many of them fled for their Lives,
leaving their Estates behind them, and though several of the Protestant
Nobility and Gentry made Head in the North: Yet they found themselves unable to
Resist the Fury of their Numerous Adversaries; However they Defeated several
Parties of Irish, and Fortified Londonderry, Slego, the Isle of Inniskilling,
and other places which they thought Tenable; For now Tyrconnel gave Order for
stopping the Ports, to prevent any more from going away, and made many large
and plausible Proposals, to induce them to join with him, though they had very
little effect upon them.

The Convention at Westminster, were still upon serious Debates about the
present Condition of the Kingdom, and in the mean time it was thought
necessary, to have the Presence of Her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange in
England; Whereupon a Squadron of English and Dutch Men of War, were Ordered to
wait upon her, till her Equipage could be got ready, and the Wind served to
bring over her Highness; And after the Lords and Commons had duly weighed the
Circumstances of the Kings Departure, they at length came to the following
Resolution.

Resolved that King James II. Having endeavored to Subvert the Constitution of
this Kingdom, by breaking the Original Contract between King and People; and by
the Advice of Jesuits, and other wicked Persons, having Violated the
Fundamental Laws, and having withdrawn himself out of this Kingdom, has
Abdicated the Government, and the Throne is thereby Vacant. In pursuance of
which Resolution, the following Declaration was drawn up in Order to such an
Establishment, as that the Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, might
not again be in Danger, and for Vindicating the Ancient Rights and Liberties of
the People in these words.

Whereas the Late King James the Second, by the Assistance of diverse Evil
Counselors, Judges and Ministers Employed by him, did endeavor to Subvert and
Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom;
By Assuming and Exercising a Power of Dispensing with, and Suspending of Laws,
and the Execution of Laws, without Consent of Parliament. By Committing and
Prosecuting diverse Worthy Prelates, for humbly Petitioning to be Excused from
Concurring to the said Assumed Power. By Issuing and causing to be Executed a
Commission under the Great Seal, for Erecting a Court called, The Court of
Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes. By Levying Money for and to the Use of
the Crown by Pretense of Prerogative, for other Time, and in other Manner than
the same was Granted by Parliament. By raising and keeping a Standing Army
within this Kingdom in time of Peace, without Consent of Parliament, and
Quartering Soldiers contrary to Law. By Causing several good Subjects, being
Protestants, to be Disarmed at the same time, when Papists were both Armed and
Employed, contrary to Law. By Violating the Freedom of Election of Members to
serve in Parliament. By Prosecutions in the Court of Kings Bench, for Matters
and Causes cognizable only in Parliament; and by diverse other Arbitrary Illegal
Courses.

And whereas of late years, Partial, Corrupt and Urqualified Persous, have been
Returned and Served on Juaries in Trials, and particularly diverse Jurors in
Trials for High Treason, which were not Freeholders. And Excessive Bail has
been required of Persons Committed in Criminal Cases, to elude the Benefi^ of
the Laws made for the Liberty of the Subjects, and Excessive Fines have been
imposed. And illegal and cruel Punishments inflicted. And several Grants and
Promises made of Fines and Forfeitures, before any Conviction or Judgment
against the Persons, upon whom the same were to be Levied. All which are
utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Statutes, and Freedom of
this Realm. And whereas the said late King James the Second having Abdicated
the Government, and the Throne being thereby Vacant,

His Highness the Prince of Orange (whom it has pleased Almighty God to make
the Glorious Instrument of Delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power) did (by the Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and diverse
Principal Persons of the Commons) cause Letters to be written to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, being Protestants; and other Letters to the several
Counties, Cities, Universities, Boroughs, and Cinque Ports, for the Choosing of
such Persons to represent them, as were of right to be sent to Parliament, to
meet and sit at Westminster, upon the Two and twentieth day of January, in this
Year One thousand six hundred eighty and eight, in Order to such an
Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties might not again be in
danger of being Subverted: Upon which Letters Elections having been accordingly
made,

And thereupon the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, pursuant to
their respective Letters and Elections, being now assembled in a full and free
Representative of this Nation, taking into their most serious Consideration,
the best means for attaining the Ends aforesaid; Do in the first place (as
their Ancestors in like Case have usually done) for the Vindicating and
Asserting their Ancient Rights and Liberties, Declare that the pretended Power
of Suspending of Laws, or the Execution of Laws by Regal Authority, without
Consent of Parliament, is Illegal. legal. That the pretended Power of
Dispensing with Laws, or the Execution of Laws by Regal Authority, as it has
been assumed and exercised of late, is Illegal. That the Commission for
Erecting the late Court of Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes, and all
other Commissions and Courts of like nature, are Illegal and Pernicious. That
Levying Money for or to the Use of the Crown, by protence of Prerogative,
without Grant of Parliament, for longer time, or in other manner, than the same
is, or shall be granted is Illegal. That it is the Right of the Subjects to
Petition the King, and all Commitments and Prosecutions for such Petitioning,
are Illegal. That the raising or keeping a standing Army within the Kingdom in
time of Peace, unless it be with Consent of Parliament, is against Law. That
the Subjects which are Protestants, may have Arms for their Defense suitable to
their Conditions, and as allowed by Law; That Election of Members of Parliament
ought to be free. That the Freedom of Speech, and Debates or Proceedings in
Parliament, ought not to be impeached or questioned in any Court or Place out
of Parliament That Excessive Bail ought not to be required, nor Excessive Fines
imposed, nor cruel and unusual Punishments inflicted. That Jurors ought to be
duly Impannelled and Returned, and Jurors which pass upon Men in Trials for
High Treason ought to be Freeholders. That all Grants and Promises of Fines and
Forfeitures of particular Persons before Conviction, are Illegal and Void. And
that for Redress of all Grievances, and for the Amending, Strengthening and
Preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be held frequently.

And they do Claim, Demand, and Insist upon all and singular the Premises, as
their undoubted Rights and Liberties; And that no Declarations, Judgments,
Doings or Proceedings, to the Prejudice of the People in any of the said
Premises, ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter into Consequence or Example.
To which Demand of their Right, they are particularly Encouraged by the
Declaration of his Highness the Prince of Orange, as being the only means for
obtaining a full Redress and Remedy therein.

Having therefore an entire Confidence, That his said Highness the Prince of
Orange, will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and will still
preserve them from the Violation of their Rights, which they have here
Asserted, and from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Rights and
Liberties; the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at
Westminster, do Resolve, That William and Mary Prince and Princess of Orange
be, and be Declared King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said
Kingdoms and Dominions' to them the said Prince and Princess, during their
Lives, and the Life of the Survivor of them; And that the sole and full
Exercise of the Regal Power be only in, and executed by the said Prince of
Orange, in the Names of the said Prince and Princess during their joint Lives;
And after their Deceases, the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms
and Dominions to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said Princess; And for
default of such Issue, to the Princess Ann of Denmark, and the Heirs of Her
Body; and for default of such Issue to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince
of Orange. And the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, do pray the said
Prince and Princess to accept the same accordingly. And that the Oaths
hereafter mentioned, be taken by all Persons of whom the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, might be required by Law, instead of them* And that the said
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy be Abrogated.

I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to Their Majesty's, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY; So help me God.

I A. B. Do Swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest and Abjure, as impious
and Heretical this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes Excommunicated
or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may be Deposed or
Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do Declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate,
has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence or
Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm; So help me God.

This Declaration being Presented to their Highnesses the Prince and Princess
of Orange, in the Banqueting House at White Hall on Wednesday Feb. 13. 1688.
and their Consent thereunto Received, they were both the same Day Proclaimed
King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, etc. at White Hall Gate,
Temple Bar, and the Royal Exchange, many of the Lords and Commons attending,
and the People proclaiming their Joys, by Repeated Shouts and Acclamations; The
Tenor of the Proclamation was as follows.

Whereas it has pleased Almighty God in his great Mercy to this Kingdom, to
vouchsafe us a Miraculous Deliverance from Popery and Arbitrary Power, and that
our Preservation is due next under God, to the Resolution and Conduct of his
Highness the Prince of Orange; whom God has chosen to be the Glorious
Instrument of such an Inestimable Happiness to us and our Posterity; And being
highly Sensible, and fully persuaded of the Great and Eminent Virtues of Her
Highness the Princess of Orange, whose Zeal for the Protestant Religion, will
no doubt bring a Blessing along with her upon this Nation; and where as the
Lords and Commons now Assembled at Westminster, have made a Declaration, and
presented the same to the said Prince and Princess of Oran^e, and therein
desired them, to accept the Crown, who have accepted the same accordingly: We
therefore the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, together with the Lord
Mayor and Citizens of London, and others of the Commons of this Reaim, do with
full Consent, Publish and Proclaim according to the said Declaration, William
and Mary Prince and Princess of Orange, to be King and Queen of England, France
and Ireland, with all the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; who
are accordingly so to be owned, Deemed and taken by all the People of the before
said Realms and Dominions, who are from hence forward, bound to acknowledge and
pay unto them, all Faith and True Allegiance; Beseeching God by whom Kings
Reign, to Bless King William and Queen Mary, with long and Happy Years to Reign
over us; God Save King William and Queen Mary.

John Brown, Clericus Parliamentorum.

It is Reported, that his Majesty should thus generously express himself upon
this Occasion: That though the Regulations seemed somewhat harsh, they were
easy to him that desired only to be a great King; But in respect to one that
Aimed to be a Tyrant, they were not strict enough.

Having thus brought their Majesty to the Throne, let us make a few Remarks
upon this Wonderful and Unparalled Revolution, and so conclude the History of
the House of Orange;

Had a Prince of less Secrecy, Prudence, Courage and Interest, undertaken this
mighty Affair, it might probably have miscarryed; but as his Cause was better,
so his Reputation, Conduct and Patience, infinitely exceeded that of King
James; He would not stir till he saw the French Forces sit down before
Philipsburg, and that he was sure France and Germany were irrecoverably
engaged; and that he should have no other Opposition, than what the Irish and
English Roman Catholics could make against him; For no English Protestant
would fight his Country into Vassalage and Slavery, to Popish Priests and
Italian Women; when a Parliament sooner or later must have Determined every
thing in Controversy, except they were Resolved once for all, to have given up
their Religion, Laws, Liberties and Estates, to the Will of their Arbitrary
Kings, and submitted for ever to a French Government; and indeed, a Nation of
less Sense than the English, might have been imposed upon; Of less Bravery and
Valor, might have been frighted; Of a more Servile Temper, might have
neglected their Liberties, till it had been too late to recover them again; And
none but a parcel of Jesuits, unacquainted with their Temper and Constitution,
would ever have hoped to have carried two such things as Popery and Arbitrary
Power, both at once, upon a People so Jealous as the English are; and who hate
Idolatry and Tyranny, above any Nation in the World.

As for King James II. had he undertaken any thing but these two, his vast
Revenue, his Reputed Personal Valor, and the Fame he had gained both at Home
and Abroad, by the Defeat of Monmouths Invasion, would have gone near to have
effected it; And after all, if he had in the beginning of October, freely
granted all the Proposals made him by the Nobility, and suffered a Parliament
to have met, and given up his Evil Ministers to Justice, and permitted the
Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales to have been freely Debated and
Determined in Parliament, it would in all probability, have prevented this
Expedition of the Prince of Orange; But whilst he thought to preserve the
pretended Succession, the Dispensing and Suspending Power, and the
Ecclesiastical Commission, to promote his future Designs, when he had once
baffled the Prince of Orange, the Nation saw through the Project, and he lost
all.

As for the English in general, their Interest Centers in the maintaining the
Rights and Franchises of their Kingdom; which renders them this Day the freest
Nation in Europe; A Character so far from supposing them to be like other
Nations, a People Headstrong and unconstant, that it shows them to be the most
Considerate and Understanding People in the World; in short, though the example
of a Neighboring Prince, had served for a Platform for other Crowned Heads, to
enlarge their Power beyond the Limits prescribed by the Constitutions of the
Kingdom: We see that at the very Moment, that the King began to act like his
Neighbor, they presently put a S^op to his Designs, without the least respect
to his Dignity; They saw how Sovereign Authority Reigned in France, as
Independent from the Laws, as in Turkey: They beheld the face of the Kingdom of
Sweden and Denmark, changed by Introducing Hereditary Succession, whereas they
were Elective before; They viewed the Face of the Kingdom of Hungary,
heretofore the Seat of Liberty, Disfigured by the same Innovation; and Poland
that boasts to have preserved the Ancient Laws entire, has notwithstanding
suffered Injurious Alterations; In short, which way soever we cast our Eyes, we
shall find Attempts of the same Nature prosper, only in England they have
failed; whence we may conclude that maugre all which has been said of the
English Nation, they are the Wisest, and most Prudent People that we know of
under the Sun.

THE HISTORY OF King William and Queen Mary.
King William and Queen Mary, being Proclaimed in all the Counties and chief
Cities of England, with the general Joy of the People, Addresles were daily
presented them from several Parts to testify their extreme Satisfaction and
Content in their being advanced to the Throne; and the Convention being by an
Act figned by the King turned into a Parliament, in the same manner as the
Convention was, upon the Restoration of Charles II. 1660. They proceeded to
enact several Laws for settling the Government upon its true and ancient Basis;
and several vacant Offices and Employments were supplied by their Majesty's,
and Dr. Gilbert Burnet was made Bishop of Salisbury in the room of Dr. Seth
Ward Deceased.

I have been very brief upon the Affairs in England, till the Happy Revolution
in 1688. because I have lately Published a Book of the same value with this,
Entitled.

The History of the two late Kings, Charles II. and James II. being an
Impartial Account of the most Remarkable Transactions, and observable Passages
during their Reigns; and the secret French and Popish Intrigues managed in
those Times. Neither shall I enlarge upon the Affairs of Ireland, intending
suddenly to publish the History of that Kingdom from the first Conquest thereof
by King Henry II. to its total Reduction by the Arms of their present Majesty's.

And now both Houses of Parliament present an humble Address to his Majesty
about the speedy relief of Ireland; in pursuance whereof the King sent over a
Proclamation of Pardon to all the Irish Papists, that would lay down their
Arms, and live Peaceably under the Government, with the full enjoyment of their
Estates, and the private Exercise of their Religion, which if they refused,
they were declared Rebels and Traitors to the Crown of England, and their
Estates to be forfeited and distributed among those that should and and assist
in reducing them to Obedience; but Tyrconnel endeavored to hinder the effect
thereof, by promising them speedy succors from France, and that King James
would come in Person with a numerous Army to their Assistance, and sent several
Detachments of his tattered Regiments to seize diverse considerable Protestants
in their Houses, who upon notice escaped into the North, and strengthened their
Party; the Priests stirred up these Raseally Vermin, that were armed with
Pitchforks, Bills, Staves, and other weapon^, to commit all manner of outrages,
to the damage of some Papists, as well as Protestants, and it was reported that
at a Consult in the Council, wherein some Popish Bishops assisted, it was moved
that the only way to clear the Country of Heretics was by a general Massacre,
but Tyrconnel opposed it. In March the late King James took Post from Paris to
Breast, and soon after landed in Ireland, with a numetous Train of Officers but
very few Soldiers.

The Estates of Scotland met the same Month at Edinburgh in pursuance of his
Majesty's Circulary Letters, and King William sent them the following Letter.

MY Lords and Gentlemen,
We are very sensible of the kindness, and concern which your Nation has
evidenced toward us, and our undertaking for the Preservation of your Religion
and Liberty, which were in such imminent danger. Neither can we in the least
doubt your Confidence in us, after having seen, how far so many of your
Nobility and Gentry have owned our Declaration, countenancing and concurring
with us in our endeavors, and desiring us that we would take upon us, the
Administration of Affairs Civil and Military, and to call a Meeting of the
Estates for securing the Protestant Religion, and the ancient Laws and
Liberties of that Kingdom, which accordingly we have done. Now it lies on you
to enter upon such Consultations as are most proper to settle you on sure and
lasting Foundations, which we hope you will set about with all convenient
speed, with regard to the public good, and to the general Interest and
Inclinations of the People; that after so much Trouble and great Suffering,
they may live happily and in Peace, and that you may lay aside all Animosities
and Factions, that may impede 10 good a Work, we are glad to find that so many
of the Nobility and Gentry when here in London were to much inclined to a Union
of both Kingdoms, and that they did look upon it, as the best means for
procuring the Happiness of both Nations, and settling of a lasting Peace among
them; which would be advantageous to both, they living in the same Island,
having the same Language, and the same common Interest of Religion and Liberty,
especially at this Juncture when the enemies of both are so ressess in
endeavoring to make and increase Jealousies and Divisions, which they will be
ready to improve to their own advantage and the ruin of Britain; we being to
the same oprnion as to the usefulness of this Union, and having nothing so much
before our eyes as the Glory of God, establishing the Reformed Religion, and
the Peace and Happiness of these Nations, are resolved to use our utmost
endeavors in advancing every thing, that may conduce to the effectuating the
same. So we bid you heartily Farewell.

From our Court at Hampton, March 7. 1689.

This Letter being read, Commissioners were named to draw an Answer full of
Acknowledgment and Respect; the late King James had likewise sent a Letter to
the Estates, but before they proceeded to read it, they passed an Act, that
notwithstanding any thing that might be contained in the Letter, for Dissolving
or impeding their Procedure, yet they were a Free and Lawful Meeting of the
States, and would continue undissolved till they had settled the Government;
which done, the Letter was read, but the Convention took so little notice of
the late Kings Exhortations, to declare for him, that the Messenger was first
secured, and then not being thought worthy detaining dismissed with a Pass
instead of an Answer.

After this, Commissioners were chosen for drawing up the Settlement of the
Government, out of which the Bishops were lest, as having disgusted the
Generality of the States, by their Prayers at the beginning of the Session,
That God would have Compassion, on King James, and restore him, and other
Passages, which discovered their disaffection to their Majesty's, and the
Government then about to be erected. The Duke of Gordon, who had the Command of
Edinburgh Castle, after he had, for sometime amused the Convention by his
delays, so soon as he heard the late King was arrived in Ireland set up his
Standard to signify his Resolution, to hold out that place, and fired all the
Cannon without Bullets to the g^^^^ Terror of those that lay under the Mercy of
his great shot.

A^^ 12. Both Houses of Parliament in England, presented an humble Address to
the King, wherein they declare that being highly sensible of their late great
Deliverance from Popery and Arbitrary Power, whereof it had pleased God to make
his Majesty the glorious Instrument, and desiring to the utmost of their
abilities to express their Gratitude, for so great and generous an Undertaking,
no less necessary for the support of the Protestant Interest in Europe, than
for recovering and maintaining the Civil Rights and Liberties of these Nations,
so notoriously invaded and undermined by Popish Councils and Counselors, and
being likewise fully convinced of the restless Spirits, and the continued
endeavors of their Majesty's and the Nations Enemies, for the Extirpation of
the Protestant Religion, and the Subversion of our Laws and Liberties
unanimously declared, that they would stand by and assist his Majesty with
their Lives and Fortunes in supporting His Alliances abroad, in reducing
Ireland and in desence of the Protestant Religion, and of the Kingdom.

In answer hereto, the King assured them of his great esteem and affection for
Parliaments, especially for this, which would be much increased by the kindness
they showed to him, and their zeal for the public good, and that he would
never abuse the Confidence they put in Him, nor give any Parliament cause to
distrust Him, because he would never expect any thing from them, but what it
was their Interest to grant; that He came hither for the good of the Kingdom,
and since, by their desire, he was in that Station, he would full pursue the
same ends that brought him; that God had been pleased to make him instrumental
to redeem them from the Ills they feared, and it was still his desire as well
as his duty to endeavor to preserve their Religion, Laws, and Liberties, which
were the only inducements that brought him into England, and to those he did
ascribe the Blessings that had attended this undertaking; he then remainded
them of Assisting his Allies, especially the Dutch, and to consider the
Deplorable Condition of Ireland; which by the Zeal and Violence of the Popish
Party, and the Assistance and Encouragement of the French, required a
considerable force to Reduce it, etc. and that a Fleet may be likewise
provided, which in Conjunction with the States, might make us entire Masters of
the Seas; and as they freely offered to Hazard all that is dear to them, so he
should as freely expose his Life for the Support of the Protestant Religion and
the Safety and Honor of the Nation.

In Scotland, the Viscount Dundee having made his escape from Edinburgh, went
to the North, where he stirred up the Highlanders to join with him, and declare
for King James; upon which the Convention ordered a number of Horse, Foot and
Dragoons to march against them, and in the mean time, the Lord Ross, who was
sent with a Letter to King William in England, returned, and brought an answer
thereto; After which, the Estates drew up an Instrument of Government, for
Settling the Crown upon King William and Queen Mary; Wherein they Recapitulate
their Grievances, and propose Remedies for the same; And then declare; That
King James the 7th. being a professed Papist, did Assume the Royal Power, and
acted as King, without ever taking the Oath required by Law, and has by Advice
of Evil and Wicked Councellers, Invaded the Fundamental Constitutions of the
Kingdom, and altered it from a Legal Limited Monarchy, to an Arbitrary
Despotick Power, and did exercise the same, to the Subversion of the Protestant
Religion, and the Violation of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, inverting
all the ends of Government, whereby he has Forefaulted the Right to the Crown,
and the Throne is become Vacant; And they do pray the King and Queen of
England, to accept the Crown and Royal Dignity of the Kingdom of Scotland, etc.

And an Oath of Allegiance was drawn up, to be taken by all Persons to them,
together with a Coronation Oath, and April 11. being the Day of the Coronation
of their Majesty's at Westminster, they were Proclaimed at Edinburgh, with
universal Joy and Acclamations; Commissioners were also Dispatched for London,
that is, the Earl of Argyle, Sir James Mountgomery of Skelmerly, and Sir John
Dalrymple of Stair younger, from the meeting of the Estates, with an offer of
the Crown of that Kingdom to their Majesty's, and May 11. 1689. They
accordingly at three of the Clock met at the Council Chamber, and from thence
were Conducted by Sir Charles Cottrel Master of the Ceremonies, attended by
most of the Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom, who resided in and about this
place, to the Banquetring-House, where the King and Queen came, attended by
many Persons of Quality, the Sword being carried before them by the Lord
Cardross, (and their Majesty's being placed on the Throne under a rich Canopy)
they first presented a Letter from the Estates to His Majesty, then the
Instrument of Government; thirdly, a Paper containing the Grievances which they
desired might be Redressed; And lastly, An Address to his Majesty, for turning
the Meeting of the said Estates into a Parliament: All which being Signed by
his Grace the Duke of Hamilton, as President of the Meeting, and Read to their
Majesty's, the King returned to the Commissioners the following Answer.

When I Engaged in this Undertaking, I had particular Regard and Consideration
for Scotland, and therefore I did emit a Declaration in relation to that as
well as to this Kingdom, which I intend to make good and effectual to them. I
take it very kindly, that Scotland has expressed so much Confidence in and
Affection to Me; They shall find me willing to assist them in every thing that
concerns the Well and Interest of that Kingdom, by making what Laws shall be
necessary for the Security of their Religion, Property and Liberty, and to ease
them, of what may be justly grievous to them.

After which the Coronation Oath was tendered to Their Majesty's, which the
Earl of Argile spoke word by word distinctly, and the King and Queen repeated
it after him, holding their Right Hands up, after the manner of taking Oaths in
Scotland.

The Meeting of the Estates of Scotland, did Authorize their Commissioners to
represent to his Majesty, That that Clause in the Oath in relation to the
rooting out of Heretics, did not import the destroying of Heretics; and that
by the Law of Scotland, no Man was to be Persecuted for his private Opinion;
and even Obstinate and Convicted Heretics, were only to be Denounced Rebels or
Outlawed, whereby their Moveable Estates are Confiscated. His Majesty at the
repeating that Clause in the Oath, did declare, That he did not mean by these
words, that he was under any Obligation to become a Persecutor. To which the
Commissioners made answer, That neither the meaning of the Oath, or the Law of
Scotland did import it. Then the King Replied, that he took the Oath in that
Sense, and called for Witnesses, the Commissioners and others present; and the^
both their Majesty's Signed the said Coronation Oath, After which the
Commissioners and several of the Scotch Nobility Kissed their Majesty's Hands.

The Parliament in England, proceeded to enact many Laws for the ease of the
People, and Security of the Kingdom; One for taking away the Revenue, arising
from the Hearth-Money, by his Majesty's own desire, who willingly resigned up
his Right therein, because it was found grievous to the People, though it
occasioned a great Diminution to the Revenue of the Crown; another Act was
passed, for exempting their Majesty's Protestant Subjects, Dissenting from the
Church of England, from the Penaltier of certain Laws; another for Abrogating
the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and appointing other Oaths; another for
Prohibiting all Trade and Commerce with France, with diverse more, and about the
same time, the House of Commons presented His Majesty the following Address.

We your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, most Humbly lay before your Majesty, our earnest Desires, that your
Majesty would be pleased to take into your most Serious Consideration, the
Destructive Methods taken of late years by the French King, against the Trade,
Quiet and Interest of your Kingdom, and particularly the present Invasion of
your Kingdom of Ireland, and Supporting your Majesty Rebellious Subjects; and
we not doubting in the least, but through your Majesty's Wisdom, the Alliances
already made, as well as those that may be hereafter concluded on this occasion
by your Majesty, may be effectual to Reduce the French King to such a
Condition, that it may not be in his Power hereafter, to violate the Peace of
Christendom, nor prejudice the Trade and Prosperity of this your Majesty's
Kingdom. To this end, we most humbly beseech your Majesty, to rest assured upon
this our Hearty and Solemn Promise and Engagement; That when your Majesty shall
think fit to enter into a War with the French King, we will give your Majesty
such Assistance in a Parliamentary way, as may enable your Majesty (under the
Protection and Blessing that Almighty God has ever afforded you) to support and
go through with the same.

To this Request and Resolution of the House of Commons, which was so graceful
to the Nation in general, his Majesty was pleased to return this Answer.

Gentlemen, I receive this Address, as a Mark of the Confidence you have in me,
which I take very kindly, and shall endeavor by all my Actions to Confirm you
in it, I assure you, that my own Ambition shall never be an Argument to incline
me to engage in a War that may expose the Nation either to Danger or Expense;
but in the present Case, I look upon the War so much already declared in effect
by France against England, that it is not so much an Act of Choice, as an
inevitable necessity in our own Defense; I shall only tell you, that as I have
ventured my Life, and all that is Dear to me, to rescue the Nation from what it
suffered, so I am ready still to do the same, in order to the preserving it
from all its Enemies; and as I doubt not of such an Assistance from you, as
shall be Suitable to your Advice to me, to Declare War against a powerful
Enemy, so you may Rely upon me, that no part of that which you shall give for
the carrying it on with Success, shall by me be Diverted to any other use.

Soon after a Declaration of War was published against France, and the Reasons
thereof, Namely, The unjust Methods of the French King, these late years to
gratify his Ambition, by Invading the Territories of the Empire now in Amity
with us, and in manifest Violation of the Treaties Confirmed by the Guaranty of
the Crown of England: His Majesty therefore can do no less than join with his
Allies, in Opposing that Kings Designs, as the Disturber of the Peace, and the
Common Enemy of the Christian World; Likewise the many Injuries done to his
Majesty and his Subjects, are a sufficient Justification for their taking Arms,
since they have called upon his Majesty so to do; and though no notice has been
taken, nor Reparation demanded of late years, for Reasons well known to the
World; yet his Majesty will not pass them over, without a public and just
Resentment of such Outrages. Also the Encroachments and Invasions of the French
on our Trade and Fishing of Newfound Land, and their Hostilities upon the
Charibbee Islands, New York, and Hudsons-Bay, Seizing the Forts, burning the
Houses, Robbing the English of their Goods, imprisoning some, inhumanly killing
others, and driving the rest to Sea in a small Vessel, without Food or
Necessaries, and this even at a time when that King was Negotiating a Treaty in
England. of Neutrality and good Correspondence in America; also his
Countenancing the Seizure of English Ships by French Privateers; His Disputing
the Right of the Flag in the Narrow Seas; which in all Ages, has been asserted
by his Majesty's Predecessors, and which he is resolved to maintain for the
Honor of the Crown, and of the English Nation, And that which most nearly
touches his Majesty, is, His Unchristian Persecution of many English
Protestants in France, contrary to the Law of Nations, and express Treaties,
forcing them to abjure their Religion, by strange and unusual Cruelties,
imprisoning some English Masters and Seamen, and Condemning other to the
Galleys, upon pretense of having on Board either the Persons or Goods of some
of his own Miserable Protestant Subjects; Lastly, as he has for some years
past, endeavored by Insinuation and Promises of Assistance to overthrow the
Government of England, so now by Open and Violent Methods, and the actual
Invasion of Ireland, and Supporting the Rebels there, he is promoting the utter
Extirpation of the Protestants there. His Majesty being therefore thus
Necessitated to take up Arms, and Relying on the help of Almighty God, in his
just undertaking has thought fit to declare War against the French King, and
will in Conjunction with his Allies, vigorously prosecute the same by Sea and
Land (since he has so unrighteously begun it) being assured of the hearty
Concurrence and Assistance of his Subjects, in Supporting of so good a Cause;
forbidding all Correspondence or Communication with that King or his Subjects;
and that all the French Nation in his Majesty's Dominions, who shall Demean
themselves Dutifully, and not Correspond with his Enemies, shall upon the Kings
Royal word, be safe in their Persons and Estates, and free from all Molestation
and Trouble of any Kind.

About the same time, the King of Spain proclaimed War against France, and the
Emperor of Germany sent a Letter to his Majesty, wherein after he has returned
thanks to the King for taking care that no Violence should be offered to the
Roman Catholics, he promises the same thing in respect to the Protestants; His
Majesty gave Advice to the Switzers, of his Advancement to the Throne; So that
now King William and Queen Mary, were acknowledged for lawful Sovereigns of
Great Britain by all the Protestant, and the greatest part of the Roman
Catholic Princes and States, for (besides the Emperor and the King of Spain)
the Duke of Bavaria, the three Ecclesiastical Electors, the Duke of Newburg,
the Elector Palatine, and the Bishops of Liege and Munster, all Roman
Catholics, declared themselves Enemies to France, and by this we may observe,
that the French Politicians were greatly deceived in their Measures, for upon
notice of the Prince of Oranges Expedition into England, it is reported, some
of them thus Discourst King Lewis, Sir, said they, There is a Civil War
kindling in England, which will last this two or three years, and Disable that
Island, and the United Provinces from Acting; In this time, your Majesty will
have Conquered all, or the greatest part of Germany; If King James has the
worst, we will persuade all the Catholic Princes to Unite, and Restore him;
All this while, your Majesty will be Head of the League, will preserve your
Conquests, and King James cannot refuse you Ireland, or any other portion of
his Kingdom, for the Expenses of the War. This done, your Majesty shall fall
upon Holland, which will be weak, and unprovided of Men and Money, and shall be
able in a little time, to oppress the Remainder of the Protestan^s. and so
become Emperor of all Europe. But (unfortunately for them) King James II. too
soon forsook his Country, and then they cried, Religion is ruined, unless all
endeavors are used for his Restoration; Upon which some would fain know what
Religion the French King is of, who persecutes and invades Papists* as well as
Protestants; and think that he must be either a Pagan or Mahumetan, or else of
a Christianity all of his own Contriving, to carry on his Perjuries and
Usurpations upon his Neighbors.

May 1. A Squadron of English Men of War under Admiral Herbert, Sailing toward
the Coast of Ireland, to prevent the French from Landing Forces and Provisions
there, understanding they were got to Sea under favor of the Night, they got
sight of them lying in the Bay of Bantree in the West of Ireland, and resolved
to Attack them with Nine Ships in the Harbor, they being about 44 Sail in all,
whereupon the next Morning the Fight began, we continued Fattering upon a
Stretch, till five in the Afternoon when the French Admiral Tackt from us, and
stood farther into the Bay; In this Action, Captain A^lme^, and 94 Seamen were
killed, and about 250 wounded; but the Enemy were Reported to have 200 Slain,
and many more Wounded, and having Landed some few Men, for fear of a second
Engagement, Retreated; after which our Squadron returned to Portsmouth, whither
His Majesty came soon after, and declared his Royal Intention of Conferring the
Title of Earl upon the Admiral, and accordingly he was afterward Created Earl
of Torrington, Baron of Torbay, etc. and the Captain Shovell and Ashby were
Knighted, and Ten Shillings a Man was given to those Seamen that had been
engaged against the French.

King James found himself at this time greatly mistaken in Scotland, which he
called his Ancient Kingdom, where he thought himself absolute Master, by making
so many Creatures and Friends, whereas that Kingdom in general, now owned King
William, and the Rebels whose number is inconsiderable, and Discovered and
Secured; The Lord Dundee only escaped who roam'd about the North parts, with
some few followers, and General Mackay at his Heels; Letters about this time
were intercepted from the late King and his Secretary Melfort, to the Lord
Belcarris and others, wherein were some Expressions that highly incensed the
Scots against them; You will ask me without question, says Melfort to
Claverhouse, How we intend to pay our Army; but never fear that, so long as
there are Rebels Estates, we will begin with the Great Ones, and end with the
Little Ones; In another Letter to Belcarris, says he, The Estates of the Rebels
will Recompense us; Experience has taught our Illustrious Master, that there
are a good Number of People that must be made Gibeonites, because they are good
for nothing else; you know, there are several Lords that we marked out, when we
were both together, that deserve no better; These will serve for Examples to
others; after the Reading of these Letters, the President of the Convention
Addressing himself to the Members of the Assembly; You hear Gentlemen, said he,
Our Sentence Pronounced, and that it behooves us either to Defend our Selves or
Dye; Upon which the Lords Belcarris and Lochore, and Lieutenant Colonel
Balfour, were Committed to Prison, and being thus forewarned, they Resolved to
keep the Army afoot, which they thought of Disbanding; As to the Hopes of the
Enemies of that Kingdom, that the Abolishing of Episcopacy may occasion another
Revolution, there is no reason to believe it, since the late Carriage of the
Scotch Bishops, has utterly Alienated the Affections of the greater part of the
People from them, so that if they were Protestants at the bottom of their
Souls, yet they appeared to be Men of no Policy nor Conduct; For they sent an
Address to King James; wherein they Highly Congratulated the Birth of the
pretended Prince of Wales, they read that Kings Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, in favor of the Papists, and for the Abolition of Penal Laws; and
how could they imagine, that when they knew it was a long timebefore they could
gain that single Point of the Superiority of Bishops, above private Ministers,
that the Scots would ever endure Popery and Arbitrary Power to Domineer over
them; Experience shows us, that they only wanted a Leader before this time: So
that when the Prince of Oranges Design was once Discoursed of, it caused an
Universal Joy over Edinburgh, and the whole Kingdom, only the Prelates writ to
King James, That they looked upon this Enterprise as a Detestable Invasion; and
after the same manner they behaved themselves, to the end, some Absenting from
the Convention, others attending only to Thwart their Proceedings, and show
their Disaffection by their public (...) So that some wise Men have affirmed,
Had the ^^^hops of Scotland showed the same Constancy (...) those of England,
their Zeal and Virtue had gained the Hearts of the Scots, and given them
opportunity to continue Episcopacy; but their ill Conduct during the two last
Reigns in their Obstinate Supporting the Roman Catholic Party, that had
already Invaded all the Liberties of the People, annulled their Privileges,
and changed a Government, limited by Law into Arbitrary Power, rendered them the
Abomination of the People, who were convinced that their Dignities were the
only things they regarded, which made them deviate from the Rules of the
Gospel, looking no farther then their present enjoyments, little minding the
betraying the Interests of Religion and the Kingdom, out of a Treacherous
Compliance with the Will and Pleasure of a Popish Court, to whom they made
themselves Slaves.

June 15. The Estates of Scotland met after their late Adjournment, and the
Duke of Hamilton acquainted them, that his Majesty had been pleased to send him
a Commission to represent his Royal Person, and that he had Orders to give his
Consent to an Act for the turning the Meeting of the Estates into a Parliament,
which was done accordingly, and soon after they made an Act for Recognizing and
Asserting their Majesty's Royal Authority and Right to the Crown, and another
for all Persons to take an Oath of Faith and Allegiance to them; and about the
same time the English Forces under General Mackay, and others being entered that
Kingdom, the Duke of Gordon, who till this time had Possession of the Castle
finding no hopes of Relief, surrendered it upon Articles to Sir John Lanier, and
so that important place, which so long had been a Terror to the City of
Edinburgh was put into safe hands, the Duke casting himself upon the Kings
Mercy without making any Article for himself, and it was reported he said, That
he had so much respect for all the Princes of King James VI. line, as not to
make Conditions with them for his own particular Interest; after this a Reward
of 18000 Marks was by Proclamation promised to those that should apprehend
Dundee dead or alive, and indeed he survived not long after, for July 26. Major
General Mackay Marching from St. Johnstown with 4000 Foot, and 4 Troops of
Horse and Dragoons, and coming within two Miles of the Blair of Athol, had
notice that Dundee advanced toward him, with 6000 Foot, and 100 Horse, the
Fight began between four and five of the Clock in the Afternoon, and lasted
till Night, with great Courage and Resolution on both sides, but at length
Mackay's Forces being overpowered with number, he retired toward Sterling,
with a Body of 1500 men in good Order, many were killed on both sides, but the
Enemies loss was greater by the Death of Viscount Dundee, who charging
furiously in the Head of the Highlanders to inconrage them, was slain with a
shot, though he had Armor; after which, a Division happened between the Lord
Dumfermling and Colonel Cannon, who shall succeed in the Command of the Rebel,
at which time Major General Mackay hearing that 500 of their Foot, and two
Troops of Horse were sent to St. Johnstown to surprise the Stores of Provisions
there, resolved to be revenged for his late loss, and Marching out of Sterling
with a Party of Horse and Dragoons, met the Rebels, and gave them a total Rout,
killing and taking Prisoners, the greatest part of them and Captain Hacket
their Commander. Soon after another Defeat was given to Colonel Cannons men,
consisting in about 4000, with the Addition of the Country, by the Earl of
Angus his Regiment under Lieuterant Colonel Cieland who after three hours sherp
dispute forced the Rebels to fly back with the loss of abo^e 300, and not above
thirty of the Kings men, among whom was the Li^utenat Colonel; this Defeat put
an effectual stop to the Incursions of the Highlanders, who lost all their
Courage with the Death of their Commander, being never able to make any
considerable Head afterward, and though the Earl of Damfermling pretended to
manage them yet several of the C^ief Nobility and Gentry came in and craved the
Benefit of the Proclamation of Indemnity, which the King had Published some
time before, to all those who before September third, should lay down their
Arms, and swear Fidelity to King William and Queen Mary; and Colonel Cannon,
who only maintained the Interest of the late King, retreated with his few
Followers to the Isle of Mall, doubtful whether to continue longer there, or
return to Ireland; Lieutenant General Mackay having put a Garrison into the
Castle of Blair, returned to Edinburgh, where several Earls that were in Prison
had their Liberty, giving sufficient Security for their Peaceable Behavior; so
that several Troops of the Kings Forces in that Kingdom were embarkt for
heland; and about the same time the Parliament there pussed several Acts which
were touched with the Royal Scepter, by the Lord High-Commissioner, and among
others, An Act for abolishing Prelacy, purporting, That whereas the Estates of
the Kingdom by their Claim of Right, April 11. last had declared, That Prelacy
and Supremacy in any Office in the Church above Presbytery, had been a grievous
burden to the Nation ever since the Reformation, That therefore the King and
Queens Majesty did abolish Episcopacy, etc. and would establish that Church
Government, which was most agreeable to the People.

And now the Parliament of England, having given the King plentiful supplies
for the Reduction of Ireland, the Army Marched from all Parts toward Chester,
and Highlake to imbark under the Duke of Schomberg, consisting in near 30000
men, with great store of all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions, and
considerable sums of Money, and His Majesty appointed a Camp on Hounslow Heath
for the Remainder of the Forces; Aug. 14. which continued only two or three
days, and in the mean time a Declatation of War, was Published against France
in Scotland; and now several English Protestants in the North of Ireland,
having got Possession of the Isle of Innis-killing, and the City of
Londonderry, they resolved to defend them against King James, and his Army of
Irish Papists, who were Marching from Dublin against them, and hearing that
Lieutenant General Macarry was abroad with a strong Detachment, Plundering and
Ravaging the Country, Lieutenant Colonel Berry fell upon them with such
Vigor, that it is judged 3000 of the Irish were slain and drowned in the Lough
near Newton-Butler, into which they desperately threw themselves, to escape the
Sword. King James arriving at Londonderry, imagined the Terror of his Arms
would oblige the English to surrender the Town upon his first Appearance, and
though Colonel Lundy and others despaired of holding it against an Army of 40000
men, with a Train of Artillery and diverse Mortars, yet the enraged People
resolve to Defend it against the utmost Efforts of the Enemy, and having
declared Mr. George Walker a Minister, and Major Baker their Governors, they
chose Colonels and other Officers, and Regimented their men consisting in the
whole of 7020 Soldiers, and 341 Officers, and rejecting all the Terms of
Surrender offered them, they fired upon the Enemy and much astonished King
James, who was within reach of their Can^on, and expected they would have
opened their Gates to him, who thereupon resolved to reduce them by force, and
within a day or two broke ground, and run their Trenches within a Furlong of
the Walls, where placing a Demiculverin, they battered the Town, but with
little Success, unless some small damage to the Market House, the Cannon from
the Town in the mean time killing many Irish, and to prevent their further
approach, the English made a Salley, killing 200 of the Enemy, with Mamow the
French General and other Officers of Note; Several other gallant Sallies were
made out of the Town, in one of which above 200 were killed and 500 wounded
with the loss of three English, and 20 wounded, June 4. the Besieged made an
Attack upon the work near the Windmill, and though the Irish came upon them
with loud Huzzaes, and though the Foot had Faggots, and after those failed,
took up dead Bodies to defend themselves, and the Horse were mostly in Armor,
yet they were beaten off, and 4000 of them killed, and but a few English; in
some of these Attacks Lieutenant Douglas and Captain Cuningham were taken
Prisoners, and after Quarter given, barbarously killed; in the Night the Enemy
played their Bombs of 273 pound weight, which ploughed up the Streets, and
killed several sick People, and in the day time their Cannon played incessantly
against the Walls, insomuch that the Garrison by Sickness more than shot of the
Enemy was reduced to 6185 men, and began to be distressed; but June 15. a Fleet
of 30 Sail under Major General Kirk with Men, Provisions and Ammunition for
their relief came into the Lough, and though some Ships attempted to Sail up
the River, yet the Fire of the Enemy from the Batteries on Sho^^, and also a
Boom made of Timber, Chain and Cable, cross the narrowest part of the River
prevented their Design, however they contrived to give Major General Kirk an
account of their Extremity, and he sent an Answer, assuring them, that they
should suddenly be supplied with all necessaries which he had aboard in
abundance; the Enemy being sensible of their exigencies, pressed on the siege
with more vigor, under their new Fench Marshal, General Rosen, who by threats
and promises used his utmost efforts to reduce the Town; June 30. Major Baker
died to the great regret of the besieged, and soon after the Garrison was
reduced to 4892 Men, yet then they made a vigorous Sally to fetch in some
Cattle, but did not succeed, losing a great number of their men; this made the
Famine Increase in the City, so that Horseflesh was sold for 20 d. per Pound,
the quarter of a Dog for 5 s. and 6 d., a Dogs Head 2 s. 6 d. a Cat, 4 s. and 6
d. and other things proportionably, as Rats, Mice, Tallow, Greves, etc. But now
when all hope failed them, July 13. the Montjoy and Phaenix, conveyed by the
Dartmouth Frigate, and other men or War, came up to the Town with little loss,
when they reckoned but upon two days Life, having only nine lean Horses left,
and one Pint of Meal to each man, 4200 only being left, whereof a fourth part
were rendered unserviceable; the Enemy perceiving that these Ships had furnished
the Besieged with Provisions; July 31 they raised the Siege in some Disorder,
blowing up several Castles with all the Houses down the River, and setting the
Country for ten Miles in a Flame in their Retreat.

Aug. 13. 1689. the Duke of Schomberg Landed at Carrickfergus with all the
Forces under his Command, and the Protestants joining with him in great
numbers, he soon reduced that Town, and sent two Regiments to Belfast, and the
General having made Proclamation; That if the Enemy continued to burn as they
had begun, if any of them fell into his Hands they must expect no Quarter; They
thereupon quitted Dundalk without any damage; after this, about 5000 Irish
attempted to take Sligo which was in the Hands of the English, but the
Inniskilling Men with about 1000 Horse, Foot, and Dragoons charged them with
such Celerity and Courage, that 700 of them were cut off, and 400 taken
Prisoners, and besides Arms and Ammunition 18000 Head of Cattle were taken from
them, which they had plundered the Country People of; in November the English
Army decamped from the Plains of Dundalk to Lisne-garvee and Lisburn, the Enemy
though Superior in number, having of late attempted little; only one Morning
early, they had hopes of surprise our advanced Parties at Newry, Killing the
Out Sentinels, and getting into the Town, but were soon beaten out again by a
Party of Colonel Ingoldsby's Regiment; and several other Parties beat the Enemy
in diverse Places, and gained great Booties of Cattle; Colonel Woolsey Defeated
the Irish at Cavan, though the Duke of Berwick was sent to enforce them, so
that though the Garrison consisted of 4000 men; yet 300 of the Enemy were
killed, and among them many Officers, 200 taken Prisoners, and Cavan taken and
burnt which the English were constrained to do to get the Soldiers out of the
Town to resist the Irish, who made a strong Salley out of the Fort.

In England her Royal Highness, the Princess of Denmark was delivered of a
Prince in August, who was Christened by the Lord Bishop of London and Named
William, His Majesty being Godfather, and Her Majesty and the Queen of Denmark
Godmothers; Oct. 19. the Parliament met at Westminster, and granted His Majesty
two Millions Sterling toward the expense of the next years War; in Scotland
Colonel Cannon continued still in the Isle of Mull, with an inconsiderable
Party of Islanders and others; some few Rebels appeared about this time under
the Land of Lochelly, burning and plundring wherever they came, about 800
Marched out of Innerlochy thinking to have surprised the Fort of Inverness; but
were defeated of their Design. The Earl of Pembrook upon his return from being
Ambassador in Holland to England, was made a Privy Councillor; some Persons
were seized about this time for endeavoring to raise distutbances against the
Government.

Dec. 16. 1689. An Act was passed Declaring the Rights and Liberties of the
Subject, and settling the Succession of the Crown; That whereas the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal and Commons Assembled at Westminster, Lawfully, Fully
and Freely representing all the Estates of the People of this Realm, did on
Feb. 13. 1688. Present to their Majesty's, then called and known by the Names
and Style of William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, being present in
their proper Persons, a certain Declaration in writing, made by the said Lords
and Commons; (Of which you have already an account) Upon which their said
Majesty's did accept the Crown and Royal Dignity of these Kingdoms, according
to the Resolution and desire of the said Lords and Commons contained in the
said Declaration, and thereupon their Majesty's were pleased, that the Lords
and Commons being the two Houses of Parliament should continue to sit and with
their Royal Concurrence, to make effectual Provision for the settlement of the
Religion, Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, so that the same for the Future,
might not be in danger again of being subverted. Now in pursuance of the
Premises, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, for the Ratifying, Confirming and Establishing the said Declaration,
and the Articles. Clauses, Matters and Things therein contained, by the Force
of a Law made in due Form by Authority of Parliament, do pray, that it may be
Declared and Enacted, That all and Singular the Rights and Liberties Asserted
and Claimed in the said Declaration, are the true Ancient and Indubitable
Rights and Liberties of the People of this Kingdom, and so shall be esteemed,
allowed, adjudged, deemed, and taken to be, and that all and every the
particulars aforesaid shall be firmly and strictly holden and observed, as they
are expressed in the said Declaration, and all Officers and Ministers
whatsoever shall serve their Majesty's and their Successors according to the
same in all times to come; and do further declare, that King James II. having
Abdicated the Government, and their Majesty's having accepted the Crown and
Royal Dignity as aforesaid, did become, were, are, and of Right ought to be, by
the Laws of this Realm, our Sovereign Liege Lord and Lady, King and Queen of
England, France, and Ireland, etc. And for preventing all Questions and
Divisions, by Reason of any pretended Titles to the Crown, and to preserve a
certainty in the Succession, the Lords and Commons beseech their Majesty's,
that it may be Enacted, Established and Declared, that the Crown and Royal
Dignity, shall be and continue in their Majesty's during their Lives, and the
Life of the Survivor of them; and after their Deceases to the Heirs of Her
Majesty, and in default of Issue to the Princess Ann of Denmark and her Heirs,
and for default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body of His Majesty, and
that the Parhament in the Name of the People will submit themselves and their
Heirs and Posterities for ever, and stand by, Maintain and Defend this
Limitation and Succession of the Crown to the utmost of their Powers with their
Lives and Estates, against all that shall attempt any thing to the contrary;
and whereas it has been found by Experience, that it is inconsistent with the
Safety and Welfare of this Protestant Kingdom to be governed by a Popish
Prince, or by any King or Queen Marrying a Papist; they do further pray, that
it may be enacted, that all Persons that are or shall be reconciled to, or hold
Communion with the Sea of Rome, or shall profess the Popish Religion, or shall
Marry a Papist, shall be Excluded, and be for ever incapable to possess,
inherit or enjoy the Crown and Dignity of this Kingdom, or Ireland, etc. And
that in all such Cases, the People are absolved from their Allegiance, and the
Crown shall descend to the next Heir being a Protestant, as should have
inherited and enjoyed the same, as if the Person so reconciled, or marrying,
were naturally dead; and that every King and Queen that shall succeed hereafter
shall on the first day of the meeting of their first Parliament, sitting on the
Throne in the House of Peers, in the Presence of the Lords and Commons, or at
their Coronation, which shall first happen audibly repeat the Declaration in
the Statute of the 30 King Charles II. Entitled, an Act for the more effectual
preserving the Kings Person and Government, etc. But if such King and Queen
shall be under the Age of Twelve years, then to perform the same, the first
Parliament after that Age; all which are by their Majesty's; by and with the
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons declared, Enacted, and
Established to stand, remain, and be the Law of this Realm for ever.

About this time the Queen of Spain was Convoyed by a Squadron of English Men
of War from Holland to the Groin in Spain, Feb. 6. The Parliament was
Dissolved, and another summoned to appear at Westminster, March 20. following,
who accordingly met, and confirmed all the Acts of the Preceding Parliament,
passing many others, both for raising Money, for carrying on the present War;
and for the Benefit of the People; in Scotland some attempts were made by the
Rebels, for in May 1690, the Colonels Bucan and Cannon being with 2000 men
(which they expected to be 4000 in a few days) at their Rendevous at Stratspey,
Sir Thomas Levingstone upon notice thereof Marched toward them with his Forces,
and surprising them in the Night in their Camp, killed 400, and took 100
prisoners, most Gentlemen and Officers, Bucan and Cannon hardly escaping, upon
which the Castle of Lethindy in which the Enemy had a Garrison under Colonel
Bucan's Nephew, surrendered at Discretion, in which was found store of Arms,
and Ammunition, with 400 Bolls of Meal, and the Standard designed to have been
set up by the late King James; and yet in this whole Action it was very
remarkable, that the English lost not one man, and had only four or five
wounded.

In Ireland, Affairs proceeded very successfully, for May 11, the strong
Garrison of Charlemont surrendered upon Articles, the Governor Teage of Regan,
and the Irish, about 800 strong, havingal most consumed all their Provisions,
marched out, leaving a good quantity of Ammunition, 17 Brass Cannon, and two
Mortars; the King now resolved, if possible, to make a sudden Feduction of
Ireland, that it might no longer be a Diversion from his attacking the French
vigorously in Flanders; and in pursuit of this ^agnanimous design, his Majesty
concluded to go thither in Person, by his Presence and Conduct to facilitate
the same, and accordingly, June 4, 1690, with a splendid Equipage, parted from
Whitehall, and coming to Chester, Emb^^^ed on the Fleet attending him, and June
14, landed at Carickfergus, being received by Duke Schomberg, the army and all
the Protestants, with general Joy, and loud Acclamations; and from thence His
Majesty marched with his Forces in two bodies, and encamped at Dundalk,
intending to go for Dublin, or else oblige the Enemy to a battle; which the
late King James was aware of, and therefore with his Army, which consisted of
about thirty-six thousand Irish and French, besides 15000 in Garrisons. He
marched from Dublin toward Drogheda, but seemed to distrust his success, for
to provide for the worst, he sent an order to Waterford, to prepare Ships for
carrying him off* June 31, King William resolving to force the Enemy to Fight
or Retreat, marched by break of day from his Camp at Ardee toward Drogheda, and
found the Irish Army encamped along the River Boyne, above the Town, and
according to his usual Conduct, with undaunted Resolution; he passed the River,
notwithstanding the utmost Opposition of the Enemy, and fell upon them with
such fury, that in a few hours their whole Army were utterly routed and
dispersed, about 3000 being killed and diverse Prisoners of Note taken, most of
the Enemies Baggage, as Chariots, Tents, Arms, Cannon, Ammunition and
Provisions, and some Money falling into the Hands of our Soldiers; the late
King James, who had stood at a distance to see the fight, perceiving the defeat
of his Forces, fled with all speed toward Dublin with a very few Attendants,
and having staid there one Night, filling the place with Fear and Confusion,
upon an Alarm that King William was on his way thither; accompanied with the
Duke of Berwick, the Marquis of Powis and some others, he left the City and
hastened to Waterford, where a Ship lay ready for him, having neither slept nor
eat till he got out to Sea, and stood away for France. Upon this the
Protestants at Dublin, who were imprisoned, had their Liberty, and a few days
after the King arrived there to the unspeakable Joy of the People. The loss of
the English in obtaining this great Victory was not considerable, only Duke
Schoniberg and Doctor Walker were both slain; after this Waterford, Wexford,
and several other places were reduced, and upon a Proclamation of Pardon, many
of the Irish laid down their Arms, and returned to their former Places of abode.

This Glorious success was somewhat clouded nearer home, for the French King to
favor his design in Ireland, had now set forth the greatest Fleet that ever
sailed on the Ocean out of France, and stood toward our Coast, as if they
designed to fight our Navy under the Earl of Torrington, who June 24 Sailed
from St. Hellens toward them; they were seen the Night before off of Freshwater
gate in the Isle of Wight, but the Wind taking them short the Admiral came to
an Anchor off Dunnose, five Leagues off the French, so that a battle was soon
expected which the Enemy did not seem to decline, the English Seamen were also
full of Courage and desirous to engage; but the French being much stronger both
for number and bigness of Ships, consisting in 82 Men of War, besides Fire
Ships and Tenders, it was not thought fit to fight in the open Sea, so that the
Earl of Torrington avoided it, till he was came to Bevesire off Beachy, which
was favorable for his purpose, and there he received the Queens Orders not to
delay engaging, if the Wind and Weather would permit, which was the Reason,
that we went to seek the Enemy, who expected us in Order of Battle, and about
nine in the Morning, the Engagement began, the Dutch that had the Vanguard
fought bravely, and both sides fired desperately three hours, till the French
not liking their entertainment bore away with all speed, but about one a Clock,
there happened a Calm, which not only prevented the Hollander pursuit, but put
them into a little disorder; the French not being able to get away were
constrained to begin the Fight again, which lasted till five in the Evening
with extraordinary fury; as for the English, some few fought well; but the
Admirals unexpected standing away prevented them from seconding the Dutch, so
that the rest stood Lookers on while the main Body of the French fell into the
Rear of the Dutch, who having fought from Morning till Night, and defended
themselves so long against a prodigious number of the Enemy that assailed them
on every side, they were so much battered that hardly three were capable of
making any defense, which constrained them to make their way through the French
Fleet to the Coast of England; The Hollanders lost two Admirals and a Captain,
and some of their Ships that could not be got off were burnt, the English lost
two Sea and two Marine Captains; Admiral Evertson declared, that all the Dutch
Officers, and Seamen had done their Duties, and had ours engaged Heartily, no
doubt the French had gone home in a worse Condition than the Spaniards did in
1588. After the Fight the French Fleet sailed Westward, and sent their Boats
Ashore at Tingmouth a small Village of Fisher Men's Cotts, which they set on
Fire, with two or three small Vessels in the Harbor, and stealing a few Sheep,
after having lain some time on our Coast to little purpose, they returned to
Breast.

At the time the French lay off the Coasts of Kent, one Godfrey Cross an
Innkeeper in that County was seen to go aboard one of their Boats, which
carried him to the Fleet, whereupon at his return, he was seized and
Treasonable Letters being found about him, he was committed Prisoner, and soon
after tried for High Treason at the Kings Bench Bar Westminster, and being
Convict was Hanged and Quartered for the same; and care was taken by Her
Majesty, in whom the Regency resided, during the Kings absence, to put the
Militia of the Counties into such a posture as to defeat any evil designs of
the Enemies to the Government; and the Militia of London, consisting in about
ten thousand men made a gallant appearance before her Majesty at Hyde Park, and
declared their Cheerful Resolution to defend their Majesty's and the Government
against all its Opponents, and the whole Militia of England computed to be
about one hundred and fifty thousand Horse and Foot showed he same forwardness.
Upon Complaint against the Earl of Torrington for the Miscarriage of the Fleet,
he was committed by the Council to the Tower; after the French had quitted our
C^^sts, and were gone into Harbor, the Militia were discharged and all
diligence was u^s;ed to repair and equip the Fleet to Sea.

About this time, w^^h (...) News of the great Success of the English against
the French in the West Indies, having beaten them out of St. Christophers, and
many other considerable places, and taken great B^^tie^ of Cattle, Corn, and
other Stores and Provisions, and that we had reduced the Fort in the Island of
Statie, and two of our Privaters falling in with twelve French Merchant men
bound for St. Maloes under the Convoy of a Frigate of 12. Guns, took four of
them, forcing the rest ashore about Cherbourg, where they were all shipwrackt
except the Frigate, and most of the men drowned:

The Rebels in Scotland, promising themselves great advantages from the French
being on our Coasts, and being deceived by false reports, 1500 of them got
together in the County of Murray under Bucan and Cannon threatening the People
to burn and destroy their Houses and Goods, if they did not join with them, but
Sir Thomas Levingstone advancing by speedy Marches, came upon them so
surprisingly that they made little Resistance, but fled with all imaginable
Confusion, and being pursued, 400 of them were killed, and the rest totally
routed and taken Prisoners with a great quantity of Claret and other
Provisions, and a great number of Officers were brought to Edenburg and
committed to the Tolbooth; soon after the remaining Rebels who escaped,
designed to have surprised the Garrison of Inverness, but were happily
prevented and deseated by the Earl of Drumlanerig, and Major General Mackay.

In Ireland, the King having secured Dublin in safe Hands, caused his Army to
march toward Limerick, where Tyrconnel and Lauzun had drawn together the late
Kings broken Forces, and having made their approaches against all Opposition,
His Majesty ordered the Trenches to be opened, and planted several Batteries of
Cannon, which made great breaches in the Walls, and a general Assault was
expected, but Aug. 28. at Night the Rains fell so excessively, that the Rivers
overflowed, and the Garrison being extreme strong the King to spare his Men,
and to avoid the many Inconveniences of the approaching Season, was pleased to
Order the raising the Seige, and refer the reducing the City, till a more
favorable opportunity; after which His Majesty returned for England, and was
received with all imaginable Expressions of Joy throughout the Kingdom.

About this time a Fleet was prepared by His Majesty's Order, consisting in
thirty two English, and twenty eight Dutch men of War, aboard of whom were
embarked eight Regiments of Foot, besides the Marine Regiments, commanded by
the Earl of Marlborough as General, and Mr. Trelawny as Major General, who
Sept. 21. arrived at Cork in Ireland, which was obliged to surrender upon
Articles, and soon after Kingsale ran the same Fate; an horrible design of the
Irish, was now discovered to have set the City of Dublin on Fire, but it was
happily discovered and prevented.

In October, the Parliament met again at Westminster, and Congratulated His
Majesty's safe return, and likewise returned their humble acknowledgments to
Her Majesty for Her Goodness, Wisdom and Courage manifested in the greatest
Dangers, even when a powerful Enemy was upon the Coasts; the Earl of Torrington
was tried on board the Kent in the River Medway by a Jury of Sea Captains, and
after a long hearing of the Witnesses, and his Defense upon a long debate, he
was acquitted. The Parliament continued to sit, and passed many Acts both for
supplying His Majesty for the War, and settling the Kingdom, to whom the King
gave an account that the posture of Affairs abroad required his Presence at the
Hague; and accordingly Jan. 6. His Majesty left White Hall attended by the
great Officers of his Household, and diverse others of the Nobility and Gentry,
and soon after arrived in Holland, though with some difficulty by reason of the
Ice; at the Hague His Majesty was received with great Joy, which they expressed
by erecting several Triumphal Arches redounding to the Glory of his Gallant
Achievements, since His Majesty left that Country.

And now a Conspiracy was discovered, managed by several Persons; for
introducing our former Bondage and Slavery, and the Lord Preston, John Ashton
and Edmond Eliot were seized, as they were designing to go for France, with
Letters and Papers of Pernicious Consequence; and Jan. 17. the Lord Preston was
Tried for High Treason at the Old-Bailey, and two days after Mr. Ashton, and
were both found Guilty; and Mr. Ashton was Executed for the same, but the Lord
Preston was Reprieved, together with one Crone formerly Sentenced upon the same
account, and the Trial of Eliot was deferred; after which a Proclamation was
issued out, for apprehending Dr. Turner late Bishop of Ely, William Pen and
James Graham, Esquires.

The Duke of Savoy, whose Family had for above an hundred years past been
trampled on by France, and would at this day have been entirely enslaved by
that King, took this favorable occasion to set himself at Liberty, while all
Europe almost lends him a helping hand, and thereupon some Months, since he
declared openly against that Crown and Released and gave Liberty to all his
Protestant Subjects, and entertained them into his Service, entering likewise
into the Confederacy with the Princes and States of Christendom, now in Arms to
reduce that Grand Usurper to Reason, and incapacitate him from being any longer
dangerous to his Neighbors; and in the latter end of 1690. His Highness sent
an Envoy to Congratulate their Majesty's Accession to the Throne, and to
express his Passionate desire to unite himself to His Majesty's Friendship by
an indissoluble Union.

Upon the Kings Arrival at the Hague, several Princes daily came thither, as
well to have the Honor to wait upon his Majesty as to confer about the state
of Affairs; March 5. the King accompanied by the Duke of Zell, and several of
his own Nobility, departed for Loo and by the way had news, that the French had
invested the City of Mons the day before; upon which his Majesty ordered the
Dutch Troops to march immediately into Flanders to the general Rendezvous, and
soon after followed in Person, being received in the Camp with extraordinary
Joy, that they should fight under the Banners of so undaunted a Prince; the
French King arrived before the Town five days after the Siege began, having
amassed all his Forces together upon this Enterprise, leaving only sufficient
to defend their Garrisons, so that by their continual firing and attacks, and
the Folly of the Burghers, who would not admit above 6000 men into the Town,
whereas they ought to have had at least 4000 Horse, and 10000 Foot, this
important Place was taken in eight days time, the Governor not being able to
make such vigorous Sallys as he might have done, because he was willing to
spare his men, but the Burghers being by this means stronger than the Garrison,
obliged the Prince of Berghes to a surrender before the Confederates could
^ossibly have leisure to relieve the Town, after which the French King returned
to Versailles; and King William came back to England, viewing some part of the
Fleet in his return; and arrived safe at White Hall, where His Majesty
nominated several new Bishops to succeed those that had forfeited their
bishoprics by refusing to swear Allegiance to their Majesty's; he likewise
took a view of the Troops that were to go to Flanders, and having provided for
the Security of the Kingdom and happily settled all affairs in Scoland and
Ireland, His Majesty declared his Resolution of returning into Flanders, and
arrived, May 2, 1691. in the Army Encamped within two Miles of Brussels, being
about 70000 strong, and the French under the Duke of Luxemburg no less
numerous. And in July Baltimore and Athlone in Ireland, were taken by General
Giukle, and the Prince of Wirtemburg; Monsieur St. Ruth, the French Kings
General being killed in the great Battle at Agram soon after, with the loss of
7000 of the Irish, and the taking of Galloway which followed, with most of the
other Forts, and Castles, and Towns, except Limerick, which was also invested
the latter end of August, upon which Lieutenant General Sarsfield, who was
retired to the Mountains with 4000 Horse and Dragoons, resolved to return to
that City, but was met by General Ginkle, and a Party of the English, who so
vigorously charged them, that they instantly fled, and were pursued to the very
Gates of the Town, above 600 Irish being slain, and 70 Officers taken
Prisoners, The Besieged seeing themselves shut up within the Walls of one
single Town, which was now almost battered down about their Ears, hopeless of
Succor, and reduced to the last extremities, Oct. 13. Surrendered up Limerick
upon Articles, whereby all Ireland was wholly reduced to their Majesty's
Obedience.

In Flanders, Sept. 19. there happened an Engagement between the French and
Confederate Armies; in the absence of the King of England, who finding he could
not oblige the Enemy to a Battle departed to Brussels, and from thence to Loo,
in order to his return for England, leaving the Command of the Army to Prince
Waldeck, who decamping from Leuse to retire to Cambron, the Enemy having notice
thereof, detached about 30. Squadrons, who marched all Night, and by the favor
of a thick mist unexpectedly fell upon 15. Squadrons of the Confederates
Rereguard, the conflict was very Sharp, and though Inferior in number yet the
Allies made a vigorous Defense, till several other Regiments came up to their
relief; which caused the Enemy to retreat; The French lost near 700 men with
many Officers, and the Confederates about the same number; after which both
Armies went into Winter Quarters.

The English and Holland Fleets under the command of Admiral Russel, had in
vain sought to engage the French this summer at Sea, and having lain some time
on the Coast of Ireland to prevent the French from sending Forces thither; came
now into Harbor after a very tempestuous Season, and the Holland Fleet
separated and safely arrived in their several Ports, and the French Fleet
returned to Breast; His Majesty being returned to England, Oct. 19. and the
Parliament sitting, the King declared himself to them, who thereupon
unanimously resolved to raise such supplies as should enable him to continue
the War with France; and in March following, His Majesty arrived again in
Holland, and from thence went to Lo, where several Princes met him to concert
the Affairs of the next Campaign, He having an Army of 30000 English in
Flanders this Summer, March 26. 1692. The Elector of Bavaria, who was made
Governor of the Spanish Netherlands during Life, arrived at Brussels being
received there with much Joy and Solemnity.

His Majesty having designed to make a Descent upon France this Summer, the
News so alarmed the French King, that he resolved to land some Forces in
England, and King James in the Head of them, some Jacobites and Discontented
People here, having given him Assurance of joining with him upon his Landing;
to which end the French King supplied Ships, Troops, and Lovis d'ores, so that
nothing was wanting but to cross the Seas, and a Squadron of sixteen Ships and
two Bombing Vessels were sitting at Toulon under Count d'Estree, to convoy the
Transport Ships thither under the Protection of the French Fleet commanded by
Vice Admiral Tourvile in the Channel, to prevent the joining of the Dutch and
English Fleets and to fight all that should oppose their Passage, but
Providence ordered the Winds and Recks to fight D' Estree, he losing two of his
largest Ships near Centa on the Coast of Africa, and the rest miserably
shattered, went to Portugal to refit, so that instead of being at Breast the
beginning of April, he did not arrive there, till the beginning of July, and
came a minute too late, as he said, to join Torville, The Q. of England upon
notice of the imbarking of so many men, gave out all necessary Orders for
securing the Coasts, and several Horses were seized, whose owners designed to
have joined the Enemy upon their Descent, which was intended to be about
Portsmouth, and the Isle of Wight; K James with his Irish Forces were come to
Cherbourg upon the Ceast of Normandy, and Monsieur Torville had great
Confidence in the Courage of his French Mariners, upon King James assurance
that the English would not fight, but be Spectators only; The English and Dutch
Fleets being happily joined without any Obstruction from the Enemy, Admiral
Russel set sail from St. Hellens, and May 19. get sight of the French Fleet
near Cape Barfleur; Admiral Torville having the Wind, hastened up to the
English, but the Wind slackning, the French Vanguard of 15. great men of War,
could not come up to the English, till Eleven next Morning, five of the fifteen
did their Duty, but the other ten kept out of Cannon shot; the Dutch were not
able to come up, the Wind being in their Teeth, the fight lasted between them
that could engage about three hours, and then the French made all the Sail they
could to get away, and the Dutch bad much ado to turn their Ships to follow
them by Reason of the Calm, during which the two main Bodies of the Fleet
la^oured to the utmost to come up with the Enemy, and being happily got up with
them, engaged resolutely for four hours, and then Torville, as his Vanguard had
done before, retreated with all speed and by the favor of a Mist got out of
sight; in the Afternoon the English Blew Squadron, which could not come up for
the Calm, fell upon the Blew French Squadron, where the most obstinate fight
was maintained, till the Night and Mists gave opportunity to the Enemy to
hasten toward their own Coasts. The next day being clear, Admiral Russel
discovered them two Leagues off, but could not come up by Reason of a sudden
Mist; about eleven at Night the French weighed Anchor by Moon light, and the
Confederates pursued them, who to save themselves ventured among the Rocks of
Jersey and Guernsey; May 21. The Admiral discovering several men of War upon a
Bank near Cape Barfleur, detacht Vice Admiral De la Val with eight or nine
Vessels, and three Fireships to set fire to them, which the next day was
happily effected; the Royal Sun, that magnificent Ship, commanded by Admiral
Torville, which was the wonder of the World, both for the exquisiteness of her
carving and the beauty of her Shape, being 20 Years in Building by the most
skilful Shipwrights in Europe carrying 110 Guns, the Admirable, of 102, and the
Strong of 80 Guns, with two less Frigates and three Transport Ships were all
sacrificed to the Flames, and the next day 12 more were burnt in a Bay behind
the Isle of Aldernay, and this without the loss of one English or Dutch Ship,
the rest of the French Fleet fled to Breast, St. Maloes, and Other Ports to
secure themselves. King James was upon a Hill, and through a Perspective Glass
saw the fight, and upon the first firing of the English, he declared; that it
was only a Signal for them to come over to the French but he soon found himself
deceived, and that it was Admiral Russell he had to do withal, and that the
Intriagues of his Jacobites had not succeeded. Thus it pleased Heaven to Crown
their Majesty's Navy with a Glorious Victory, and to preserve us from the
Chains prepared for us by the two dear Allies; for notwithstanding the specious
Declaration published by King James, upon his Assurance of being restored, yet
we have all the Reason in the World to believe, his Pardon would not have
secured the Nation from Popish Vengeance, but that we should have all felt the
utmost effects of his Rage and Fury, as well as the Honorable and Worthy
Persons following, whom he excluded from all hopes of Mercy, that is, the Duke
of Ormond, the Marquis of Winchester; the Earls of Sunderland, Bath, Danby, and
Nottingham; the Lords Newport, Delamere, Wiltshire, Colchester, ^^^^bury,
Dumblane, and Churchill; the bishops of St. Asaph and London; Dr. Tillotson,
and Dr. Burnet; Knights, Sir To. Howard, Sir J. Worden, Sir S. Grimston, Sir S.
Fox, Sir George Treby, Sir Ba^il Dixwel, and Sir John Oxenden; Esquires F.
Russel, R. Levison, J. Trenchard, C. Duncomb Citizens of London; Edwards,
Napleton and Hunt, Fishermen, with all others that offered Indignities to him
at Feversham, with Ashton and Crosses Judges and Jurymen; also all Spies, and
those that have betrayed his councils in his absence.

May 15, 1692. The French Army, after having made many Marches and
Countermarches invested the strong Fortress of Namur, being encouraged thereto
by the treacherous Baron de Bersey, who being born a Subject of Spain, and
having received some disgust from that Court, was corrupted by the French, and
making his escape out of the Town, informed the Enemy of the Condition thereof,
which he had got full Information of by his Intimacy with the Governor, the
Prince of Brabancon, so as to inform them of the best places for the attack,
which was strong, and which weak, so that the Town was surrendered in five
days; and awhile after. Williams Fort and the Castle were likewise delivered
up: It is very well known that the King of England took all the pains
imaginable to get his Army of several Nations together before the Siege; and
that the Duke of Luxemburg, who lay with a strong Detachment to cover the
Besiegers, used all manner of Caution to avoid a Battle, by Incamping in places
where he could not be assaulted, being sufficiently acquainted with the temper
of King William, to whom it was natural to despise danger, and who pushed onthe
relief of the Place to the utmost, for as soon as be came to Mehaine, he
instantly caused Bridges to be built in the Night to cross the River next
Morning, and to attack Duke Luxemburg in the Morasses: which he had certainly
done, if a very extraordinary Rain had not fallen, and if all the Generals had
not unanimously dissuaded him from it, because of the impossibility of forming
a Line of Battle in a place so full of Water; after the surrender of Namur, the
King being informed, that the Duke of Luxemburg was upon his March from
Enguien, resolved to advance with all speed to the same place, but the French
got there before him, and posted themselves between that place and Steinkerken,
among Hedges and Woods, however King William resolved to attack him there,
which much surprised Luxemburg, who upon view of the advantageous Seituation of
his Camp, had said, That none but an Alexander or a Caesar durst attack him in
that place; but it was William the Great who performed that part, and marching
silently all Night, fell upon the French with such fury next Morning, that in a
few hours, above 7000 of the Enemy were slain, with a great number of Nobility
and Officers; and afterward retreated at leisure, the French not having the
Courage to follow them. So that the attack and retreat were equally Glorious,
the King having exposed himself amidst the Cannon and Muskets shots where the
fight was hottest, riding continually from one end to the other to give
necessary Orders, so that it was next to a Miracle that his Sacred Person was
preserved among so many imminent dangers. Thus His Majesty gloriously ended
this Campaign by a Signal Victory over the French at Sea, and by having several
times braved his Enemies by land, harassing them by his continual Marches, and
attacking them in their Retrenchments, seeking only an opportunity of putting
an end to the War by a General Battle, and so to procure to Europe, a solid and
durable Peace,

On the Contrary, the French King dares never to appear in the Head of his
Troops, but endeavors to make himself renowned by Treachery and Violation of
Oaths; These are his Fortress, and Assassinations, and Poisonings are Crimes,
which in that Court are not prohibited, Witness the Valet de Chamber, who
poisoned the Duke of Lorrain; the French Cook, who, at the Instigation of the
French Ambassador, poisoned Mr. Harbord, at Belgrade, for being vigorous in
procuring a Peace betwixt the Emperor and the Turks; and lastly the Sieur de
Granval, who with some others was hired by the Marquess of Barbesieux,
Secretary to the French King, to Murder King William, being also encouraged
hereto by K. James, and his Queen, who told him. If you and the rest do me this
service, you shall never want; but this horrid Villainy being happily
discovered, Granval was about this time deservedly executed for the same. In
October, His Majesty returned again to England, and the Parliament being met,
he made a Gracious Speech to them; after which, they unanimously Voted a supply
of near five Millions, for carrying on a vigorous War against France

Having thus given a brief account of the most considerable Transactions in
these Kingdoms, till the beginning of the year, 1693. and the fifth of their
Majesty's Happy Reign, I shall here conclude; and that they may continue to
Re^gn long and prosperously over us ought to be the Prayer of every good
Protestant throughout these three Nations.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for N. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey, near
Cheapside.
History.
I. ENglands Monarch: Or, A Compendious Relation of the most remarkable
Transactions, from Julius Caesar to this present; adorned with Poems, and the
Picture of every Monarch from King William the Conqueror to the third year of
K. William and Q. Mary. With a List of the Nobility, the Knights of the Garter,
the number of the Lords and Commons, who have Votes in both Houses of
Parliament; and many other useful particulars. Price One Shilling.

II. THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland containing a particular and
Impartial Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other Remarkable
Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents which happened from the beginning of
the Reign of K. Charles I. 1625. to His Majesty's happy Restoration: The
illegal Trial of K. Charles I. at large, with his last Speech at his suffering;
and the most considerable matters till 1660, with Pictures of several
accidents. Price One Shilling.

III. THE History of the two late Kings. Charles the Second, and James the
Second: Being an Impartial Account of the most Remarkable Transactions, and
observable passages, during their Reigns; and the secret French and Popish
Intrigues and Designs managed in those times. Together with a Relation of the
Happy Revolution, and the Accession of their present Majesty's, King William
and Queen Mary to the Throne, Feb. 13. 1688 9. Price One Shilling.

IV. THE History of Oliver Cromwell, being an Impartial Account of all the
Battles, Sieges, and other Military Achievements, wherein he was engaged in
England, Scotland and Ireland; and particularly all the Sea Fights with the
Dutch and French, with the Siege and taking of Dunkirk; and likewise of his
Civil Administrations, while he had the Supreme Government of these three
Kingdoms, till his Death Relating only matters of Fact, without Reflection or
Observation. R. B. Price One Shilling.

V. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towrs Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues and other
occurrences, for above 903 years past, in and about these Cities, to the year
1681. Illustrated with Pictures. Price one shilling.

VI. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England, Scotland, and
Ireland; or an account of many remarkable persons and places; and likewise of
the Battles, Seiges, prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders and other considerable Occurrences and Accidents for
many hundred years past. Together with the natural and artificial Rarities in
every County in England, with several curious Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

VII. THE History of the Kingdom of Scotland, Containing, An Account of the
most Remarkable Transactions and Revolutions in Scotland for above 1200 years
past, during the Reigns of 69 Kings, from the year of the our Lord 414, to this
present; Intermixed with Variety of Excellent Speeches, and several Prodigious
Accidents, and other Matters both Delightful and Prefi^^^le, with a List of the
present Scots Nobility, Illustrated with Pictures. Price one Shilling.

VIII. THe History of the Kingdom of Ireland, being a Succi^ct Relation of the
most considerable Passages and Occurrences in that Kingdom, since the Conquest
thereof by King Henry II. With an Account of the Rebellion, and Horrid
Cruelties of the Irish in 1641. Likewise the late Battles of the Boyne, Aghrim,
etc. With the Seige of Lymerick, Price one Shilling.

IX. THE English Empire in Ameri^^, or a prospect, of His Majesty's Dominions
in the West Indies, namely, New-sound-land, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, (...), Anguila,
Monserrat, Dominica. St. Vincent, Antego, M^vis, or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados and Jamaica: With an account of their Discovery, Situation and
product: The Religion and Manners of the Indians, and other excellen^^s of
these Countries. Illustrated with Map^, and Pictures, Price one Shilling.

X. A View of the English Acquisitions in G^inea and the East-Indres: With an
account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other Observables in those Countties. Together with a description
of the Isle of St. Helena and the Bay of Souldania; intermixed with pleasant
Relations. Price one Shilling.

XI. THE English Herce: Or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full Account of
the dangerous Voyages, admirable Adventures, of that Val^ant and Renowned
Commander. As, I. His Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the W^st Indies,
where they saw a Pile of Bars of Silver near 70 foot long, 10. foot broad, and
12. foot high. II. His incompassing the whole World in 1577. gaining a vast
quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage into America in 1585. and taking
the Towns of St. Jago, St. Domingo, Cartragena, and St. Augustine. IV. His last
Voyage into those Countries in 1595. with the manner of his Death and Burial.
By R. B. Price One Shilling.

XII. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem. Containing first, the Travels of two English
Pilgrims, some years since, and what Admirable Accidents befell them in their
Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo etc 2. The Travels of 14 English Merchants in
1669. from Scanderoon to Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah, Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho,
the River of Jordan, the Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo.
To which is added, a Relation of the great Council of the Jews assembled in the
Plains of Ajarday in Hungary 1650. to examine the Scriptures concerning Christ.
By S. B. an Englishman there present: With the notorious Delusion of the Jews,
by a false Christ, at Smyrna in 1666. Lastly, The Extirpation of the Jews
throughout Persia in 1666. Price One Shilling.

XIII. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men; with the strange Events,
and signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious places
and persons in all Ages; Being an Account of a multitude of stupendous
revolutions, accidents, and observable matters in diverse States, and Provinces
throughout the whole world; With Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XIV. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World; Three whereof were
Gentiles; 1. Hector of Troy. 2. Alexander the Great. 3. Julius Caesar. Three
Jews. 4. Joshua Captain General of Israel. 5. David King of Israel. 6. Judas
Maccabeus. Three Christians. 7. Arthur K. of Britain. 8. Charles the Great K.
of France. 9. Godfrey of Bullen King of Jerusalem. Being an account of their
Lives, Victories and Deaths. With Poems and the Picture of each Worthy. By R.
B. Price One Shilling.

XV. FEmale Excellency, or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Worthy Lives of
Nine Famous Women, As, I. Deborah. II. Judith. III. Q. Esther. IV. Susanna. V.
Lucretia. VI. Voadicia Q. of Britain. VII. Mariamne Wise to K. Herod. VIII.
Clotilda Q of France. IX. Andegona Princess of Spain. Adorned with Poems and
Pictures to each History. By R. B. Price One Shilling.

XVI. Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching death, and how the
event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers and deplorable distresses
at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to Penitents, with the Dying Thoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a future State. Price one shilling.

XVII. Unparalleled Varieties, or the Matchless Actions and Passions of
Mankind; displayed in near four hundred notable Instances and Examples,
discovering the Transcendent Effects, 1. Of Love, Friendship and Gratitude. 2.
of Magnanimity, Courage and Fidelity. 3. Of Chastity, Temperance and Humility:
And on the contrary, the Tremendous consequences, 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and
Ingratitude. 5. of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery. 6. Of Unchastity,
Intemperance and Ambition. Imbellished with proper Figures. Price one shilling.

XVIII. THe Kingdom of Darkness: Or the History of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitions, Possessions, Disturbances, and other wonderful and supernatural
Delusions, Mischievous Feats, and Malicious Impostures of the Devil. Containing
near Fourscore memorable Relations, Foreign and Domestic, both Ancient and
Modern. Collected from Authentic Records, Real Attestations, Credible
Evidences, and asserted by Authors of Undoubted Verity. Together with a Preface
obviating the common Objections and Allegations of the Sadduces and Atheists of
the Age, who deny the Being of Spirits, Witches, etc. With Pictures of several
memorable Accidents. Price One Shilling.

XIX. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts, containing, 1. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful Signs and Prodigies, Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea, with an account of the most famous
Comets, and other prodigies, from the Birth of Christ to this time. 2. The
Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and other curious
Inventions in all Ages, as, the Seven Wonders of the World, and many other
excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth. Beautified with
Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XX. MEmorable Accidents, and Unheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several strange Events and Historical Passages which have happened in several
Countries in this last Age. Printed at Brussels in 1691. and Dedicated to His
present Majesty, William, King of England, etc. Published in English by R. B.
Price one shilling.

XXI. MArtyrs in Flames, or Popery in its true Colors being a brief Relation
of the horrid Cruelties and Persecutions of the Pope and Church of Rome, for
many hundred years past, to this present time in Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany,
Poland, Lithuania, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Scotland, Ireland, and
England, with an Abstract, of the cruel Persecutions, lately exercised upon the
Protestants in France and Savoy in the years 1686. and 1687. Together with a
short account of Gods Judgments upon Popish Persecutors. Price one shilling.

Miscellanies.
XXII. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select and choice Emblems,
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, Curiously Engraven upon Copper Plates;
with Fifty delightful Poems and L^ts, for the more Lively Illustration of each
Emblem; Whereby Instruction and good Counsel may be promoted and furthered by
an honest and pleasant Recreation. Collected by R. B. Pr. 2 s. 6 d.

XXIII. EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral, Written by the Magnanimous
and truly Loyal A. L. Capel Baron of Hadham; Together with some Account of his
Life, and his affectionate Letters to his Lady the day before his Death, with
his Heroic Behavior and last Speech at his Suffering; Also the Speeches and
Carriages of D. Ham. and the E. of Holl. who suffered with him: With his pious
Advice to his Son. Price 1 s.

XXIV. VVInter Evenings Entertainments in 2 Parts Containing, 1. Ten Pleasant
Relations of many Rate and Notable Accidents and Occurrences; with brief
Remarks upon every one. 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with their Explanations,
and useful Observations; and Morals upon each. Enlivened with above 60
Pictures, for illustrating every Story and Riddle. Excellently Accommodated to
the Fancies of Old or Young, and useful to cheerful Society and Conversation.
Price One Shilling.

XXV. DElightful Fables in Prose and Verse, none of them to be found in Aesop,
but collected from diverse ancient and modern Authors, with Pictures and Proper
Morals to every Fable. Several of them very applicable to the Present times. By
R. B. Price bound one Shilling.

Divinity.
XXVI. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion,
Representing the several steps and degrees of the Sorrow and sufferings of our
blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost. Together with brief Resolutions to
all those Scruples and Objections usually alleged for the omission of this
important Duty. With Eight curious Sculptures proper to the several parts, with
Graces. Imprimatur. Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Epis. Land. a Sacris. Price One
Shilling.

XXVII. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, brief directions to all Christian how to
attain everlasting Solution: To which are added several other small Tr^sts.
Price One Shilling.

XXVIII. YO^^ths Divine Pastime, containing torty remarkable scripture
histories, turned into common English Verse, with forty Picture, proper to ea^^
story, very delightful for the virtuous, employing the vacant ^ours of young
persons, and preventing vain and vi^ions divertisements. Together with several
scripture hymns upon diverse occasions. Price 8d.

XXIX. THE young man's calling, or the whole duty of youth, in a serious and
compassionate addres to all young persons to remember their Creator in the days
of their youth Together with remarks upon the lives of several excellent young
persons of both S^xes, as well ancient as modern, who have been famous for
virtue and piety in their Generation, etc. With twelve curious Pictures,
illustrating the several histories. Price 1s. 6 d.

XXX. THE vanity of the life of man represented in the seven several stages
thereof, with pictures and poems exposing the follies of every Age. Price eight
pence.

XXXI. MOunt Sion, or a draught of that Church that shall stand for ever;
together with a view of that World w^^^ shall be broken in pieces and consumed.
By William Dyer, Author of Christ's famous Titles, and a Believers Golden Chai^
P^^^e one shilling.

XXXII. DIst^^ssed Sion relieved, or, the Garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness. A Poem. Wherein are discovered the grand causes of the Churches
trouble and misery under the late dismal dispensation; with a complete history
of, and lamentation for those renowned Worthies that fell in England, by Popish
rage and cruelty from the year 1680. By Ben. Keach. Price 1s.

XXXIII. ANtichrist stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be mystery Babylon
the Great Whore, Rev. 17. by many and undeniable arguments answering all the
objections of the Papists, and all others. Together with the Judgment of many
ancient and modern Divines, and most eminent writers concerning the rise and
final ruin of the Beast and Babylon, proving it will be in this present Age.
By Ben. Keach. Price One shilling.

XXXIV. THE Devout Souls daily Exercise in Prayers, Contemplations and Praises,
containing Devotions for Morning, Noon, and Night, for every day in the week,
with Prayers before and after the Holy Communion: And likewise for Persons of
all Conditions, and upon all occasions: With Graces and Thanksgivings before
and after meat. By R. P. D. D. Price bound six pence.

XXXV. SAcramental Meditations upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and graces when they draw nigh to God in that most awful and solemn Ordenance
of the Lords Supper. By Jo. Flavel Minister of Christ in Devon. Price One
Shilling.

XXXVI. JAcob wrestling with God, and prevailing: Or, a Treatise concerning the
Necessity and Efficacy of Faith in Prayer: Wherein diverse weighty Questions and
Cases of Conscience about praying in Faith, are stated and resolved: For the
comforting and satisfying of weak and scrupulous consciences, the conviction of
formal Hypocrites, awakening of all Saints, both weak and strong, great and
small, to this great duty of Prayer. By Thomas Tailor, formerly at
Edmunds-Bury, now Pastor to a Congregation in Cambridge. Price one shilling.

All Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.

FINIS.

