IMPRIMATUR

THO. TOMKYNS, R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno. GILBERTO Divina
Providentia Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi a Sacris Domesticis.

Ex Aedibus Lambethan. Julii 9. 1668.

A TREATISE PROVING Spirits, Witches, AND Supernatural Operations, BY PREGNANT
INSTANCES AND EVIDENCES: Together with other Things worthy of Note.

By Meric Casaubon, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill. 1672.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, (what ever thou art otherwise, thou art not a true
Christian, or so good, as thou should be, if thou do not account that of
a Christian, thy best title) though it does concern thee, no further,
perchance, than I shall tell thee by and by; yet it does me very much, in
thankfulness to God, and to acquit my self of wilful negligence in some
particulars of this ensuing Treatise, to acquaint thee with the occasion, and
in what condition I was, when I wrote it. I will not go back so far, as to tell
thee, what I have suffered, since I have been in the world, by sicknesses, and
some other accidents, the relation whereof though very true, yet I am sure,
would be incredible unto many. There may be a time for that, if God please. It
shall now suffice to tell thee, that about three years ago and somewhat better,
being in London, I was seized upon with a cold, and shortness of breath, which
was so troublesome, that I went to an intimate friend, and learned Physician,
for help, who made no question, but in few days he would cure me, and to that
end, prescribed some things. But before many days were over, himself ended his
life; in whose death, good learning (ancient, I mean) had a great loss. But the
comfort is, which I can witness, he died a Christian. After him, the cause
still continuing, I had recourse unto another, of the same profession, whom
though I knew not before, yet I found him very friendly, and so far as I could
judge, very rational in his prescriptions. But notwithstanding such help, the
disease increasing, rather than abating; I at last, resolved, with Gods help,
for Canterbury again, which I did think many times, I should never see more.
Where, for eight or nine months, I continued much in the same case; till at
last, that disease ended in some nephritical fits, which I did not expect to
outlive. But I did; till April 1666. when I was freshly assaulted with new
fits; which, more remisly, or sharply, continued some months; till at last,
diverse other evil symptoms concurring, I lost sleep; and so lost it, that for
the space of four months, and upwards, I may truly, to the best of my
knowledge, say, I had not one hour of natural sleep, but such as was, by the
advice of my Physicians, procured by Drugs, the strongest that are, to that
end: which sleep, so procured, left me always in such a hatred, and detestation
of life, that nothing but obligation of conscience could have prevailed with
me, or any body else, I think, in my case, to preserve life at so dear a rate.
What I was unto others, I know not: I was unto my self, I am sure, a wonder;
(nay (...), prodigium: a monster; our old translation) that I did hold out so
long. And yet, when I did most despair of life; or rather, comfort my self,
that the time of my deliverance was now surely come; so it pleased God, I began
to recover sleep, and not long after, amended to such a degree of cheerfulness,
(...) for many weeks after, I did ever and anon (...) whether I was not in a
dream. But (...) the continuance of my cheerfulness, though (...) other
weakness* I think any Christian (...), if he do not think me worse than an
ordi^^^y Heathen, or Infidel; will easily believe, that I had some thoughts,
how I might employ a ^^fe, (so much of it, as was yet to come) so strangely
prolonged, to do Him some service, whom I lo^^ed upon, as the only Author.
First, I resolved (my most immediate profession) to preach, as often as I
could. And for the first time, (being an Easter Day, a very proper day, after
such a reviving) I thought; as to bodily strength, I came off well enough. But
when I attempted it a second time, though till the Evening before, I thought my
self in very good case; yet I found my self suddenly so disabled, and brought
so low again, (which continued for three days) that since that time, my opinion
has been, I should but tempt God, to think of any such thing any more. After
this, my cheerfulness, and vigor of spirits still continuing, I began to think
of writing; a trade which I began very young, and of which, I thank God for it,
I have had comfort at home, and abroad as much, and more than I did ever
promise my self. I did pitch upon a subject, which I did think most convenient
for me, as having more immediate relation to devotion, and not unseasonable, in
these ungodly times. It was not long, before I had all my materials, out of
several papers, and Note-books; together and ready. But when I thought to put
them into a form, by coherence of matter and style; I found my self so unable,
that I did absolutely conclude, I had no other business in this world, and to
no other end God had prolonged my life, than by continued earnest repentance (a
greater work, I doubt, than many imagine) to fit my self for a better. How I
have acquitted my self, I must leave to God. But time passing, month after
month, and I still continuing in as good vigor of mind, I thought, as when at
the best; it troubled me not a little, that I should live profitable unto my
self only. At last, this subject, once before thought upon, but since
forgotten, came into my mind again. I will not be so bold, without better
warrant, with God Almighty, to say, that he put it into my head, either before,
when it first offered it self; or now, when I remembered it. But this I may
truly say, since I have been a writer, I never proceeded in any subject, (for
the time that was bestowed upon it) with more expedition and alacrity. For it
has been my case, ever since I came out of that languishing extremity, which
affected my Spirits most; that my body has continued very weak, ever since; so
that it is but some part of the day, when at best, that I can converse with
books; seldom so well, that I can walk, or stand upon my legs: and when once
set in my Study to write, or to meditate; it is irksome to me, to rise upon any
occasion; and therefore I avoid it, without there be some great necessity: much
more tedious and irksome, and not without danger, to reach books, which I
cannot reach (a great part of my books) without climbing; nor always find, very
readily, though ranged and ordered with care; when I seek them. This is the
cause, that my quotations are not always so full, or so punctual, as otherwise,
they might have been. But for the truth of them, which I think is the main
business, I durst undertake. For though I have many things out of my private
Papers, and Notebooks, or Adversaria, which for the reasons before alleged, I
could not now revise in the Authors themselves, out of which I had them: yet
out of the originals I had them I am sure, and not out of other men's
quotations; which I never trusted so far, as to enter them without examination.
If, for want of the Originals, I have taken any thing upon trust, I have
acquainted the Reader, and so discharged my self. So far, I can undertake; but
that in perusing the Original Authors, either formerly, or now again, I have
mistaken in none; this I dare not undertake, who confess, that in the reading
of one passage, sometimes, once, or twice; when I made no question of the
sense; yet in a third reading, I have found (sometimes I say; not very often,
perchance) that I was in an error. And if I might advise, I would not have any
man take upon him the name of a Scholar, that will trust any quotations, if he
may go to the Originals; nor trust any translation, if he can understand the
Authors in their own tongue: which if more practiced, good books would be in
more request.

That I had such a subject in my thoughts, many years ago, may appear by
somewhat I did write in the Preface to Doctor Dee's book; and then, indeed, I
was big with it, had time, and opportunity served. But after that I was once
fixed upon other things, or cares, occasioned by that miraculous revolution of
affairs in this Kingdom, which soon after happened; I may sincerely protest, that
I never thought of it any more, except some chance brought it into my mind; but
never as thinking I should ever meddle with it, further than I had done. Not
that I ever promised any thing, which I had not then, when promised, some
probable hopes, I should; and always since, a willingness to perform; but
because I have been always taken up, so far as my health, and other necessary
occasions would give me leave, with somewhat, that I thought more seasonable or
necessary.

And so I thought now of this subject, as I have handled it. For Credulity, and
Incredulity, in general, being my Theme, which left me to a liberty of choosing
fit instances, where I would, so that upon them I might but ground such rules
and directions for either, as might be proper to my undertaking; I have
endeavored to pitch upon such, as might afford somewhat against the crying
evils of these times, contempt of good learning, and Atheism.

And whereas I mention sometimes three Parts, as intended; two only being here
exhibited: true it is, that three were intended, in case my health had afforded
it. But it did not. And indeed, I wonder it has done so much, the little time
considered, that has been bestowed upon it. Yet, is not the work imperfect,
therefore; which might have been finished in the First, but that, as the Second
has afforded more instances, (and of another kind) than are in the First Part;
so might the Third also, than in either First, or Second, if I live to do that
also. It cannot be very soon, I am sure, because what spare time I have from
sickness, till this Summer be over, is otherwise destinated. And though I am
much weaker already, than I was, when I began; yet whilst I live, I shall
despair of nothing, who have had so much experience, what God can do, beyond
all expectation; or, (in man's judgment) credibility. Farewell.

CANTERBURY, 1. June, 1668.
ERRATA, with some Additions, at the end of the Book, which they that read the
Book, are desired to be mindful of. To which, let this be added.
PAge 275. line 16. I believe, allow it but a hundred thousand spectators, a
very small proportion for Vniversus Populus Romans which we know has been censed
(Citizens, inhabitants of Rome) at one time, four millions, and above: at
another time, six millions, and above: could not therefore, I believe, (yet
with submission to better judgments) enclose, or cover less, than fourscore, or
a hundred Acres of ground: a thing, nevertheless, scarce credible, I doubt, to
best Ingineers, or Architects, later ages have afforded. However, though we may
be mistaken, in the casting of particulars; yet that Pliny could mistake in his
report, or the account he does give us, of a thing so public, and yet of fresh
memory, when he wrote; no rational man can believe. A man would think, this
could not, etc.

OF CREDULITY AND INCREDULITY, In things Natural, and Civil. The First Part.
AMONG other errors of our Life, to which that Caligo mentium; or, darkness of
our understanding; by some Ancient wise Heathens, who knew not the true cause,
so much wondered at; does expose us; there is scarce any thing, wherein men
either more frequently err, or with more danger, than in unadvised bel^ef, or
unbelief.

IN Civil affairs as rash belief has been, and daily is, the undoing of many;
so obstinate unbelief, of as many, if not of more. Credere, and non Credere (to
believe, and not to believe;) that Elegant fabulator, who lived in Augustus his
time, and was a Servant of his, (well deserving to be better known unto good
Schools, than he is commonly) has made it the argument of one of his morals,
showing by pregnant instances the danger of each; as (...), and (...), (
belief, and unbelief) is the argument of two Orations in Dio Chrysostomus;
whose very surname, Chrysostom, does testify, what account the age he lived
in, made of his wit, and language.

BUT again; easy belief has contaminated, and obscured the History of Nature,
with many ridiculous fables and fictions: but unbelief, with no less prejudice
to truth, (which according to Plato, most properly; nay, only, he says; does
belong unto such things) and withal, to man's nature, has bereaved it of its
more noble function, the contemplation of things spiritual, and eternal; not
discernable with bodily eyes, but by the light of faith, upon Divine revelation
chiefly: but upon sound reason and certain experience also. A little portion of
which knowledge, and contemplation, though but little, is even by Aristotle,
that incomparable Naturalist, preferred before the most perfect knowledge of
nature, that man is capable of: De part. anim. lib. 1. cap. 5.

FROM ungrounded belief, gross superstition, by which true Religion is not a
little infected, and adulterated, has proceeded: but, from the contrary, right
down Atheism (whether openly professed, or palliated, as the fashion is:) by
which, all sense of piety, all sense of immortality, being taken away, and
nothing left to man, but what is common unto bruits, (since that reason,
confined to things sensible and perishable, is little better than sense; and
sense, in bruits, is by many deemed, and called reason:) man may truly be said,
to be metamorphosed into another creature.

LASTLY, if we appeal unto the Judgments of men; on the one side stands the
credit and authority of so many ages, which commend that of Epicharmus unto us,
((...)^ translated by Cicero;) Nervi, atque artus sapientiae, non temere
credere; that is, Not easily to trust, (or, to believe) are the very nerves and
sinews of wisdom. On the other, Non satis credere, want of faith, or belief;
(so Seneca, a wise man too, though not so ancient:) is the original of all
misery: and one of no less credit, and antiquity, (some few years abated) than
Epicharmus, has told us long ago, that (...), infidelity, or want of faith,
(his very words, recorded by Plutarch; cited by Clemens Alexandrinus; (...)) is
the cause, that God and his works are not better known unto men.

WHICH contrariety, not of opinions only, but of events also, upon which those
opinions were grounded, and which occasioned that contrariety; makes me think
sometimes the better of those ancient Philosophers, who maintained and argued
it at large, that nothing could be certain unto men; and that peremptorily to
conclude of anything, as either true, or false, was great rashness, and
ignorance; since that of all those things controverted among men, some boldly
affirming, and others as peremptorily denying; there was not any thing for
which, and against which probable reasons and arguments might not be produced;
which might, if not amount to an absolute aequilibrium in the balance, yet
induce a rational man, to suspend his assent. To make this good, how far they
proceeded, there be Books both Greek and Latin, yet extant, that will show:
which though written by Heathens, and by many, both Heathens, and Christians
opposed; yet have they not wanted some able Champions, even in our age.

BUT since this is not our business here, and that a perfect Sceptick, what
ever they may pretend in words, is an impossibility in nature, as by more than
one, but St. Augustine for one, is well observed; we may certainly conclude,
that neither to believe, or unbelieve (in things Natural, or Civil) is
absolutely good, or bad, but as either are guided and regulated, more or less,
by reason and discretion: which though they cannot secure any man, the wisest
that is, (such is the condition of mortal man upon earth) that he shall never
be deceived; yet may secure him, that his error shall not be without comfort,
that he was not deceived as a fool, for want of wit and consideration: which is
the comfort, that Divine Hippocrates does propose unto them, that miscarry (a
thing he thought very possible) in a right course, that they miscarry, (...),
that is, ( according to, or, for no want of reason,) and bids us keep to that
still, though again and again crossed, by ill success.

NOW because a well grounded belief or unbelief (in things Natural, or Civil,
as before) are, for the most part, the effects of much observation, and long
experience, which many for want of years, (though supplied in many, by natural
pregnancy) have not yet attained unto: that such as have not, may, if they
please, reap the benefit of others observation, is one main end and purpose of
this present undertaking. And to prevent all mistakes, which our title might
occasion, and the Readers may the better be satisfied, what to expect: First,
whereas we say, in things natural, by natural, I do not only understand such
things, which apparently have some ground in nature, and whereof a probable
reason may be given; which is the more ordinary notion: But also, as by
Trallianus, an ancient Physician, (not to name others) by some very eminent in
that art, once to me much commended; the word is usually taken, as when he
distributeth, which he does in every disease almost, his remedies and receipts,
into methodical, and natural; by methodical, understanding, rational: that is
such, of which, or for which a reason may be given, (...), as he speaks in one
place: by natural, those which are supposed to work by some natural efficacy,
though the reason, or true cause be, as yet, secret and unknown. Of which
nature, he does make all amulets to be, which therefore he calls (...), or
naturalia. Of this notion of the word natural, St. Austin takes notice, in his
eleventh book De Doctrina Christiana, Chap. the 20. as ordinary in his days.
For having spoken of Ligatures, and Characters, he does add, quae mitieri
nomine Physica (in some Editions, Physicam, falsely) vocant, non quasi
superstitione, sed natura prodesse videantur. If therefore we say somewhat, of
such also, we do not extend the notion of the word beyond its bounds. For as
Trallianus, so other Physicians of his time, and of our time also, as by name,
Sennertus, do also use the word: Specifica, and Naturalia, for the same thing.
But again, if under the same title, we speak of some things acted, or effected
by spirits, though the authors, or actors themselves, according to the common
opinion, (contradicted by many ancients) as incorporeal and immaterial
essences, do not so properly fall within the cognizance of ordinary nature; yet
their operations upon corporeal essences being effected, and brought to pass,
(for the most part at least, as both ancient and late, that have written of
these things, are of opinion) by means natural, though to us unknown; may very
well be termed natural in the latitude of the notion before explained: though
to us unknown, I say, as who know yet of nature, in comparison of what we do
not know, but very little, as they that have taken most pains in the study of
it, acknowledge and lament. Had we added the word supernatural, in this place,
( natural and supernatural) it might have been too general, and comprehended
miracles also, for which we have a more proper place, under the title of things
Divine. And the word, Diabolical, or Demoniacal, since there was no need of it,
I was willing to forbear.

SECONDLY, I desire the Reader to take notice, that whereas some who have
written (...), ( of belief and unbelief) have chiefly, under that title,
insisted upon trust, or trusting, between man and man, in point of friendship,
and ordinary conversation, in contracts and promises, and the like, I meddle
not at all with it in this sense; by thin^s Civil, understanding only
relations, or histories of things done, or pretended to be done by men; to be
seen, or known in the world, not ordinary, and to all men, credible.

AGAIN, Credulity, opposed to Incredulity, may be understood two ways, either
as a virtue (for so the word is taken sometimes, by Christian writers,
especially;) or both Credulity (the most warrantable and ordinary sense of the
word) and Incredulity may be taken as two vicious extremes, of what we may call
(...), in general, taken for a rational belief, or, belief grounded, either
upon ordinary grounds of reason, and probability, which begets, a moral belief;
or upon such pregnant pressing reasons, as produce a firm assent, answerable to
certain knowledge, or science, though not science properly, because not
grounded upon the knowledge of the causes. In either sense, credulity taken,
will fit our purpose well enough: yet of the two, I rather choose the second,
that credulity may be taken for a vice; that so, as all, or most virtues,
according to Aristotle's doctrine, (though by some, upon very light grounds, as
I conceive, much opposed) we may place this (...), or belief also in the middle
of two vicious extremities. And so is this business of believing very well
stated by Plutarch, in more than one place, and upon several occasions.

LASTLY, whereas my title promises the consideration of both equally,
Credulity, and Incredulity; and most of my examples will be found of
Incredulity, or such as tend to the reproof and confutation of it, I may be
tho^ght to have dealt partially, as though I favored, or less blamed
Credulity, than the contrary vice. But that does not follow, neither had I any
such respect, in the choosing of my examples. Neither indeed is it absolutely
determinable, which of the two, Credulity, or Incredulity, is most dangerous,
or blamable; but as the particular object of either is, so may the one be more
or less than the other. But I must confess, the business of incredulity did
more run in my head at this time, because of the times so set upon Atheism,
which of all kind of incredulity, is the most horrible, and damnable, and most
unworthy of a rational man. Now one prime foundation of Atheism, as by many
ancient, and late, is observed, being the not believing the existence of
spiritual essences, whether good, or bad; separate, or united; subordinate to
God, as to the supreme, and original Cause of all; and by consequent, the
denying of supernatural operations; I have, I confess, applied my self, by my
examples, which in this case do more than any reasoning; and (the authority of
the holy Scriptures laid aside) are almost the only convincing proof; to the
confutation of such incredulity: in this first part, especially. However,
unadvised credulity and incredulity being considered as two extremes, by the
doctrine of contraries, it will follow, that what tends to the illustration, or
confutation of the one, does in some sort equally belong unto the other; and
though the examples, generally, have more reference to the one, than to the
other; the observations, upon the examples, shall equally concern them both,
which is enough to justify my Title.

NOW because credulity, and incredulity, does properly belong unto such things,
as are wondered at, either, as besides the ordinary course of nature; and
therefore wondered at, because rare and unusual; or against it, and therefore
thought impossible, or supernatural; it will not be amiss in the first place,
to consider what those things are, considered in their kinds, or generality,
which usually cause admiration. As I go along, I may meet with somewhat, that
may occasion some consideration: otherwise, I have no intention, but to name
them only.

MONSTERS are the most ordinary subject of their admiration, who are not
qualified to admire any thing else, though it deserve it, much more. However,
they that have, or shall read the History of Monsters, written by Bauhinus, not
to mention others; may think the better of many things, which before perchance,
they thought incredible. Though he treat of all kind of Monsters, yet
Hermaphrodites only, are in his Title, as the most prodigious, or most
considerable. Indeed, many laws have been made about them, and many cases
proposed, and answered, both in the Civil, and Canonical law. I have read also,
of trials, processes, and Judgments against, or concerning them, in several
Courts, beyond the Seas; and Pliny does record, that in his time, they were in
deliciis, not for their beauty, and good parts, I suppose, but (such is the
perversity of some) for their very monstrosity. And what if after all this,
some men will maintain, that there be no such creatures? One great argument
will be; they never saw any. Another, there have been some counterfeits. Upon
these grounds, who sees not, how much the History of Nature may suffer,
through the rashness and ignorance of some, who affect to be thought wise; for
denying what other men believe, the Continuator of Thuanus his History will
tell, what passed in Paris, Anno Dom. 1613. about this controversy, if any
desire to know.

AFTER Monsters, those things I reckon, that happen by natural sympathies, and
antipathies; (though these also, denied by some, who must adventure upon
somewhat, that they may be thought some body) and again those things that
proceed, from what Physicians call (...), or (...), (it is written both ways:)
to which sympathies may be referred, but it extends much further: and again
those things that proceed from the strength of imagination: concerning all
which not only example, and instances, in most books of all arguments, are
obvious; but also peculiar books, and tractates, made by learned Physicians and
Philosophers, searching into the causes, (though natural acknowledged, yet
hidden, and secret) so far as the wit of man can reach, are extant: all these,
I conceive, to them that search into the works of nature with diligence, offer
themselves frequently, as worthy objects of admiration.

ANOTHER great object of admiration, is that which they call occultae
qualitates; to which some sympathies and antipathies; as also (...) may be
referred; but is much more general, than either. Those occultae qualitates have
been styled by some men, who had the ambition to be accounted more profound,
and quicksighted into the works of nature, than others, asylum asinorum; or,
the refuge, or sanctuary of Asses; but, in their attempts and endeavors of
rendering of reasons, to maintain manifest qualities, they, generally, have
acquitted themselves so weakly, so childishly, as by the discourses and
refutations of Physicians, and Philosophers, both ancient and late, generally
most approved and known, does appear; that what they thought to brand others
with, has unhappily, but deservedly stuck to themselves, their reasonings, if
not themselves, being become the scorn and ludibrium of all truly wise, and
judicious. So hitherto, I am sure, according to the old Philosophy. But what
the conceited omnipotency of Atoms, according to the new Philosophy, (or
revived Epicurism) may do, to satisfy all doubts and scruples, I know not. For
my part, I shall not be ashamed to acknowledge my weakness: I have looked into
it, with as much candor, and diligence, as in such a case I thought necessary;
so far from prejudice, that I would persuade my self, I could not but speed,
and find what I sought for: but I have not I profess it; yet with submission,
to better judgments.

TO these occultae qualitates, we may add, influxus coelestes, or influentiae;
to which I find very learned men, Physicians and others, to ascribe strange
effects: Yet there be very learned too, that will by no means admit of such: as
learned Pererius by name, who does inveigh against them, as the confusion of
all sound Philosophy, and in very deed, the true asylum asinorum. Yet, if a man
consider of it soberly, and read impartially, what is by very sober men pleaded
for them; he may find ground enough, (it is my opinion) to believe them:
especially, when he does consider, that Aristotle himself was forced, besides
his four Principia, or Elementa, to have recourse to a quintam essentiam,
(besides that, which he does appropriate to the Heavens) as a more noble cause:
yea to God himself, in some things, as the immediate cause, operating above
nature, above reason (humane) by his mere Omnipotency. Whereby Aristotle does
apparently lay a foundation for miracles, as we may show in due place: whereas
some conceited foolish men, pretended Christians, but real Atheists, as
Pomponatius and the like; because they would not seem to depart from
Aristotle's doctrine, refer all miracles to natural causes. Besides it is well
known that Hippocrates also, does acknowledge (...), in diseases; by which
though Gallen, and some others understand ambientem aerem, only; yet even so
then certainly the aer preternaturally, or supernaturally affected, by some
divine, or celestial cause; which is the more probable, because in other places
he does speak of the Gods, (according to the phrase of those days) very
reverently, and does much ascribe to their power, in those things that happen
unto men.

BUT to our Coelestes influxus: though they be granted, yet it is very
possible, that many things may be ascribed unto them, which may proceed from
other causes. That some men are lucky at Cards, beyond all imagination, or do
feats with them, beyond the limits of any supposed activity, or juggling; such
as learned Raguseius does profess in the presence of some others, men of great
worth and fame, whom he does name ( Hieron. Fabritius, ab Aquapendente:
Hercules Saxonia, etc.) to have seen, and admired; I should not, though never
so much admired, or incredible, ascribe to a Celestial influence, though I find
a very good Author, whom I ever looked upon as a second Aristotle, (the
greatest commendation, I think, that can be given to man, Religion laid aside)
in point of sound and solid reasoning; even Thomas Aquinas, cited for it, by
the same learned Author: whose opinion, in that matter, I much sooner embrace,
that such things are done by contract with the Devil. And yet I have ground to
believe, that so much may be done in this kind, by art and cunning; (which
things are commonly referred to the power of u^e and custom, which will be our
next consideration, after this of influxes) so strange and miraculous, in
appearance, that a man had need to be very well versed in such speculations,
before he charge any man. And that is, when the case is so notorious, as no man
can rationally doubt; as in that pretended Jugler, who (related by diverse)
before Charles the Ninth, King of France, made the Rings of a gold Chain, to
leap toward him one after another, who was at a distance; and after that, made
the Chain whole again: which, at last, himself confessed to have done by the
help of the Devil; for which he was deservedly cast out of the Court, and
punished. Learned Vossius has it too, and quotes three Authors for it, but
those three, have it but from one, which kind of quoting is not so safe, except
this very thing add some weight, because it has been believed by such, and
such, and not contradicted by any. But, in a case of this nature, before such
company, and yet of fresh memory, when the first relation was made; the
testimony of one credible witness, may be thought sufficient. But for Pererius,
why he should be so bitter against Celestial influences, since he also does
grant, and ground upon occult qualities, which often are fetched from Celestial
influences, and liable to the same inconveniences, and therefore by some, as
was said before* who would gladly be thought to see further than other men, so
termed, ( asylum asinorum) I see no reason.

BUT granting these influences, the great question does remain, whether they
work, as general only, or as particular causes also. It is the opinion of some
very learned, that their power, and operation does extend even to particulars:
as for example, to dispose and to incline (not compel) a man, to such and such
actions: but of more, that they work only, as general causes: as for example,
why in some ages, men generally have been more inclinable to superstition,
ready to believe, and to swallow more, than the boldest impostor could invent:
in others, more to Atheism and incredulity, all upon the senses, and what is
visible and palpable, though against all sense and reason. In some, more for
strifes, and contention; in others, more for peace, and calmer studies. And
what shall we say to that influence, that produced in men that frantic humor,
the beginning whereof is ascribed by Historians, to the year of the Lord 1260.
of wandering about, half naked, and whipping themselves unto blood? Which though
suppressed by authority for a while, sprung up again some forty, or fifty years
after, with so much advantage, that most Kingdoms in Europe, were overrun with
it; and notwithstanding the opposition of Popes, by their excommunications, and
other means that were used, continued above 100. years after; as does appear by
a peculiar tractate of Gerson, the learned Chancellor of France, set out Anno
Dom. 1460. against it. Thousands in one company, of all kind of people, might
have been seen in diverse places, thus martyrizing their bodies, by tearing
their flesh, and their blood running; a pitiful sight, in outward appearance,
but whether to the greater pleasure of their distempered minds, or pain of
body, I know not. I have spoken of it, elsewhere, which I shall not here
repeat. I quote no Authors: there are so many Historiographers, besides others,
that take notice of it, I think it needless. If I may speak my mind without
offense, this prodigious propensity to innovation in all kind, but in matters
of learning particularly, which so many upon no ground, that I can see, on
appearance of reason are possessed with; I know not what we should more
probably ascribe it unto, than to some sad constellation, or influence. But to
conclude this matter of influences, whether of general, only; or, of particular
efficacy also; it is agreed on all hands, that they are secrets of Nature, or
of Heaven, if you will; which none will, upon pretense of any art, attempt to
dive unto, but upon a presumption, that the world (as of wicked men in general,
some Philosophers have maintained) cannot subsist without cheaters and
impostors.

ANOTHER great cause of wondering, is the power of use and custom: which they,
who either by the report of others, creditable witnesses; or by their own
experience, have not been acquainted with, and well considered of, must needs
ascribe to magic, and supernatural causes many things, which are merely
natural. It is a subject of a large extent, but of excellent use, in diverse
respects: which made some ancient Fathers, (not to mention other Authors, of
all professions) upon diverse occasions so largely to insist upon it, as they do
sometimes. St. Chrysostom says plainly, that there is not any thing of greater
power, and which produces stranger effects, among men: the consideration
whereof he does make excellent use of, in matters of life and religion: which
is the reason, that he does insist upon it so often. Among others, one great
use is, to discern some actions, which have been admired, and through
ignorance, thought miraculous and supernatural; from supernatural and
miraculous indeed: the discerning of which, of what moment it has been, in
Civil affairs, sometimes; and sometimes religious; many pregnant examples might
be produced. Another great use the ancient Fathers make of this speculation, is
to convince the sluggishness of men, in the pursuit of Heaven, who flatter, or
rather fool themselves with a conceit of impossibility of performing what is
required, and without which no Heaven can be attained; when they see or may
see, such visible examples of far greater performances for a less reward, God
knows, by constant endeavors, and resolution. It is possible, the Reader may
light upon a book, tituled, A Treatise of Use and Custom. It is not in the
Title, but might have been added (as here) in things Natural, Civil, and
Divine. That which gave occasion to it, (for I must own it as mine, though set
out, without my name) was: I was at that time much troubled, and as I thought
injured, by what, in the law of this Realm, goes under the name of Custom; to
me, before, little known: and as the business run often in my mind, (riding
especially, when I had nothing else to busy my thoughts) it brought in time
many things into my mind, which I had read, and observed, concerning custom, in
general; till at last it came to this, that was printed. I needed not have
owned it, some may think; and better so, perchance: yet the thanks I have had
for it, from some, to whose judgment I could not but ascribe much, because I
knew them very conversant in the study of Nature, whereof also they have given
good proof to the public; has made me to adventure upon this acknowledgment.
However, were it now to be reprinted, (such is the largeness of the subject) it
might be sit^ed for public use much more, than ever it was. Now those things
that are archieved by Art and Study, though they may seem not so properly
Natural, in that sense we take natural here; yet as they are referred to the
power of use and custom (a great mystery of Nature, in our sense, and the
subject of much admiration, as that Treatise will show them, who desire further
satisfaction about it) so, they properly belong to this account.

I MAY not, in this survey of several helds, which usually cause admiration (I
observe no order, but take them as they offer themselves) I may not, I say,
omit the wonders of Chemistry: by some so much doted upon, (right Mountebancks,
and cheaters in this) that they would refer all mysteries and miracles, even of
Religion unto it* and to that end, fetch the pedigree of it from God himself,
in his holy word, (much profaned and abused by their ridiculous, senseless
applications, and interpretations: wherein, I think, one Robert Flud, of this
Country, worthily for it chastised by Gassendus, has exceeded, even to the
height of blasphemy; all that I have read or heard of) and after him, from
Adam, from Solomon, by sundry fabulous forged writings: and whom not?
Trithemius, that learned Abbot, and a great pretender to Mysteries himself,
whose inventions have troubled so many heads, to so little purpose hitherto;
his judgment of it is, that parum in se continet, praeter verba, frauds,
vanitatem, dolositatem, and the like; which he would have the necessary
attendants on it. What made him so angry with it, I know not. For my part, I am
bound to speak of the art it self, lawfully used, as by most learned Physicians
at this day, with all respect and gratitude, as owing my life, under God, to
it. For when (it may do some others good perchance, to know it) I was a young
Student in Christ-Church College, in Oxford, in a grievous sickness (it was
thought, the Small Pox had struck in) I had two Physicians, whereof, the worthy
Professor, Dr. Cleyton was one, the other, a young man, of St. Magdalens^ Hall,
or College, as I remember; by the appointment of my then Tutor, Dr. Meetk^rke,
since that, Hebrew Professor in Oxford; and afterward one of the Prebends of
Winchester, of ever dear and honored memory to me. But my disease so
prevailed, it seems, that after a fort-night, or thereabouts, having been
prayed for in the Church once or twice: at last both my Physicians came to my
Tutor, and told him they had done what could be done by art: there was no hope
left, but in Gods great power, if he thought fitting: otherwise I had not many
hours to live. Having thus taken their leaves, and left him very sorrowful;
about one hour after (this is the account I had from him, by word of mouth, and
under his hand too) the younger Physician came to him again, confirms to him
what they had said before, when together; but withal, made a motion, if he
thought fit, as in a desperate case, to try some means* which possibly might do
more than could be expected, by ordinary ways. At the worst, I could die, but
two or three hours before my time. The Doctor was at a stand; asked whether he
might not send to my friends, before, to London; of which famous Dr. Thory was
the chief, whom I was trusted to, and who took care of me. To which being
answered, that before the man could come to London, the business would
certainly be over; he gave way: and presently, Pills, or Potion, somewhat was
given me, which in less than twenty four hours, (with Gods blessing) restored
me to sense, and speech; and from that time, I remember well, by what degrees I
recovered. For I was brought so low before, that though pretty cheerful, ever
since; it was a whole month at least, after, before I could read in a book, or
stand well upon my legs; to say no more. Now, that, what I took, was some
Chemical composition, my Tutor told me, but no particulars of it, which I
suppose were not told him. For I never was so happy, as to see, or know him,
that had been the Author of so much good, under God, unto me; who I think died
soon after himself: neither can I so much as give an account of his name, till
I can find the Doctor's papers, which at present I cannot. I know how averse
some are from Chemical receipts: which indeed, from mere Empiricks, must needs
be very dangerous: but from a man, that is well grounded in the old way, may do
strange things. This example therefore I thought would not be amiss.

I HAVE been much pleased with the relation of diverse experiments, which I have
read in Quercetanus, when I have found them confirmed by other sober writers,
that were not, or are not, mere Chemists. For till then, I think a man may do
well to suspend his faith. And I know that Quercetanus himself, though very
learned otherwise, is suspected sometimes by some, who generally give him good
respect, to impose upon the Credulity of his Readers. How much more Crellius,
Paracelsus, and the like? I find learned Sennertus charged with no less then
Atheism, by more than one, for giving too much credit unto him: as
particularly, concerning that, which they call, the spiritual rose: that is, a
rose (and if a rose, why not any other plant, or flower) by art, reduced into
ashes, wherein the substance of the rose shall be so preserved, that with a
convenient heat applied, a spiritual rose shall arise, and appear in the glass,
like in all things to what it was before. Yet this is averred for a truth by
some, who profess to have made frequent experiment before company. So Gafarell,
as I find him cited by others: but Gafarell is a man of very little authority
with me; (especially in so great a thing) neither with any man, I think, that
loves sobriety. I have ground enough for what I say. Had he, himself no
intention to deceive; yet the Authors, whom he does trust, such as Galeatus,
Thevet, Cardan, (of whom more afterward) and his doting Rabbis, sufficiently
show, what a man of judgment he was. In the beginning of that Chapter, where he
treats of the rose, he tells us of another experiment, very well worth the
knowing, if true, ( Cardan is his Author) that a knife, being rubbed upon some
kind of Loadstone, or a pointed instrument; the body may be cut, or run in,
without any pain at all. It may be true, but I would have better authority for
it, than Cardans; that mendacissimus, by his own, and his friends
acknowledgment: but more likely to be false, because not better known, or more
inquired after. But the testimony of a learned Physician of this Country,
confirmed by a noble and learned Knight, does much more move me. Neither are
the arguments, brought against the possibility of such a thing, by those before
mentioned censurers, of any great weight with me. Why should it overthrow all
Faith, and all Religion, or be prejudicial to the power of God; as though God,
who is the Author of Nature, were not the Author of all wonders, brought to
pass by natural means? Indeed, in point of Philosophy, it must needs be very
strange, and in some manner incredible; because of that known Axiom, A
privatione ad hab tum, etc. But to contest against clear evidence, by
Philosophical Axioms; is as much against Philosophy, and Aristotle
particularly, as any thing. Neither (if true) does it abate of the wonder of
the resurrection, to me; who still look upon the same God, by his power the
Author of the one, as well as of the other. Neither is my Faith concerning the
resurrection of the dead, confirmed unto me by this experiment, (if it be true,
which I desire I may be allowed to say, till I have seen it my self, or see
more reason to believe it) which I thank God, does rest upon better grounds,
than Chemical experiments; but illustrated, I will acknowledge, and say, not a
little. For as here, out of ashes, so there, out of the dust: as here, the same
rose in substance, yet a spiritual rose; so there, the same body in substance;
but a spiritual body: this, by fire; the other, I will not say by fire, yet not
without fire; when the Elements shall melt with fervent heat; and a new Earth,
and new Heavens are promised. So much for the possibility of this noble
experiment I can plead: to which I add, that the same that deride it, as
impossible, in point of reason; and, as impious to believe; yet grant the
birth, and growing of a Plant in distilled water, as possible and true, which
to some others, may seem as incredible. But on the other side, when I consider,
that what these write of plants and flowers; others, write of metals and
minerals, that they may be so resolved by art, ut in vitro ins^ar fruticis and
arbus^ulae, efflores^ant and surrigantur: it makes me to suspect the other the
more. For if such things could be done, methinks they should be seen oftener
than they are; or rather, reported to be. It were a sight for Kings and
Princes; not to be done in corners, and by men, who, I am sure, have been found
tripping in less matters. I make as much doubt of that which they call, aurum
alatum, though by some averred with much confidence. For if true, the invention
and use of Gunpowder, would be little regarded, in comparison.

THEY that write of the wonders of nature, or natural magic, as they call it;
bring into this account also some things that have been done by exquisite art,
apt to cause admiration, in the beholders, and incredible, or almost incredible
to them, that have it by relation only. Though art, and nature be commonly
opposed; yet well may such things be reckoned among the wonders of nature also,
in more than one respect; whereof one may be, because the Authors of such
wonders must be looked upon as helped, or fitted by nature, more than art, if
by art at all. Such a one is mentioned, a rustic by his profession and
education, by Wormius, in his Musaeum* whose pieces were admired by all, and by
some, he says, though^ to exceed bare art. Such were the works of Archimedes,
that admirable man, whose miraculous achievements, though brought to pass by
Art, (whereof himself has left sufficient evidences, to posterity) yet so far
surpassing the reach and abilities (for ought we can find) of all that have
been since him, in so many ages since, that we must needs think there was in
him, and his works, much more of nature, than art. What praise a late Architect
( Dominicus Fontana) got, for removing one of the Roman, or Egyptian rather
Obelisks, from one side of the Vatican Church, where it had stood a long time
in Circo Neronis, to the other; all books that treat of these things* are full
of it: as particularly, how long the Pope ( Sixtus the V.) was, before he could
get any body that would undertake it; and how much the work was admired, (and
still is) when it was done; what instruments were used; what cost was bestowed,
and the like. It was, or is, an entire stone, of 956148 pounds weight: 170 foot
high, as some write; but it may be a mistake of the Print: for others, whom I
rather believe, say but 107; besides the basis, 37 foot high. The manner, how
it was done, is acurately set down by Henr. Monantholius, in his Commentaries
upon Aristotle's Mechanics. But what is this to what was performed by
Archimedes, in his time? Which things, though of themselves, very incredible;
yet attested at such a time, and by such witnesses, as they are, one may as
well doubt, whether ever there was such a place as Syracuse, or such a man as
Marcellus: not to speak of his own works, yet extant, which they that are able
to understand, or part of them, look upon with as much admiration, as ever
those works of his were, by them that saw them. I cannot but laugh at the
conceit of some men, who think, that the use of Gunpowder was known to
Archimedes, and that, by the help of it, he did what he did, at the siege of
Syracuse: such a conceit also has Sir Walter Rawleigh, as I remember, of
Alexanders time; but upon what grounds, I shall not now enquire. But certainly,
Archimedes his inventions are much undervalued by them, who think such things
could be done by Gunpowder. Gunpowder indeed in a Ship may blow it up,
suddenly: out of a Ship, may sink it, in time, if it be not too far. But to
hoise a Ship, from the walls of the town, which were compassed by the Sea, at
one end; and then to plunge it to the bottom: nay, to make it dance in the air,
and twirle it about, to the horror, and amazement of all spectators; and other
things, more particularly described by Plutarch, and by Polibius; is more, I
think, than can be ascribed to the power of Gunpowder. However, the wonder of
Gunpowder, is, the first invention, which was casual, except the Devil (which I
do not believe, because less hurt is now done in fights, than was, when no
Gunpowder was) had a hand in it: what is now done by it, no man does wonder at:
but what Archimedes did, was begun, and carried on by Art, and an incomparable
brain, or wit, the gift of God, or nature only.

AMONG other works of Archimedes, one was a glass Sphere; so Claudian of it,
but, which is more likely, Lactantius says of brass: by both it is elegantly
described; by the one, in Verse; by the other in Prose. This Sphere represented
the motions (we may be allowed to speak so I hope, notwithstanding the new, or
rather, in this, old revived Philosophy: for all men, I see, are not yet
persuaded, nor like to be, to embrace Copernicus's opinion) of the Spheres, and
Planets exactly; of the Sun and Moon, especially, from which the division of
days, and months, and years does wholly depend. Here was matter of admiration,
especially if he were the first, that ever attempted it. Of the truth, or
possibility of this, no man does doubt. But if it be true, which is written of
another Sphere, found in the precious Cabinet of Cosroes, King of Persia, when
he was overcome (after he had committed many horrible cruelties against the
Christians) by Heraclius, the Roman Emperor, which not only represented the
Spheres, and their motions, but also rained, lightened, and thundered: as I must
acknowledge, that it surpassed that of Archimedes; so I shall take the liberty
to doubt, whether any such can be made, by mere Art. Yet Sci^kardus, in his
series of the Kings of Persia, does speak of one of a latter date, made by one
Stafflerus Tubingensis, not less admirable, which also exhibited a Rainbow; if
many old men (for, by a mischance of fire, it was burned before his time, it
seems) by him carefully examined about it (he says) may be credited.

I KNOW not by what chance, a Discourse has fallen into my hands, containing an
excellent description of some such Machina, called Horologium Astronomicum,
which, as I guess by the last words, was to be seen in Germany, in the year of
the Lord 1590. The words are; David W^^lkenstein, Vratislaviensis, Silesius;
Mathematum professor, and Chori Musici praefectus in Argentoratensium Academia;
Honestissimo and integerrimo viro, Domino Gregorio Zolchero, amicitiae and
observantiae ergo, describebat Anno Dom. 1590. I will set down (some perchance
will desire it) the beginning also.

DESCRIPTIO Astronomici Horologii, etc. Horologium hoc (...) est, id est, per
se mobile, ponderibus agitatum. Nomen ei indimus ab usu: nempe quia horas,
praecipuas temporis parts, annum, mensem, nychthemeron, diem, noctem, horam,
minutum etiam, mobilibus statuis, elegantissimis picturis, jucundissima sonorum
harmonia, and cantu, discriminat and judicat. Parts ejus sex sunt. Prima
continet globum coelestem, secunda Astrolabium: Calendarium, and orbem
horariorum minutorum. Tertia habet tres orbs periodicorum motuum; menstrui,
horarii, and hebdomadarii. In quarta, Regina considet, and, circum eam, aliquot
proc^res versantur cum praecone. Extra Regium Palatium, sunt M^rs, and Mil^s,
and post hos duos, Angeli. In quinta, sunt duo Angeli, Excubitor, and Gallus.
Hae quinque parts, in aperto sunt loco. Sexta pars, in abscondito est, cymbala
continens.

THUS far the first page, with three lines of the second, written in an
excellent hand, distinguished with variety of Incks, (besides the Title Page,
which has more variety) black, and red: upon pure Vellum; but that it has
received some hurt by Seawater, as I guess. The whole description does consist
of twenty four Pages. Here indeed, in this whole description, I find nothing of
thunder, or lightning: no rain, no rainbow, as in the former: but so many
other things ( Eclipses of Sun, and Moon, among the rest) that if I be not
mistaken in the sense of the words, may deserve almost as much admiration. I
did once conceive, that it was a public Clock at Argentoratum, (in Germany)
famous for some noble pieces of Architecture; but no mention of any such thing
has occurred hitherto to me, that I can call to mind. I have read a
description out of Politians Epistles, that has much affinity with this, but
that it is not so large, neither does it mention any Statues, or Images, or
Musical instruments. I doubt not, but some may know more of it, than I do,
which this, may provoke them to impart.

AND now I am upon it, it must be acknowledged in general, that no Science, or
Contemplation does afford more wonders, and more abstract from all materiality,
( Theology always excepted) than the Mathematics, or Mathematical conclusions.
As for example, (though it be a common example, yet never sufficiently admired)
that two lines, bending the one toward the other, may be drawn (still bending,
as before) in insinitum: that is, to eternity, and yet never meet: This, when a
young Scholar in the University of Oxford, I was showed, and sufficiently, by
ocular demonstration, as it were, convicted, that it must be so: yet still so
strange and incredible did it appear unto me, that I could never be satisfied,
but that there is some kind of fallacy in that business. I have heard it thus
also proposed, which did increase my suspicion the more. A. B. stand at a
distance. B. stirs not: A. makes toward him. The first day, he goes half
the way. The second, another half, of the space that remained, after the first
days work, or march. The third, another half of what remained. So the fourth,
the fifth day; still one half of the way, or space, that remains, and no
more. I ask, when shall A. be at his journeys end, and overtake B. I answer,
upon the same ground, as before, Never. I would not have these things used, as
arguments to confirm the truth of Christian faith, or of any Articles of our
faith (I see it is done, by some) that seem most incredible. For though assent
may be extorted, by apparent irrefragable proofs, and propositions; yet hardly
true belief wrought, and obtained. Gassendus says, he will suspend his says:
adhuc ambigo, is his word: and gives his reason, Because Mathematical (to
which, nevertheless, of all humane Sciences, it is acknowledged, that truth
does most properly belong) suppositions may be true in one sense, and not in
another. Chrysostom. Magnenus, a great stickler for the atoms says, Non eadem est
ratio linearum Mathematicarum, and Physicarum. I hope, then, it will not be
required, that Divinity shall be tried by the Mathematics, and made
subservient to them; which yet the temper of some men of this age, does seem to
threaten, who scarce will allow any thing else, worthy a man's study; and then,
what need of Universities?

BUT, not the Theorems of the science, but the works of Mathematicians, was
that we were upon, as a more proper object (more visible, I am sure) of
admiration, and by consequent of Credulity and Incredulity. Such were those
admirable works of Archimedes we have before spoken of, and may have more
occasion perchance, in our Second Part: and therefore shall proceed no further
in this subject. So we go on.

THERE is not, I think, any thing more liable (after monsters) to popular
admiration, than those things that grow in different Climats, or Countries.
But, as it belongs to fools and children most properly, to gaze, with no little
wondering sometimes, at those that wear Clothes and Apparel different from their
own, or that, which they are used unto: (some there be so simple, that can
scarce believe them real men, endowed with the same qualities of nature, if the
difference of apparel be very great) so truly, to wonder much at any natural
thing; as plants, or beasts, or the like, that are said to grow, or live in any
other part of the world; or upon relation, scarce to believe that to be truly
existent, though we have good authority for it, which our own Country does not
afford; must needs argue great simplicity and ignorance. What can be more
different (of things that are of one kind) than Europian, and Asiatick Wheat,
otherwise called Turkish-wheat? What if all, or most other things did differ as
much, the difference of soil and climat considered; it were no great wonder, in
point of Nature. I have both seen the picture and narration of Lobsters,
drawing men, notwithstanding their resistance, with arms in their hands; into
the Sea, to eat them. I will not upon a single testimony, though I have no
exceptions against the relator, absolutely believe that it is true: though I
believe it possible. A flying Mouse, is no wonder in England: why should I
wonder at a flying Cat (I do not mean an Owl) if I have good authority for it:
I have Scaligers, but that is not enough to make me believe it, though he name
the place, except he said he had seen it, which he does not. It is enough for
me, that I believe it possible; and if it be true, when I know it, I shall make
no wonder of it. Since we know it that the world is full of variety, (none of
the least of its ornaments, and an argument of the Creators power, and wisdom)
why should we wonder at all, or make any difficulty to believe, what does only
confirm unto us, what we know, that the world is full of variety? But this kind
of admiration, or unbelief, (besides them I have spoken of before) does
naturally belong to them, who never were out of their own Country, nor ever had
the curiosity to read the travels of others; upon whom Seneca passes this
judgment; Imperitum animal, homo, qui circumscribitur natalis soli fine, which
I may English, That man is more an animal, than a man, whose knowledge does not
extend beyond the things of his own Country. But then, I say, we must have good
grounds for what we believe. For to believe every thing, that is reported or
written, because it is possible, or not at all strange, in case it be true;
does argue as much weakness, as to believe nothing, but what our selves have
seen. But there will be a more proper place for this afterward. These things
here spoken of, might be referred also to the power of use and custom before
spoken of, but in another sense.

OF diverse things, which are ordinary objects of admiration, and by consequent
of Credulity and Incredulity, has been spoken hitherto: but the most ordinary,
is yet behind; and that is, things that are supernatural; of which we may
consider two kinds. Some things so called, (termed also natural by some, as was
said before) because no probable natural reason has hitherto been found, or
given, nor are apparently reducible to any of those former heads, before
mentioned: though it is possible, that time, and further experience may
discover more, and that be found natural, in the ordinary sense; which before
was judged supernatural. And again, some things, which though called natural
also, by some; yet, not by ordinary men only, who may easily be deceived; but
by others also, men of fame, and approved sobriety and sincerity, whose
business it has been all their life long, (whether obliged by their
profession, or no) to enquire into the ways, and works of nature, are deemed
and esteemed, the actings of Devils, and Spirits immediately; or of men and
women, assisted with their power, as their instruments. But at this very
mention of Devils and Spirits, I see methinks, not a few, and among them,
some, not only in their opinion, but in the opinion of many others, and by
public fame, learned and experienced men; some, to recoil with indignation;
others, gently to smile, with some kind of compassion. Now if it may be
rationally doubted, whether there be any such thing as Devils, or Spirits, and
consequently such men, and women, as Magicians, and Sorcerers, and Witches;
then there is as much reason, to doubt of all those particular relations, which
presuppose the operation of Spirits, whether by themselves, immediately, or by
their agents, and instruments, Witches, and Wizards. And indeed so we find it
commonly, that they that believe no Devils, nor Spirits, do also discredit and
reject all relations, either ancient, or late, that cannot with any color of
probability, or knack of wit, be reduced to natural causes; and that they do
not believe Witches and Wizards, seldom believe that there be Devils, or
Spirits. I might go further, according to the observation of many, both ancient
and late: but I will stop there. However, if not all Atheists themselves (which
I have more charity, than to believe) yet it cannot be denied, but the opinion
is very apt to promote Atheism, and therefore earnestly promoted and
countenanced by them, that are Atheists. And indeed, that the denying of
Witches, to them that content themselves in the search of truth with a
superficial view, is a very plausible cause; it cannot be denied. For if any
thing in the world, (as we know all things in the world are) be liable to
fraud, and imposture, and innocent mistake, through weakness and simplicity;
this subject of Witches and Spirits is. When a man shall read, or hear such a
story, as Erasmus in his Colloquium, entitled Spectrum (the thing was acted in
England, as I remember) does relate: Who does not find in himself a
disposition, for a while, to absolute Incredulity in such things? And the world
is full of such stories; some, it may be, devised of purpose, either for sport,
or of design, to advance the opinion, in favor of Atheism: but very many so
attested, that he must be an infidel, as can make any question of the truth.
How ordinary is it to mistake natural melancholy (not to speak of other
diseases) for a Devil? And how much, too frequently, is both the disease
increased, or made incurable; and the mistake confirmed, by many ignorant
Ministers, who take every wild motion, or fancy, for a suggestion of the
Devil? Whereas, in such a case, it should be the care of wise friends, to apply
themselves to the Physician of the body, and not to entertain the other, (I
speak it of natural melancholy) who probably may do more hurt, than good; but
as the learned Naturalist does allow, and advise? Excellent is the advice and
counsel in this kind, of the Author of the book de morbo Sacro attributed to
Hippocrates, which I could wish all men were bound to read, before they take
upon them to visit sick folks, that are troubled with melancholy diseases. But
on the other side, it cannot be denied, because I see learned Physicians are of
that opinion, and visible effects do evince it; but that the Devil does
immiscere se, in several diseases: whereof Sir Theodore Mayerne, (whom I think
for strange and even miraculous cures, I may call the Aesculapius of his time,
and do no body wrong) gave me a notable instance, concerning a maid in his
house, that had been bitten by a mad Dog, which also died of it: to whom when
he came in a morning, with a Looking-glass (to make trial of what he had read,
but not yet experienced himself) under his gown; before he was in the room, she
began to cry out, and told him what it was he had about him. But I leave a
further account of it to his own learned and voluminous Observations, which I
hope they that have inherited that vast estate, will not envy to posterity. Yet
I know there be Physicians too, that would make us believe, that bare
melancholy, will make men, or women prophecy, and speak strange languages, as
Latin, Greek, Hebrew; (of all which there be sundry unquestionable instances)
but such are looked upon, by others of their profession, the far greater, and
every way, much more considerable number, as Heretics in that point. But
because the matter is liable to mistakes, and imposture, hence to infer and
conclude, there is no such thing, as either Witches, or Spirits; there is no
truth, but may be denied upon the same ground, since it is certain, there is no
truth, no nor virtue, but is attended with a counterfeit, often mistaken for
the true; as by diverse Ancients, both Historians, and Philosophers, is
observed, and by sundry pregnant instances confirmed; whereof I have given a
further account in my Latin notes upon Antoninus, the Roman Emperor, his
incomparable (I must except those of our late Gracious Sovereign, and Gods
glorious Martyr) moral Meditations.

NOW whereas I said but now, they that did not believe there be Witches, or
Spirits, did generally discredit, and reject such relations, either ancient or
late, as cannot with any color of probability or knack of wit, be reduced to
natural causes: it is true, generally they do. But see the contradictions, and
confusions of a false opinion, and affected singularity. For some of them of a
more tender mould, being convicted by frequent experience, of the truth of
those operations, by others accounted supernatural, or diabolical, and yet, it
seems, not willing to recant their error of the nonexistence of Witches and
Spirits, which perchance had got them (the thing, certainly, that diverse aim
at) the reputation of discerning able men, above the ordinary rate of men; to
maintain their reputation, they devised a way, how not to recede from their
former opinion, and yet not deny that, which they thought (it is their own
acknowledgment) could not be denied, but by madmen; that is, supernatural
(generally so called) operations. How so? Why, they tell us, that all men, good
or bad, learned and unlearned; by the very constitution of their soul, and the
power and efficacy of a natural faith, or confidence, may work all those
things, that we call miracles, or supernatural operations. This was the opinion
of one Ferrerius, a later, and learned Physician in France, whom I have had
occasion, but upon this very subject, elsewhere to speak of. How many more
besides him, did espouse the same opinion, (for he was a man of great credit,
as by Thuanus his relation does appear) I know not. Now because I never heard,
neither is it alleged by any other, that I have read, that this man, or any
that were of his opinion, did ever attempt to do miracles, which certainly they
would have done, had they had any confidence in their opinion; May not any man
probably conclude from thence, that they maintained, what they knew in their
own conscience to be false: or by Gods just judgment, for not submitting their
reason to his Revealed Word, and the ordinary maxims of Religion, were suffered
to entertain such opinions, as must needs argue some kind of deliration and
infatuation?

BUT if the Reader will have the patience of a short digression, I will tell
him a story, concerning this Au^erius, or, as Bodin writes him, Ogerius, which
may be worth his hearing; not because it is strange, which is not my business,
properly, but because it is not impertinent to what we drive at, truth. There
was, it seems, at Toulouse in France, where this man lived and died, a fair
house, in a convenient place, which was haunted, and for that reason, to be
hired for a very small rent. This house, Augerius (as once Athenodorus, the
Philosopher, did at Athens) not giving perchance any great credit to the
report, did adventure upon. But finding it more troublesome, than he did
expect, and hearing of a Portugal Scholar in the town, who in the nail of a
young boy, (it is a kind of Divination, we shall speak of, in due place) could
show hidden things, agreed with him. A young girl was to look. She told, she
saw a woman curiously clad, with precious chains, and gold: which stood at a
certain pillar in the Cellar, (the place, it seems, chiefly haunted) having a
Torch in her hand. Hereupon the Portugal's advice to the Physician, was, he
should have the ground dug, just in that place; for that, certainly there
was some treasure there. The Physician had so much faith, it seems, as to
believe him, and presently takes care for the execution. But when they were
even come to the treasure, as they thought, or whatever it was; a sudden
whirlwind puts out the Candles, and going out of the Chimney, ( spiraculum
cellae, the Latin Translation calls it: which may be understood of a
Storehouse, in any part of the House, or a Cellar, or Vault: I live in a House
built upon a Vault, which once had a Chimney) battered some 14 foot of
battlement in the next house, whereof part fell upon the porch of the house;
part upon the said Chimney, and part upon a stone-pitcher, or water-pot, that
was carried by a woman, and brake it. From that time, all annoyance of Spirits,
ceased in that house. When the Portugal was told, what had happened, he said,
The Devil had carried away the treasure, and that he wondered the Physician had
no hurt. Bodinus, my Author, says, The Physician himself told him the story,
two days after; who presently after ( Bodinus, I mean) went to see the ruins,
and found it as he was told. And this, says he, happened in a very clear calm
day, as at the best time of the year, though it was the 15 December, 1558. By
the Dedicatory Epistle, in my Edition, Bodinus first set out his book 1579:
Augerius died, 1588. There arose some difference, it seems, between Bodinus,
and this Augerius, before he died, as Thuanus does tell us. But whether
friends, or foes, (though here, Augerius is styled by him, Medicus Doctissimus;
and a little before, where he speaks of his opinion, vir doctus) no man, I
think, can rationally have the least suspicion, that Bodinus, upon the very
place, where the thing happened, which could not be long concealed from public
knowledge, durst, or could relate it in any particular, otherwise, than as it
was generally known in all the Town, to have happened, and Augerius himself had
made relation to him. And this was the man, who not able otherwise to avoid
Spirits and supernatural operations, which as to the matter of fact, he does
acknowledge, and thinks it a kind of madness to deny them; did take upon him to
devise and maintain, that all men naturally, learned and unlearned, were in a
capacity to do miracles by their faith, I wish the Reader would take the pains
to peruse that whole Chapter of his, De Homerica Curatione, as he does call it,
to see, how that learned man does labor miserably to come off, with any
probability, with his mad project; which yet, he professes, he did not
hastily, or unadvisedly fall upon; but, cum toto animo ac studio omni [in eam
cogitationem] incumberem, as himself speaks. A good caveat, I think, to
others, how they entertain new opinions. Yet, I cannot absolutely say, that he
was the first Author of this mad device. The Enthusiastic Arabs long before,
(we have given an account of them, elsewhere) did broach some such thing; which
by Cornelius Agrippa, is largely explained and maintained in his books, De
occulta Philosophia: but neither by the Arabs, nor by Cornelius, is this power
given to all men in general, learned, and unlearned; but to them only, who by
constant study and speculation in these mystical arts, (in very truth,
Diabolical, and so acknowledged, in effect, by Cornelius himself, in his solemn
recantation in his books, De Vanitate Scientiarum; though not believed by all
men, to have been so sincere, as it should have been) have refined their Souls
to such a degree of perfection, as much exceeds the bounds of ordinary
humanity. But, neither were these ever famed for wonders, or miracles done by
them, that I remember, whether Arabs, or others. Ancient Magicians, as
Porphyrius, Iamblicus, and the rest; did profess to deal by Spirits: So later
Magicians, Agrippa and others; and Trithemius, in his answers to the questions,
proposed unto him, as the man then in Europe, best able to resolve him, by
Maximilian, the Emperor, concerning the power of Witches, etc. does much
inveigh against the malice, wickedness, and fraudulency of those Spirits. And
those few set aside, as Agrippa, Trithemius, and some others (of whose great
acts nevertheless, I find but little recorded) it is well known, that such as
we call supernatural, not Divine operations, have in all ages, since those
ancienter Magicians, been wrought by men and women, who were altogether
illiterate, and for their lives, most infamous.

AS for them, who allow and acknowledge supernatural operations by Devils and
Spirits, as Wierius; who tells as many strange stories of them, and as
incredible, as are to be found in any book; but stick at the business of
Witches only, whom they would not have thought the Authors of those mischiefs,
that are usually laid to their charge, but the Devil only; though this opinion
may seem to some, to have more of charity, than Incredulity; yet the contrary
will easily appear to them, that shall look into it more carefully; as by that
little we shall say of it afterward, any indifferent man may be satisfied. And
though it is much, that he does grant, and no small part of what we drive at,
when he does acknowledge supernatural operations, by Devils and Spririts, as we
said before: and that he had not the confidence, though his project of
acquitting Witches from all crime, might tempt him to oppose himself to the
belief (grounded upon daily experience) of all ages, of all men, some few
excepted; nevertheless, I cannot but look upon the opinion he does maintain, as
gross, and notorious incredulity; and of very pernicious consequence; and
therefore, think my self bound to enquire into it a little further, before I
proceed to other matter.

MY first argument, or observation shall be, concensus generis humani. For,
that some few here and there dissent, if any should object them against the
universal consent of men; he may as well object, that the earth is not round,
because there be many hills, and valleys in most part of the world. Now this
reason from the generality of men's belief all the world over, must be of great
weight to engage ours, except there be manifest reason to the contrary.
Aristotle does acknowledge it, a man otherwise not over-credulous, or addicted
to popular opinions; (...), says he; What all men believe, we may say, is
truth. And what use has been made by ancient Heathens and others, of this
general consent of mankind, to prove that there is a God, is well known. It is
very usual with many, when they have some strange opinion to broach, to tell us
of some erroneous persuasion, which has long prevailed among men; as, that
thread bare example of the Antipodes, which once to believe, was heresy; to
which some others may be added. But in this particular, how impertinent such
allegations are, who does not see? For it is one thing by some authority of
man, or probability of reason, to be misled into an opinion, determinable more
by speculation, than experience; or, if by experience, yet rare, and difficult,
and wherein few men are concerned, as to matter of life: In such a case, if the
error be never so general, it is no wonder. But in a case of this nature, as
Witches (to which we add, Spirits, in general, and supernatural operations)
which does mostly depend, especially where learning is not of daily experience,
and wherein men's lives and fortunes are so much concerned: to be misled in
this, and from age to age, to continue in the error, is a strange thing indeed,
if not a mere impossibility. The world is much wider now (as to Knowledge) than
it has been formerly: and therefore the consent of it so much the more
considerable. I have (as all men, I think have that are any thing curious) read
several relations of all the known parts of the world, written by men of
several Nations, and Professions, learned and unlearned, in diverse languages:
by men of several ages, ancient and late: I do scarce remember any short, or
long, but does afford somewhat to the confirmation of this truth; but in most,
I remember well to have met with very particular accounts and relations of
Witches and Sorcerers; strange divinations, predictions, operations, whereof
the relators, many of them, men of several Nations and professions, Papists and
Protestants, who probably never heard of one another, profess themselves to
have been eyewitnesses.

NOW if we confine our selves to this one part of the world, which we call
Europe, to which one part all learning seems now to be in a manner confined;
which, within this hundred, or two hundred years, has produced so many able
men of all professions; Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, and Philosophers; Papists
and Protestants; those few men excepted, who may soon be named all, known by
their writing, to have dissented; Who is there among them all, who has not,
pro re nata, and as occasion served, born testimony to this truth, or cause?
But how many are there, of most Kingdoms, Germans, High and Low, French,
English, Spanish; not to seek further; of all professions that have written of
this subject, pleaded it, by reason and experience, and all kind of proofs;
answered all objections, and pretensions: some whereof, learned and grave, have
had the examination of persons, men and women accused for those wicked
practices in great number. Nicholaus Remigius, a man both pious and learned, (I
wish covetous Printers had not bereaved us of his excellent Poetry, in many
Editions) in his books of Demonolatrie, does profess, within the space of
sixteen years, to have had the examination of near 2000, whereof 900 were
condemned to death. We may say the same, or there-abouts, I think, of
Grillandus, not to mention others. That so many, wise and discreet, well versed
in that subject, could be so horribly deceived, against their wills; or so
impious, so cruel, as wilfully to have a hand in the condemnation of so many
Innocents; or again, wilfully, in the face of the Sun, and in defiance to God,
by so many false relations, to abuse all men, present, and future; what man can
believe. Their chiefest evasion, who are, or would seem to be of a contrary
opinion is, what a strange thing a depraved fancy, or imagination is; how
easily it may represent to it self Devils, and Spirits; Sorceries and
enchantments, and, God knows what: which things, commonly talked of, among
ordinary people, especially, as many other things are; though they have no real
being, yet may make great impressions in the brain, and offer themselves in
sleep, or when the brain is sick, and out of temper, by melancholy especially.
Or, if they be of Wierius his opinion, what advantage the Devil may make of a
sick brain, to make silly poor women believe, that they have done things, which
they never did, nor could. And this, when they have proved by two or three
examples (or say twenty, or more; for it is no hard business) they think they
have done much. But what reason have they, to think this such a mystery, that
none of those, that have had to do with Witches, and Sorcerers, ever heard of
any such thing; and would not well consider it, before they passed any
judgment? But what if more than one, ten, or twenty perchance, (it has been so
sometimes) have been actors, or accessories in some one execrable business,
and, upon suspicion, being severally examined, are found to agree in one tale;
to have been thus and thus encouraged, assisted, by Spirits; to have acted such
and such things; met in such places, at such times; which things, accompanied
with notable circumstances, are found upon examination to be true, in all
points and particulars? What if others, men and women, be convicted by the
deposition of sundry creditable witnesses, upon some sudden quarrel, or old
grudge; To have cursed, and threatened, thus and thus; men or cattle; and that
it has happened accordingly: Strange deaths, strange diseases, strange
unnatural, unusual accidents, have ensued: can all this be, the effects of a
depraved fancy? Or what, when such a house, such a parish has been troubled
with such unusual accidents; if all those accidents, immediately cease, upon
the arraignment and execution of some, that are suspected, and have confessed,
(though it does not always so fall out, that they confess, which may be some
argument of their repentance, which, I fear, is not very usual) shall we impute
all this to a depraved fancy, or imagination: or say, with Wierius, that all
this is done by the Devil only, to bring poor innocent women to destruction.
And that God does suffer these things, to punish (but more of that by and by)
the credulity of men? Truly, as I can believe, that some men, innocently, for
want of experience and good information, may hold such an opinion, which of the
two, they conceive most charitable; so, that any man of ordinary capacity, that
has taken pains to inform himself, can really, without some great and secret
judgment of God, persist in it, is to me almost incredible; or not less strange
than any of these supernatural operations, which ordinarily cause most
admiration.

THEN, if a man consider, what kind of men, for the most part, they have been,
who have taken upon them, to oppose the belief of mankind, or universality of
men, concerning Witches, etc. some notorious Atheists, as Pomponatius,
Vaninius, etc. others, confident, illiterate wretches, as one of this Country,
Reginald Scot, and the like; he will think certainly, that if the cause be no
better, than the Patrons, it cannot be very good, nor see any reason at all to
embrace it. But I must not let Reginald Scot pass so, without a further
account, for their sakes (if any) that have a better opinion of him, though
otherwise, a very inconsiderable man. His book, I must confess, I never had,
nor ever read; but as I have found it by chance, where I have been, in friends
houses, or Booksellers shops; and, as the manner is, cast my eyes, here and
there; by which persunctory kind of taste, I am sure, I had no temptation to
read much of him. I do not, therefore, take upon me to judge of him, by what I
have read of him my self, which being so little, might deceive me; but by what
I have read of him, in others, whom I know to have been learned, and judicious,
and of great moderation and candor, in judging, even of enemies. This, I hope,
I may speak without offense, or contradiction, of one, whose surname,
notwithstanding the vast difference of their worth, comes somewhat near (for I
know, that observations have been made, even upon names to the others
christian-name; and that is, Doctor R^ynolds, when he lived, as I take it,
Regius Professor of Divinity, in the University of Oxford: who it seems upon
the report the man had got among the vulgar, had the curiosity (a right helluo
librorum, as any was in his time) to read him. He does mention him more than
once, or twice, in those learned, and elaborate Praelectiones of his upon the
Apocrypha; and not only name him, but takes notice of many particular passages,
and confutes them; or rather, makes himself and his Auditors (now Readers)
sport with them, but always admiring the unparalled boldness, and
impertinence of the man. Of all the books he does mention, in those large and
elaborate Prelections, I do not remember any whom he does censure with more
scorn and indignation. Neither is Dr. Reynolds the only man I have read, that
does censure him: I could name two or three more, if it were tanti, or worth
the while. And what might not we expect from a man, who reckons Plutarch, and
Pliny (so I find him quoted) among the Fathers of the Church: and Leonardum
Vairum, a late Spaniard, who has written three books, De fascino, or
Incantatione, (I have him not, but in French) and styles himself Beneventanum,
Ordinis Sancti Benedictini, and Priorem Abbatiae ejusdem, in Italia: makes him,
I say, either a Protestant, or an ancient Father: But these things we may laugh
at, if these were his greatest errors; concerning which, they that desire to
know more, may find enough in that learned piece before mentioned.

AS I was upon this, and had even written, or rather, (for I had ended this
first part, and was now writing it out, as fast as my weak condition would give
me leave) written out so far: a worthy learned friend, whose judgment and
communication in all kind of literature, wherein he is very expert, I much
value, brought me a book entitled, A Philosophical endeavor, in the defense
of the being of Witches and Apparitions, against Drollery and Atheism, 1668.
Glad was I, to see the book, who am a stranger to all new books, except it be
by some chance, these many years; and I was not long, before I had run it over.
I was glad to find, that we agree so well in our account, both in this
particular of Reginald Scots, and of Witches in general, though in different
ways. He Philosophically, and subtly: I, more popularly and plainly; yet I
hope, not less usefully. As for his particular opinions, or conjectures, we may
take further time to consider of them. His zeal against the Scoffers and
Drollers of the time, as he does call them; that is, against Atheism, which now
passes commonly, but most falsely, and among them only, who want true wit, and
solidity; for wit and gallantry, I do much applaud. So much of it, (the book I
mean) if not to satisfy others, yet my friend, who did help me to the sight of
it.

BUT Wierius was a learned man, a Physician by his profession, who neither
wanted wit, nor experience. They that have read his other book, De lamiis,
(which I never saw) lay to his charge, that he is not constant in his opinion:
sure I am, in his book De praestigiis, etc. he does show much inconsistency:
and sometimes, no small conflict and repugnancy, as a man that is much put to
it, and does not know what to say. For example, where he does argue, whether
men or women, Sorcerers and Witches, may become unsensible to any torments,
inflicted by Magistrates; at first, he does deliver it affirmatively, that they
may; and wickedly, or unadvisedly, (as elsewhere frequently, for which he is
much condemned, and censured by some, to have written more in favor of
Spirits, than women) does set down some charms, that (he says, or may be so
understood) will do it. But then immediately, he does propose some things to
the end, that what he has delivered before as true and certain, might be
questioned and deemed rather ridiculous and false, than true, or credible. For
(says he, as though any man, acquainted with the world, or the Scriptures,
could not have answered it) all powers are of God: it is not likely, that God
will give so much power to Devils, as to hinder the course of Justice. A great
argument indeed, of Gods power, and providence over the world, that though he
does it sometimes, to make us the more sensible, and thankful; yet he does it
not often. Secondly, because God, as he is just, will not have wicked actions
(a great and invincible argument, that there is a time and place of rewards,
besides this present world) to pass unpunished. Yet for all this, his
conclusion at last is: (Sed tamen hominum impietate sic merente, saepius haec
accidisse fateor) that it is so nevertheless; there be Charms and Spells, which
with the Devils help (through the wickedness of men) will make men and women
unsensible of any torments, be they never so great. This puts me in mind of
what I have heard from Sir The^dore Mayerne, (though dead many years ago, yet
his memory, I hope, is yet fresh and living: I shall need to say no more)
whereof he had been, he said, an eye witness; and what course was then held in
Geneva (which then abounded with such creatures) for the prevention, or redress
of such Diabolical unsensibleness, in Witches, and Magicians. I could say more
from him; but I will not, now he is dead, give any man occasion to question the
truth, either of his, or my relation. But to return to Wierius: So much was the
man himself unsatisfied in his own opinion, that it is no easy thing for any
man else, that reads him, to know what he would have. For, that horrible things
are done really, according to the confession of women, accounted Witches; that,
he does not deny: That diverse things, by the confession of these women, of the
time, and place, and manner, and accomplices, come to be known, which before were
not known, and which upon diligent examination are found punctually true, in
every circumstance, according to their confession; he does not only
acknowledge, but does tell many strange stories himself to confirm it. What
then? The Devil, says he, makes them believe they have done, what himself has
been the true author of; nor could indeed be done by any, but himself. But did
ever any man believe, that which Witches did, they did it by their own power?
But that they wilfully, and knowingly, to satisfy their own lust, or desire of
revenge, or other wicked end, make use of the Devil, to bring such wicked
things to pass, which are confessed to be true and real, and wherein they
usually are instrumental themselves; as by clear manifest proofs, and evidences
(if any thing be clear and certain in the world, besides their own confession)
does often appear; this is that which is laid to their charge, and for which
they deservedly suffer.

NAY, he does not deny, but that such as have been bewitched, have been
restored by those, who were suspected (and convicted, some) to have bewitched
them: and yet for all this, bare Fancy the cause of all. I beseech him, What
has he left to us, that we can call truth, if this be but fancy? And still
the conclusion is, that God does suffer these things, poor innocent women to
perish, for the Credulity of men; because they believe that there be Witches in
the world: So that according to him, not those women, who are suspected and
convicted by the Devil, upon their earnest seeking to him, to have done such
and such things; but they that are so credulous, as to believe it, deserve more
(though he does not say it, it does follow so) to bear the punishment. And who
does not see, that by this doctrine, the greatest Malefactor, Traitors, Rebels,
and the like, may be accounted innocent? If this be not enough, to show that
the man was infatuated; then hear him plead, that Witches cannot be, because it
is against the Goodness of God, to suffer, that poor old women, oppressed with
misery and age, should fall into the worst of evils, as to become a prey unto
the Devil. And again, that if God did give such power to Witches, the world
could not subsist: That if Witches have such power, what need any King, or
Prince be at such charge, to raise Armies, to defend themselves, or offend
others; when one single Witch may bring the same things to pass, without such
trouble, or cost? Now the strength of these arguments does lie in this; if it
be true, first, that women are the only object of Gods Providence and Goodness,
and not men: And secondly, because God for reasons best known to him, yet not
altogether incomprehensible to man, does sometimes suffer (as in Jobs case)
some of these things to be, which we may believe, and yet believe that not one
hair of our heads can perish, to our prejudice, without Gods permission: that
God, I say, because sometimes, is therefore bound to suffer them always, and
has given the Devil absolute power over the Earth: which things, if
ridiculous, and impious; so certainly must the opinion be, that is grounded
upon them. But if all this reasoning will do nothing* yet Wierius has another
refuge; though, we see these things, (which we think a good argument of truth
in most other things) yet we must not believe them, but rather think that the
Devil has bewitched our eyes to represent unto us things, that are not really,
than to believe, that women can be so cruel. So he professes of himself; Tam
enim id existit inhumanum, tetricum, and crudele, and creditu difficile, ut si
vel meis intuerer haec oculis, etc. Yet of men, he will believe any thing, it
seems, by those sad stories he tells us of Sorcerers, whom he does detest to
the pit of Hell; but of women ( S^lomon did not find it so, nor the Author of
Ecclesiasticus) we must not believe any such thing. My opinion, (to end this
discourse) concerning the man, is His Prince, and Master, whose chief Physician
he was, had been wrought into that belief by some, (as always here and there
some have been of that opinion) before Wierius had any thing to do with him;
that it was so, and so, in the case of Witches, just as Wierius does endeavor
to make good, in his book: who also (his Prince) what he believed, took a
pleasure (if not, pride) to discourse it publicly. All this, I learn from
Wierius his dedication, and some passages of the book: my opinion is, that to
gratify him, was the chief ground of Wierius his undertaking, who probably by
what we have observed, would not have engaged himself into such trouble of
spirit, and mind, to oppose the public belief, without some great provocation.
This is a charitable opinion, the Reader will say, if he consider, what is
objected unto him by others, to prove, as was intimated before, that what he
intended, was not so much to favor women, as the Devil himself, with whom, it
is to be feared, that he was too well acquainted; as (besides other pregnant
arguments) Cornelius Agrippa his disciple, and bosom friend, according to his
own relation and acknowledgment. But enough of him.

TO others, that are of his opinion, or perchance deny Magicians, as well as
Witches, I would have them to consider, that if there be really such, as the
world does believe; who (whether men, or women) by entering into covenant with
the public enemy of mankind, and by the mischief they do, not to particular
men, women, and children only (not to mention dumb creatures, which are made
for the service of man) but even (God permitting) to whole Towns, and
Countries, by Fires and Pestilences, and otherwise, as the most approved
Historians, and Physicians of these times, who have taken great pains to search
into it, and give such reasons as few, I think, will undertake rationally to
refute, do assert and maintain: If such, I say, really, who for those reasons,
deserve no less than the Devil, to be accounted the enemies of mankind: what
may we think of those, (though some, I believe, through ignorance, and for want
of due information) that become the Patrons of such? And if there be laws
against calumniators, and false witnesses, and those that go about to take away
the good name, even of private men and women; what punishment do they deserve,
that dare publicly traduce all the venerable Judges of so many Christian
Kingdoms, as either ignorant wretches, or wilful murderers?

BUT all this while, we have said nothing, from the authority of Gods Holy
Word, by which, besides some pregnant examples of Witches, and witchcraft in
the Scriptures, all Sorcerers and Magicians; all Witches and Wizards, with much
exactness distinguished and enumerated, are condemned to death; and their sin
set out, as the most heinous of sins, in the eyes of God; and for which more
than any other, the wrath of God comes upon the children of men, to the utter
destruction of whole Kingdoms and Countries. This indeed I should have begun
with, and might have contented my self with such authority, had I to do with
Christians only. But I know what times we live in: we may thank these late
confusions, the fruit of Rebellion, and a pretended Reformation, for a great
part of it. But they that are true Christians, need no other proof, I am sure.
Others, if rational, and not too far engaged into Atheism, have somewhat also
to consider of, if they please.

I THINK I have spoken of most of those general heads, under the Mathematics
(as by the rest, many particulars, which I do not mention) comprehending the
Optics, and all manner of glasses, by which strange things are performed: most
of those general heads, I say, natural, and supernatural, which usually cause
admiration among men; and thereby become objects of credulity and incredulity;
Civil, and Divine only, which we refer to their proper places, excepted. I
shall now in the next place give some Instances, first in things merely
natural, as generally understood; then in things supernatural; or, in
Trallianus, and other ancient Physicians, their sense and notion, which we have
followed in the Title; natural too, but as natural is opposed to rational:
which things, intended for instances, shall be such, which I, upon grounds of
reason, as I conceive, profess to believe; though by many, who suspect the
relations, not credited, or thought impossible. After which instances, I shall
annex some directions, or observations; with some examples of some things,
which but lately generally credited, have proved false, which I think may be
useful.

MY first Instance shall be concerning those men and women, who have been
reported to have lived some years without either meat or drink: except air
should be accounted meat, as to Chamelions, and some other creatures it is
generally (though denied by some, I know) supposed to be. The truth is, that
having had occasion sometimes, not otherwise very forward to tell strange
things, though never so true, in ordinary discourse, yet upon occasion,
supposing this to be no such strange thing, because I had read so much of it,
but might be believed; I did once adventure, in very good company, a learned
Physician being then present, to mention such a thing: but I perceived it was
entertained, as a thing not credible; especially, after the Physician, in very
deed an able man, whom I did not desire to oppose in a thing more properly
belonging to his cognizance; had passed his verdict upon it, that it could not
be. Yet now, I will say, upon the credit of so many good Authors, and the
particular relations of so many examples, delivered with so many circumstances,
wherein no mistake, or imposture can rationally be suspected; that I do believe
it, that diverse men, and women, but more women, than men, have lived diverse
years, (some to their lives end, others for some years only, and then returned
to eating) without any bodily food, ordinary or extraordinary, liquid or solid;
yea, I believe it, as I believe that I my self, with ordinary food, and Gods
blessing, have so many years above 60. lived hitherto.

BUT here, before I proceed, lest any, now that mocking and scoffing at
Religion, and the Scriptures, is so much in fashion, should take any advantage,
to slight and deride Religious, or miraculous fasts, such as are recorded in
the Scripture: I must profess, and declare in the first place, that I never met
with any relation, true or false, of any man or woman, that ever did, or could,
by any art, or study; (though, by the Devil, I think, such a thing might, God
permitting without any prejudice to religious and miraculous fasts) bring their
bodies to any such thing. But so many, as I have read of, were such, who either
after some great and tedious disease, or some natural operation of a proper
temperament, or constitution of body, not voluntarily, but against their wills,
came to this strange pass. The want of which right information might make some,
whom Joubertus does mention, and style, men for their simplicity, and piety
(except he speak it ironically) venerable; to discredit, what otherwise, upon
such evidences, they would have believed. I remember well, that when I was a
young Student in the University of Oxford, I had often a book in Quarto (as we
call them) in my hands, which also had the picture of the party cut to the
life, which did contain a very particular relation of one of these: which
because I never did meet with since, (it was in one of the Booksellers shops,
not in any Library) I make this mention of it here, so far as I can remember.
But diverse others have written of it: among others, Joubertus, before
mentioned, a French Physician; against whom one Harvy appeared, to show the
impossibility, in point of nature; who, by more than one, I believe, (for
Raphael Thorius, Doctor of Physic, whom I may not mention, without honor,
both for his worth, and for particular obligations; lent me a little French
book in defense of this subject, which he accounted a very solid piece, by
which this secret of nature came first to my knowledge) by more therefore than
one, I believe, but by one, who was most taken notice of, Franciscus Citesius,
the then French King, and Cardinal Richel^w's Physician; a very learned man was
answered: who also wrote the story of one of these foodless, or if we may so
call them, Aerial Spiritual creatures, which he calls, Abstinans Consolontanea:
the book Printed in Paris, 1639. But besides him, I have also one, Paulus
Lentulus, a learned Professor, he was then, Bernae Helvetiorum, who has
written the History of one himself, and collected several relations, most, by
men of note, as Langius, Hildanus, and others, (not omitting Citesius before
spoken of, but contracted) concerning others, not a few, in other Countries.
This book has the attestation and Encomium's of many learned men prefixed: and
has the picture of one of them also; yet I cannot believe, that it is the book
I saw in Oxford, which, as I remember, gave account of one only, and was, I
think, a thicker book. Truly, it would be hard, if not proud and insolent,
(Saint Augustine, in the like case, says impudent) to question the faith, or
judgment of so many credible men, (some, of eminent fame) of diverse Nations and
professions. But that which makes the case indisputable, is, that some of
these, whose story is exhibited, have been long, or long enough to find the
truth, kept and observed by Divines, Physicians, Magistrates: one, by
Maximilian the Emperor, his great care, and particular appointment, (whose
story is written by more than one) to see, whether there could be any fraud, or
imposture. And besides, the very sight of some of them, might have converted,
or silenced at least, the most incredulous obstinate creature in the world;
their stomach, and bellies, whereof nature had no further use, being found so
shrunk, that it was impossible to think, that meat and drink could there find a
receptacle.

I WAS once kindly entertained at a place, (in England, but where, or by whom,
except I had the consent of them, to whom I profess to owe much respect for
their kindness, the Reader must excuse me) where after I had been some days,
upon some information concerning a Gentlewoman, that had some relation to the
house, though not then in the house, who was said to live without meat; I made
bold to ask my friend, (a noble Knight) the Master of the house, what he knew
of it. His answer was, that she had been his housekeeper, one month, he said,
as I remember, and sat at his table every day, but had never seen her eat. This
did set an edge upon my desire, and curiosity, to enquire further. This
Gentlewoman had married one of his Sons, who lived and kept house by himself
(there also have I been kindly entertained more than once) not many miles off.
He was a Scholar, and a very ingenuous Gentleman, and one, who himself was as
curious to understand as much of nature, as by ordinary study and curiosity can
be attained. His answer was, that ever since (some years, I am sure) she had
been his wife, he never did observe her to eat otherwise, than that sometimes,
once in a week perchance, in handling of dishes, she would seize hastily upon
some one bit, which her fancy more, than her stomach, was tempted with. I make
no question, but if faithful observations were duly made, which was the way in
ancient times, of all that happens extraordinarily in this one Country of
England, we should not need be beholding to strangers so much, or at least,
would find less cause, in many things, to reject and contemn their relations,
as incredible and fabulous. Sure, I am in most books that I have read, to
understand what is not ordinary in the cause of nature; I find England often
named, where I can find or hear of no Englishman, to attest. In this very
particular I am now upon, I have read of some, I am sure, reported to have
lived in England without either meat or drink; I know not how long, of whom I
have read nothing in English Histories. But I shall not trouble my self to find
where, having said enough to satisfy them, who have not, by some solemn vow or
resolution, made themselves impenetrable to reason. Yet, the story of an
English-woman or maid, that lived, I think, twenty years without eating,
written by Roger Bacon, the Reader may find, if he please, in the Collection
before mentioned, for the truth whereof; though I doubt not the possibility,
except otherwise confirmed, I will not engage. But whereas he does fetch the
cause from Heaven, or Heavenly influences, if he be in the right in that, this
example will not so properly concern us, who pretend in this particular to
nothing, but natural causes. I know there be also who ascribe it to the Devil;
neither will I deny the possibility of such a thing. However, when natural
causes may clear the business, except some unnatural circumstances, as
sometimes it does happen, persuade to the contrary; much better it is to let
the Devil alone, than to fly to him for satisfaction.

BUT to return to our relations: I have said it before, and say it again: No
man I think that will take the pains to read the books I have mentioned, with
all the particulars which they contain, but will, what ever opinion he was of
before, acknowledge himself satisfied of the truth, as to matter of fact. As to
possibility in point of nature, I will not be so peremptory, though I
acknowledge my self very fully satisfied, by those learned Tractates that have
been set out about it, that it may be. Now that any (women most, to whom this
has happened) should after long sickness fall to this, and so continue, dull,
heavy, consumptive in their bodies, and some without motion; and so, after some
years, die; though strange even so, yet I do not see much to admire, but that
it should so happen unto any; who nevertheless for some years have continued
fresh and vigorous, with a good color, and without any abatement of flesh
without, or any other notable alteration; and have returned in time, to eating
and drinking again, as other folks; as I think it happened to her, that was
kept by Maximilian's order; is that I most wonder at, and wherein we might with
more probability suspect a supernatural cause, though herein also, I submit to
better judgments, and believe as they do, that it may be, naturally. The matter
is fully discussed by Sennertus also, a man of so much authority with me, and
with all men, I think, whom new discoveries have not so besotted, as to think
nothing right, but what is new; that he alone might go a great way to persuade
me. Marcellus Donatus also, De Med. Hist. mirab. lib. 4. c. 12. is very full
upon it: and has many instances: this among the rest: That a certain Priest
did live 40. years in Rome with Air only, as by the keeping of Pope Leo, and
diverse Princes, and the Narration and Testimony of Hermol. Barbarus, is most
certain.

HOWEVER, I am not so addicted to any cause, that I would allow of any indirect
ways, to maintain it. To prove the possibility, among other arguments and
instances, that are used, I shall here take notice of one, and what I have to
except against it: not hence to infer against the cause it self, any thing, for
which there is no just reason, this being but a remote and inconsiderable
proof, in comparison of so many more pregnant and direct evidences: but to take
this occasion, by the way, to show, how testimonies should be examined, before
we yield much to their authority. It is alleged by more than one, that there
is a people in the North, about Mascovia, who constantly from such a day in
November, to such a day in April following, hide in Caves of the Earth, and
continue all that time without any food, but sleep. Now that this was averred
to Henry the III. King of France, when in Polonia, by men of great quality, who
lived in, or about those Countries, and might easily know the certainty, with
great asseveration; this indeed, I believe, and is of great weight with me,
(though I would not, upon no greater evidence, press, or persuade any other) to
work somewhat toward a belief. Sennertus, I find, dares not peremptorily
affirm it, for a truth; or much trust to it, for an evidence; as having much
greater, and more wonderful things, which no man, he says, can question, to
prove the possibility of living, without eating, or drinking. Yet it does
appear by his words, though he feared it would ( multis fabulo sum videri) by
many be slighted as a fable, yet that himself did much more incline to believe
it, than not. And there be other relations of those Northern people, believed,
I see, by sundry grave and learned men; which, to be compared, might seem every
whit as strange and incredible. But because I do not make it my business here,
to undertake for the truth of it, as I before professed; nor have any intention
to entertain my Reader with strange relations, more than shall be necessary to
my principal end; I shall willingly forbear them, or reserve them to another
place. That which I have to except in the relation of this story is, that two
Authors are named, Gnagninus in Muscoviae descriptione; and Sigismundus Baro,
in Hebeirsten, in itineratio: as two several Authors, and two several
testimonies; whereas if we examine those Authors, they will appear in this, but
one, not only by the words, which they borrow the one from the other; almost
the same, in both: but also by Gnagninus, who at the end of his Description,
does make honorable mention of Sigismundus; whereby it does appear that he had
read him, and borrowed of him. But, what is worse, upon further examination, it
will appear, that this Sigismundus Baro, says no such thing at all himself,
but has that passage verbatim, out of an Itinerarie of a nameless Author,
written in the Ruthenick-tongue: translated, or part of it, by himself, and
inserted in his own Commentaries: and moreover, that he had, with all possible
diligence (as he professes, Page 89. of the Antwerp Edition, Anno Dom. 1557.)
inquired of those huminibus mutis, and other, morientibus and reviviscentibus;
those sleepers in Caves of the Earth before spoken of; yet professes he could
never meet with any, that could say he had seen it himself, but only heard it
from others: and therefore says he, ( Vt aliis ampliorem quaerendi occasionem
praeberem) to the end, that others might further enquire, not as believing it
himself, or commending it to others for a truth; he was willing to let them
know, what he had found in the Itinerary. It is almost incredible, what a wrong
to truth this manner of citing of witnesses and testimonies has been in all
ages, when three or four, sometimes four or five, or more, are cited, as
several witnesses, who upon examination, prove but one, and perchance, not so
much as one, good, or clear witness. But I have done with my first instance or
example: which concerned things natural, as ordinarily taken; and though store
of such offer themselves to me; yet, because I have reason to make what have I
can, being every day, by much weakness summoned, or put in mind; I will proceed
to instances in things supernatural, which will better fit my design.

MY second instance therefore shall be out of Seneca, who in his fourth book of
Natural Questions, which does treat of Snow, Hail and Rain: in his sixth
Chapter, relates rather as a tale, than a truth, (so he does profess, at the
beginning) what he found recorded, and believed by some others, to wit, that
there were men in some places, who by observing of the clouds, were able and
skilful to foresee and foretell, when a storm of Hail was approaching. Cleonis
was the place, by him named; which was then the name of more places than one:
but by what he says of it, it should be a Town of the Peloponnesus (now Morea,
under the Turk) of no very great fame, or name. But it seems, whether by the
nature of the Climat, or somewhat else, natural or supernatural; very subject
to storms of Hail, by which the fruits of the ground very commonly destroyed.
It did so trouble them, that after many endeavors, it should seem, to prevent
their loss, they at last found a strange remedy. First, it must be believed,
according to the relation, that by diligent observation of the clouds and other
temper of the skies, in such storms, which, to their great grief and damage,
were so frequent among them; some men had attained to that skill, that they
could, as was said before, foretell a storm. Of these men, some were chosen and
appointed, as public officers, (therefore called (...); that is, observers of
the Hail) to give warning to the people, who upon that warning did hasten to
kill, some a Lamb; others, according to their abilities, Pullum: some young
thing or other: probably, a Chick: the blood whereof was offered, as a
Sacrifice. But if any were so poor, or by chance, so destitute at that time,
that he had neither agnum or pullum: why, then his way was to prick one of his
fingers with some bodkin, or writing-steel (as the fashion was then) that had a
good point, and that blood was accepted for other; and so the storm certainly
diverted. In the relation of this, Seneca does use some merry words, which have
deceived many, (which has made me the more willing to take them into
consideration) as though it were far from him, to believe such an absurd and
impossible thing. Grant, says he, there were such men, that could foresee and
foretell a storm: what relation have the clouds to blood; or, how can such a
little quantity of blood, as a Chicken, or a prickt-finger can afford, so
suddenly penetrate so high, as the skies, to work such an effect? Yet if a man
does well observe his words, it will appear, that Seneca did more incline
himself to believe it, and so does propose it to us, rather as a thing true,
than otherwise. For after he had said, that men in the examination of the
cause, were divided; some, as became very wise men (that is his word)
absolutely denying, that any such thing could be, that men should covenant with
the Snow, and with small presents pacify tempests, (though, says he, It is
well known, that the Gods themselves are overcome with gifts: for, to what end
else, are all their sacrifices?) Others thinking, that there was in blood,
naturally, some kind of efficacy to repel, and avert a cloud; he does further
add, what he knew would be objected by others; but how can, in so little blood,
be so great force, as to pierce the clouds, and to make them sensible of its
power? After this, knowing, and tacitly grounding, there was no arguing the
possibility of a thing by reason, against certain evidence; for which in this
case there was so much to be said: How much more safe, and ready would it be,
(says he) barely to say, It is a lie, an arrant lie; it cannot be. And then go
on: But at Cleonis, they were wont to punish them severely, who had charge to
prevent the tempest, if through their negligence, either their Vines, or their
Corn had suffered. In our XII. Tables also, (the old Roman-law) there was a law
against them, who should by any kind of enchantment, hurt, or destroy other
men's Corn. To what end all this, think we, but to make it appear, that if
evidence would carry it, there was enough to persuade us, the report of Cleonis
was true enough. Yet after all this, fearing he had gone too far, to expose
himself to the ludibrium, or derision of those sapientissimi, or wonderful wise
men, who would believe nothing to be true, (the clear profession of the
Epicuraeans of those days) the cause whereof they could not understand; to make
some amends, he ends his discourse in the reproof, as it were, of rude ignorant
antiquity, that could believe such things, as that there were Charms or Spells
for the Rain, to be procured, or put back: which, says he, is so clearly
impossible, that we need not go to Philosophers, to know their opinion.

AS for Seneca's meaning, whether I be in the right, or no, I shall not think
my self much concerned; let every man after diligent perusing of his words,
judge as he pleases. Though this more, to make my interpretation of his words,
more probable, I have to say, that it does appear by other places, how fearful
he was to utter any thing in this kind, that was not generally believed, though
himself, in all probability, made little or no question of the truth. See but
immediately before, how tenderly he does propose, and not without an Apology
for himself, lest he might be thought seriously to believe it, (which also made
Ovid so fearful, though himself an eyewitness, to write it) that the Northern
Seas are wont to freez, or to congeal, in the Wintertime. Let also Pliny's
words be considered, concerning this very thing; not the place, but the thing:
There be Spells against Hail, says he, and Diseases, and ( ambusta, which he
also calls, ambustiones: that is, (...)) burnings: some of which have been
tried: (or, by experience, approved true) Sed prodendo, obstat ingens
verecundia: that is, but to set down particularly, a mavelous shame (or fear)
does hinder me, as well knowing the different opinions of men. Let every man
therefore think of these things, as himself pleases. So Pliny: whereby does
appear, that he durst not speak what he thought, and believed, lest he should
undergo the reproach (those wonderful wise Epicuraeans; Pliny himself, a great
favourer of their Sect; being very numerous, and in great credit in those
times) of a writer of tales. But, as I said before, let Seneca's meaning be
what it will; as to the thing it self, though I will not undertake for the
truth of it, according to every circumstance of Seneca's relation, partly
because I never saw the Records of that City my self, which happily Seneca did;
and partly because Plutarch, who does mention those, (...), or observers of
Hail, does not name any place, and instead of the blood of a Lamb or Chick,
does mention another kind of blood: yet that there is no such impossibility in
the relation, but that it might be very true; so far I dare undertake, and I
hope to make it good. Neither will it appear incredible to any man, who instead
of a natural, will but allow us a supernatural cause. But first let us see what
we can say, for the truth, or probability of the fact, or thing; and then let
the Reader judge, what may probably be the cause. It seems that very
anciently, such an opinion has been among men, Romans and Grecians, that by
some Magic or supernatural art, (for the Devil was not so well known, in those
days, though Demons, which was an ambiguous word, as elsewhere I have showed,
were) strange things might be wrought, as in the air, so upon the land, to
further or hinder the fruits of the Earth. Empedocles, anciently, a notorious
Magician, became very famous for his skill in that kind, ever since he helped
the Athenians, when by unseasonable winds, all their Corn was like to miscarry;
as Laertius, and others, bear witness: from which time and thing, he got the
title of (...), or wind-stiller. Among other things, it was very generally
believed, that Witches and Magicians had a power, or an art, to transfer both
the crop and fertility of one field to another. Messes hac atque illac
transferunt diris tempestabibus, omnesque fructus, paucorum improbitas capit;
says the Author of that Poem, or Comedy, ancient and elegant, commonly called
Q^erel^u: quite different from that in Plautus. And Tibullus long before, to
the same purpose; Cantus vicinis fruges traducit ab agris. One Caius Furius
Cresinus, a Roman of a mean fortune, whose grounds were observed to thrive so
beyond measure, that he did reap more ex agello, or a little field, than his
rich neighbors did, of sundry large ones; was accused, that he did fruges
alienas pellicere veneficiis; that is, that by witchcraft he did rob other
grounds, to enrich his own. It came to a trial, but he came of with great
honor. Pliny is my Author.

BUT, by the way, it will, I hope, be no digression, to take notice of another
story of his, which will not be impertinent to our present discourse,
concerning this anciently believed translation of the fruits of the Earth, from
one ground to another; and very pertinent to our main subject, of Credulity and
Incredulity, of which Pliny does afford more examples, than any other Author I
know; and is very often wronged, and censured by men, through Incredulity,
grounded upon ignorance. Many fabulous relations he has, I know, from all kind
of Authors, which himself made no other account of, for the most part. Nay, I
am sure, he does sometimes reject that for fabulous, which upon better
consideration, will appear true enough. We may therefore think our selves
beholding to him for the knowledge of many true things, which, if because
accounted by him fabulous, he had taken no notice of in his Observations; we
had never known. But, however those things may prove, or be judged, which he
had from others; it can hardly be showed, that he records any thing of his own
time, or upon his own knowledge, that can be proved a lie: and it is well
known, that being a man of great wealth, and dignity, wilfully and willingly he
did adventure his life (and lost it, we know, in that adventure) the better to
learn the truth, and, if possible, to discover the cause of some strange
things: So heartily was he addicted to the study of Nature, and therefore more
unlikely, he would wilfully, do the truth of Nature so much wrong, as to
violate and defile it (willingly and wittingly) with fabulous narrations. But
now to the story which himself does call, ( Prodigium super omnia, quae unquam
credita sunt:) A prodigy beyond all prodigies, that ever were believed; and
yet delivered by him, as a true story. In Nero's time, he says, it so
happened, that a whole Olive-field was transferred, or carried to the other
side of the high way, and the ploughed ground, that stood before in the adverse
side, set in the room. He does not ascribe it to any witchcraft: though; it be
so apprehended by some, that tell this story after him: as Lodovicus Vives by
name, for one. It is much more likely, that it happened, if true, (as I think
very reasonable to believe) by some strange Earthquake, or motion of the
ground, in those parts, occasioned by subterraneous winds, and vapors. Who
has not heard of Trees, and Rivers, removed from their proper place, and
placed elsewhere, by Earthquakes? But if any be so incredulous, as not to
believe Pliny in this: what will they say to Machiavil, an Historian without
exception, that I know of, whatever his religion was; who tells us of a storm
in Italy, by which, besides many other wonders, (I have not the original
Italian) Tecta, quae templis inaedificata erant; the roofs of Churches, (he
names two) integra compagine, ultra milliare inde consedere: were removed whole
and entire, above an Italian mile: l. 6. p. 3478. He does indeed leave it free
to the Reader, whether he will impute this strange accident to a natural or
supernatural cause; and to us, and our purpose, whether natural or
supernatural, is indifferent. So much to give some light to that part of
Seneca, that mentions, according to the phrase of the XII. Tables, the
enchanting of grounds, or fruits of the ground.

NOW to return where we begun; Extraordinary storms of Hail; very prejudicial
to the fruits of the Earth, which seemed supernatural; in these days Seneca
speaks of happening very frequently: (I am much deceived, if Geneva, which in
Calvin's time was much infested with Witches, has not formerly known such
accidents) Country people sought for remedy to such, as did deal in those
things; by whom they were taught Rites and Sacrifices; as also Spells and
Charms, which proved very helpful, and therefore used very frequently. In so
much, as they that did write of agriculture, or, De re rustica in those days,
did not think they did acquit themselves of what they promised sufficiently, if
silent in these things: as particularly may appear by Columella, (not to
mention others) not inferior unto any that has written of that subject, either
ancient or late; in his Tenth book, whereof he has some receipts, not much
unlike this in Seneca. Certain it is* that Spells and Charms were in such
credit in those days for such uses, that even Constantine the Great, a
Christian Emperor, when he made Laws against enchantments; he does except
those, that were for the preservation of the fruits of the Earth, and those
that were made, or used against Hail, particularly: Cod. l. 9. tit. 18.
inscribed, De Malesicis, and Mathematicis; which, according to the style of
those days, was as much as magis. In the fourth Chapter, or Paragraph, De
magia; these words are; Nullis vero criminationibus implicanda sunt remedia,
humanis quaesita corporibus, aut in agrestibus locis, innocenter adhibita
suffragia: (Some might by that word perchance, understand Ecclesiastical
prayers; but here of necessity, Magical Spells and Charms, must be understood,
which he does excuse only, for the good that they do) ne maturis vindemiis
metuerentur imbres, aut venti, grandinisque lapidatione quaterentur: quibus non
cujusquam salus aut aestimatio laederetur, sed quorum proficerent actus, ne
divina munera, and labores hominum sternerentur. I think I shall not need to
English this, because the substance of it is already expressed. Neither did
this Law die with Constantine; for it was renewed by some Emperors after him,
though at last, as it well deserved, repealed and abrogated. And God forbid,
any such thing should ever be allowed in any place, that pretends to
Christianity. For besides that we must not do evil that good may come of it;
where such wicked practices are suffered, though some present benefit may be
reaped for a while, yet the curse of God will be found, sooner or later, to
light upon the place; and for some benefit, unjustly purchased, many mischiefs,
(if not utter destruction, through Gods just judgment) will ensue. However,
that the opinion of mischief, done by Witches and Magicians, by storms of Hail
particularly, did continue long after Constantine's law was repealed, may
appear by laws made against them in after ages: as particularly by Lodovicus,
King of France, and Emperor of Germany, his Additions to the Capitula made by
him, and his father Charles the Great, Add. II. c. 18. de diversis malorum (so
printed, but Magorum certainly is the right) flagitiis.

I THINK by this that has been said, it will not seem strange, that any Town,
in those Heathenish times, should have such officers, as from their office
should be called (...), or Hail observers; especially, when Seneca does in a
manner appeal to public records. But that such a device, the blood of a Lamb,
of a Chick, or a prickt-finger, should have such operation, as to prevent the
danger, may be a wonder indeed, yea, an incredible thing to them that do not
know, or believe there be such creatures, as Devils and Spirits in the world;
whose delight is, to abuse mankind with such fopperies, that whilst men
ascribe the efficacy to some outward things, they may less suspect themselves,
or be suspected by others, to work by unlawful means, and get an ill name, if
no other punishment for it.

LEONARD Vair, in his book of Charms, has a relation of a strange custom, in
some places, very well known to him, it seems; for he speaks of it with much
indignation; (in Spain or Italy, we may be sure) which custom is; when
Country People will drive Grasshoppers, or any such hurtful Vermin (frequent in
that Country, probably) out of their grounds; they hire a Conjurer for Judge,
and two Advocates; the one to plead the cause of the Vermin, the other of the
people, which solemnly performed, at last, sentence of Excommunication is
pronounced against the Vermin. Thus the Devil, by his instruments, Conjurers
and Sectaries, does endeavor to bring the most solemn Ceremonies of the
Church, even the Sacraments (whereof examples in books of this argument are
very obvious) into contempt. Vair does not tell us, with what success: but by
what we shall observe in due place, as occasion does offer it self; the Reader
will yield it very probable, that it is not, sometimes at least, without
success; and how little reason any man has to be scandalized at such things,
shall be fully argued, before we end this first part. But it would please some,
better perchance, to hear of somewhat merely natural, that should have, or be
reported to have the same effect, which we ascribe to the power of Devils and
Spirits. I have some Authors for it, but believe it who will, (though I profess
to believe much of the virtues of Plants and Minerals, if Coral may be reckoned
among them) that red Corals have the same property: and that in Germany, many
husbandmen, upon approved experience, will after sowing, here and there, but
especially in the borders of their grounds, scatter some little broken pieces
of red Coral; and by that means preserve their own from all hurt, when their
neighbors grounds, round about, are much annoyed by the violence of either
Hail or Thunder. My Author, as I take it, is a German himself: he might easily
have known the truth. He makes himself a great peregrinator, to satisfy his
Curiosity, or improve his knowledge in natural things. Such a thing as this,
methinks, had he had any hopes to find it true, might have been worth his
labor, though he had rode many miles, and he might have had the thanks and
blessings of many for such a discovery, had it been certain. This makes me very
much to suspect, if not affirm, that it is but a tale. I have read of women
too, somewhere, who upon such occasions, use to cast up salt in the air, which
is more probable: but with what success, or upon what ground, I can give no
account.

BUT if after all this, not yet fully satisfied with such instances, as the old
known world has afforded, we will take the pains, to search the Records of the
new world, there we shall meet with Seneca's case very punctually; the blood of
men offered unto Devils (their Gods) to preserve their Corn, and other fruits,
from Hail-storms, and Tempests. Witness Petrus Martyr Mediolanensis, De Insulis
nuper inventis; whose testimony, not to seek further, we may rest upon, as a
very credible witness.

BUT to proceed, and so to end this particular, which Seneca gave us the
occasion of; That Devils can raise storms and tempests (if God permit) by their
own power and skill, when they please; they that believe the History of Job,
will make no great question: and if Devils; Witches also by his power; as all
that have written of Witches, who believe there be such, averr, and give many
instances. As for rain, mentioned by Seneca, (though his words sound otherwise
to me, than to any by whom I find him quoted: let the Reader judge by what I
have said of it before) as, the dotage of antiquity; as of Hail, so of Rain, I
find none that have written of Witches, and believe them, but determine it
affirmatively, that the Devil has the power of that also, God permitting, when
he will. To pass by ordinary instances: Dion Cassius, a very serious Historian,
has a relation of plenty of rain, in time of greatest necessity, by which a
Roman Army, was as it were, miraculously preserved; procured by Magic. Which,
with Baronius, I should be very inclinable to believe to have been done by the
prayers of Christians, as under Aurelius Antoninus; acknowledged even by
Heathen writers; it once happened: But that the Chronology will not, I doubt,
agree: Christianity was not so ancient in those parts, I believe. We have now
gone through all the particulars of Seneca's relation: I shall only add, I do
not believe, that Cleonae (for the word is differently written) by the
situation of the place, was more subject to Hail, than any other place; but
the Devil by some chance of opportunity, having once got this superstition
there established, he would be sure they should not want occasion to continue
it; which must be, by frequent Hail threatened; and probably he did so order it,
of purpose, in the air, that they might easily see, without any Conjuring for
it, when a storm was coming.

IN the next place, I shall take notice of a relation in Philostratus, (an
Author, though fabulous in those things, that concerned his main design, to
make a God, of a Magician; yet for some strange relations, once supposed false,
now approved true, well deserving to be read) and his conceit, or Comment upon
the relation. The Relation is this, how Apollonius being in Prison by
Domitian's command, and one of his legs fettered; Damis that attended him,
began to be much out of heart, and doubtful of the issue. Whereupon Apollonius,
to revive him, showed him his leg out of the fetters: and when Damis had
sufficiently viewed it, loose, and free; of his own accord he put it into the
fetters, or stocks ((...)) again. Whereupon Damis does infer, that surely,
because he did it with such ease, without any previous prayer or sacrifice,
that he must be more than a man. Now, that this might probably be done by
Apollonius, we may believe, since he did much more afterward, which by
Christian Fathers, and Historians is acknowledged, when being brought out of
prison, as a criminal, to the Court- hall, or place of Judgment, Domitian being
present, he vanished out of sight, and was at the same time seen far from the
place, but not in prison any more. The relation then admitted, or supposed:
what is Philostratus his descant upon it? The simpler sort, says he, ascribe
such things (...), to Witchcraft or Magic: (...) that is, (not as the Latin
interpreter, though not much amiss to the sense, Quas ad plurimas rerum
humanarum proficere arbitrantur) and so they judge of many other things, that
happen in the world among men. He goes on: The public wrestlers and fencers,
out of a greediness to be victorious, they have a recourse unto this:
(Witchcraft or Magic) but the truth is, they are not at all the better for it,
when they have done: but if by chance (or providence: (...), so is the word
often taken, as I have showed elsewhere by some examples, to which many more
may be added) they happen to prevail, wretched men ((...)) bereaving themselves
of the praise, ascribe it to the arts. And in case they be worsted, ((...):
what that (...) makes here, I do not understand: till some body tell me, I
shall make bold to read, (...)) yet will they not mistrust the art. Fool, will
they say: for had I but offered such a sacrifice, or burnt such incense, I
could not have missed of the victory. And so he goes on, that it is so with
Merchants and Lovers: and how they suffer themselves to be cheated by these
Sophisters, as he calls them. They that will read this Author, may not trust to
the Latin Translation; no, nor to the Greek Text, as now printed. I wish some
body had undertaken the printing of it, in my time; they might have had it more
correct and intelligible, in many places, than it is, in any Edition I have
seen. But, to the business. He would not have it thought, that Spells and
Charms can do any thing: there was a reason for it. He knew, Apollonius did
deal in such things, as could not be ascribed to natural causes: so that he
could not avoid the suspicion of a Magician, if there were any such thing as
Magic. Now, if once granted, that all, who pretended to such things, were but
impostors, and could do nothing, really; then it must of necessity follow, that
Apollonius, what he did, did by the finger of God, and was a divine man. Though
we deny not, but there have always been, and are now; in England, I believe,
not a few; London especially; Morlins, and others, who have a way to cheat and
abuse silly people; (whether rich or poor, I call them so, that are so easily
caught) making them believe, they can do great things, whereas, in very deed,
all they do, (except they deal by the Devil, as Apollonius did) is but cozenage
and delusion: yet this discourse of Philostratus notwithstanding, if we search
the Records of Antiquity, we shall find, that in those days, and before, as it
was very ordinary for them, who did strive for victories publicly, either in
the Circus, by racing, or any way else, by any kind of game or exercise; to
apply themselves to Witches and Magicians, that by their help, they might be
sure of the game; so, not unusual also, for men to prevail, by those arts.
Which gave occasion to Constantius's law, De maleficis comprehendendis; where
learned Gothofred his note is; Agitatores equorum plerique, etc. that is, Most
horse-racers of those times, by magical arts, at times, did hinder their
adversaries horses, and made their own sw^fter, as St. Jerome in the life of
St. Hilarion; Arnobius, contra Gentes, and Cassiodore in the third of his
Varia, bear witness. So he. We shall have a proper place afterward, to
consider of St. Jeromes words here cited, which are very pregnant, and apposite
to prove the thing; but otherwise, might cause further doubt and wonder, and
therefore must not be passed over in silence. But besides those quoted by
Gothofred, there be others of as great, or greater antiquity, and authority,
that bear witness to the same truth. Ammianus Macellinus, in his 26. History,
does record, that one Hilarious, a horse-racer, was put to death by Apronianus,
then Governor of Rome, a man, he says, of equal integrity and severity; for
being convicted, to have sent his son to a Magician, to be taught by him,
(secretiora quaedam legibus interdicta) certain secret Spells and Charms (so I
take it) by which without any man's knowledge, he might be assisted, and enabled
to compass his desires, in the way of his profession. St. Augustine also
writes of himself, that at a time, when he prepared to make a party in a
singing-prize or match, upon the Theater, (nor then, a Priest, or in Orders,
you may be sure) an aruspex (or Magician: so taken sometimes*) offered him for
a good reward, to make him victor: which he professes he did abhor, and
detest. But I must not conceal from the Reader, that Galen whose judgment, in
such a case, must needs be very considerable, seems to deride such things, and
particularly, that by such devices any man should be enabled, ((...), etc.) to
confound his enemy, in publ^ck Courts and places of Judicature, and to stop
their mouths, that they shall not be able to speak. He does indeed, but then it
was, when in general he denied all Magical or Supernatural operations, and, as
a rational Physician, and Naturalist, in which profession he was accounted the
wonder of his age, he thought himself bound to deny, whatsoever had not, as he
speaks in more than one place, (...): a probable reason to satisfy a rational
man. Yet the same man afterward, upon further experience, and better
consideration, fearing also (probably) the reproach and derision of men, for
his obstinate incredulity, did nobly recant, and acknowledge his error, as we
shall show afterward.

BUT to go on as we began: we read besides, that at the Olympic games, the
greatest and most solemn conflux of mankind, that has been known, either
before or since; and the records whereof, were accounted most authentic; a
certain Milesian of known valor or ability, being to wrestle with an Ephesian,
he could do nothing, because the Ephesian had about him, (...), that is,
certain Spells or Charms, so called, The Ephesian letters: which being
suspected, and taken from him, he was thrown by his adversary, no less than
thirty times. So Eustathius upon the 19. Odissie. Suidas has the same
relation; but there, the Text both, and the Translation had need to be
corrected: a little will do it, ((...) for (...)) that sense may be made of it.
That there be, even now, Spells and Charms, when God is pleased to give way,
(which in all things, wrought by the Devil, must always be understood) to make
men invulnerable, no man, I think, upon the attestation of so many creditable
witnesses, can rationally doubt. Learned Sennertus, in his book De vulneribus,
begins his 24. Chapter thus; Cum nihil hodie, etc. that is, Whereas there is
nothing more ordinary, now adays, among Soldiers, than by certain Pentacula,
and Seals, and Characters, to fence themselves, and to make themselves
inviolable against all kind of arms, and musquet-bullets, etc. and so far was
he from suspecting, that any body that knew any thing of the world, would make
a question of the truth of it, that omitting that disquisition, as needless and
ridiculous, he presently falls upon that* whereof only he thought question
could be made; An liceat Christiano, etc. Whether it be lawful for a Christian
by certain Amulets, or Seals, fastened to the body, or the like, to make himself
inviolable to any kind of arms. Some take upon them to limit, how far the
Devils power, in point of reason, may extend in this kind; as I remember a
learned man does, who has written the life of Monsieur de la Nove, a French
Gentleman of great fame. So does Sennertus too: he tells of many particular
cases, for which no reason can be given, but experience; wherein, and whereby
the power of those Spells is eluded or frustrated. But I think the truest
limitation, is, so far as God will permit, or give leave. For I doubt not, but
the Devil can do much more, as he is a Spirit, by his own skill and power, than
to preserve a single man, even from Canon-shot. It is much more strange, which
yet I believe true, that whole Armies of men, (God then, not without good cause
certainly, permitting) have been defeated by his power, as by several
Historians and others, the relation whereof, because obvious enough, I shall
here omit, is averred: and some others made victorious as strangely: in all
which things, though set on work by men also, I look upon him, but as Gods
executioner; without whose leave and permission, whatever his power be, by his
nature, he cannot hurt the meanest man. They that desire to be further
satisfied in this particular, may read Delrio, the Jesuit, if they please; in
his Magical Disquisitions. Yet I will not say, that I believe every thing, that
he does propose as true: it may be his faith, does in some things extend much
further than mine: but I would have the quality of his witnesses well
considered; and if they will not (I think they do) avail to a certainty in this
point; there be others that may be consulted, whom no man, that I know, has
gone about to contradict, or challenged of falsehood, except it be in the way of
those incredulous wise men, of whom Seneca speaks, ( Mendacium est: fabula
est) it is a lie: it is a lie. I will not believe it. But I name him before any
other, because every where to be had.

I HAVE already gone further than I needed, to make good my censure of
Philostratus, or Damis, in Philostratus, his false and deceitful judgment,
concerning the power of Magic, to offend, or to defend, in several cases,
which has occasioned us, all this discourse. The Reader I hope will
acknowledge himself satisfied, that he was in the wrong, if he did think so,
really.

NOW as I have hitherto argued against Incredulity, in this particular; so will
I also give some examples of too much Credulity, in the same business, as I
conceive, and why I think so. A learned man that has written, De Idololatria
Magica; Photius, says he, in Olympiodoro narrat. No, not so, but,
Olympiodorus, in Pholio: it is not Photius, that is the Author of the tale; he
says nothing of it; but Olympiodorus, barely; whose words about that, and
diverse other things, he does, as out of other Authors, only transcribe. Well,
what says Olympiodorus? That in Rhegium, over against Sicily, there was a
Magick-Statue, or a Statue made by Art- Magic, to avert the burnings of Mount
Aetna in Sicily, and to keep the Islands from the invasion of barbarous
Nations: which Statue being broken by one Aesculapius, Governor of it under
Constantius, the Emperor; the Island was grievously annoyed by both; those
burnings, and the Barbares. As much is said by the same Author, of three other
Statues, to secure the Empire from the eruption of the Barbares. That the said
learned man gave some credit to this, as that such Statues were made, and that
they were effectual to that end, may be gathered by his words. Postea Diabolus,
etc. But I will not much stand upon that: it may be he did not intend it.
Before I pass my judgment, concerning the thing, as to the efficacy of such
Statues: I must acknowledge, that I easily grant, that such Statues made by Art
Magic, and to such ends, have been anciently. For besides what is here related
by Olympiodorus; Gregorius Turonensis, Bishop of the same Town, in his History,
lib. 8. Cap. 33. where he describes a general conflagration of the City of
Paris, (but not comparable to that of the City of London, of fresh and horrible
memory) which happened in his time; at the end of that Chapter, he has these
words, Aiebant hanc urbem consecratam fuisse antiquitus, etc. that is, It was
reported, that this Town had formerly been consecrated, that no fire should
prevail in it, no serpent, no glis, (a Dormouse properly; but I take it here
for a Rat; I have some reason for it; but I will not stand upon it) should be
seen. But now lately, when a Vault belonging to the Bridge, was cleansed, and
the sullage, that filled it was carried away; a brass Serpent, and a brass Rat
were found in it: which being taken away, both Serpents and Rats, without
number, have appeared; neither has it been free from the violence of fire. So
he besides: Leo Affricanus in his Ninth book, of the description of Africa,
where he treats of the River Nilus; out of ancient writers of those parts, does
relate, that in such a year of the Hegira, such and such being Governors;
there was in the rubbish of an Egyptian Temple, found a Statue of Lead, of the
bigness (and form, I suppose) of a Crocodile, graven with Hieroglyphick
letters, and by certain constellations contrived against Crocodiles, which
being broken in pieces by command of the Governor, Crocodiles began to lay
wait for men. But again: the Author of the Geography, commonly known by the
name of Geographia Nubiensis; in high credit with all men, that are studious of
the Arabick-tongue, in his fifth part of the third Climat, (for so he does
divide his book) Of the Country Hems, says he, the Metropolitan Town is Hems,
(whether Emissa or Hemesa, of the Ancients, I am not now at leisure to
consider) which by witchcraft and enchantment is so fenced, that no Serpents,
or Scorpions can have entrance, and in case any be brought to the Gates, they
die presently. Then he tells us of a horse-mans Statue, set upon a high arch in
the middle of the Town, turning every way according to the wind: and of the
picture of a Scorpion, in one of the stones of the arch: to which painted, or
carved Scorpion, if any man, bitten by a Scorpion or Serpent, apply dirt or
mortar, and afterward, that dirt or mortar, to his wound or bitten place; he
is presently cured. But this is beyond my scope, as well as my belief. But of
the horse-mans Statue, or picture of Scorpion, in the wall; being so confirmed
by other parallel stories, I think it may be believed. Had we any certainty of
the Ancient Palladium of Troy, I should have begun there. But out of all
question, we may conclude, that such Magical Statues have been found in more
than one place: and not improbable, that the Devil, as he is a great emulator
of Gods works, but not his holiness, might have a respect to the
brazen-Serpent, set up in the wilderness by Gods appointment. But of the
efficacy of those Statues, according to relations, we may very well make a
question: neither will History make good, if well examined, all that is written
of them. Neither is it probable, that the Devil, who can do nothing to annoy or
protect men, without permission, can warrant any such things, as are reported,
for the time to come, except he could beforehand by some natural or
supernatural observations of his own (as in many prophesies of his, concerning
things to come) find out the mind, or counsel of God in those particulars; or
that God, or some good Angels subordinate to God, and privy to his will and
determination in those things, had revealed it unto him; neither of which is
very likely. And that which makes it more unlikely, is, that even those, who to
become invulnerable, have had recourse to the Devil, or his agents, and have
enjoyed the benefit of their purchase for some time, even to admiration; yet
have found themselves, on a sudden destitute of it, to their great
astonishment, and have miserably perished in their confidence, as is observed
by more than one, who have written of that subject. How then should he be able
to warrant any Town or City, and make his promise good for many ages?

WHAT I intended, to wit, a full consideration, or refutation rather of
Philostratus his assertion, is, I hope, sufficiently performed.

OUR next instance shall be from Josephus, the Jewish Historian, highly
esteemed, both by Romans and Grecians, and by one that could judge of good
books, as well as any man of this, or former ages, styled, Diligentissimus, and
(...) omnium Scriptorum: The most diligent and greatest lover of truth of all
writers; sacred always excepted, we must understand. This Josephus in his Eight
book of Jewish Antiquities, and second Chapter, where he treats of Solomon's
wisdom, and exquisite knowledge of Nature; following the tradition of the Jews
of those days, who because they were great exorcists themselves, and dealed
much in Spells and Charms of all kinds, (so that from them the Heathens
received diverse, extant in their books to this day) to countenance their
unlawful practices, did persuade men, that Solomon was the founder of what they
falsely called, Natural Magic: to magnify this Art, and the power of it,
Josephus does there produce a notable instance, which is this: How, that on a
time, himself being present, one Eleazer, before Vespasian, and his Sons (or
Children) and the chiefest Officers of the Army, did cast out Devils from
several that were possessed; and to satisfy the company, there was no juggling in
the business, commanded the Devils, as they went out, to do somewhat, which
might witness the presence of a supernatural power. To bring this to pass, this
dispossession I mean, besides words, there was some other mystical action: that
was, the applying of a certain ring to the nose of the possessed, under the
seal of which ring, a piece of root was enclosed, which was believed (so
reported, at least) to be of singular efficacy to drive out Devils. The name of
the root is not there set down by Josephus; but in another book, De bello
Iudaico, lib. 7. Cap. 23. he does name it, Baaras, and withal does tell strange
things of it, what danger it is, to pull it out of the Earth, except such and
such ceremonies and cautions, which I forbear here, be used. Now that in all
this Josephus, though his report, to some may seem, both ridiculous and
incredible, and is, I know, by some rejected as merely fabulous, which made me
pitch upon it the rather; yet that in all this, he does deal bona fide, truly
and sincerely: as I believe my self, so I hope to give good and convincing
reasons, why others also, who pretend to reason, as the trial of truth, should
believe. First, that such a thing was really done before Vespasian, the Roman
Emperor, as he relates it; they that know that Josephus was a man as nobly
born; so of great credit at the Court, and in great favor with Vespasian
himself; how can they rationally doubt? He must be supposed more than a mad
man, that durst write such a forged story, and attest persons of that quality
for the truth; had it been a thing of his own devising, nay had he lied in any
circumstance of it. As for that he writes of that root or herb, that it has
such properties, such virtues, how to be pulled out of the earth, and where to
be found, etc. whether true or no, must not be laid upon his account, as I
conceive, because in that, trusting the relation of men, whom he took to be
real honest men in their profession, and to work by natural means, himself
professing no skill or insight in that art; it is enough that in all he says
of it, there is nothing, but what was generally believed, or at least reported
and famed, not among the Jews only, but Grecians also, and others that were
Gentiles. The name of the herb, he says, was Baaras: and what is that, (from
(...) or (...): I need not tell them, that have any skill in the tongue) but
(...) in Greek: which herb is acknowledged by all, or most that write of herbs.
Josephus says of it, it will with some adjurations, expel Devils: Pliny says,
or Democritus rather, in Pliny it is a Magical herb, which Negromancers or
Magicians use to raise the Gods: that is, in the phrase of our times, Spirits.
Josephus says, there is great danger in the pulling up of it. One way he does
mention, is, by uncovering the root so far, that it may have but little hold in
the ground, and then tying a dog to it, so that the dog may easily draw it out
with him, when he thinks to follow his Master going away, as he followed him
thither. But if the report be true, the dog comes short of his reckoning, or
rather does much more than what he thinks he does. For when he thinks to follow
him, he does his Master a better service; he dies for him, who otherwise (if
the report be true, as before) could not have outlived the boldness of his
attempt. A strange story, but not of Josephus's contriving, nor by Josephus
only believed. The very same, as to the substance, is recorded by Aelianus
also: De Histor. animal. lib. 14. cap. 27. more fully, and, as his manner is,
with studied elegancy. He does also give it another name, taken from this very
ceremony, or action, (...), that is, dog-drawn. The Latin interpreter does
somewhat contract the relation, for which I do not, seeing he has all the
substance, much blame him, it being almost impossible to express all in another
tongue without an unpleasing redundancy, except the sweetness (next unto sweet
music, to curious ears) of the collocution (a grand mystery of the so much
admired Sophisters or Orators of those times, their Rhetoric, as elsewhere I
have declared at large) could have been exhibited also. But again, Josephus
says, the herb grew in Judea: Democritus, in Pliny says, in Arabia: but this
is easily reconciled, and is done very fully, by learned men: and had
Democritus said in Egypt or Aethiopia, there is enough besides, to satisfy
any man, that Baaras was a known herb, to those effects by him mentioned, among
men of that profession, whom Josephus, (a learned pious man, but herein too
credulous, but not the first or only pious and learned, that has been deceived
in such) accounted holy religious men, but in very truth, no better, (as how
many at this day) than cheaters, and impostors, to what they pretended; by some
others, of those times, who had considered of it better than Josephus, rightly
called, praestigiatores and magi. Now Josephus so far acquitted, that he had no
intention to deceive, but was deceived himself by others; if any will be so
curious, as to know what truth there is, or then was, for the reports
concerning that herb; that there is such an herb, which for some kind of
resplendency, may be called Aglaophotis, is by all Botanicks, or Herbarists I
have seen, acknowledged. And if it be a kind of Peony, as is averred by diverse,
which against the falling sickness is known to be of excellent virtue, it is
less to be wondered, that for this very reason, it was first supposed to be of
some virtue against Devils and Demons, the nature of this disease being
somewhat extraordinary, and by some formerly supposed to proceed from some
extraordinary cause; for which reason it was also called, (...), or, morbus
sacer, the sacred disease; and not only supposed to proceed, but also certainly
known sometimes to be accompanied with extraordinary supernatural effects; yea
pla^^y, Diabolical: whereof I have given some instances in my Treatise of
Enthusiasm. So far the mistake then might be tolerable: but for the rest, the
danger of plucking it out of the ground with the root, and the means used to
prevent it, this by the experience of best Herbarists of these days, being
found false, and fictitious; we must look upon it, as the mere invention of
Magicians and Impostors to inhance the credit of their Drugs, and to serve the
Devil by the increase of superstition; whereof examples are so obvious (in
great Towns, as London especially) as no man needs to wonder at it.

BUT yet let us see, what may be said, even for that, not altogether improbable
perchance; so they that are not so much experienced, will the better know by
this example, how to examine the truth of things, and to distinguish between
certainty, and probability, or possibility. Do not we to this day find things,
which they call Empirica and Specifica, in the writings of very sober
Physicians, that may seem as strange? As for example* The rindes of the root of
Elder, pulled off from the upper part, shall purge by vomit: from the lower, by
stools. The brain of a Ram, with some other ingredients, a good medicine
against madness; provided that the Ram be a virgin Ram (virginity, an ordinary
caution, in diabolical exploits, to blind the world, as afterward shall be
observed) and that his head be cut off at one blow. I find this in Sennertus:
the other in Anatomia Sambuci, printed in London: where the Author thinks, but
does not affirm, that this happily may be ascribed to some Idiosyncracy, either
of the body of the patient, or of the humor, that causes the disease; or
perchance, to the strength of imagination. And even Galen, such an hater of all
that resented of any superstition, and rigid exacter of reason; he recanted
afterward, we shall show; but even whilst he was so, in his Tenth book, De
compositione Pharmacorum, where among others, he does set down a remedy against
the stone in the bladder; This remedy, says he, must be prepared with a kind
of religious observation: For the ingredients must be beaten, or bruised in a
wooden-morter with a woodden-pestle; and he that beats, must not have any Iron
about him, either in his fingers, or shoes. And this he calls a mystery, which
he says he learned from a Rustic. But should I here take notice of those
strange things, and wonderful effects of herbs, which no less a man than
Matthiolus tells of, in his Dedicatory Epistle to his Herbal for truth; what
has been written of the herb Baaras, would be acknowledged very credible, in
comparison, I dare say. Yet I believe our modern Herbarists, that experience
does teach them the contrary. Well, but does it follow necessarily, that if it
be not found so, now: therefore it was never so? Yes, if we stick to the true
real nature, or natural effects of the Herb. But who knows, but that the Devil
might abuse the Magicians of those days, in that kind, making them believe,
that those strange effects (for of that I make no question) did proceed from
the natural properties of the very herb, thus and thus observed; which does not
hold at this day; as I dare say there be many superstitions about Herbs and
Plants, now in force among men of that wicked profession, which were not known
in former times. There is nothing in all this, but is very possible; and if I
said probable, it might be justified. But considering how many things in this
kind, are to be found in the books of old Magicians, as Democritus, and others,
which upon trial, even in those days, were found false; and because we would
not multiply wonders, where there is no necessity, that when there is, as we
conceive, we may speak with more authority, and be believed; I shall rather
stick to my former judgment, that it was but a fiction of the Magicians of
those days, to add credit and reverence to their art.

BUT now I turn to the men of these times; the wits, as they call themselves,
and by some others, for want of real wit, and good learning, are so called; who
because they believe nothing but what is palpable and visible, deny therefore
Spirits and all supernatural effects; and consequently the truth of all
relations, wherein supernatural causes are engaged; what will these men say, to
this of Josephus? That he did invent what he records to have been done,
before such witnesses? What reason can they give, for such a senseless
supposition? Or that the eyes of so many were deceived, who thought they saw,
what was not truly and really to be seen? But then how deceived; by what means,
natural or supernatural? It poseth me to think what they can pretend, why we
should not believe. Yet I will suppose that somewhat they will say; if nothing
else, yet this, that it is an old story, and therefore they are not bound to
believe it. A worthy answer for men that pretend to reason. But I will see, if
I can fit them with a later, to the same purpose, and as irrefragable, as I
account that old.

ANDREAS Laurentius, a late and learned Physician, well known to the world by
his writings, in his book De Strumis, or Kings Evil, printed in Paris, Anno
Dom. 1609, and dedicated to Henry the Fourth, of late Glorious memory; in his
first book, ninth Chap. where he treats of the power of the Devil, to cause,
or to heal diseases, at large; he has there this story: The most Christian
King, says he, (the very same to whom the book is dedicated) did see a Rustic
(or Country Clown) who by the incense, or smoke of a certain herb, in a moment,
as it were, would cure all that were sick of the Kings Evil. He made them
vomit, so that they did cast much pituitous stuff, and with it certain little
creatures, which he said were the (germina) buddings (or seminaries perchance)
of the disease. This I have heard more than once from the Kings own mouth, when
he did enquire the reason from me. Besides the King, Monsieur de Lominie, one
of the Kings Privy Council: Monsieur de Frontenae: Francis Martell, chief
Chyrurgion to the King, and diverse others of the Kings bed Chamber, did see the
same. I always was of opinion, that it was done by the Devil. Neither was I
deceived in it: for this Rustic some few days after vanished, and from that
time, though by his friends, and those of his house, sought far and near, was
never heard of. So he. Good, and unquestionable witnesses I hope, the King, and
so many others of his Court, men of credit, and of all men (the Chyrurgion, at
least) best able to judge.

LET this be compared with Josephus his relation: which shall we s^y is the
strangest? This I think. What then shall we say, is there any such thing in the
world, as Truth: or such a thing in the Heavens Firmament, as a Sun? If so,
then let us account, though strange, yet not prod^gious those things, which are
known so often to happen: but those men not so strange, as prodigious, who what
all men see, would make us believe they do not see, or though they see, yet
will not believe.

BUT now we are upon it I will run through some other instances: I shall not be
long upon them; but they shall be chosen instances, that nothing may be left
for the cure of those men (a hard cure I must confess) who love their disease,
nay are proud of it, for the most part, as knowing they owe the reputation they
have (among the vulgar) of wise men, unto it, more than they do, or have cause
to do, unto any thing else. I speak this of the most. If any truly discreet and
wise, and learned I must add, be of the same opinion too, we must needs look
upon it, either as a judgment, or some natural distemper of the brain; for
which I have the warrant of a learned Physician before spoken of, and one of
their own sect in part; who though he did not believe Devils, because he did
not see them; yet what he saw, and had often seen, or had been often seen by
many others, whom he believed, (what we call supernatural operations) he
pronounces them mad, that did not believe. It may be the number of instances
and testimonies of several men, of several nations, in cases or diseases of a
several nature, may do what any one single or double evidence, though never so
clear, could not.

ANTONIUS Benevenius, what I have seen of him is but very little in bulk, but
very considerable; and I see he is in good credit with all Physicians, for he
is often cited by them with good respect. Nay, if I be not mistaken in
Sennertus, lib. 1. Part. II. cap. 31. where he treats of the Epilepsie, he has
been set out with the Scholia's of learned Dodoneus, which must be no small
honor unto his book. I have been beholding to it elsewhere: and therefore
shall give him here the first place. Well, in that little book of his, De
abditis nonnullis ac mirandis, etc. in the 26. Chapter he has this story. A
Soldier had an arrow shot through the left part of his breast, so that the
iron of it stuck to the very bone of his right shoulder. Great endeavors were
used to get it out, but to no purpose. Benevenius does show, that it was not
feasible without present death. The man seeing himself forsaken by Physicians
and Chyrurgions, sends for a noted Ariolus, or Conjurer: who setting but his
two fingers upon the wound, with some Charms he used, commanded the iron to
come out, which presently without any pain of the patient, came forth, and the
man was presently healed. Vidimus, he says: we did see it: but I do not
approve of his censure at the end, that two were damned (the Patient and the
Conjurer) for this Act. It was possible, the Patient was not so well
instructed, how unlawful it was to seek to the Devil for help; how much better
for a Christian, though he suffer never so much, whereby he is made so much the
more conformable to Christ his Savior, to die. Or perchance not sufficiently
instructed, that such a cure could not be wrought by such means, without the
Devil. There be strange things written of the herb Dictamnus, which if he had
read, or were told, he might think the man had the right way to use it, which
all men perchance have not; nay, we need no perchance, if all that I have read
of it, both in ancient and late Authors, be true. Besides, God might be so
merciful unto him, that he might heartily and with many tears repent of what he
had done in the extremity of his pain. The Conjurer also, who can absolutely
say, that he never repented? Not in the ordinary way of the world only, with a
simple Lord have mercy upon me, when he was at the last; but time enough to
make his repentance real, and sincere? Though I must needs say, I think it is
very seldom, that God does grant true repentance unto such, who wilfully and
deliberately have put themselves into the hands of the Devil, and either
directly (as many do) or tacitly, which must be supposed, have abjured any
right, or pretention to Gods mercy.

MY next instance shall be out of Zacutus Lusitanus his Praxis Medicinae
admiranda; a book of great credit with all I have met with, but those who will
admit of nothing for truth, (an effect of their ignorance many times more than
incredulity) but what their little reading, and scanty experience has
commended unto them for truth. Which, I doubt, is the case of not a few in
these days; who to avoid labor, and to cover their ignorance, would gladly
reduce all medicine to some few, whether true or pretended, and by most
believed true, revelations of these later times. Galen and Hippocrates, (I have
heard it my self) what should they do with them? The course of Physic is now
altered, by late discoveries: there is no more need of them. Ignorant wretches,
and unhappy they, that fall into such hands. But I have done. Zacutus his
relation is this: A young Gentleman, of a comely shape, and of excellent parts,
was so passionately in love with a fair maid, of a noble parentage, about
eighteen years old; that he had no rest, neither night nor day, very near unto
distraction. But when by reason of the inequality of their birth, he found
nothing at her hands, but contempt and scorn; enraged, he applies himself to
Witches for revenge. They according to art, make a picture or image rather, of
her, in wax, which when pricked, with some Charms, and imprecations; at the
same time the party was seized with such horrible torments in all parts of her
body, that she thought her self pierced, or run through with some sharp weapon.
It was not long before diverse Physicians (the best that could be had, we may
presume) were sent for, who at first thought those horrible accidents must
proceed from some distemper of the womb. But after they had observed, that all
remedies they had applied made her worse, rather than better, they absolutely
pronounced her disease, to be no natural disease, and that she was either
actually possessed by some evil Spirit, or infested and infected by some of their
creatures. In which judgment, see God would have it to prevent the
contradiction of some confidents, which in all places are to be found; when she
began to cast out of her body lumps of hair, ( tribulorum fasciculum, I know
what it may signify besides, but I would not make the matter more strange than
it must needs) others of thistles, needles; then a black lump in the form of an
egg, out of which, when dissected, came flying Ants, which did cause such a
noisome stink, that no body was able to abide the room: they were much
confirmed. But at last, reduced to great extremity, and at the point of death,
with much difficulty, being in a syncope, she vomited a certain creature, of
the bigness of an ordinary fist, of a black color, long tail, hairy all the
body over, like a mouse; which being fallen to the ground, did with great
swiftness run to and fro the room, and then died. The Parents astonished with
this horrible case, and seeing their child forsaken by Physicians, they have
recourse to all the Witches, Sorcerers and Magicians the Town or Country
yielded. Among all these, one was found, who did with no small confidence, upon
condition of a good reward, undertake to make her well, if they sent for him,
when she was in a fit. It was agreed: being in a fierce sit, he is called: who,
( Zacutus then present, he says of himself) after he had applied a very white
paper to her pole, in which two letters only (T. M.) were written, and an Asses
hoof half burned, and chanted to her ears some words, ( Zacutus did not hear
them it seems) she was presently free from all evil, and so continued for the
time to come. Morbi ergo trans naturam, etc. that is, Diseases therefore
besides nature, as after Fernelius, Carrerius upon Galen de locis aff. disp.
37. does vigorously argue must be cured by remedies that are not natural. So
Zacutus concludes, as he did begin, making that, by his title, the very drift
and purpose of his narration. I hope he did mean well, but wish, he had spoken
more warily. For first, were such cures never so certain and ordinary, yet are
they impious, and unlawful; as not Divines only, the most and best approved,
but also learned Physicians well determine and conclude. True it is, there is a
story of a Dispensation granted by Pope Nicolaus the V. to a Bishop very dear
unto him, which may seem to cross what we say, if Popes might not err, and do
wickedly, as well as other men. For the Bishop having been bewitched unto a
grievous disease, of which he could not after many endeavors be cured by any
natural means; a Witch offered her self, and upon condition she might be
allowed to bewitch her, that had bewitched the Bishop unto death, (which she
said was in her power to do) undertook to cure him. Whereupon the Pope being
sued unto for a Dispensation, he granted it, and the business was done, the
first Witch died, and the Bishop was restored. Sprengerus as I take it, who was
an Inquisitor for all such businesses at Rome, was the first that made it
publicly known. Scarce any body that writes of this subject of Witches, and
their power, but takes notice of it from him. And as yet, I have not found it
contradicted by any, that I can remember. Neither do I remember that Delrio, in
that bulky book of his Disquisitions, takes notice of it any where; which we
may be sure he would not have omitted, to vindicate the Pope, had he known how
to excuse it with a good conscience, or how to censure it without offense. But
the truth is, though he take no direct notice, and durst not apparently
justify it, yet that it made him write more favorably of such cases, than
otherwise he would have done; for which he is justly blamed, and as solidly
refuted by learned Sennertus. lib. 6. p. 9. cap. 8. I cannot but suspect. Yet
as to this particular case, what he thought of it, he does, without any
particular mention, tell us freely enough, when he does limit his license or
dispensation (which he does allow) with this proviso, that if help be required,
or admitted from such; yet of no other than the very Witch or party, that has
done the mischief. For which, though he gives a very good reason, yet he
concludes but timorously, Quare raro admodum, etc. It must be therefore but
very seldom, if ever, lawful, to require the help of another Sorcerer, [or
Sorcerers] but only from him [or her] who is the actor of the mischief. But
seldom, if ever. Now here, in the Bishops case, it was required by the Bishop,
and indulged by the Pope, that a Witch, by bewitching her to death, that had
done the mischief, might do the cure. Was not this example, think we, in the
mind of Delrio, when he so wrote; and was not he put to it shrewdly, between
fear on the one side, and conscience on the other? But how more they, between
such manifest evidences on the one side, and an obstinate and resolved
incredulity on the other, who after all this will tell us, dare tell us, there
is no such thing, as Witches or Sorcerers in the world? Well, it was so it
seems in this particular: the Witch that had done the hurt must perish, or the
Bishop could not be cured: but lest the Reader should mistake, that it is
always so, he may learn by another instance.

LEONARD Vair in his book of Charms, before mentioned, has a story of a woman,
which though she passionately loved her husband, yet when he came to approach
her as her husband, she was affrighted with such horrid phancies and
apparitions; and if much urged, suffered in her body such strange symptoms or
accidents, that she became an object of no less horror, than pity, to all that
saw and heard her. Her husband was one, that this Leonard (no mean man, for his
worldly estate and credit in the world) had a great affection for: and was not
wanting to him, in the best advice, or assistance he could give him. But all to
no purpose. They continued in this forced kind of continence, from the first of
their legal matrimony, three whole years: at the end of which, the Witch that
had out of mere envy and malice bewitched the woman to this unusual kind of
affliction; whether procured, or of her own accord I know not, because my
Author does not tell me, came to the house, absolved her; and from that time
they lovingly and comfortably enjoyed one another. My Author does not say he
saw it, the woman, I mean, in her fits: neither was it sit he should be
admitted to see; which himself, I dare say, (a pious honest man, his book
speaks him) would have refused, had he been desired. But how every thing did
pass, he did not want good information, we find by the account he does give us,
and the circumstances of fact, as he does relate them, fitter to be read in
him, than related by me, in the judgment of any indifferent Reader, may amount
to a Vidimus. It will be found in his third book of the said Treatise, of my
French Translation, Page 502, etc.

BUT secondly, curantur, Zacutus says, as if it were very certainly feasible,
at any time, which is most false; and though his words seem to imply so much,
yet I hope and believe it was not his meaning. For though God, for some reasons
permit such things some times; and one reason certainly is, that men generally
so inclinable to Atheism, might certainly know, if not wilfully blind, that
there is somewhat besides flesh and blood, and what may be seen with bodily
eyes (that is, ordinary nature) to be thought on; yet I am very confident, that
not one in a hundred, nor a thousand perchance, that seek to Devils and
Witches, does speed, or obtain what he does desire; not because the Devil does
want power, or will, but because God does not permit. Nay, many certainly, when
they have done what they can or could, to be acquainted with Devils, yet have
missed of their desires, which might be a just judgment of God, so to harden
them the more in their Athiesm, and other wickedness; or an act of his
providence perchance, to prevent the mischief that they would do, had they such
an assistant. Whereof we have a notable example in that monster, Nero, who as
Pliny relates, having with care and great longing, applied himself to the best
Magicians of his time; yet God would not permit ( Pliny was not so well
persuaded of the gods of his time, as to say so) but would not, I say, permit,
that they could do any thing before him, for the credit of their profession;
whereby Nero grew very confident, and upon that very ground, many were then,
and have been since, that there is no such thing as Magic; and that all that
professed it, were but cheaters, and impostors. We might also say somewhat of
Julian the Apostate, one of the greatest followers of Magicians, when Magic
and N^cromancy was in highest request, that ever was; as all writers,
Christians, and others acknowledge. Yet for all that, how long he reigned, and
how he died, we know. But yet more particularly, we have heard of one Bishop,
who sped (as to this world, wretched man) in the hands, or by the hands of a
Witch: But Bodinus will tell us of another Bishop, whom he names, with all his
titles and dignities; and he says he was present with one Faber, a learned
Physician: when one of that profession did take upon him to cure him of a
Quartan Ague; which nevertheless, for all his confidence, he could not do. But
this is but one for another, because it offered it self so opportunely: but I
believe, as I said before, that many more, without number, miscarry, either
seeking to no purpose, or when they have found whom to treat with, finding
themselves cheated and frustrated.

BUT to return to the relation it self, wherein I would leave nothing
disputable; I observe in it an Image or picture of the party to be tormented,
made of wax. I observe it, because I know some, who question not the power of
Devils or Witches; yet in this particular are not satisfied, how such a thing
can be. For there is no relation or sympathy in nature, (says one, who has
written not many years ago) between a man and his effigies, that upon the
pricking of the one, the other should grow sick. It is upon another occasion
that he speaks it; but his exception reaches this example equally. A wonder to
me, he should so argue, who in many things has very well confuted the
incredulity of others, though in some things too credulous himself. If we must
believe nothing but what we can reduce to natural, or, to speak more properly
(for I my self believe the Devil does very little, but by nature, though to us
unknown) manifest causes, he does overthrow his own grounds, and leaves us but
very little of magical operations to believe. But of all men, Cardan had least
reason to except against this kind of Magic, as ridiculous or incredible, who
himself is so full of incredible stories in that kind, upon his own credit
alone, that they had need to be of very easy belief, that believe him;
especially when they know (whereof more afterward) what manner of man he was.
But I dare say, that from Plato's time, who among other appurtenances of Magic
does mention these, (...) that is, as Ovid does call them, Simulachra cerea, or
as Horace, cereas imagines, (who also in another place more particularly
describes them) there is not any particular rite, belonging to that art, more
fully attested by Histories of all ages, than that is. Besides, who does not
know, that it is the Devils fashion (we shall meet with it afterward again) to
amuse his servants and vassals with many rites and ceremonies, which have
certainly no ground in nature, no relation or sympathy to the thing, as for
other reasons, so to make them believe, they have a great hand in the
production of such and such effects; when, God knows, many times all that they
do, though taught and instructed by him, is nothing at all to the purpose, and
he in very deed is the only agent, by means, which he does give them no account
of. Bodinus in his Preface to his Daemonology, relates, that three waxen-
Images, whereof one of Queen Elizabeth's, of glorious memory, and two other,
Reginae proximorum, of two Courtiers, of greatest authority under the Queen,
were found in the house of a Priest at Islington, a Magician, or so reputed; to
take away their lives. This he does repeat again in his second book, Chap. 8.
but more particularly that it was in the year of the Lord 1578. and that
Legatus Angliae, and many Frenchmen, did divulge it so; but withal, in both
places he does add, that the business was then under trial, and not yet
perfectly known. I do not trust my memory: I know my age, and my infirmities.
Cambden, I am sure, I have read and read again: but neither in him, nor in
Bishop Carletons thankful remembrancer, do I remember any such thing. Others
may perchance. Yet in the year 1576. I read in both, of some pictures,
representing some, that would have killed that glorious Queen with a Motto,
Quorsum haec, alio properantibus! which pictures were made by some of the
conspiracy for their encouragement; but intercepted, and showed, they say, to
the Queen. Did the time agree, it is possible these pictures might be the
ground of those mistaken, if mistaken, waxen Images, which I desire to be
taught by others, who can give a better account.

MY next and last instance, in this kind, or matter of Cures, shall be out of
the Observationes Medicae, of Henricus ab Heers, Domestic Physician, not many
years ago, to the Elector of Colen: a man of no small credit in those parts
among the better sort, especially; but no friend to Empericks, among whom he
reckoned Van Helmont as one of the chief. But I shall not interpose my judgment
in that. Of Heers, I dare say in general, not to meddle with those things that
properly belong unto a Physician to judge of; that he does write as a sober,
learned, and (which is the Crown of all) pious man. The subject of his eighth
observation, is a very strange story of a young maid, that was bewitched by one
of that wicked crew; which being found by the consequents of the presence, or
absence of the Witch; she was laid hold of, arraigned and convicted; and for
that, and many other things of the same nature done by her, as she confessed,
deservedly put to death. But with the Witch, (as she her self at her death, had
foretold it would be) the pains of the miserable girl did not expire, but
continued at least one year after. So long is expressed, how much longer I know
not. Heers had the keeping of her a good part of the time. In the mean time,
such strange things happened unto her, and such strange things came out of her,
that her keeper did verily believe, and did endeavor to persuade diverse
others, who were admitted daily spectators, (Scholars and Philosophers, or
Naturalists, among the rest) that not the maid really in her body, did suffer
those things that did appear unto them, but that their fascinated eyes (as it
does happen sometimes) did falsely represent unto them things which had no real
being. But did not long continue in that opinion, being convicted by manifest
experience, as he does relate, to the contrary. The particulars are so many,
that I must desire the Reader, if so curious, to take them from the Author
himself: who in the relation is so put to it, to protest and to apologize for
himself, that I doubt he had not been much acquainted with such cases, by his
own experience, or read much in others, that write of them. Quae tunc viderim,
audiverim, etc. What I then saw, heard, handled, because I know there be many
that will not believe, etc. So God bless me, I shall write nothing, but what I
have seen. And again, I do most conscienciously, (or, by what is most sacred)
and all my domestics are ready with me most solemnly to take their oaths, etc.
But yet of all particulars, the last of all seems to me most observable, and
that is, a natural receipt, commended and approved by more than one before, men
of credit and learning, which he will tell you, it was a long time, though he
did use all possible endeavors, before he could procure to remove or cure such
kind of witchcraft: but at last he got it, and it wrought the desired effect.
For the maid, he says, with the use of it, perfectly recovered. He does make
us believe, he has given us the receipt clearly expressed, which to understand
he was long puzzled. If so, he has deserved well of posterity, and deserves the
thanks of the present age. However, it is very possible that what he found
effectual, and some others before him, to such a purpose, may fail sometimes;
which in things of such an abstruse nature, and which depend of many
circumstances, it is no great wonder that it should be so, when we see that
ordinary Physic does not always produce the same effects in all bodies; no,
nor in the same sometimes.

NOW of these receipts (this, upon this occasion, to direct the belief of
others, not much versed in such things) that pretend to some hidden, but
natural virtue; therefore, as we had it before by some called, natural, (...),
or eminently: such as keep to things merely natural, as herbs, roots, stones,
and the like; and are not accompanied with any words, or spells, pronounced or
written; nor contain rites and ceremonies, as many are; I know not, if we
allow, as all sober men must, of occult qualities, I know not, I say, why we
should suspect our selves, or make others scrupulous of such: especially when
commended unto us by persons, that are not at all suspected, and that they are
known to have been effectual, I will not say always, but sometimes. I am not
therefore of their opinion, I must confess, who confine us to those things, for
which a probable reason may be given, from the nature of the ingredients, or
simple materials. But on the other side, where there is any just ground of
suspicion, it must be considered also, that it may be the craft of the Devil,
or his instruments ( Witches and Magicians) to ascribe cures to things natural,
as the means, to draw us on by degrees; when those natural things signify
nothing at all really; and all the operation does proceed from a more mystical
and concealed cause. But again, no question, I think, is to be made, but that
the Devil and those that work by him, to inhance the credit of their art, or
power, where they are allowed, disguise sometimes the operations of things
merely natural, of purpose, with superstitious rites and ceremonies, which of
themselves do nothing; though probably without them, those natural things would
not prove efficacious in the hands of them, that had them from such masters;
nor yet in the hands of others perchance, through the ignorance or omission of
some small circumstance, which in point of very nature, may much alter the
case. However, in process of time, it is likely that such and such things came
more generally, (as many of those naturalia or specifica are) to be known to be
efficacious to such ends, which were at first as great secrets, prescribed by
those masters, to them that did apply themselves to them. For otherwise, how
they should come to the knowledge of men, (though some, by some casualty might,
I confess) were hard to guess. Of this nature I suspect something may be found
in Trallianus, than whom, I think, no man (those that profess such things under
the Devil their Master excepted) has more of these Naturalia or Specifica, for
all kind of diseases. A strange thing, that a man in his profession, and the
rational way, so learned and useful, as I have heard some eminent Physicians
attest, besides what Fererius and others write, should give credit to so many
tales, as he that reads must needs suspect, or rather absolutely pronounce of
many, or most of them. Yet is he not content to set them down barely, to
satisfy the curiosity of some, as he does sometimes profess; but many times
does commend them, as approved by certain experience. Other ancient Physicians
have, I know, some; but so many as Trallianus has, and so confidently
proposed, I think not any. Yet that he was a Magician, or did work at all by
the Devil, of whose nature, and properties probably he knew little or nothing,
I do not believe: but if his naturalia did prove so effectual, as he would make
us believe, I must suspect nevertheless that the Devil had a hand in the
operation of many of them. And should any man, acquainted with the mysteries of
our faith and the Scriptures, go the same way, to advance the credit of such
remedies. I should believe him either a Magician, or as bad as a Magician. But
even among Christians, (professed Christians at least) as elsewhere, so in
England, there be I doubt too many, that are not so tender-conscienced, as to
stick at those things, or enquire after the lawfulness of the means, (through
ignorance, and want of good information, some, probably) may they but compass
their desire, either of profit, or of ease. A very good friend of mine, a
serious man, and a good Preacher, told me this story, as very well known to
him. A friend of his, he said, having been long troubled with an Ague, and
probably tried many means without success, either went to, or lighted upon an
Apothecary (he named him, and the place of his abode) who undertook to cure
him, and to that end, delivered unto him six very small rouls of paper, rouled
up very close, and bid him eat them. But he before he did execute what was
enjoined, had so much curiosity or boldness, as to look into one of them first,
then into another, and lastly, into a third; in all which, he found no more,
than this written, Do well, or, All is well: so reported unto me, uncertainly;
but one of the two, certainly. Having satisfied his curiosity, and happily
thinking there could be no Magic in this, he did what he was bid, that is, eat
them. Whereupon he was surprised with great pains, the like whereof he had not
felt before, for a while: but afterward, was altogether free of his disease.
Whereof having given an account to his friend, or Physician, what he had
suffered first, and how free afterward; Then I will warrant you, said he
presently, you did open some of the papers; and so many papers, as you opened,
so many fits you had, I believe, of those pains, which his friend told him, was
very true. At the same time, one that was present, but not so well known to me,
told a story, that had much affinity, and I am much deceived, if I have not
read somewhat printed that has more: but one will serve our turn of this kind.
For though I may perchance believe my friend, as he believed his, that it is
true; yet to commend it to the Reader, as an absolute truth, I dare not, but
upon a probable supposition of the truth, the opening of the papers, and what
ensued excepted, I should not much wonder at the possibility of the thing, in
point of nature. For a strong confidence, if the Apothecary did well act his
part, or imagination may do much: it is a common observation, and examples
every where are obvious.

NOW to proceed, I have given, I think, a sufficient account of the power of
Magic in point of Cures, which by some, besides them that deny all
supernatural operations, is not believed, but more, I believe, for want of
diligent enquiring into the thing, then through mere incredulity. I have made
choice of such instances, against which what rationally can be excepted, I
cannot so much as imagine. But I will yet oppose incredulity, in another kind
of supernatural operations, by instances as irrefragable as the former; and to
them that think themselves concerned in the true sense of the Scriptures, more
considerable. Psalm 58. verse 4. and 5. it is written: They are like the deaf
Adder, that stops her ear: which will not hearken to the voice of the
charmers, charming never so wisely. Besides, Ecclesiastes the 10. verse the 11.
Surely the Serpent will bite without enchantment, and a babbler is no better:
and again, Jeremy the 8. and the 17. verse: For behold I will send Serpents,
Cockatrices among you, which will not be charmed, and they shall bite you says
the Lord. For the first place, it were no hard matter to interpret the words of
the Psalmist, as spoken proverbially, without any consequence of a supposition
of the truth, or reality of the thing, in matter of fact. For many things are
thus spoken proverbially, which they that speak have no intention to assert as
true, or perchance know, or believe at last, to be most false. So Cygnea
cantio: Sirenum cantus, and the like; for which perchance somewhat may be said,
but not believed I am sure, by all that use the speech. Or if I compare a woman
to a Circe, or a man to Proteus, or to aggravate any burden, say it is heavier
than that of Atlas; no rational man will hence conclude, that I believe that
such have been really. But the two other places are more positive, and cannot
so well be evaded. Yet Valesius, not to name others, a very learned Spaniard,
in his books, De Sacra Philosophia, has taken great pains to persuade men,
that these things were spoken not proverbially, but mystically, and
allegorically; and though he deny not supernatural operations by Devils and
Spirits, whom he does not at all doubt of: yet as to this particular, of
enchanting by magical words, he does altogether deny, as possible, and
whatsoever is alleged by any ancient or late writer to that purpose, he does
reject, as merely fabulous. It seems by Pliny, that learned men of old, have
been very much divided in their opinions about this matter; insomuch, that he
dares not take upon him to decide it, but leaves it free to every man to
believe as they shall see cause: His words, elsewhere produced by me, in a
proper place, very notable and applicable to many occasions, are, Maximae
questionis, and semper incertae est, valeantne aliquid verba and incantamenta
carminum; and again more particularly, Varia circa haec opinio, ex ingenio
cujusque vel casu, mulceri alloquio for as: quippe ubi etiam Serpents extrahi,
cantu cogique in poenas, verum falsumne sit vita non decreverit. So he. We
shall give light to those words, cogique in poenas, afterward: We have given
the substance of the rest before. Now for my part, partly upon what I have seen
my self, but much more upon the testimony of others, who profess to have seen
it, and give a particular account of every circumstance; men all generally well
accounted of; I do profess that I know not what to believe in the world, which
I cannot say I have seen my self; if I may not believe this, and commend unto
others, for a truth. If any thing, I say, which I cannot say, I have seen my
self: which would be a strange kind of Incredulity, and worthy to make a man
unworthy of the society of men, of whom, even the best, and most creditable, he
can entertain so base an opinion: Neither can it, I think, enter into the heart
of any man, to be so mistrustful, but theirs only who are conscious unto
themselves of their own baseness, and make no other difference between lying
and speaking truth, but as either best fits their present occasion. As for
Valesius his opinion, though a learned man, and for ought I know, pious and
wise; yet it is no wonder to me, that any one man, though pious and learned,
should fall into an opinion very paradoxical, and contrary to most other men's
belief: especially in a thing of this nature, which most depends of experience.
Pliny has sufficiently warned us against this scandal, or exception, when in
this very case, he tells us, that men are apt to believe and frame their
opinions, according as they have found; or, by their particular experience: an
excellent observation, and, as I said before, applicable to many things of good
moment, whereof I have given examples elsewhere. I am very confident, that it
was not Valesius his luck, to meet with any man (much less two or three, or
more) whom he accounted pious and judicious withal, that could say, he had seen
the thing done, with his own eyes, and in the presence of many others: but more
probable, that he had met with, or heard of some cheaters and impostors in this
very case, whereof it were no very hard thing, I believe, to find instances and
examples: and when a man has once framed to himself an opinion, and pleased
himself (as we are too apt) in his invention; it is no easy thing, (such is
the infirmity, even of the best of men) to get him out of it. But Valesius has
been, and his reasons fully answered and confuted by more it may be, but by one
I know, very learned and judicious; and with so much respect and moderation, as
that Valesius, I think himself, would have thought himself, had he read him,
rather beholding to him, than otherwise, of whom also I should not be afraid,
or think it any discredit (such an opinion I have of his real worth and
learning) to borrow some instances, in such a case, more to be resolved by
instances, that is experience, than any thing else. But that my curiosity has
been such in this particular, that I think (without pride or bragging (be it
spoken) I could have furnished him. Which I may say also of what he has
written of, and upon Josephus his place, before examined, very accurately and
learnedly: let the Reader, upon comparing, judge, as he shall please* But I
have not yet, though before I have, upon another occasion, named the man: It is
Doctor Reynolds, Royal Professor in Oxford, when he lived: and the book his
learned Praelectiones, before named also. A pity it is, as he does complain
himself more than once, that the condition of those Praelectiones was such,
that he was forced oftentimes to repeat the same things, which is able to make
those, that have not patience, nor know how to value such ware, to be soon
weary. His chiefest instances, besides Fernelius and Matthiolus, their opinions
in the case, upon certain proof and experience are, the first, Baptista
Mantuanus, a known Physician, in his notes, or observations upon Avicen, which
he does call Lectiones: whose words are; Ego mihi credit, vidi meis oculis,
etc. that is: My self with mine eyes, you may believe me, have seen it, a
certain man who when he had made a circle (cumque signaret) and drawn some
characters about it, and uttered some words, he did call together above a
hundred Serpents. So he. This indeed Montanus does not relate to the same end
that I do, to prove that there be supernatural operations by the intervention
of Devils and Spirits; but he, to prove the strength of imagination. For he
was, it seems, of the opinion of some Enthusiasts Arabs, as Avicenna and some
others, embraced by some professing Christianity also; who did ascribe so much
to the strength of imagination, as if Rain, and Thunder, and even Earthquakes
might be caused by it. Certainly, they that did believe this, really, had a
very strong imagination. How comes it to pass, they never did none of those
miracles? But for a further resolution, or refutation of this, if any desire
it, I refer them to learned Fyenus his excellent Treatise, De viribus
Imaginationis, well worth the reading, written in the old Aristotelean way;
though he do Aristotle some wrong, unwillingly I believe, when he does say,
that Aristotle he believes, did write of the strength of the imagination, no
were, but Problem. l. 10. c. 12. a great mistake. But to our purpose. Remigius
his relation, which is not in Reynolds, is more strange, and not less credible,
I think. I have seen a man, says he, who from all the neighborhood (or
confines) would draw Serpents into the fire, which was enclosed within a
Magical Circle; and when one of them, bigger than the rest, would not be
brought in, upon repetition of the Charms before used, he was forced, and so
into the fire he did yield himself with the rest, and with it was compassed. So
Remigius. By this, what Pliny meant, by his cogique in poenas, may be
understood. But I must conceal nothing from my Reader. They that should see my
Remigius would easily believe that I have read him over, more than once, by my
noting and scribbling in most pages of it. Yet at this time, I must confess, I
could not find this passage, where I thought it most probable it would be
found. And that which makes me somewhat suspicious is, that I find much of this
relation, set out with more flourish, as acted elsewhere: which I confess is
very possible, that what the Devil has done in one place, he may do in
another. And this I find in an Author, who professes to have traveled the
greatest part of Europe, to satisfy his curiosity: and to speak truth, for the
bigness, I have not read stranger things in all kinds in any book: but this of
Serpents, he does relate from others, of what credit I know not; he does not
say he did see them himself. And therefore the Reader may suspend his belief,
as to this particular relation; if he please, till he or I have found it in
Remigius. Yet withal I must say, that the same Author, but now spoken of,
though he does not attest this relation of Serpents as a thing seen by himself;
yet another he does, ( Vidimus) his word, which in point of the creatures
charmed, is as different, as Serpents, are from Flies; in all other things have
much affinity: Hercules (...), is the title of the book: one Joh. Exnestus
Burggravius, the Author: these two particulars of Serpents and Flies, page 68.
and 77. My Author for Remigius, is one that calls himself Philippus Ludwigus
Elich, in his Daemonomagia: who is very full of quotations, out of good books,
I confess, but otherwise, whether sober or no, when he wrote; he is so full of
extravagancies, I do not know. But again, Remigius and Burggravius, their
relations agree very well; but that they do not agree in the place, which is no
argument against the truth; some may think it a confirmation of their
relations, because as I said before, it is very possible the same thing in
substance might be acted, as most other things are, in different places: But
Delrio, in whom though diligent and copious enough, I find none of these, nor a
word of Valesius, he has an example which he calls celebre exemplum, as known
unto all men, that seek after these things, and uncontrollable; so I understand
him; but of a quite contrary event: for there the Magician was killed by the
Serpent, who last appeared, who probably might be the Devil himself: but enough
of this.

MY next instance (in Reynolds also) or testimony, is of Andreas Masius, that
excellent Commentator, and learned Divine, who being entreated by Wierius, to
explain unto him the true notions of the Hebrew words, wherewith all kind of
Witchcraft is expressed in the Scriptures, when he comes to the word (...),
which properly signifies incantare, or to inchant; he does add: Et ego vidi,
etc. I also have seen them, who with words (or charms) could stop wild beasts,
and force them to await the stroke of the dart: who also could force that
domestic beastly creature, which we call a Rat, as soon as seen, amazed and
astonished to stand still, as it were immovable, until not by any deceit or
ambushes, but only stretching their hands they had taken them, and strangled
them. So learned Masius. Some Reader it may be that is not incredulous, for
want of due consideration, will be astonished at these things, that such power
should be given unto man, or Devil. But they should rather make this use of it,
that if such power even Spirits have, that are Gods creatures, and servants;
which both good and bad are, though against their wills; what may his power be,
who is the Creator of all things; and how inexcusable they, who in some
articles of our faith, stick at some things, as impossible to God? And if they
believe, (they do, if true Christians) that one Angel, at Gods command,
destroyed in one night, one hundred fourscore and five thousand men, why, a
wonder unto any, that a man, by the help of the Devil, who is a rebel-Angel,
should have such power (God not hindering) upon dumb creatures, whether fierce
or tame? The German Piper, I think, there be but few, but sometime or other
have heard of, who having agreed with the Town, or Village, at a certain rate,
to destroy all the Rats, which did much annoy the place, and after performance,
was denied, and laughed at: drew by his music all, or most Children of the
Parish, or place, after him; who (if a true tale) were never heard of. It is
related by many for a truth, and said by some, to be left upon the records of
the place or Country. But I will not trouble my self to seek my books or papers
for it, at this time. Enough has been produced of later times, which I think
unquestionable, and I have yet more to the same purpose. I remember well, that
many years ago, Sir Henry Wootton, being then Provost of Eaton-Colledge, he did
tell me, that some body, whether English or Outlandish, did offer unto him to
destroy all the Moles of the Country for I know not what compass of ground: but
this, not by any charm, or incantation, he said, but by a secret of nature;
because the Moles, at a certain time of the year, it was their nature and
custom, to gather together in one place, and then, what to be done, I know not:
he told me more, but this is all I remember. But I have a story of a later
date, which though for some reasons I am somewhat shye to come to: Yet, because
in two several places in my Notes and Observations upon Diogenes Laertius
lately set out, and in those Observations upon the Psalms, and Proverbs, the
importunity of Printers, when I was not very well furnished, either with books
or leisure; but worst of all, of will, (when nothing could be expected to be
acceptable, and welcome, but what relished of schism and rebellion) extorted
from me: but because in those two several places I have touched upon it, I
desire I may have the liberty to relate it here at large.

IN the year of our Lord 1648. I then lived in Sussex, some three miles from
Chichester, under the protection, not out of any love to me, who was looked
upon as a desperate malignant; but out of a respect to my wife, between whom,
and his wife, there was some relation of kindred; but under his protection,
whom I dare not name; but a man of very great power, at that time; I wish he
had made better use of it, than generally he did: though I never heard that he
did much enrich himself by it, which many others did, who had less power, but
were more covetous. I must acknowledge, not knowing at that time, where to
dispose my self more commodiously, I was much beholding to him: and it did much
conduce to my peace and quietness, as being of that profession and party, then
sufficiently hated and persecuted; that he would do me the favor, and honor
sometimes, as to come to my house. One time (I can tell the very day, it was
the 11. of February) he came, and brought with him a Gentleman, his wives own
father, and of kin to mine, who had been not long before Sheriff, as I
remember, of Sommerset-shire, and suffered much by the times, for his loyalty.
They came on horseback, with diverse servants, among whom, because the chiefest
of the company had lately bought a Barbary-horse, to whom he did not think
convenient, as yet, altogether to trust himself; was one John Young, a known
horse-courser of that Country. Whilst we were above, in the best Room I had,
and the Servants in the Kitchen by the fire; my son (the only I then had, or
since have had; some 12. or 13. years of age) comes in, with his Mastiff, which
he was very fond of, as the Mastiff was of him: John Young, to make himself and
the company sport; What will you say, Sir, says he, if I make your dog,
without touching of him, lie down, that he shall not stir? Or to that effect.
My son, for it was a Mastiff of great strength, and courage, which he was not a
little proud of; defied him. He presently to pipe, and the Mastiff (at a
distance) to reel: which when the boy saw, astonished and amazed, he began to
cry out. But the man, fearing some disturbance in the house, changed his tune,
or forbear further piping, (I know not which) and the dog suddenly became as
well and as vigorous as before. Of this I knew nothing, till the company was
gone. Then a maid of the house observing that I much wondered at it, and wished
I had seen it: O Master, said she, do you wonder at it? This man does it
familiarly, and more than that, the fiercest horse, or bull that is, if he
speak but a word or two in their ears, they become presently tame, so that they
may be led with a string; and he does use to ride them, in the sight of all
people. This made me the more impatient; and so it was, that being invited
thither to dinner against the next day, I thought long till the time was come,
and had not (the next day) been long there, but told the Master of the house,
before much company, that were then present, what I had heard of the man, and
how desirous I was to be further satisfied; That shall you soon be, replied he:
and presently sent one for him. But answer was brought he was gone abroad, but
they thought he would not be long away. This very delay, though but for so
short a time, troubled me, which whether observed or no; Well, well, says the
Master of the house, I will give you some satisfaction, in the mean time, by
one story I shall tell you. This man, said he, was once in company, and being
in the mood (or to that effect) began to brag, what he could do to any dog,
were he never so great or so fierce. It happened, that a Tanner, who had a very
fierce Mastiff, who all the day was kept in chains, or musled, was in the
company, who presently (not without an oath perchance, it is too usual; good
laws against it, and well executed would well become a Christian Commonwealth)
offered to lay with him ten pounds he could not do it to the said dog: that
was, without any force or use of hands to lay him flat upon the ground, take
him into his arms, and to lay him upon a table. Young happened to be so well
furnished at that time, that he presently pulled out of his pocket (I think I
was told) ten shillings. The Tanner accepts; the money on both sides laid into
the hands of some one of the company, and the time set. At which time, to the
no small admiration, certainly, of them that had not seen it before, but to the
great astonishment, and greater indignation of him, that had laid the wager;
with a little piping the party did punctually perform what he had undertaken.
But instead of the ten pounds he expected, being paid only with oaths and
execrations, as a Devil, a Magician: after some expectation, a suit was
threatened or commenced. The conclusion was, that the business being on both
sides referred to arbitration, and this very Gentleman that told me the story,
chosen and agreed upon for one; of ten pounds, five (if my memory fail me not
in any particular circumstance, as in the main, I am confident it does not)
were given him, and there was an end. Then they began to tell some other of
that company, besides horses, what he had done to fiercest bulls, before great
company, and some persons of quality: but withal, what one bull, more
refractory than the rest, had done to him; carried him, against his will, into
a deep pond, where he was in some danger, but at last, had his will of him
also, as well as of the rest. Whilst they were speaking, in comes John Young.
John, says the Master of the house, here is a Gentleman, at whose house you
were yesterday: he is very desirous (to satisfy his curiosity, and to no other
end) to see some of your feats. I was sitting by the fire, (it was cold, and I
was not very well) but turned and fixed my eyes upon him, and he his, as
earnestly upon me. I told him what I had heard of him, and that it would much
satisfy me, to see that done with mine eyes, which, I knew, by some was
thought impossible. Whereupon the man, still earnestly looking upon me, began a
discourse, how that all creatures were made by God for the use of man, and to
be subject unto him; and that if men did use their power rightly, any man might
do what he did. I must confess, I did wonder not a little to hear a man, whom
by his profession, and his countenance, you would hardly have thought able to
read (and whether he was, I do not know) to speak so Philosophically;
especially after. I remembered what I had read in Cornelius Agrippa, that
famous, but learned Magician, to the same purpose, De occulta Philosophia lib.
3. cap. 40. Quod unicuique homini impressus est character, etc. where he
begins: It is approved by good experience, that man naturally has an inbred
power in him of binding and commanding, etc. and yet, it is far from my
thoughts to think, that ever the man heard so much as of the name. But after I
had heard him awhile, I did adventure to desire him, that I might hear some of
his piping. He, as one that made very slight of it, took a little stick out of
the Chimney, most of the company being busy in discourse, one with another,
not regarding what passed between him and me; and did begin to make some kind
of noise, wherein I did not think there was much music. But this I observed,
(the Reader may laugh, and I know it might be a chance) that whilst he was
piping, which was not long, a Cat that was in the Chimney-corner, came toward
him, and looked upon him, in that posture of body, that I could not but take
notice of it. But, by this, Dinner was brought in, and the room with guests and
servants, pretty full. The man promised me he would come to my house, and I to
him, he should not lose his labor. I trusted to it, and forbear any further
mention of him, whilst I was in the house. But when returned to my own, I
expected, day after day, and no news of him. I sent, as opportunity offered it
self, messages unto him: promises were returned, but no performance followed.
At last, after I began to suspect the man avoided me, I made two journeys to
Medhurst, some seven miles from mine own house, where I was told, or not far
off, he did live; but for ought I could do, I never had the sight of the man
ever since, and I think he died before, or soon after I left the Country. Upon
enquiry, all that I could learn is, that he had learned it of his father, who
they said, drove the same trade before him.

IF the Reader have received any satisfaction from this story, I am glad of it.
If not, to make him amends, I will tell him another, I cannot say more true;
but he will perchance, because better attested, and from the place, and
occasion more noble; whereof a Bull is a considerable part. And this, not
because I desire to please his ears, (which is far from me) but to vindicate a
truth of such consequence, which cannot (except Scripture authority will be
thought sufficient, which in this particular seems to some doubtful) be better
vindicated, than by experience. After the death of Pope Leo the Tenth, and
before Adrian the sixth, his successor, was chosen, (being then absent) and
come to Rome, there was, it seems, besides other confusion, by strife and
divisions, a grievous Plague at Rome: which did so amaze the people, being
otherwise, by other evils, much annoyed and perplexed; that having tried other
usual means to no purpose; at last, they had recourse to one Demetrius, a
Grecian, and noted Magician, who was said, and attested by some, to have done
wonders in that kind, in other places. The man, with much confidence, undertook
the business, promising to clear the City, not for the present only, but for
the time to come also. This to bring to pass, (for a good reward, we may be
sure) he requires a bull to be brought to him: a black bull it must be* and a
very fierce one, they say it was: but he after some charms, made him gentle and
patient enough, so that he suffered his horns to be cut off, without any
resistance. What I chiefly aimed at, is at an end: but if the Reader desire to
know somewhat of the issue, truly I am at a stand in that. Quercetanus, de
peste, relates it out of Paulus Jovius, whom I have not; Pestem Romae
grassantem, sedatam fuisse incantationibus cujusdam Demetrii, etc. that is,
That the Plague, raging in Rome, was assuaged by the enchantments of one
Demetrius, etc. Delrio, the Jesuit, out of Grillandus, says nothing of the
Plague, ( Delrio does not, whether Grillandus does, I know not; I have him not
at this time) but only of the Bull (which he calls, ferocissimum taurum) how he
was calmed by Magick-art, and led by a string, hundreds of people following,
and for this very act, Demetrius, as a notorious inchanter, cast into prison.
But Gilbertus cognatus, (him I have) who very largely does tell the story, and
by some prayers I have of his in another book, seems to have been a very
religious man, and was then at Rome, as I take it: by him, indeed the Plague is
mentioned, a very sad Plague, and the confusions of the City at that time fully
set out: the Magician also hired, the Bull required and tamed: all this he has
at large: but not that the Plague was thereupon assuaged or removed: though it
seems the people of the City, had so good an opinion of the man, after he had
done his feats, that when cast in prison, by authority, as a Magician; he was
violently delivered by them, and set at liberty. And Cognatus does add, that
from thence, he went into a certain place, where the Plague was, and that it
was said, he had, by his art cleared it; but, said only: whether truly or
falsely, he does not tell us. Onuphrius, in the life of Adrian the sixth, does
mention the Plague, but nothing else: neither indeed was it for the credit of
the place, or people, he should. For Cognatus writing to his friend about it,
begins, De Graeca illa (the Magician that was employed was a Grecian, I told
you before) superstitione, quae Romam, Anno 1522. invecta fuit, scribere
volens, vereor, etc. that is, Purposing to write of that Greek superstition,
which was acted at Rome, in the year 1522. I have reason to fear, that neither
I shall acquit my self, as I ought, and that both to you, and other Readers,
the thing will seem incredible. For such is the indignity of the thing, etc.

WELL, I think we may take it for granted, if certain and approved experience,
can make any think indubitable, that by charms and enchantments many
supernatural operations, are brought to pass: and if such approved testimonies
of fresh memory were wanting, yet to me, as to many others I suppose, the
testimony of so many ages, grounded upon common experience, would be a
sufficient evidence. After the Scriptures, Homer for his antiquity, of all
Authors now extant, is most considerable; whose testimony is ordinarily
produced, as indeed very pertinent and emphatical: So is Plato's, in more than
one place: So Pindarus, and diverse others, whom I pass by, because every where
to be found. Physicians and Philosophers, if not all, yet not a few, did allow
of them; and the laws of Princes sometimes did, and sometimes not; but those
that did not, and were most severe, but not unjust against them, (as indeed
they were, sometimes) they are as good evidence, in our cause, to prove that
such things were practiced, and found available, as those laws, that did favor
them. Ammianus Marcellinus, whose judgment we need not much stand upon, as long
as his testimony, for the matter of fact, is good: in his History of those
times, when himself lived, does record it, as an example of great cruelty, that
some were proceeded against in his time, as great malefactors, because they had
made use of anile incantamentum, ad leviendum dolorem; and in another place,
that a certain Magistrate, (anum quandam simplicem, etc.) that is, Did put to
death a simple (or innocent) old woman, which was wont with smooth (or
harmless) enchantments, to cure intermitting Fevers, (or Agues) after that the
same being sent for, had healed his own daughter. A cruel thing indeed, that he
should use her help, or art, to cure his own daughter, and afterward put her
to death, for curing others, and making a practice of it: except we understand
it so, that this man in authority, not fully satisfied that such a thing could
be; that is, that charms and enchantments were of that power, and having such
an opportunity to know the truth, having a daughter sick in the house, he made
use of her; and finding that she was a Witch, indeed, and dealt in those
things, which by the laws of those times were strictly inhibited under pain of
death; so he put her to death, notwithstanding that (against his expectation
perchance) his daughter had reaped the benefit of her unlawful profession. And
yet let us observe by the way, that if he did it of purpose, to make trial, and
to know the truth; besides that he made himself obnoxious to the law, for
trespassing against it, under pretense of trial, and finding of transgressors;
which I believe the law did not allow: he might also have missed of his end.
For it was possible, that she that had cured many by those unlawful courses,
might not cure all, though she used the same means. For still we must
presuppose the concurrence of Gods will and permission, without which nothing
lawful or unlawful can be done: besides, what may also be alleged from natural
hidden causes: and there be store of instances to that purpose, that effectual
charms, in, and by the same hands are not always effectual. But again, Wierius
would say, that the Devil, to mischief a poor innocent old woman, did so
contrive it, that her charms should be effectual at that time, though in very
deed, all that she did, did contribute nothing really to the cure, whereof
himself was the immediate and only author. So far we may admit, that the charms
of themselves were nothing, but as they were made effectual by him. But the
woman therefore, that did apply her self to the Devil, and entered into covenant
with him to such and such purposes; or, say she made no direct covenant, yet
used an indirect way, by the laws of the land severely interdicted; she
innocent, and no Witch, but in conceit? Who sees not, I have said it before,
and say it again, how by this device any malefactor may become innocent? But of
Wierius, and his opinion, before sufficiently.

WHAT Ammianus does call, anum simplicem, I understand a white Witch, as in
some parts of England they are called; that is, such as are generally, by the
common people, supposed to do no hurt, but much good; to distinguish them from
ordinary mischievous Witches. When I lived in Sommerset-shire, where, as soon
as by years capable, by the Collation of Lancelot Andrews, then Bishop of
Winchester, (whose name will be in honor, and his books in request, as long as
good learning, and true piety both, which of late has suffered great
detriment, are in credit in England) I had a Living; I became acquainted with a
very pious and hospitable Gentlewoman, one Mistress Still, the widow of Bishop
Still his eldest son, as I take it; and by her, with another of the Bishops
sons, yet living, for ought I know: a Gentleman of excellent parts; but, I
think, better known unto most, by a strange infirmity he had, for which many
that had seen him abroad, as I have often seen him, and once at my house, would
have sworn he had been bewitched; yet natural, and contracted, as I have heard,
by some hurt in his backbone, through the unruliness of his horse, when he was
upon his back. But this story, now to be told, I had from him. I wish I could
relate it in his words, for he was an excellent speaker: There was in his
fathers time, whilst a Parson of some Living there, in that Country, such a
creature, which for the good she was supposed to do, and good only, had got the
name of a white Witch; and was by many, who were not sensible of the hurt she
did, by drawing so many into condemnation, and the snares of the Devil, who did
use her help; magnified and admired. It seems the woman did not want, either
tongue or boldness, to justify her self, and her proceedings, when occasion
was; and had got the reputation, among many, not only of a cunning, but also
religious woman. Whereupon Doctor Still was desired by some of better judgment,
to admit her to some kind of conference, that the people, if possible, might be
undeluded. But he, for good reasons, I make no question, refuted it: yet was
willing to repair to the Parish, where she lived, and publicly out of the
Pulpit, declare his opinion concerning such practices, which he hoped, would do
as well, or better; which was kindly accepted. The Sunday, or Lord's Day (which
some affect to call the Sabboth-day, but not so properly) being come, which he
had set and promised, he went: Any body may suppose well accompanied, with
friends and servants. The horse that he did ride, was his own ordinary Gelding,
to which he was accustomed. But when near the place, (town or village) the
horse began to rise, and to cast, in a strange manner, which he never was known
to do before: and his carriage was so impetuous, that no body could come near
the rider, who was supposed to be in very great danger, as they were all in
great amazement. But at last, there being some kind of Cross or Marketplace,
with a stone-ascent to it, not far of; the horse carried him up thither, and
then stood stock still. The Doctor had no hurt, but could not for a time, but
be very sensible of what he had suffered by such violent concussion (or
succussion more properly) in his body: and by the strangeness and
unexpectedness of it in his mind; so that of necessity he was forced to turn
back, and they that expected him, were disappointed. What become of the
creature afterward, either I never knew, or have forgotten. The Doctor, we
know, continued in good credit, and became afterward Bishop of the place. I
have done with my story, which for the substance, as related unto me, I dare
warrant true: but if mistaken in any circumstance, I desire the Reader to
consider, that it is almost half a hundred years since it was told me. I know
there be many, so little grounded in the true faith and mysteries of Godliness,
that at the hearing of this (if they believe it) they will be ready, either to
quarrel with God Almighty, for suffering; or to interpret this permission of
his, as a kind of justification of the woman, and her practices. But we shall
meet with such objections, in another place, before we end this first Part. I
shall say no more here, but this: How can they so much wonder at this, who
know, that God in all ages has suffered, sometimes, as lately amongst us,
eminently a wicked cause to prosper: and Godly men, his faithful Ministers and
Servants; yea godly Kings and Princes (whereof our late most pious Sovereign, a
rare example) to fall into the hands of the wicked? That the Church of God in
general has been ever subject to the opposition and persecution of the Devil
and his instruments; and more particularly, that St. Paul, though a Saint, so
dear unto God, met with an Alexander, who greatly withstood him; and that, when
he would have come, once, twice, to the Thessalonians, who perchance needed him
as much, or more, than the Doctor was needed in that place (Town or Village)
whether he was going; he was hindered by Satan?

BUT now I am in Sommerset-shire, before I leave it, I beg the liberty of
another relation, which though it be not much to my main purpose, yet because I
have not hitherto, to my best remembrance, met with it elsewhere, or not so
fully as I wished, I would preserve the memory of it to posterity. And first of
all, I will here insert it, as it came to my father (of bl. m.) from a very
good hand, which no man, I dare say, will except against; then I will perfect
it (if not much mistaken) with such additionals, as I learned in the Country,
when I lived there.

(...): (It was his fashion so to begin almost every thing, that he wrote: I
hope there is no superstition in it, the great (...), or terriculamentum of
this Atheist^cal age. Ancient Christians, instead of it, used ordinarily the
Cross: there was no Popery then:) Rem miram mihi narrabat hodie, Dom. Episcopus
Eliensis, Sanctae pictatis Antistes. Dicebat se accepisse a multis, sed
praecipue a Dom. Episcopo Vellensi nuper mortuo, cui successit Dom. Montacutus:
evenisse ante annos circiter XV. (he did write this in the year of the Lord
1610. or 1611. as I guess: for I find no date) in urbe Wella, sive ea dicenda,
Wella, die quadam aestiva, ut dum in Ecclesia Cathedrali, populus sacris
vacabat, duo, vel tria tonitrua inter plura audirentur, supra modum horrenda,
ita ut populus universus in genua (...), procumberet ad illum sonum terribilem.
Constitit, fulmen simul cecidisse, sine cujusquam damno tamen. Atque haec
aulgaria. Illud admirandum, quod postea est observatum a multis, repertas esse
Crucis imagines impressas corporibus eorum, qui in aede sacra tum fuerant.
Dicebat Episcopus Vellensis, D. Eliensi, uxorem suam (honestissima ea foemina
fuit) venisse ad se, and ei narrasse pro grandi miraculo, sibi in corpore
impressa signa extare; quod cum risu exciperet Episcopus, uxor nudato corpore,
ei probavit verum esse, quod dixerat. Deinde ipse observavit sibi quoque
ejusdem manifestissimam imaginem impressam esse, in brachio, opinor: aliis, in
humero, in pectore, in dorso, aut alia corporis part. Hoc vir maximus, Dom.
Eliensis, ita mihi narrabat, ut vetaret de veritate historiae ambigere.] Ex.
Advers. Is. Casauboni N. 4. fol. antepenult.

THE sum is, That at such a time (some eighty years ago, or thereabouts) a
strange thunder, for the terror of the noise, happened in the Cathedral of Wells,
in Sommerset-shire, as the people were there at Prayers or Sermon: which made
them fall all upon their knees. That afterward, it was observed, that a Cross
was imprinted upon the bodies of all, or most there assembled; of the Bishop,
and his virtuous wife particularly.

I WILL not take upon me absolutely to determine, how these Crosses might come:
I should not make any great wonder of them, no more than I do of those stones,
which by the pious and learned compiler of Musaeum Veronense, are called Crucis
Lapilli; and fully described by him: which I do not find adscribed to any
other, but a natural cause. Learned Remigius, I remember, has an observation,
that very frequently, those bodies, that are struck with Thunder, are found
marked with signs, resembling the impression of nails; which they that are
simple, says he, suppose to be the Devils claw, whom they believe to have
hoofs and nails, not ordinary. But this, as well he might, he does laugh at,
and proceeds to the inquisition of a natural cause, out of Aristotle, and
others. But I will not transcribe, where there is such facile excess.

I AM a great admirer, I profess it, of a stone, which is not very rare. Many
call them Thunder-stones. I have them of diverse forms, (as to the bigness, or
whole body) which in some is perfectly Oval: in some more round; in others
pointed or pyramidical: some for the length, not unlike a helmet; and some very
flat, which have somewhat of the resemblance of a heart, divided in two. And
this is observable in some of them, that the lines not going through the body
of the stone, (not visibly at least but ending soon, they represent a perfect
Star or Asterick, as usually painted; curiously set out in several rows of
little points. But this (the occasion of this short digression) is essential to
them all, that are perfect; not broken, I mean, or wore out: They have five
double lines, made of two distinct rows of pricks, or full-points, as it were;
but with great variety. For in some, every row is double, very artificially set
out. The points in most, are, as it were, dented in the stone: in some others,
extant, or eminent: but still five, curiously drawn from the top, and all (or
most of them) meeting in one center, which is, as it were, a navel: which
navel, as also the vertex, or very top, seems in some of them, to be a body
by it self, or a different piece, and separable from the rest; but closely
joynted, or joined. I have sought into them, diligently, that write of stones;
but hitherto, found but little, that satisfies me. They are not of the nature
of ordinary stones, I am sure; but, as I conceive, owe their original to some
kind of generation. Learned Wormius, who has made a great collection of them;
in his Musaeum Wormianum, does tell us, it is the opinion of some, that they
engender, even whilst stones; which his own observation, that he has some,
which have other little ones annexed, and as it were proceeding from them, does
make the more probable: to him, at least. Nec certe omnino abnuere p^ssum: he
says of himself. Most, that write of them, tell us, that by Pliny, they are
called, Ovum anguinum, or Snakes-egge. It may be so; but what reason might
enduce them, to think so, I must confess, that as yet I am to seek. His
description is; Vidi equidem id ovum mali orbiculati modici magnitudine crusta
cartilaginis, velut acetabulis brachiorum polypi crebris, insigne Druidis;
which before I take upon me to translate, I must understand better, than I do.
Sure I am, here is no mention of the five lines, or tails, as Gesnerus calls
them, the most eminent thing in these kind of stones. Besides, whether a true
ovum anguinum, or no, the trial is, says Pliny, Si contra aquas fluitet, vel
auro vinctum: Will these stones do so? I have so little belief they will, that
I never yet could be so idle, as to make trial. But again, he writes of them as
stones or eggs rather, (for he does not at all, in all his description, make
them to be stones, or call them so) of great worth and rarity; which, if these
kind of stones be not much rarer in Italy, than they are in England, cannot be
true of them. Nor even so neither. For England, where they are so common, being
then in the power of the Romans, they could not be very rare at Rome, if in any
request. He tells of many strange, or rather admirable qualities, which the
Druids, and Magicians reported of them; but not as believing them. However, if
that be true, he seems to report in good earnest, that a Roman Knight, whom he
names, was put to death by Claudius, for having one of them about him, when he
was in suit of law, hoping by the help of it, to become victorious; it will
follow, that this Snakes-egge was accounted a magical thing, which will agree
well enough with those things, that are written, and by some believed, of the
virtues of these Thunder-stones. But this is not much, to persuade me, that
they are the thing intended by Pliny, by ovum anguinum, when so many other
things are against it. Let me add, that the figures of these stones, set out by
Wormius and Gesnerus, though they agree so well, that a man may suspect, they
had them the one from the other; yet not very like, in either of them, to those
stones that I have. For whereas their figures between the lines, are scabrous,
or full of little protuberances or eminences, like little warts, as Gesnerus
calls them; mine are smooth in those interstices, one or two excepted, which
might contract their raggedness, from the ground, where they did long lie. I
have one so smooth, that one half of it is perspicuous or pellucid, and does
represent within, some kind of circles or tunicles, like Onions-coats; which
also has this singular, that in one side of the circumference, it has a
little round excrescence, as it were a Wen, or a Wart, but smooth. The truth
is, the figures in Wormius do not agree with his description. The description
tells us, that the lines or tails, ab apice, in basin: from the top, to the
navel, as I call it; or as he, not improperly, (alluding to the modiolus of a
wheel, where the radii meet, and are fastened) modiolum, do excurrere: the
figure fetches them from the basis: which is so main a difference, that Gesner
by that chiefly does distinguish them from the true, or supposed, ovum
anguinum, or Snakes-egge: by some supposed to be a Toads, and by others, the
egg of a Tortoise. And as to the stones, which Wormius under one figure, and
under one kind, by the name of Brontia, Thunder-stone; or ovum anguinum does
describe; Gesner has the figure of them in another place, (page 166. of my
Edition) under no certain name: and Chapter 3. p. 59. etc. under the title of
Brontia, Ombria, and Ceraunia: which are the right figures of the stones, which
(but with much more variety) I have, very well, and fully enough described by
Wormius. But it is time I should end this, occasioned merely by the mention of
Thunder, and Thunder-marks; and some kind of affection I bear unto these
stones, which seem to me to promise somewhat more than ordinary, and worthy to
be enquired after. As old as I am, I could be content to be carried a good way,
(for go I cannot, I am sure) to learn somewhat of them, not so much of their
virtues, as of their production, which to me seems a great secret of nature.
Yet when I consider, that nature does seem to take some pleasure in those kind
of figures, which consist of five divisions, as by the Stella marina, (not to
speak of five fingers, and five toes in man: besides what in diverse other
creatures is answerable to either: five senses, etc. is another thing, because
not apparent externally) a Seafish: stella Solis, etc. described and figured
by B^ll^nius, and others; and by those pretty stones, ordinarily known (and so
described by Gesner, de fig. lap. p. 37. etc.) under the name of asteriae,
astroitae, etc. as also by the pentaphyllum, whereof there be many kinds and
the like: (to all, or any of which, whether the Pythagoreans, by their mystical
quinary, by them called (...), which consisted of three triangles, joined or
interlaced into five points, or angles, described by Lucian, had any reference,
I shall not now inquire) and again, that some Naturalists by many pregnant
instances, do maintain, that neither Sea, nor Land does produce any thing, but
is imitated and represented in some kind, by some kind of fossile in the bowels
of the Earth: (whence so many bones of Fishes, yea whole Fishes, imperfect, as
to the form, but perfect stone, are found, and dug up out of the Earth, even
upon high hills, far from the Sea: some my self have, and look upon, when
occasion offers its self, with pleasure, and admiration) these things
considered, I think it is possible, these stones may be nothing else, (but even
so, well deserving some kind of admiration) but some kind of fossiles; nature
aiming by them at the representation of somewhat that does live, or grow,
either in the Sea, or upon the Land. But I forget my self.

BUT now to return to our Wells Thunder; the additional of the relation, which
I have promised, is more strange to me, than any thing in the said relation; if
it be true. For since no mention of it is made in the exhibited relation, I
cannot absolutely satisfy my self, that it is true; much less can I warrant it
to others. This premised, that which came to me, whilst I lived in that
Country, from some others, who pretended perfect knowledge of the thing, is
this: A certain man, they said* had been not long before inducted into a
Benefice in that Country, of whom there was a report, (but no proof) that he
was addicted to the black Art. This man being summoned, as the fashion is, by
authority, to Preach in the Cathedral, took his Text: Thou God of Spirits: (I
was told no more, as I remember) out of Numb. 16.22. or 17.16. and whilst he
was in his discourse about Spirits; (of purpose it may be, to confirm the
opinion of some, that he had to do with them, thinking thereby, to be looked
upon as an extraordinary man; though perchance no such thing really) this storm
of Thunder happened. Concerning which, I have now, besides the relation,
delivered bona fide, what my memory afforded unto me: which perchance may
receive some illustration from what, not out of my memory, but out of my book,
whereof I keep such things, which I have by the relation of others, and would
not forget; I have yet to say. However, if there be any mistake, rather than
his name should suffer, from whom I had it, I will take it upon me: He was one
of the Clergy, and a frequent Preacher in this Cathedral, to their very good
liking, that could distinguish (which few do or can) between sense, and sound:
solid good matter, I mean, and a plausible voice and delivery, which has been
treated of at large by me, with an accurate examination of the natural causes,
in another book. I shall not conceal his name to any that have known him: to
others, it is needless. The account of my book is this: 17. lul. Anno Dom.
1638. of Mr. etc. That about some thirty years ago, when he was a young Scholar
in Trinity College [in Cambridge] as they were in the Hall, at the Greek
Lecture, the Reader then reading upon Aristophanes his (...), (he thinks) and
perticularly treating of the word (...), (that is, Thunder) there came a sudden
clap of Thunder, that struck them all down, and some a good space from the
place, where they stood: astonished all, and deaded one, for the space of six
hours, who also continued lame of it, for three months after: and split one of
the main rafters of the roof, in two, etc. there being no appearance of any
Rain, or Thunder before.

THUS verbatim, as I entered it in my book, how long after, I know not; but
probably not long after. However, I cannot promise I have exhibited his own
words, and therefore if there be any impropriety, or mistake in the exposition,
I desire, that may be imputed unto me. Now supposing this, as I believe it
true, I do not propose it, as a matter of great admiration: but well worthy of
consideration, and which may give some light to such accidents. For, among so
many daily events or accidents, which have nothing in them, but what is
ordinary; what wonder is it, if by mere chance, as in the casting of many
stones at random, something happen that is not ordinary? It is possible, a
blind man, if he shoot often, may hit the mark, when an expert shooter may
miss, if he shoot but once or twice. Such a Thunder, I am sure, was nothing but
usual enough; especially, if at a seasonable time of the year, as this
probably, because nothing observed to the contrary. And that at such a time,
when such a Lecture was read, which treated of, or mentioned Thunder; if there
were no more in it than I have heard, that is, that, not the person reading,
nor, any then present, were justly suspected; such a thing should happen, might
be a chance. Neither should I make much more of the former relation, if the
second part of it, whereof I have no certainty, be not as true.

NOW to enchantments again, the validity whereof, because, of old, so
controverted, that Pliny, as before observed, thought no age would, or could
decide it; and of late there have not wanted learned sober men, who have
maintained the contrary opinion, though I have been long upon it, from men to
beasts; not Serpents only, (justified by the Scriptures) but horses, dogs,
bulls; and all this by certain undeniable instances, sufficiently proved; I
will yet before I end this subject, instance in some other kind, not yet spoken
of, which, as the humors of men are, may perchance affect some Readers as much,
or more, than any of the former instances.

THE hunting of an enchanted Hare I have read, by an excellent pen: who does
acknowledge never to have seen it himself, (his hunting was after books, he
says of himself, not Hares: it was mine too, when I was able) but does set it
out upon the credit of diverse Huntsmen, as a thing not at all to be doubted of.
I wish it were not true, but I doubt not, but there be too many in the world,
who would make no scruple to go to the Devil, not for their profit only, but
also for their sport, and mere divertisement: and that others there be, who to
satisfy them, who have more conscience, will devise somewhat to make them
believe it is lawful enough, though done by the Devil, being done but for
sport: or if that will not do it, that such a thing may be contrived, without
the Devil. Let a man but once begin to indulge against his conscience, by
degrees he will stick at nothing. (...): it is a just judgment of God, whereof
this age does afford many sad examples. My Author does style himself,
Praedicateur du Roy. [Essay des merveilles de nature, etc. par Reve Francois,
Praedicateur du Roy: a Rouan 1626.] If so, me thinks it would have become well
a man of that profession, to have said somewhat, whereby it might have appeared
unto the world, that he did not allow of such practices, as lawful. Truly, one
great reason that has moved me to take notice, is, to show my detestation, of
what my Author does leave without censure. This that follows, is more harmless
I hope, because I have read of strange things, that dumb creatures, even wild
beasts are capable of, by the industry of man: I have read a relation, whereof
Julius Scaliger is the Author, of a tame wild-Boar; or if that sound too much
of a contradiction, of a wild Boar, by art and industry so tamed, and
disciplined, that he would hunt with the Dogs, as skilful and obedient as the
best of them, and do his Master very good service. This, to some may seem
incredible: but to them that have not read, what fiercest beasts, by art and
industry (who therefore have been by many supposed not altogether destitute of
reason) have been brought unto. Yet I would not warrant, but that this fierce
Boar, by nature, might return to his nature, some time or other; or, at least
do some acts of a fierce beast. But for Agrippa's black Dog, though denied by
some, who would have us to think well of him, ( Agrippa, I mean) because they
do, as Wierius and some others; yet upon the attestation of so many others of
better credit, I cannot but think of it, as a creature of another nature.

NOTHING now remains, and that too before promised, but to consider of Galen's
opinion, and what may rationally be objected from his authority. For that such
a man as Galen, a right ingenuous man, a lover of truth, as I always accounted
him, who lived to be a very old man, and consequently not less experienced,
than he was learned; that he should in all those books of his, now extant, as
often as occasion offered it self, declare himself as one who gave no credit at
all to such things, and made no better account of them, than arrant juggling; I
look upon it I must confess, as a weighty objection. To this we might answer,
that though Galen was a man of great authority, yet he was but one, to whom the
authority of many famous Physicians in his time, or soon after, not to speak of
those before* might be opposed. It is the privilege, if not affected humor, of
some great men of real worth; who also know themselves to be so, in the opinion
of the world, to hold some Paradoxes; and perchance being unadvisedly fallen
upon them in their younger years, they think it (a great error) against their
credit to acknowledge it, when they are old. Besides, what if Galen thought
those things, not altogether false perchance, yet dishonorable to his
profession, and of evil consequence to mankind, by reason of the increase of
impostors, and impostures, if credit were given to the validity of
enchantments; in point of cures especially? And that this may not appear a
suspicion without all ground, does he not in his books de Compos. Medicum, lib.
3. cap. 2. where he treats of the Cures of the Parotides, reject Archi^enes his
advice, of anointing the place infected with the blood of a mustela, upon this
very ground, because such prescriptions, if received, would be prejudicial to
the art, as though so defective in those cases, that without such helps it
could not work a cure: professing, that for this very reason, he had forborne to
make trial, and therefore could not tell, whether it would or not? The Reader
may remember, what was said of Valesius before. But all this will not need, if
we stick to Trallianus (who is conceived to have lived in Theodosius his time,
not many ages after Galen) his answer, which is, that whatever his opinion has
been formerly, yet in his latter years, convinced by manifest and frequent
experience, he did recant and acknowledge his error. Galen his words, as he
does exhibit them out of his book, (...), in Greek are; (...), etc. that is:
There be, I know, who think of Charms no better than of old women's tales. And
so did I for a long time: but at last, by the evidence of those things that did
clearly appear unto me, I am persuaded that they are efficacious. For in their
case that are bitten by a Scorpion, I have found them useful. And and in their
case who had bones that stuck in their throats, which they did presently cast
out by the help of Incantation. And many noble achievements in every kind of
disease are wrought by it, when it does not miss of its end. Or if you will,
with the Latin interpreter; At multa praeclara singulae habent incantationes,
cum institutum consequuntur. Either way, Galen does acknowledge that they are
not always effectual: which to believe, or to maintain, were very absurd, and
contrary to providence, and to the course of nature in general. But of that,
enough has been said before. Hereupon Trallianus does conclude; If then divine
Galen, and most of the ancients with him, etc. But where shall we find this in
Galen, or where this book of Galens? In the Latin Edition indeed of his works,
there is a book of that subject to be found, but not worthy Galen's name, most
are of opinion: However, though not extant at this time, nor mentioned by Galen
in the Catalogue of his books, after which he might write many books, as we
know St. Austin did some, which are not mentioned in his Retractations; yet it
is not likely that Trallianus, whose love to the truth, made him not to spare
his so much admired Galen, when he saw just cause, as himself in his fifth book
(not to mention other places) does abundantly declare; durst mention such a
book, except such a one had been then extant in Galen's name, or could be
mistaken in his judgment concerning the Author, whom he had read so diligently,
as by his writings does appear. So that even Valesius, though he does write
against the opinion maintained by Trallianus; yet he does, upon his authority,
yield it, as unquestionable, that such a book was then extant, written by
Galen. As he, so Fererius, who has written a Chapter of that argument, and
entitled it, as Galen had his Treatise.

NOW because in those times most incantations, used, not only by the Jews, but
by Gentiles also; as by Trallianus, by Lucian, by Origin, and by others may
appear, had the name of Dominus Sabbath, as a chief ingredient; it is
observable, that some godly Fathers, who knew Christians had more right to that
name, than either Gentiles or Jews of those times had; thought it no
superstition, to commend unto them the nomination of the Lord of Sabbath upon
such occasions, not as an enchantment, but a lawful prayer. So does Cyrillus
Alexandrinus, in his book, De Adoratione Spirituali, lib. 6. whose words
perchance some might interpret, as though he allowed those words to them that
have faith, as a lawful charm. But what he writes in that very place against
all kind of enchantments, as unlawful, and forbidden by God; may sufficiently
acquit him from any such intention. But I cannot acquit Origin, neither is it
much material, except I could acquit him of so many other pestilent errors,
wherewith he stands charged in the Ecclesiastical story, and his books yet
extant, though much purged by Ruffinus, the Latin interpreter, proclaim him
guilty of. In his 20. Homily, upon Josuah, part of which, in Greek, is
preserved in that Philocalia, collected out of his works; he does very
erroniously ascribe power to the very words and letters of ordinary charms; for
which he does appeal to common experience; and consequently would have the very
letters, or words of the Scripture in any language, though not understood, if
but read and pronounced, to be of great power and efficacy; which as it is
against the very principles of Natural Philosophy, so against the determination
of all sober Philosophers, Physicians, and Divines.

YET as there is nothing so uncouth or absurd, but shall meet with a Patron: so
has this opinion of the efficacy of bare sounds and letters, met with some, in
our age: as Thomas Bartholinus for one. This Thomas Bartholinus, one of the
King of Denmarks Physicians, the Author of many curious pieces; if he be not
either too credulous sometimes, or too ambitious, to be the reporter of strange
things; in his Centuriae, Historiarum Anatomicarum rariorum, upon the
experience of some, to whom he does give credit, does maintain, that the
Epilepsie may be cured by charms, and those charms upon a natural account of
the causes not unlawful. His reason I will not stand to examine. I think they
will not persuade very many, besides those, who think well enough of charms in
general, whatever it be that makes them effectual; but would be glad to find a
plausible pretense.

THIS mention of Bartholinus, puts me in mind of a strange story. I profess
again seriously, as I have done before, this Discourse was never undertaken by
me, to tell the Reader strange stories, though true; which might have made it
much more both easy and voluminous. Yet the use that may be made of this, in
point of Credulity or Incredulity; in case any such report, as very probably,
may occur of any other place or Country; besides what inferences or experiments
may be made upon it, for the public good, if this be true, makes me take
notice of it; and the rather, because having enquired of diverse Travelers into
those parts, whom I have had the opportunity to consult about it: I have not,
as yet, met with any, that could give me any account. Now the story is this: In
Italy, not above twelve leagues (they reckon there by miles ordinarily, but he
says, 12. leucis) near a Town or Village, vulgarly known, he says, by the
name of Il Sasso: (in Latin, Braccianum) there is a Cave, commonly called the
Cave of Serpents. Serpents at all times, it seems, but at some time of the
year, more certainly, and solemnly, frequent it in great number. And then, if
any troubled and afflicted with any ordinary disease, proceeding from a cold
cause; as the Palsy, Leprosy, Dropsy, etc, come and lie down, immovable;
which the better to do some take Opium beforehand; Serpents will come about
him, and suck him, or lick him, till he be well. He tells of more, but of one
Cardinal among the rest, particularly, who being desperately ill, there
recovered. Many other things he tells of it, which, it seems, with other
company, he went of purpose to see. This upon the report of the Country people
he more delivers of it, which sounds somewhat of a fable, that one of the
Serpents, Corona insignitus, adorned with a kind of Crown, as the governor of
the rest uses to come out of his hole first, and after diligent search, if he
finds all things safe, gives notice unto the rest. This, if true, may give
light to some other story, which, as I said before, made me the more willing to
take notice of it.

BY this, I hope, yea and before this, as I have said before; but that I had
some consideration of the good use, that might be made of what did offer it
self over and above; but now again, by this, I hope, it will be granted by all,
that do not profess wilful incredulity, and contradiction; that many things
happen supernaturally, which are above the sphere and activity of the believed,
and beloved atoms, and can be referred to no other cause, but the operations
of Demons, or evil Spirits: which once secured; Atheism has lost its greatest
prop, and the mockers and scoffers of the time, the chiefest object of their
confidence and boasting; which though not our immediate subject, yet of
purpose, as before said, did we make choice of such instances of Credulity and
Incredulity, that we might, una fidelia (as they say) duos parietes; and yet
still according to my Title, in this First Part, have I kept within the bounds
of things Natural, which by many, according to the genius of the times, are
laid for a foundation of Atheism; or at least for the undermining of
Christianity: which they that profess, and yet secretly endeavor to undermine,
deserve to be accounted the worst of Atheists. I have now but a word or two
concerning Divination and Prodigies, in general, because in all ages a main
object of Credulity* and Incredulity, to add; and then we shall see what
observations more we can draw from the premised instances, and so conclude;
which I begin to be weary of, as much as any Reader can be, this first Part.

DIVINATION, as it belongs unto God, more properly; (nay unto God only, if it
be true divination; that is, such as has no dependence from any natural cause,
according to the course of nature, established by God in Heaven, or in Earth;
but the will of God only) we have nothing to do with it here. Of other
divination, common to men and Angels, (whether good or bad) but in a different
degree, which is grounded upon the knowledge of natural causes, long
observation and experience, and the like: First, Humane, so far as may be
accounted for by natural causes, no man does doubt of; though many things by
men that have a natural sagacity, improved with long study and experience, may
be done, or foretold upon grounds of reason, which by them that are not
acquainted with such things, may be thought incredible; of which more
afterward. Secondly, Daemoniacal, whether immediately by themselves, or by
their instruments, which they that do not believe the existence of Devils and
Spirits, are obliged to deny; is that which we are to consider of, so much as
may concern us, to settle, or direct the belief of others, who may need it, and
are content to hear reason. Further than that, we have no intention, or
engagement to meddle with it; which elsewhere we have done more largely, and
concerning which, there be so many books already extant, as that it would be no
small work to find any gleanings, worthy the acceptance of judicious men; as
it would be very easy, (the work of most writers) out of which others have
done, to compile whole volumes, Among us, of late writers, Peucerus is most
known, who has written a large volume De Divinatione. I wish he had left out
his Divinity, which fills a great part of the book; I should think better of
it: though even so, the rest does not give me that satisfaction, which I might
have expected from a learned man. For, approved instances, or experiments, (as
I may call them) he has few or none; and what is it, the wit of man can find
out in such an abstruse subject, but what is grounded (besides the authority of
Scripture) upon experience? Raguseius, a Venetian, Theologus, Medicus and
Philosophus, as he is styled, by himself, or by his friends; has written two
very learned Books, De Divinatione; but the greatest part is against Judicial
Astrology, which he once professed himself, and got credit by it, he says
himself; but was so honest and conscientious, that notwithstanding the credit
he got by it, he would be a jugler (his own word) no more; and to make amends
to God and the World, for what he had been or done, thought himself bound in
conscience, to write against it. I think I could reckon half a hundred, or
more: but that is not my business.

THE several kinds of Divination, that have been used anciently, (and are yet
most of them) and have got a proper appellation, as (...), and the like, are so
many, that even to reckon them, would take some time. At the end of Agrippa, De
occulta Philosophia, in that Edition I have, there is a pretty full inventory of
them. So in Debio, Pucerus, Wierius; and many others. To these, if we add
those, which by the relation of Travelers are proper almost to every Country
or Nation, where Christ is not known; there being scarce any Country, for any
other thing so wretched and barbarous, but has attained to so much knowledge,
(if we may call that knowledge, which does commonly most abound, where brutish
ignorance and savageness has its reign) as to be masters of some kind of
Divination or other. Of those many kinds that have anciently been used, and of
those many that have been since devised, made known unto us by the relation of
Travelers; I shall take notice of one or two particularly, and then proceed,
with submission to better judgments, to a general conclusion concerning them
all.

OF those anciently used, which I shall take notice of, the first (because,
where we have the relation of Augerius the Physician, his haunted house
promised) shall be (...), or nail- divination, says Delrio is, by anointing
the nail of an impolluted boy, with some kind of oil, or sout; and using some
conjuration of words; to see things at a far distance, and the event of things
long before. But of an impolluted boy: why so? Let no man think the better of
the Devil for that, or of this kind of Divination. It is Porphyrius his
observation, or admiration rather, long ago, recorded by Eusebius in his own
words; and since Eusebius, by St. Augustine, in Latin; his admiration I say,
why such masters of uncleanness, in point of life and actions, should
nevertheless, in their mysteries, stand so much for cleanness, and purity.
Porphyrius, who might very well know, as one that had served them a long time,
does but propose the question by way of admiration; he does not answer it: any
Christian may, who is taught, that the Devil is the author of all evil, all
uncleanness, and affects nothing more; yet is an impostor, withal, and would
be thought an Angel of light; and to that end, does amuse them that serve him,
with some shows of holiness, in rites and ceremonies of his own institution,
that he may be thought to love, what in truth, and sincerity of life, he does
abhor. And as he, so his servants, that promote his interest in the world by
sects and divisions. What more rise in their mouths, and ordinary or external
behavior, than holiness and purity? I need to say no more; the rest is too
well known. But this by the way only. Now to the nail-Divination; Delrio says,
he knew a veteran Spaniard, who did practice it, and instances in some
particulars of his Divination: moreover observes of the same, that though he
could (he does attest it, it seems) by charms and incantations cure the wounds
of others; yet neither would cure his own, nor suffer them to be cured by
others, by the same means. Some may mistake him, as though the man he speaks
of, made scruple, for some hidden reason, to have enchantments used upon
himself, although he did not scruple to use them upon others; which is not
impossible. But I rather believe his meaning is, though the man with bare
words, as apprehended by many, but very erroniously could cure other men's
bodily diseases; yet the wounds of his soul, whilst he continued in that base
practice and service, long graviora, (that is wanting in Delrio, to make his
expression full) much more grievous, and much more to be dreaded; the proper
cure whereof, are words, (good advice and instruction, according to that of
Horace, Sunt verba and voces: that is, charms, and by charms, understanding,
sermones Philosophicos; as that which follows does evince) he refused,
miserable wretch, either to admit, when offered, or to procure from others.
What Delrio does here attest of one, Filesacus, De Magia Idolol. does attest of
another, not upon his own knowledge, but upon the report of a man of quality,
to him well known: nobili and generoso, are his words. But enough of this.

ANOTHER kind of Divination is, that they call (...), of which they reckon
diverse species. One was, or is, to hang a ring by a thread, and to cast it, or
to hold it over a boul of water, so that it touch not the water. But this is
nothing without the charm, that belongs unto it. After that, by the knocks of
the ring upon one of the sides, which how many they shall be, or how few, to
signify so and so, is before agreed upon; the event (God permitting, as
always) is declared. I have known somewhat, which in outward appearance may
seem to have some affinity, though to another end: which is, to know the hour
of the day. It was my luck once, at an Inn, in very good company, to see some
trial of it. The ring did hit just so many times against one side of the glass,
as the clocks did strike, or had struck-hours, and then stood still. I saw it,
when the ring was in the hands of some, that wondered at it, as much as I, and
had never seen it done before. Yet I am sure, no charm was used, which is the
main business; nor any of the company suspected. Yet the motion of the hand, in
such a case, not easily discernable, might deceive them, that look, if the
actor had any purpose to juggle: which, I am confident, was not the intention
of any then present: not theirs especially, who wondered at it, and made trial
themselves for better satisfaction; which was done then by some, who sound it
so too. But the surest trial would be, to hang the ring upon a little frame,
made gallows-wise, and if then also, truly I should not stick to conclude, that
there is somewhat in it more than natural; and should advise them that profess
they had often tried it, both by day and by night, as some did to me since,
with great protestation, that it never failed; earnestly advise them never more
to meddle in it.

IN the life of St. Hilarion, written by St. Jerome mentioned before, we have a
notable example of Hydromancy supernatural, but not Diabolical. The rites
indeed, and ceremonies, charming excepted, were much alike; but the efficacy
not from the Devil, but God. And probably, God might prompt that holy man to
use the same rites (but without their words) that Magicians did, to convince
them that ascribe much to them, as all Magicians do; that the efficacy was not
from the outward visible rites and ceremonies themselves, which to that effect
were but ridiculous; but from an invisible cause, or agent, whether good or
bad; and withal the better to manifest his power, who could use their own
weapons against themselves, that trusted to them; as we see he did in the case
of Balack and Balaam; when Balaam's enchantments intended for a curse, were, by
Gods power, turned into a blessing. Upon such extraordinary examples, we can
ground no warrant for our imitation, no more than by casting of rods upon the
ground, or smiting of the dust of the earth; we may lawfully attempt to turn
rods into Serpents, or, the dust into Lice, because Moses did both; for which
he had an express command from God, but we none. That Hilarion also had a
command, or commission for what he did, if pious indeed, and holy, as
represented unto us by St. Jerome, who might know better than we, I think we
are bound to believe.

OF those kinds of Divination used at this day (besides the Ancients) which we
have knowledge of, none, I think, either for the certainty, if reports be true,
or for the manner, more notable, or considerable, than that which is described
by Leo Africanus (a man of no small credit among them, who are well versed in
the History of the world) highly esteemed, and chiefly practiced in Africa, in
Fez (one of the Royal Cities of that part of the world) especially. The
particulars of it are there to be seen in the Latin translation of it, lib. 3.
p. 131. as also in the English, in Purchase his Pilgrimage: (a book of very good
worth, with them that know the right use, and more valued abroad, than it is at
home by many) second Tome, page 796, etc. It is a very perplex and intricate
way, and requires great learning: but if as many think, there be nothing of
Magic in it, and that it never fails, which some, even Christians, have been
bold to affirm, well worth the labor. Leo Africanus from the report of others,
speaks of it very moderately; he does not affirm either. He professes, that
being offered the learning of it, by some, well able to teach him, he durst not
meddle with it, because it has so much affinity with the black Art. What
religion the man was of, when he wrote, I cannot gather certainly by this book
of his: but a Mohammedan I guess, though there be places, that favor of
Christianity; as in the description of Nilus: if he did not himself alter those
places of purpose, in his Italian translation of his original Arabic, after he
was become a Christian. Erpennius, whom I have reason to remember with honor,
for the honor he did to me, when very young; but much more, for his noble
performances, out of his purse, (being wealthy) partly; and partly by his
excellent knowledge and industry, to promote the knowledge so difficult before,
of the Arabic tongue: he also is one of them, that did believe this art, or
way of Divination infallible; though, and so we must excuse it, he might speak
the more favorably of it, out of his love and respect to that noble tongue.
For my part, I shall not scruple to conclude it, if not divine, for which there
is no ground at all, than fallible, and more than probably, notwithstanding all
pretenses to nature, diabolical. Certain enough, were it known infallible,
there would be greater resort to it from all parts of the world; and many more
of all Nations would apply themselves to the study of it, and that it does so
often prove true, as generally believed, is argument enough to me, because not
Divine, that it is Diabolical.

I WILL not trouble my self, nor my Reader, with the relation of more kinds of
Divination, used at this day, in several Countries, which all stories of
travels, almost, into those parts of the world, where Christianity is not
professed, afford examples of, different from those used in other Countries.
Concerning all which my opinion is, not that they are infallible any one of
them, which I know cannot be: but that, really, by all, or most of them, where
the Relator does faithfully acquit himself, and does not wilfully counterfeit
and impose, or ignorantly mistake, which may easily be avoided, where we have
variety of relations, from several Authors, that do not borrow one from
another, to compare; but this case excepted, my opinion is, that really by all,
or most kinds of these divinations, even those that may seem most ridiculous,
strange things are foretold. Besides printed relations, so many, in several
languages, of men of all Countries, and professions, in this our Europe: I have
heard the depositions, or attestation of more than one intelligent man, and in
their lives and conversations, and in their discourse too, very sober and
serious, who protested to have been present, when such and such things, some in
one place, some in another, were foretold, which happened accordingly. But
secondly, to believe that any of those things, that really came to pass, were
foreseen and foretold by virtue, or by any natural efficacy of those rites and
ceremonies, words, or actions, that were used, in, or by any of those kinds of
Divination, whereof some are apparently most horrible and abominable; others,
as sottish and ridiculous, were, I think, not much less ridiculous, or
abominable. Neither shall I except Judicial Astrology; which though apparently,
it be more mysterious, and deal in things more specious and sublime: yet, in
very deed, is founded upon mere imaginary suppositions, and Poetical fictions,
words and names, which have no ground at all in nature; as by them that have
taken great pains in the search of it, and have set out the vanity of it; and
even by them, that have done their utmost, to uphold the credit of it,
otherwise; but could never answer those things that are opposed; is
acknowledged. Yet to say, that nothing, that has strangely been foretold by
professed Astrologers, according to the rules and maxims of their Art, such as
they are; besides what may be supposed to have happened by mere chance, as in the
multitude of predictions, some things must, and do, were to contradict the
experience of all ages, of all places; and to give men some ground, to doubt,
whether there be any such thing as truth in the world.

AND what shall we say of the Oracles of the ancient times? That many of those
things that went under that name, were mere juggling, and roguery, I grant it:
but that they were nothing else, I think a man that has read ancient Authors,
and Histories, Greek and Latin, may as well doubt, whether ever really any such
men as Socrates, or Caesar and Pompey; ever any such place as Delphos, and
Dodona, and the like; as to doubt of the accomplishment of many of those
things, so foretold, as read in the Histories of those times. And to me it is a
greater argument of Gods power and providence, that upon the Incarnation of his
Son, the long promised and expected Oracle of the world, and the propagation of
his Gospel, all those Oracles, attended before with so much solemnity; should
in all places, to the great wonder and amazement of wisest Heathens, as by
Plutarch's Treatise of that subject does appear, did cease, or begin to cease
in all places: than any matter of wonder, or offense, that God should give so
much power to the Devil, (this always supposed, that his Providence in all
answers, that were given, did overruled, as himself pleased) in those times of
darkness and ignorance. For though Divination does yet, by Gods permission
continue; yet all in that kind, is nothing in comparison of those ancient
Oracles, in several places of the world; which all Nations almost of the then
known world, did resort unto, with so much solemnity. However, even by the
account the writers of those times have given us, it does appear how much Gods
power and providence did overrule, and restrain the power of the Devil, (as
before was said) as himself pleased: which made so many answers to be so
ambiguously given, that which way soever the matter fell out, the Devil or
Demon (as the Merlins of our days have a providence to save their credit)
might not be found a liar. But of Oracles particularly, I have said more
elsewhere, which I shall not need here to repeat.

NOW to return to Divination in general; it is observable, that many things
appear to us under the notion of Divination, which to Devils and Demons are no
such thing: and that partly through the privilege of their nature, as pure
spirits, by their creation; and partly, by their experience, much improved by
time, in all kind of knowledge, of things natural; and in the affairs of the
world, relating unto men; to whom the most understanding men compared, in point
of natural knowledge or wisdom, are but as children; yea very babes, and
simpletons, if we may so speak. For example, if (in some remote part of the
world, we will suppose) it be asked, whether any English-ship be coming, or,
when to be expected; and the answer according to the way of Divination by such
rites and ceremonies, as are usual in the Country be, three days, or three
months: if the Ship or Ships be upon the Sea; they that can, as the most
learned that write of these things, are of opinion, in a moment, as it were,
convey bodies some hundred of miles; how easy is it for them to know, though
yet five or six days sailing distant, whether any such be upon the Sea? Or if
they say three months, and it prove so, what wonder, when even men, that are
concerned, and well acquainted with the course of those affairs, and see the
preparations, though they cannot foresee many things which the Devil can, may
probably conjecture, that within three, or six months, they may be at their
journeys end, as it does often happen? We might instance in a hundred things of
the same nature; but this instance I have chosen, because some that I have
conferred with, who had known in their travels such a thing done, more than
once, did seem to make a great wonder of it. Pausanius, I remember, in his
fourth book, does tell us of one Ophioneus, famous in those days for divination
among the Graecians; and his way; the more to be admired, because in show, it
had nothing that was extraordinary, and yet was very effectual. As he does
express it, it was this: (...): that is: He would enquire what and how things
had gone before, and so foretell both privately and publicly what should come
to pass afterward. Cicero was famous for this kind of Divination, in his time,
and seldom failed. The manners of it, and the grounds, he does largely set out
in an Epistle of his to Caecinna, well worth the reading. What pity, that some
in these days, who take upon them to be such Diviners, have not more of this
kind of divination, at least, that they might not always so grossly mistake? Now
this kind, though of all other kinds of divination (setting true prophesying,
by divine inspiration, aside) most lawful, and commendable, in Statesmen
especially; yet of all others, may be said, as I conceive, most proper unto the
Devil, as he is a spirit of such standing, since his first creation. For being
altogether grounded upon a good headpiece, and long experience; the
disproportion between a man, and an Angel or Spirit, both in point of years and
natural abilities; who does not understand? Our conclusion then, as before,
that there is not any kind of divination publicly practiced, or commonly
known, so strange or so ridiculous, but by the Devil's intervention, to whom,
what rites or ceremonies are used, or whether some or none, but only to amuse,
is altogether indifferent, is available sometimes: and yet none, as to man's
judgment, so plausible, and so probable, but is fallible, and does often
deceive.

BUT that which in this matter of Divination most poseth my reason, which also
posed Aristotle so much, that he could neither believe, nor yet absolutely
deny, is, that there be men and women, but women especially, in whom rests a
spirit of divination, (so expressed, Acts 16.16.) by which they foresee, and
foretell strange things, and seldom miss. All Histories afford notable examples;
so that even some that believe no Spirits, (whether a God, or no, I know not)
yet acknowledge, There be such, that foretell (they say) very certainly, for the
most part. They impute it to a proper temperament, an (...): any thing, so
neither God nor Devil be in it. What great occasion they had to fear him,
should they grant him an existence, I know not. But one example, every where
obvious, and well attested, (for in this also, as in all things, there is
frequent mistaking, and imposture) I will instance in. Innocentius the Eighth,
Pope of Rome, who sent a man into England, or Scotland rather, named Adrianus,
famous for his singular wisdom, and judgment in matters of the world: which
soon after, brought him unto Henry the Seventh, King of England, his favor;
and his favor to the Bishopprick of Bath and Wells, in Sommersetshire.
Returned to Rome, and in great employment under Alexander the sixth; he was
made a Cardinal; and after Alexander, flourished under more than one, but under
Pope Leo the Tenth particularly. It was his ill luck, if not occasioned by any
impiety, and unthankfulness to God, to grow acquainted with a woman, in whom
such a Spirit was. Among many things, which she foretold, both public and
private, which in all points, and circumstances fell out accordingly; she also
foretold, that one Adrian by name, born of mean parentage, preferred merely by,
and for his worth, should be Pope after Leo. This exactly agreeing with his
case, and having had, he thought, sufficient proof of the truth of her
predictions, he confidently applied it unto himself, and made no question, but
he was the man, that should succeed Pope Leo. In this confidence, he began
(such a bewitching thing is Authority, notwithstanding the sad examples every
Age and Country, when too eagerly coveted, does afford) to think the time long,
before the Pope died; and, to hasten it, with some others, conspired against
his life; and, though prevented, and pardoned, lived afterward and ended his
days miserably: or, if he had so much grace, as to think so, and to make a
right use, more happily (because obscurely) and never heard of more, than
before. But Adrianus is not our business. The woman's prediction was verified by
the event. For Adrianus the sixth, a man of mean parentage, of excellent worth,
being then absent, was chosen: (of purpose, a man would think, for no such
thing was intended, and scarce believed, when it was done) to verify the
prediction. But God forbid, we should so think seriously: but it fell out
strangely, that cannot be denied. Now were it so, that this Spirit of
Divination were found in men and women, such only, who by their life and
conversation, did show somewhat of either worth or godliness more than
ordinary, (it is Aristotle's objection) it would not be so strange, or
incredible. But for the most part, if not always, (true prophets excepted) it
falls out quite contrary. And therefore by the law of God, such were to be put
to death, Lev. 20.27. And happy is that Kingdom, (for there God has promised a
blessing) where no such, who take upon them to prophecy, (whether their
predictions prove true or no) are suffered to live. But Credulity and
Incredulity is the thing we have to do with. What then shall we say? First,
that Aristotle's objection is very plausible, and worthy of Aristotle; and the
same objection lies against the Salutators of Spain, who for the most part,
are ignorant people, of a lewd conversation; and yet are believed generally, to
do strange cures. Franciscus a Victoria, of whom, besides Grotius, diverse
Protestants speak with good respect, is so put to it in this case, that he does
not know what to pitch upon; as himself does ingenuously acknowledge. Of four
opinions, which he does propose, he does leave us free to choose which we will:
Either that they cheat, and impose: or that, what they do, they do it by the
Devil: or perchance, by a special grace, for reasons best known unto God: or
lastly, that it may be a secret of a proper natural temperament. So still we
are left in uncertainty. But against manifest experience, besides the authority
from the word of God, there is no arguing, as to matter of fact. It is not any
part of our task, to examine the reason. But, were the nature and divisions, or
kinds of Spirits better known unto us, than they are, or should be ambitious to
know, whilst we live; it is likely we might say more to it, than now we can. I
shall conclude, that, as I account great Incredulity not to believe that there
be such predictions; so, to believe them, before the event have confirmed them;
to enquire after them; to regard them, is little less, than Apostasy from God,
and from the true faith. If true sometimes, yet false often; but always
dangerous, if not pernicious to them that hunt after them.

SAINT Augustine in one of his books contra Academicos, under the name of
Licentius, one of the Collocutors, in that Dialogue, does tell us of one
Albicerius, a notable Diviner, in his time, well known unto him in his younger
years, (an excusable curiosity, in that age, and profession) long before he was
a Christian. Three or four notable stories he has of him; but first of all, or
before that, what kind of man he was, for his life. A very rogue, as any was in
Carthage, and such a whoremonger ( innumera scorta, says St. Augustine) as
scarce any age has known the like. The first story is, that, consulted about
some silver Spoons, that were missing, by a messenger; he presently told the
owner of the Spoons, the thief, and the place, where they were at present. I
believe some of our London-Prognosticators, have done as much, or near, if
public fame (though they may think it a credit) do them no wrong. Another
time, when St. Augustine, or some of his familiar acquaintances, went to him, to
be satisfied about somewhat, which he does not relate; he, not only satisfied
them in that, to the utmost of their expectation, or desire; but moreover,
acquainted them, that their boy, or servant, by the way, had stolen some money
out of the bag of money, which he carried after them; even before he had set
his eyes upon the said boy, or servant; and forced him to restore every penny,
before the masters of it did know, what, or how much had been taken away. A
third story is, of one Flaccianus, well known to St. Augustine, it seems, who
being about to purchase a piece of ground, went to this Diviner, or
Cunning-man, to see, what he could tell him about it: who had no sooner seen
Flaccianus, but presently told him what he was come about, and named the
ground, or Farm, as it was ordinarily called; which Flaccianus himself (it
seems, it was somewhat an uncouth hard name) did not well know. But the fourth
story, made St. Augustine, (a young man then) under the name and person of the
said Licentius, even tremble for amazement, whilst he did relate it. A
condisciple of his, or one that had been, hearing so much of the man, and
either not believing, or, for further trial, and to know the utmost of his
power, went to him, and boldly and importunately challenged him, to tell him
what it was he had in his thoughts: who, put to it, as he was, told him, he did
think of Virgil. Being further asked, what particular place of Virgil, the man,
though otherwise, scarce able to read, pronounced aloud, boldly and securely,
the very verse of the Poet, he had then in his mind. Who makes any question,
but he, that did this, (no man of God, but a very rogue) was really possessed by
the Devil? And do we wonder at it; or rather wonder, that any, men or women,
that take upon them to do such things, in a Christian Commonweal, should be
suffered to live? Or that any, that make use of such, whether men or women,
should make any question, (if Christians by profession and education) but that,
in so doing, they go to the Devil? But some may wonder perchance, as St.
Augustine, or his friend, did, at the first, (for afterward he made nothing of
it) that the Devil should have such power, which the Scripture does seem to
appropriate unto God, to know thoughts. But it is one thing, to have the
thoughts of all men, in all places, at all times, open and naked, which belongs
unto God only; and, by some subtilty or secret of nature, to know the thoughts
of some men, at sometimes, which the Devil can, it is certain, if God do not
hinder: which men also, well acquainted with nature, by diligent observation of
the eyes, and otherwise, may, in some part, attain unto. And why not this, as
possible, as for men (but women rather) in the light, or daytime, at a good
distance, to communicate, and to impart their thoughts, freely and fully,
without any noise or voice, by the observation of the lips only, and other
parts about the mouth? A secret of nature lately discovered; of which more in
my Treatise of Enthusiasm, Chapter 4. of the second Edition, page 181, etc. I
name the second Edition: because, not so much of it in the first to be found.

AFTER Divination, somewhat, because of the affinity, may be expected of
Prodigies, of which, as of Divination, much has been written, and argued to
and fro, by diverse: and very lately by one, by some whom I have heard much
commended. I therefore shall say the less; neither indeed does my subject
engage me, to say much. As all other things in the world, not determinable by
sense, those especially that relate to God, and his providence, have been
liable to superstition and credulity; so this of prodigies, as much as any. The
ancient Romans have been noted for their excess, in this kind; and their best
Historian, Titus Livius, for inserting that, into the body of his History,
which stood upon public records, has been censured as fabulous: for which
nevertheless, he does often excuse himself, and smartly does censure the
credulity of the people of those days. Yet I make no question, but by the
contrivance of the Devil, in those days of ignorance and superstition, (as of
Oracles was said before) for the increase of superstition, many things in that
kind might happen, (besides what did by Gods order and appointment) which have
not happened so frequently since. But what excess soever they might justly be
charged of, yet we must acknowledge, that the ground of it, Quod omnium
secundorum adversorumque causas in Deos (had he but said, Deum) verterent: that
is, in effect, Because they b^lieved a God, and a providence, the cause of all
good and evil that happens unto men, as the same Livy does inform us; was
commendable, which would make us (besides other reasons) think the better of
prodigies in these days, wherein Epicurism and Atheism do so mightily prevail.
And it cannot be denied, but they lived then, generally, according to their
belief; frugally and virtuously. Witness those rare Examples, those times
afforded, scarce to be matched in any other age. And, as this belief made them
virtuous; so their virtue, conquerors of the best, and greatest part of the
then known world. Whereas when all observation of prodigies ceased, which the
same Livy says did proceed, ab eadem negligentia, qua nihil Deos portendere
vulgo nunc credunt: (a mild word negligentia, for Atheism, or Epicurism) all
manner of vices, pride, luxury, covetousness, and the like, crept in; which
occasioned their Civil wars; and their Civil war, with these vices, the ruin
of that glorious Empire. Were there no other thing in the world, to persuade
me; yet the authority of two such men, as Camerarius and Melanchton; so pious,
so learned both, would make me not to reject all prodigies, whether public or
private. Yet it must be confessed, that where the opinion lights upon a man,
who is naturally tender and fearful; and such was the nature of them both I
have named, of Melanchton especially; it hardly escapes excess. But again, were
there no other examples or instances of prodigies (known to me) than what
happened before the death of Julius Caesar, the Roman Emperor; and what before
Henry the Fourth, late King of France; who for their valor, and manner of
death, may well be paralleled, being so well attested, as no rational man can
make any question; I should think and acknowledge my self sufficiently
convicted, that there be prodigies: presaging prodigies, I mean. And if in
their case, why not in the case of many Princes, and others; such especially,
who have been active men in the world, and made a great noise by their
valourous or ventrous achievements, and undertakings? Always provided, that
there be like evidence and attestation. I think I have read in Julius Scaliger,
a man of singular as learning, so piety; some where; (I find it so in my
papers, but not the place quoted) Melior superstitio (so it do not proceed to a
breach of any particular command of Gods revealed word: so I understand it)
nimia sobrietate, quae facile degenerat in Atheismum: that is, Better is
superstition, sometimes, than too much sobriety, (or cautelousness) which is
apt soon to degenerate into Atheism. At another time, perchance, I should not
think so well of it: But now when Atheism does so prevail, and true Piety,
under the name of superstition, subject to derision; I think the advice is not
amiss.

ANCIENT Heathens had an opinion, not unworthy the consideration, that no
prodigy, or bad Omen, could hurt them by the event, who did profess not to
regard them, or could elude them by a contrary interpretation. Pliny's words to
this purpose, are; Exemplis apparere, ostentorum vires and in nostra potestate
esse, ac, prout quaequ^ accepta sint, ita valere. He does add, In Augurum certe
disciplina, etc. that is, That by the discipline of the Augures, (a sort of
Diviners or Soothsayers among the Romans) it is very certain, that neither
imprecations, or auspicies (or presages) did belong unto them, (to hurt them)
who when they had any work in hand, did profess and declare they did take no
notice of either: Quo munere divinae indulgentiae, maius nullum est, says he;
that is, Than which, the Divine mercy has not vouchsafed unto men a greater
gift, or boon. So Pliny, lib. 28. cap. 2. And in the next Chapter he does
mention some particular rites and ceremonies, which they used, to elude, or
avert mischiefs, when threatened by some ill presage, or inauspicious accident.
Of which St. Augustine does treat, and reckon many, in his second de Doct.
Christiana, Chap. 20. I make no great wonder, if many of those superstitious
rites and ceremonies by both Pliny and St. Augustine mentioned, were thought
efficacious to elude, or avert; when the observation of prodigies was so
transcendent, that every thing almost, that did not happen every day, was
looked upon as a prodigy. It was not hard to avert, or elude (as they
interpreted it) what probably, as founded upon such groundless fears, and
imaginations, would never have happened: though probable too, that mere fear and
imagination, though no better grounded, might be the cause sometimes, that some
things happened really, which otherwise had never been. But however, because
Pliny, no very superstitious man, who elsewhere has not faith enough to
believe, that God cares for the world, or takes any notice of men's actions,
whether good or bad: because he does here, we see, so magnify the power of
faith, and therein the goodness of God, that would so provide it, and appoint
it: and that, besides Pliny, there be others, that attest the same, or much to
the same purpose; as afterward in due place may be showed: we may consider,
besides Christian faith, whether there be not some kind of natural faith, such
as natural, mere natural men are, and always have been capable of; which with
God, by his own order, and appointment, is, and always has been more or less
meritorious, or efficacious for the averting of some temporal evils; and a good
pledge, or forerunner of that true faith (in Christ) by which we hope, not only
to be rescued from that misery, which, as the wretched posterity of a sinful
protoplast, we are born unto; but also (I expect no otherwise, but that the
wits will laugh at our simplicity) purchase Heaven it self, and Immortality.
But of this, more elsewhere, which I will not here transcribe.

WITH this of Pliny the elder, does well agree the resolution of Pliny the
latter, and as well with Christianity; and therefore not unworthy our
observation. A friend of his, who was to plead a cause, within one or two days
after, had a dream, which much troubled him, and threatened, as he did interpret
it, some kind of miscarrying. Whereupon he does address himself to Pliny, that
he would procure him a further day. Pliny first does propose unto him, what in
such a case himself had done, preferring that excellent rule or maxim of
Homer's: (...)^ (That is, in effect; That a good cause ought to be regarded
more than any signs or prodigies whatsoever) before terrifying dreams and
visions, when he was to defend the cause of an innocent friend, against potent
enemies: Wherein, notwithstanding his terrifying presages or prodigies, he
prospered. He did so, and hoped his friend might also. But if that would not
satisfy him, his next advice is, Quod dub^t as ne feceris: which he calls
Consultissimi cujusque praeceptum, the precept or advice of all that are wise
and prudent; Not to do that whereof you doubt: which, I think does very well
agree with that of the Apostle; And he that doubts is damned if he eat,
because he eats not of faith: For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. But
lastly, I make great difference of prodigies, that concern private men only;
and those which concern Princes, and whole common Weals. I do not think these
so easy to be avoided, as those.

I HAVE done with prodigies: I now proceed to that I have to observe upon the
instances, or the chiefest of them, that have been produced, which may be
useful, as I conceive, in all, or most other cases of Credulity or Incredulity.
And here, first of all, I propose this rule of Credulity or Incredulity in
general, in St. Augustin's words; Multa (St. Augustine has it, Nonnulla only;
but I think it will bear multa very well) credibilia, sunt falsa; sicut
incredibilia multa, sunt vera. Or in Minutius Foelix his words, more pithily:
In incredibili, verum; and in credibili, mendacium: that is in English, That
many things, which seem incredible, are true: and many things false, which are
very credible, or likely-true. Which is no more, if so much, than what
Aristotle long before in that known Axiom of his taught; that, falsa quaedam,
etc. that some things that are false, have more appearance of truth, than some
things that are true. It is no argument to me, that a thing is true, because it
is possible; no, nor because probable: nay, it is certain, that many lies and
falsehoods are founded upon this very thing, probability. Though civility may
oblige, not to contradict, where we see no impossibility; yet discretion will,
to doubt, and to suspend assent, till we see good ground of belief. I know the
wisest man may mistake sometimes; many are credulous; and many love to tell
what themselves have forged, or what they have from others, though themselves
perchance do not believe it. I am no Sceptick or Pyrrhonick; and whether ever
any such were, really, is a question: which to be, in my apprehension, is
little less, than of a rational creature born, to turn into a senseless brute.
And it does much derogate from Gods goodness, to think that he should give us
reason, the best of gifts, for no other use, than always to doubt; which is
worse, than to have no reason at all. Yet this I must say, which I think most
true: their profession was, if ever any such, to doubt of all things: the best
way, never to be a Sceptick, is, not to be too quick of belief, and to doubt of
many things. Take it from St. Augustine, that it may have more authority, best
in his own words, but because very worthy to be known unto all, that would be
wise, I will put them into English. They are out of his book De Magistro, which
in a Socratical way, that is by way of Dialogues, does comprehend diverse
curious speculations concerning the end, or use of speech. St. Augustine, one of
the two speakers, taking upon him to be the Magister; and Adeodatus the other
speaker, made to be the disciple. This Adeodatus, after much arguing to and
fro, having often been compelled by force of argument, to confess that true,
which he thought false; and on the contrary, that false, which he thought
otherwise of before; being grown, at the last, more cautious, what he denied,
or assented unto; he is commended for it by St. Augustine, in these words: I am
well pleased with your doubting, as it is a sign to me of a mind (or
disposition) not inclinable to rashness, than which [such a disposition]
nothing does more conduce to setledness or tranquillity of mind. For how can we
avoid trouble of mind, when those things which through too great facility of
assent, (or Credulity) we had yielded as true, by opposite arguments begin to
totter, and at last are extorted from us against our wills? So that, as it is
but reasonable to yield assent unto those things which we have thoroughly
considered, and perfectly understand* so to embrace that we know not, as though
we knew it, and understood it, is no less dangerous. For the danger is, that
when we have been often beaten off from those things which we conceived once
most firm and solid; we fall at last into such a hatred, or jealous suspicion
of reason, that we shall not think fit or safe, to yield assent unto any truth,
though never so perspicuous and apparent. So St. Augustine there. Though he
speak properly of belief and unbelief in matters of opinions, determinable by
reason only; and we of belief and unbelief in matters of fact, only,
determinable, not by reason, but by experience: yet his words are very
applicable to our purpose; one great ground of Incredulity, and that which does
most justify it to the world, is, groundless Credulity.

BUT on the other side, to go on where we began, with St. Augustin's rule;
besides what is against the faith, or does imply manifest contradiction; to me,
I confess, nothing is incredible. I see so many things with mine eyes; and many
more I read of, in them that have collected, and set out Nature's Wonders, in
several kinds; all miraculous to me, because though I see the thing plainly and
undeniably, yet I comprehend not the reason; and those that have attempted to
find it, I speak it of many natural things, as the Lodestone, and the like,
are either ridiculously come off, as Pomponatius, and the like; or have still
left the matter in great obscurity, and their reasons liable to many
objections: and again, I see or believe upon good attestation, so many strange
effects of the power (with God's permission) of Devils and Spirits; so many (to
sight, and for any reason that we can give) miraculous operations; that I know
not what it is, besides what I have before mentioned, without good and mature
consideration, that I can think incredible, or impossible. Yet I know that the
Devils power, allow him to the utmost of what can rationally be allowed to a
created Spirit, is limited, and that he cannot do many things. What those
things are that he cannot, is disputed, and argued by many, to whom I willingly
subscribe. But he can so imitate and counterfeit, that we shall find it a very
hard task, to distinguish between the reality of that which he cannot, and the
resemblance, which he does offer unto our eyes. He cannot create substances: he
cannot create men, or women, nor the least creature, I believe, that has its
Being by generation: but he may cast before our eyes such shapes of those
things, which he cannot create; or so work upon our fancy, that it shall
create them unto us so vigorously, so seemingly, that he may attain his ends by
those counterfeits, as effectually, perchance, as if all were in good earnest,
what it appears to our deluded eyes. So that the most satisfactory limitation I
can find or think of, of his power, is, that he can do no more, than what God
does permit, who has reserved to himself the Sovereignty of the worlds
government, and will not suffer them that trust to him, and depend of him, in
the least degree, to suffer by him more, than what may be for his own glory,
and their further good, if they patiently submit, and their faith and
confidence hold to the last. Where^n I am so confident, and so much confirmed,
even by those strange effects of the Devils power, which I have read and
believe, that it never yet entered into my heart to fear any thing of him more,
than his temptations, against which Christ has taught me daily to pray. But of
this more, by and by. Upon these grounds, Miranda naturae, Nature's wonders
first, for which no satisfactory reason can be found; collected, as many, or
most, hitherto known by diverse; but, if diligently sought, daily to be
multiplied: and secondly, the power of the Devil, which though not so great
now, as it was before Christ, yet great enough still, to cause admiration; I
know not well, I say, what to account incredible. Could one man, trusting to
the strength of his wit, and the efficacy of his art, not without some ground
(as some learned professors of the art have taken upon them to maintain, which
I meddle not with) speak so proudly, (...): find me but a place where I may
stand conveniently, (at a convenient distance from the earth it self, I suppose
his meaning was) and I will move the whole earth: and could the same man do
things in the sight of many, which were then generally thought impossible, and
now to many more incredible? and how shall we limit the power of Spirits, in
knowledge and experience so far exceeding that of men's, when God does permit?
Yet for all this, I do not deny, but it is limited, as I said before, because
it is both against faith, and against reason to believe, that God will permit
them to do many things, though not so easy, precisely to determine, what those
things are; and much harder to discern what is real, and what is counterfeit,
among the works of so skilful juglers. Not easily to believe then, what
otherwise is acknowledged very possible; nor yet absolutely to reject as
incredible, what to ordinary sense, and reason may seem impossible, but to
consider how attested, and not to dispute against clear evidence; that is our
first rule, or observation.

OUR second shall be; In the relation of strange things, whether natural or
supernatural, to know the temper of the relator, if it can be known: and what
interest he had, or might probably be supposed to have had, in the relation, to
have it believed. Again, whether he profess to have seen it himself, or take it
upon the credit of others: and whether a man by his profession, in a capacity
probable, to judge of the truth of those things, to which he does bear witness.
Every one of these particulars would require a particular consideration, but
that I would not be too long, or tedious. To make application of this to those
witnesses, or the chiefest, I have produced and made use of: I can give no
account of their temper by their life, or actions; they were not, nor could be
known unto me, that way. But he was not altogether out, who said, Loquere ut te
videam: though subject to many exceptions, I know; yet ordinarily, a man may
give some guess at a man's temper in point of seriousness, or lightness, by his
writings. Cardan was a learned man, and one that was well acquainted with the
world; of great experience, I make no question. But he was a man ventosi
ingenii, self-conceited beyond measure, and as covetous of popular applause:
never spoke man more truly, than he that first past that censure on him. Any
man of ordinary judgment may quickly perceive it by his writings. A man, that
did affect to tell strange things, that cause wonder, that he might be wondered
at, and admired by them, that did believe him. And indeed he does tell more
strange things of himself, and his father, and some other relations of his,
than a man shall likely meet with any where else. But he was not only ventosus,
as censured by others, but also mendacissimus, a notable liar, as acknowledged,
and proved by his great friend Nodaeus; and by his confession of himself,
according to his horoscope, Nugax, religionis contemptor, maledicus, impurus,
calumniator, etc. all which the same Nodaeus does acknowledge most true of him.

SOME man may wonder, (this by the way) what made Nodaeus, who otherwise does
most ridiculously exalt him, to acknowledge so much truth: but there was a
reason. Cardanus and Nodaeus were not of one Religion, in point of Spirits; of
whom, though Cardanus tells many strange stories, which I believe (from such a
convicted liar) are false; yet among so many, it is possible some might be
true. But whether false or true, Nodaeus, as all, or most that are of that
persuasion, admirers of Epicurus, etc. could not endure to hear of them. In
that particular, he does cast dirt upon him, and makes him the vilest man, that
ever was: In others, if you will believe him, Cardanus was an incomparable man.
This in another age, might have been thought a contradiction; and Nodaeus
himself censured for a man of no judgment at all, if not worse. But he knew
what times he wrote in, and how men stood affected. Neither did his judgment
herein deceive him; which in a more sober age, if God will be so merciful, may
cause no small wonder. Well, Cardan, for one, was a learned man, of great
experience: but I say, by Nodaeus his leave, this mendacissimus does spoil all.
I think they that trust him, deserve to be deceived; and I doubt many stand not
upon that so much, so they may be thought some body, because they read Cardan.

I KNOW not any I have made use of, but, so far as may be guessed by their
writings, were sober and serious men: and so accounted by those (known unto me)
who mention them in their writings. They were all, or most of them, learned
Physicians, and therefore best able to judge of those things, which they wrote
of, and attested. How it should advantage either the credit of their Art and
profession, (which to preserve, made Galen so unwilling a long time, as before
observed, before he would acknowledge the efficacy of charms and incantations)
or their particular profit, in their practice, to acknowledge, and of their own
accord publish and proclaim the efficacy of supernatural means for cures, etc.
(such as we have made choice of too for instances) no man, I think can imagine:
how it might impair it, is very apparent. The best reward of their ingenuity
from the greater number, or those sapientissimi, in Seneca, they could expect,
is, to be accounted either liars or idiots. Lastly, Remigius excepted, of whom
some question may be made; because he says, vidi hominem, he saw the man; he
does not say, he saw the thing: (which yet may be true enough, for any thing he
says) all the rest expressly profess, to have seen with their eyes, what they
relate. Vair indeed does not mention his eyes, but he has those circumstances,
which he does attest, which, as I say there, amount to a vidimus, or, cecular
attestation.

BUT then, thirdly, Seneca says, oculis nihil fallacius: and does give some
instances. His instances are true, yet I cannot allow of his inference. We must
trust to our eyes, in most things; to our ears, and other senses, else we shall
not know what to trust to. However, it is very true in some cases, our eyes,
our ears, and other senses may deceive us; and that relation may be suspected,
which is grounded upon two eyes, or ears only; though the witness be granted an
honest discerning man. I could mention many things that have happened unto my
self in that kind: but one thing, that has made most impression, I shall make
bold to relate. It is not many years; but it was some time before our happy
restoration: My Son (the only I have or then had) and I had rid some twenty or
thirty miles that day, and came to the house of a worthy Gentlewoman, of some
relation, by marriage; where I had been often kindly entertained. In the night,
about midnight I then guessed, my said Son, and I lying together, and both fast
asleep; I was suddenly awakened by the report of a Gun or Pistolet, as I then
thought, discharged under the bed. It shook the bed, I am sure. Being somewhat
terrified, I awakened my bedfellow; asked him, whether he had heard nothing;
told him what I had heard, and felt. He was scarce awake, when a second blow
was heard, and the bed, as before: which did put him in such a fright, that I
forgot mine own, and wholly applied my self to put him out of it, and to keep
him in his right wits. Thus busy, it was not long before a third blow, and
still the bed as before. I would have risen, but that he did so closely embrace
me, that I durst not leave him, neither was he willing to let me go. It was an
hour at least after that third and last blow, before I could get him to sleep;
and before day, I also fell asleep. In the morning, being up before me, I bid
him look under the bed, which he did, but not so carefully, as one possessed with
other apprehensions about the cause, as he might have done. I charged him not
to speak to any, until my self had first acquainted the Mistress of the house,
whom I knew, an understanding discreet Gentlewoman. It was about dinnertime
before she came down to the Parlour, and then as soberly as I could, none being
present, but two of her daughters, virtuous Gentlewomen; I first prepared her,
not much to wonder, or to be troubled. So I acquainted her. I perceived by her
countenance, it did trouble her, and as we were discoursing, she looking upon
me, as expecting somewhat from me, that might prevent further jealousy or
suspicion; I happened to tell her, that I had some thought in the morning, that
it might be the cords of the bed: She presently, and with a joyful countenance,
said, It is so certainly; for the bed was lately corded with new cords, which
were so stretched, that the man told us, he was afraid they would break, if not
then, yet soon after, when the bed should be used. She had no sooner said it,
but sends one of her daughters up to look, and it was so indeed: the cords were
broken in three several places. What others, to whom the like, or somewhat like
had happened before, or otherwise better experienced in such things, might have
thought of it, I know not: I have no thought to make a wonder of it, now I know
the cause: But I suppose it might have happened to some other, as it did to me,
till I knew the cause, to be terrified; and so terrified, that had I gone away
before I had been satisfied, I should not have been conscious to my self of a
lie, if I had reported, that the house was haunted. I could never have
believed, that such cords could have made such a loud noise; besides the
shaking of the bed, which added much to my wondering, until I knew the
certainty. I could not have believed, I say; though I have considered since,
that even a small thread, hastily broken, makes no small noise; and besides,
that a Pistolet could not be discharged, but there would have been a smoke, and
smell. But whatever some might have thought, it is enough that it might have
happened unto some others, as to me, to prove that our senses may deceive us
sometimes, and that it is not always enough to say, I have seen it, or I have
heard it. But when a thing does happen in the clear light of the Sun, and in
clear sight (for at a distance many eyes may be deceived; and a panick fear, in
the time of war, may make a whole camp upon some very slight mistake or
suspicion run away: but that is another case) but clear light, and clear sight,
of many sober, and not pre-occupied with any passion, if then many eyes be
deceived; it is very likely, and so I grant, it does often happen; it is by the
art and intervention of the Devil, that they are so. Now in those relations I
have made use of, some things were done very publicly, before many; not any,
but had more witnesses than one or two, and therefore more likely to be true.

FOURTHLY, At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word or matter be
established: we know who says it; and, if there be no just exception against
the witnesses, is most agreeable to the practice of men, in all places. I have
cleared my witnesses from all exceptions; and they are more than one or two
that witness the same thing, though not the same thing numerically, yet the
same thing in effect; to wit, the truth of supernatural operations, by Devils
and Spirits; which they, who upon such proofs and attestations will not
believe, may justly be charged with obstinate, and if we consider the ill
consequence of such unbelief, pernicious incredulity.

LASTLY, somewhat has been said of it before, but it cannot be too often
repeated: Let no man that does aspire to the knowledge of truth, discredit the
truth or reality of any business that is controverted, because the thing is
liable to abuse and imposture. It is a very popular way indeed, and with vulgar
judgments, of great force: but it is the way to deny all truth, and to
overthrow all government, and whatsoever is most holy among men. For what is
it, if well looked into, that is not liable to abuse, and imposture? To insist
upon somewhat that is obvious, and what every man may judge of: No wise man
does doubt, but that there is such an art, as Physic or Medicine; acknowledged
in the Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament: magnified in the Civil
Law: besides the testimonies of private men, of all professions, every where
obvious. And for my part, though all the world should be of another belief, yet
I should think my self, who more than once (with Gods blessing) have been saved
by it, bound with gratitude to acknowledge the efficacy and excellency of it.
Yet if a man were disposed to argue against it, as needless, or pernicious, how
easily might he find arguments? As first, because diverse Nations have done
without Physicians, as well as with them: the Romans, for a long time; the
Babylonians, whose custom was, as witnessed by Herodotus, to keep records of
diseases and cures; and to expose their sick to the view of all men: not to
insist in other Nations, which have been specified by others. And then, the
Sects and Factions of Physicians, that have been at all (...): their different
judgments, of the causes of (...), and different (...) curing; not only
^^^^ferent, but even contrary: as every man knows, that has but looked into
their books. And then, if we consider the number of Empericks, bold illiterate,
ungrounded men, that go under that name; and the credulity, or cove^^^^ness of
many, who to save somewhat, will trust themselves into any hands, rather than
be at the charge to send for, or go to an allowed, and well-grounded Physician;
it is a great question, (or perchance, no question, but many more, certainly)
whether more are not killed by such usurpers, and counterfeits, than are saved
(under God) by true learned Physicians, where they most abound. But all this
may easily be answered, and Physic vindicated; but with this acknowledgment,
that the best things that are, may be abused: and so those things, that in
their nature have the truth and reality of existence as certainly, as those
that are seen and discerned by the eye, may be counterfeited and falsified, and
are liable to the mistakes of men that are ignorant, and the illusion of
juglers and impostors.

FOR a further direction to them that may want it, in this matter of witnesses
to make faith to strange relations; I will take notice of some objections that
are made, or may be made. As first, what can be more creditable, than what does
stand upon public records? may some body say. So did all those prodigies Livy
does relate. Must we then think our selves in reason bound to believe them,
all, or one half of them? No: it is a mistake. That which stood upon record,
was, that such and such (if more, than one: of many prodigies, but one) did
inform that such and such a thing had happened; who delivered it upon their
honest word, (not oath, that I can find; except it were upon some extraordinary
occasion) that it was true. This was the superstition of the Romans, of those
victorious times, that they thought nothing, that did relate to the service of
their Gods, must be neglected: and so a record of it was made, nunciatum esse,
that it was reported, not verum esse, that it was true. Yet we find in the same
Livy, that oftentimes, upon just suspicion* that which was related, did pass
some kind of examination; and if found defective, not allowed. But what shall
we say to Plutarch's relation, who not upon his own credit only, and yet he
acknowledged a grave, and serious Author; but upon the credit of many then
living, in his Treatise of the Soul; not now extant; but so much of it is
preserved in Eusebius; does seriously relate, of one very well known unto him,
and his familiar friend, as I take it; who died, he said, and his Soul after
three hours, remanded to his body; because it was upon a mistake of the
messenger, that he was deprived of life by such a sickness, when another man
was intended and sent for. After which restoration to life, he lived many
years, and was then alive, Plutarch says, when he wrote this of him. This
relation, I must confess, did somewhat trouble me, when I first read in
Eusebius; and the rather, because Eusebius does barely relate it, and excepts
against nothing, which some might interpret as an assent, but is not; there was
no need, if what he aimed at, be considered. But however so barely related, did
trouble me for a time. But afterward, upon better consideration, I thought and
still think that both Plutarch and his friend, might be very honest men, and
speak no more than what they believed to be very true; and yet we not bound at
all to believe them. For first of all, this departing of his soul was in a
(...), Plutarch says; that is a kind of unnatural deep sleep, which by them
that are not much acquainted with the proper terms of Physic, and differences
of every disease, might easily be mistaken for an (...): which Physicians
define, Soporem gravem, quo qui tenentur, etc. that is, A k^nd of sleep, which
they that labor of, sleep profoundly, and dream; and afterward, when
awak^ned, what they did dream, they think to be true, and relate it unto others
for very truth. Or, as Sennertus elsewhere; They lie as though they were dead,
and frequently, after they are awakened, make report what strange things they
have heard and seen.

NO wonder then, if the man in such a distemper, saw strange visions; and it is
probable, he had read of some such thing, that had happened, or commonly reported
to have happened unto some others; whereof the learned Annotator, in the last
Paris Edition will give a further account to them that desire it. But this
granted; it follows in Plutarch, that the other, who by right should have died,
(for there was a mistake of men, or souls, as was said before) upon the return
of Antillus his soul, (that was his name) when he heard what had happened to
Antillus, and what report he had made of his visions; that is, that his soul
should be returned indeed; but the others, first intended, would be sent for;
he fell sick, and died in very deed. Truly I think according to the belief of
the vulgar of those days, it were a wonder, a great wonder, if he had not. For
he was not only told, what this revived (as was thought) Antillus had reported
of him, as revealed unto him in that other world; but people (so goes the
story) were daily and hourly at his door, to see the event, which was enough to
startle any man, that had not a very great courage, and knew nothing to the
contrary, but that what was reported of Antillus his death, his miraculous
reviving, and what Antillus himself had since reported, as revealed unto him,
where he had been, was very true; enough I say, to startle him into an
alienation of mind, or a sudden death: whereof there be many examples of men,
who surprised with a sudden great fear, though without any other hurt, or
danger, have fallen into some sickness, which has ended in death. He
therefore, who upon this, or like relation of Plutarch, should censure him for
a fabulous writer, would do him wrong, and bewray-either malignity or
ignorance. Yet many fables we may find in Plutarch, which being delivered by
him, not credited, nor to that end they should be credited, but according to
the Mythologie of those times, which was no small part of their learning, and
is yet to all men, for the understanding of ancient books, without which no
true learning can be purchased; for such fables, and the like, delivered upon
certain suppositions; it were very ridiculous, and injurious also, to account
him fabulous.

BUT because this is a profitable point, to prevent rash judgment, which
commonly proceeds from ignorance, or want of judgment, or ingenuity, the worst
of the three; among them that have lately written of Demons and Spirits, and
their instruments, men and women, Witches and Sorcerers: Bodinus and Remigius
are most known, I think, and read. Learned men both; and who I think, had no
intention at all to impose upon their Readers, but wrote as themselves
believed. Yet for all this, I do not think my self bound to believe every thing
that they believed, and thought truth: neither could I, for the reasons before
alleged, ground upon any of their stories, but as the authorities, and
circumstances of the story, well pondered, shall induce me Though learned, yet
men; and as men, liable to errors and mistakes; and in some things, perhance,
more credulous, than I should be. What either of them might think of the
efficacy of washing of the hands; of Sal^; and of a Vine-stick; of the crowing
of the Cock, and the like; I make no question, but they had some plausible
grounds, and the confessions of diverse Witches (first deluded by the Devil,
that they might delude others, and by degrees, draw them to other more
superstitious observations) for it; besides what is objected to Bodinus
particularly, by the censors of his book, if true. Many men when they have got
some such thing by the end, that may accidentally prove false, or it may be
justly famed as superstitious* they think they have enough to discredit a man,
and to blast his labors, though otherwise never so worthy, or profitable;
which, as I said before, is an argument of great either weakness, or malice. I
know it is the manner of many, incredulous men especially; when they are
pressed with any authority, and cannot otherwise evade. A very learned man, in
his books, De Origin Idololat. (or rather, De Theologia Gentili, etc. a far
more proper Title, except he had followed it otherwise: which gave me
encouragement to write of the same subject, De orig. Idololat. long ago, though
never yet printed) does pass a harsh judgment against Bodinus, as for some
other things; so particularly, for his severity, or rather, as he makes it,
rash and injurious partiality, in admitting all kind of witnesses against
suspected Witches: and to draw out compassion more forcibly, he styles them
imbecillem sexum. I will not take upon me to excuse Bodin in all things. Yet
had he as well considered the atrocity of the crime, than which none can be
either more injurious to the Divine Majesty, or more pernicious to the
community of men; he might as well have censured his severity in this case, an
excess of zeal for God and men; as he does censure it, and aggravate it, want
of equity and mercy. And sure I am, that a very learned man too, and of great
fame in the world; out of mere indignation, and zeal to God, seeing Witches and
Sorcerers so indulgently dealt in France, (where Bodinus lived) did write, as
himself professes, that learned Treatise, De Idololatria Magica, which is
extant.

BUT in very deed no man can deny, but in this case of Witches, and persons
bewitched, great judgment and circumspection, and all little enough, ought to
be used. I remember when I lived in Sommersetshire, very young then; I heard,
at my first coming into those parts, of one that was much pitied, (a Gardener
by his profession, and a very honest man every body said) as strangely
bewitched: who also, as I was told, had appeared before the Judges, at the
Assizes, more than once, in some of his fits. It was said, as I remember, that
one or two, if not more, had been condemned, and suffered about it. I was also
told of diverse of the Clergy, who being desired, had been with him, to comfort
him. Yet at last, some years after, this very man proved to be the Witch, (a
Witch or Sorcerer himself) and was at Bridgwater Goal, I being then in the
Country: where he carried himself, by common report, as a desperate Atheist,
and seemed to slight the proceedings of Justice against him, being confident he
should escape. The very night before execution, (intended) though kept with
great care, and well fettered, I believe; yet being left alone some part of the
night, or his Keeper sleeping, he got away by casting of himself down through a
high hole, or window in the wall; and it was said (my habitation was not very
far from the place) that a great heap, or pile of Fagots, which lay far enough
in the yard from the place, were removed, and placed under the wall, for his
escape. But the man being diligently pursued, after a day or two, was found in
a Barn; and for all his confidence (upon the Devils promise, I suppose) that he
should escape, was speedily executed. Thus the Devil deals with his vassals. He
does keep his word to them, (worse than the Devil they then, who promise, and
take no care to perform) and yet they are not much the better for it, but in
this, the utmost of miseries, that their confidence does hinder their
repentance: It is bad to have to do with him. I have given a true account of
the business, if neither my memory, nor my information have deceived me. I wish
we had yearly, an account of all memorable things, that happen in this kind, in
all parts of England. I doubt not, if performed by such as are creditable, and
judicious; but good use might be made of it.

BUT again, when strange things are pretended, and creditable witnesses
produced; yet it is the part of an intelligent reader, or auditor, before he
gives full assent, to consider the nature of the thing, and all the
circumstances of it. For some things are of that nature, though never so well
attested, a man would think, that are yet possible to be mistaken; either
because they cannot be so thoroughly examined and searched, as some other
things: or because, not accompanied with convincing circumstances, that make it
clear unto all men, not set upon contradiction, that there is somewhat
supernatural, or besides the course of ordinary nature, in the case. I will
instance in a notable example. In the year of our Lord, 1593. a rumor was
spread, far and near, concerning a Silesian boy, about seven years of age, who
had, they said, a golden tooth growing in his mouth. It was two years after,
time enough a man would think to find out the truth, before the story was
published in Print; and then too, by no mean man, but by Jacobus Horstius, a
learned Physician. Soon after (I follow the account Sennertus gives of it) he
was seconded by one Martinus Rulandus, a Physician too, of good account. These,
it seems, made no question of the truth. But two years after that, one
Ingolsterus opposed him; Rulandus I mean; and the same year, Rulandus replied
in his own defense. The substance of their reasoning to and fro, is to be found
in Libavius his Singularia, (one of the first books that stirred me up to apply
my self, when very young, to the study of nature, so far as at spare hours I
might compass) Tome II. with his own conjectures all along, rational, and well
worth the reading. It is incredible what strange apprehensions some men had,
concerning this prodigious tooth; extending their prognostics of it, as far as
the Turkish Empire, and his war with the Christians. But in the end, it proved
but a cheat. How discovered, is nothing to my purpose. But I would have the
Reader to consider, though I cannot excuse the credulity of men in it, which
may be a warning to others, not to believe every thing, that is believed, and
well attested, till they have well pondered all circumstances; yet to consider,
I say, that it was very possible for men to be mistaken, where they could not
have such full inspection; except the tooth had been out, as is easy in many
other, whether pretended, or real wonders. Besides, there was no convincing
circumstance, but such rather, as might induce a man, to suspect a fraud. For
the Parents were poor, and reaped great profit, by showing this tooth, in this
way of showing it, such as it was. But if a man of good credit and judgment,
should tell me he has seen a maid in the presence of diverse others, sow and
write (exquisitely both) with her tongue; which I think a greater wonder, than
to do it with the feet, as of more than one I have read: or seen a man, whose
arms were so cut off, that nothing but short stumps were left, handle (pardon
the word: if I should say, manage, I know no great difference) a sword, charge
and discharge a musket, and the like; though the matter seems to me very
strange, and almost incredible; yet I cannot suspect any fraud or mistake, if
my Author be true, and sober; as I am sure I have good authors for both, which
no judicious man can rationally suspect, or question; Nicolaus Tulpius, of
Amsterdam, for the maid; and Ambrose Pareus, for the man; who also relates,
that the said man made a trade to rob and kill upon the ways, and for it was
condemned to death.

BUT to return to our miraculous Tooth: Though the cheat was then discovered,
and the discovery published by more than one; yet the noise of the miracle had
spread so far before that; and in the minds of many had made such deep
impression, that the credit of it continued long after; and for ought I know,
does yet, among some, to this day. Sure I am, that a Jesuit, who not many years
ago, with no small diligence, and yet much brevity; has given us an account of
three parts of the world, (I have seen no more) does mention it, as a thing
very real. Except he should intend it of another boy; because it is in the
description of Hungary, that he has it; whereas ours was in Silesia. But I
rather think it is his mistake, or the mistake of some, whom he has followed.
If so, then we must say, that the miracle by time, has well improved: For he
does not only tell of a boy with a golden tooth, but also of nine tendrels, and
natural leaves, of pure gold: which might (upon good attestation of
eyewitnesses) be thought the more probable, if, as some are of opinion, gold
grew in Mines, altogether as a tree; and gold mines be nothing, but sundry
trees of gold. His words are; Schemnitium -- civitas alia, ubi dives fodina
aurea, quin etiam ex vitibus claviculi, and folia ex puro auro aliquando enata;
pueroque succrevit dens aureus. I could have named a man of these times, (an
English writer) also, who does mention it as a true story. But for his love to
ancient learning, and the pains he has taken to vindicate it against the
attempts of some others; I will reserve his name to some better occasion.

BUT in all those stories, either of supernatural cures, or incantation of
Serpents, I have told; things were acted publicly, or in the sight of many; or
accompanied with such circumstances, as make the case indubitable, and out of
all possibility of a mistake. Except a man will say, that some of those things,
were indeed represented to the eyes, whether of more, or fewer, so that they
did verily believe they saw such and such things; which yet were not so, truly
and really, as apprehended. This indeed does happen sometimes, but never ( in
clear light, etc. as before limited) but by diabolical art, and illusion: so
that as to the proving of supernatural operations, it comes to one. Yet this I
will say: if in the incantations of Serpents, one or two only, of that kind,
had been charmed at once; I might have suspected, that by art, and industry,
they might have been taught that obedience, if not to run into the fire, yet to
suffer themselves to be handled, and the like; because I know of dogs, and
Horses, and Elephants, (besides what I have seen myself) and even of Serpents,
what has been written by some, both ancient and late.

TO instance yet in another particular of ungrounded I cannot say; for I think
the most cautelous, might have been deceived; but deluded credulity, whereof I
think I can give a better account, than yet has been given, for ought I know,
by any in Print, though more than one, I know have taken notice of the cheat;
so I call it, though the authors of it aimed at somewhat better, they will say,
or some for them, perchance. In the year of the Lord 1550. Henry the second,
King of France, being then Bononiae; that is, (for there be three Towns, if not
more, one in Italy, another in Germany, and a third in France, of that name)
Bologne, in France; which having been taken a year or two before, by the
English, was then restored; a Letter was written by one Pinellus, a French
Physician, who was then, it seems, at Court with the King, to a friend of his,
of the same profession, one Mizaldus. I have not met with the whole Letter any
where, which therefore I here exhibit.

Joh. Pipinus, Anto. Mizaldo, fuo S. P. D.
GAVDEO mihi oblatam esse occasionem, charissime Antoni, qua rem novam, and
plane admirabilem, tibi nunciare sit datam. Nuper ex India Orientali Regi
nostro allatum hic vidimus lapidem, lumine and fulgore mirabiliter
corruscantem, quique totus veluti ardens and incensus incredibili lucis
splendore praefulget micatque. Is jactis quoque versus radiis, ambientem
circumquaque aerem luce nullis fere oculis tolerabili, latissime complet. Est
etiam terrae impatientissimus: si cooperire coneris, sua sponte and vi, facto
impetu, confestim evolat in sublime. Contineri vero includive loco ullo
angusto, nulla potest hominum art: sed ampla liberaque loca duntaxat amare
videtur. Summa in eo puritas, summus nitor: nulla sorde, aut labe coinquinatur.
Figurae species nulla ei certa; sed inconstans and momento commutabilis: cumque
sit aspectu long pulcherrimus, contractari sese tamen non sinit; and si
diutius adnitaris, vel obstinatius agas, incommodum adfert: sicuti multi suo
non levi malo, me praesente, sunt experti: quod siquid ex eo fortassis enixius
conando adimitur aut detrahitur, nam durus admodum non est; fit (dicta mirum)
nihilo minor. Addit insuper, is hospes, qui illum a^tulit, homo uti apparet,
Barbarus; hujus virtutem ac vim esse ad quam plurime cum utilem, tum praecipue,
Regibus imprimis, necessariam: sed quam revelaturus non sit, nisi pretio
ingenti prius accepto. Reliqua ex me praesente audies cum primum Rex ad vos
redierit. Superest at te, and si quos isthic habes viros eruditos
diligentissime orem, ex Plinio, Alberto, Morbodeo, aliisque, qui de lapidibus
aliquid scriptum reliquerunt, solicit disquiratis, quisnam sit hujusmodi
lapillus, aut quod illi nomen (si modo fuerit, antiquis cognitus) praescribi
vere possit. Nam in eo peranxie, nec minus inf^liciter ab aulicis nostris
eruditis, hactenus laboratum, quibus si palmam in ea cognitione praeripere
possem, mecum felicissime actum iri existimarem. Incredibilis enim, and Regi
imprimis, and toti denique procerum aulicorum turbae ea de re commota est
expectatio. Vale.

Bononiae, Pridie Ascensionis Christi, M. D. L.
I HAVE set down the whole Epistle, as it was written, because, as before said,
I have not met with it whole elsewhere; and pity it were, that what so many
years, to so many, has been the ground of so much trouble and inquiry, should
not be fully known. And now for their sakes that understand not the Latin, I
will set it down in English too.

Joh. Pipinus, to Ant. Mizaldus, his loving friend, health, and greeting.
I AM glad, dearest Anthony, that this opportunity has offered it self of a
new, and wonderful relation. We have lately seen a stone, which was brought to
our King, out of the East Indies, shining with admirable light and brightness,
as if it were all on fire; such is the splendour and flashing of it, filling the
air round about with rays, which no eye can bear. It is very impatient of
earth, and if you go about to cover it, it makes its way by force, and flies
up on high. No art of man can conclude it, or contain it in a narrow room;
naturally affecting wide and free places. It is of perfect purity and
cleanness, and cannot be soiled with any spot or foulness. The shape of it is
not certain, but inconstant, and in a moment changeable: and though it be of a
beautiful aspect, yet cannot endure to be touched; and if you think to use any
force, it is not without some inconvenience, as some, in my presence, have
found to their cost. And if with much end^avour, you happen to take any part,
or parcel from it, (for it is not very hard) it is not (O wonderful) the less
for it. To all this, the same man that brought it, a mere Barbarian to sight,
does add, that the virtue of it, as it is useful for many things; so chiefly to
Kings, very necessary: but not to be revealed, without a good sum of money
first paid. Nothing now remains, but earnestly to entreat you, and other
learned men where you are, that you will make diligent search in Pliny,
Albertus, Marbodeus, and others, that have written of stones, what this stone
is, and in case it were known to the Ancients, what is the true name of it. For
in this is the industry of our Courtiers, who pretend to any learning, now
occupied; wherein if I could prevent them, I should think my self very happy.
For it is incredible, how much the King himself, and the whole Court, long to
be satisfied. Farewell.

From Bononia, Ascension Eur. 1550.

WHERE Mizaldus was, when the Letter came to him, I know not certainly: but I
guess at Paris. Hereupon, the fame of this rare stone was spread far and near;
and all curious men, Philosophers, and Naturalists, invited to spend their
judgments. Thuanus, many years after, enters it into his History, as a thing
worthy of eternal memory: Dum Rex Bononiae esset, allatus ad eum ex India
Orientali, etc. concluding thus: Haec, ut in literis Johan. Pipini, oculati rei
testis, etc. making no question at all of the truth, but whether such a stone
ever known to the Ancients or no, leaving that to the further enquiry of
Philosophers and Naturalists. No such thing is now to be found in Thuanus,
after the matter was once come out, and he knew it was a cheat. Yet, so long
did the fame of this precious stone continue, that in the year 1622. when that
admirable Treasury of choice rarities, called Musaeum Veconense, (which I value
the more, because of the sobriety, and piety of the setters out of it, as by
the disputation at the end, does appear) it was yet current in those parts, and
great endeavors were used, for the procuring of it, if to be purchased at any
rate. So we find it there, and moreover, how men versed in those things,
differed in their opinions: some accounting it a natural, other a magical
stone, and the like. Whether Fernelius was the first, (as Dr. Harvy does inform
us) who placed the Oedipus, and unfolded the riddle, I know not: I rather
suspect, because I find it explained in the copy of the Letter I have, which I
take to be ancient, that it came from them, or theirs, that were the first
contrivers of it. Now truly, had any man but suspected, that it was possible,
(concerning which we shall have a more proper place and full enquiry in our
second part) that any learned ingenuous man would be so disingenuous, and so
idle, as merely for the pleasure of the trouble, and puzle of others, to busy
himself to contrive a cheat: I think a less man than Oedipus, might have
unfolded the riddle, for any great intricacy of it. I am confident, that
nothing but a strong presumption and confidence, that Pinellus was too grave
and too serious, to take such a person upon him, made it a riddle so long. It
might have been observed, that though the Author set down the time and place,
when, and whether this strange stone was brought, and also make bold with the
Kings name, either upon a confidence, those whom he did abuse, would not soon
have the opportunity to ask him; or because he had obtained so much favor of
the King, upon some plausible pretense, that he was content to be named; yet it
might have been observed, that in some other things, he speaks not so
particularly, as might have been expected. He does intimate indeed, that many
they were, besides the King, that had seen it, and wondered at it: but names
none particularly, as Josephus does, (by their relations and offices, which
does amount to a naming) and Laurentius, in their stories: this last
especially, very particularly; which takes away all possibility of either
fiction or mistake. And if any man think that the very strangeness, or
incredibleness of the story, was enough to make a wise man suspicious; should
we take a survey of those strange things, secrets of nature, time has
discovered, in several ages of the world, somewhat might be found perchance,
though since, because better known, not so much regarded, that might deserve as
much admiration. To pass by, what either Pliny upon the report of others, more
ancient, or since him, Albertus Magnus, the wonder of his age, and many ages
after, for natural knowledge, have written of some stones; which though written
by such, yet I believe no further, than I see cause; that is, than is approved
true, by good experience, which is repugnant, I am sure, to many of their
traditions: I will only instance in the effects of quicksilver, known and
tried, vulgarly enough, but accurately collected, and set out by Acosta, in his
Natural History of the Indies, lib. 4. cap. 10. and 11. and by Levinus.
Lemnius, De occult. Not. Mir. lib. 2. cap. 35. we shall find some particulars
of this imaginary stone, truly verified of quicksilver, and diverse others not
less admirable, with equal truth attested of it. But let us see: I think with
little alteration, as strange a riddle as this, might have been contrived: as
thus, A very resplendent stone, (or if you will, without any sophistication; A
liquor, that wets not) of no certain form, not tractable, without danger: and
if you divide it in never so many parts, or parcels; of it self, it will come,
or affect to come into an entire body again: and which is most admirable,
though it be the heaviest thing in the world, yet with fire, it will vanish
into smoke, the lightest thing in the world: and though vanish, yet not
consume; for sooner or later, it will come to a body again, without any loss or
diminution. All this, to which more may be added, according to the description
of the two forenamed Authors: the word stone, which I am sure is more proper of
quicksilver, as it is a mineral, than of fire only added. Not to mention
Gabriell Fallopius, who, of all I have seen, has written of it, the virtues
and properties, most accurately, in his book, De Metallis and fossilibus, cap.
11. and 36.

AND who could tell, had the relation been true, but that this stone might have
proved a Magical stone? Who has not heard of those Astrological (according to
the vulgar opinion, and their usual graveure; though the efficacy, by many
ascribed to the Stars and Planets; by more, and the more solid, to the Devil
only) stones and gems, called by the Grecians, (...), and by the Arabs,
Talismata; the use and superstition whereof though we abhor, yet the
operations, attested by so many, how can we rationally deny? Let Gyges his
ring, though not thought so by all that write of it, pass for a fable; yet
learned Camerarius, I am sure, does write of a ring of his time, for which he
had the attestation of some, whom himself did believe very creditable, much
more miraculous, than that of Gyges, because this made the wearer only
invisible; when he would, and gave him light in darkness, at pleasure; but the
other represented things future, and a-far off, which of the two I account the
greater wonder.

THIS, I thought not amiss, to prevent the insulting of those sapientissimi, or
wondrous wise m^n, Sen^ca speaks of, who when they hear, how many both learned
and wise, were gulled by this cheat; will be ready to applaud themselves, and
say, what fools were they, that they could not see, that it was a lie: an
arrant lie: an impossible thing. So that, if learned men, and honest men by
common reputation; merely for the pleasure of deceiving, and puzling, (which
has too much of the humor of the Devil, to be believed of real honest men)
will conspire to turn juglers; I know no fence against it, but absolute
Incredulity, in such cases: which is a remedy as bad, or worse than the
disease; the danger of being cheated. But if, as by Fernelius is alleged, the
end of the project was, to make men more sensible of their folly, who admire
nothing generally, but what is seldom seen; whereas, in very truth, those
things, that are ordinary and daily, if looked upon with a Philosophical eye,
deserve as much admiration; and still ask for new signs from Heaven, when all
that is about us, if rightly understood; what we daily handle and see; what we
eat, drink and wear; are clear signs and evidences of the infinite power and
wisdom of the Creator; this, indeed, is a useful and pleasant speculation,
which many Philosophers and others, have largely insisted upon; and the fire, I
grant, (as well observed by Avicen, whom Fernelius does cite) is a very
pregnant example; yet, some other way might have been found, I believe, as by a
convenient parable, some pretty fable, or so; which might have wrought upon the
vulgar as well, as this crude lie.

I AM at an end of my first part, as to matter of Credulity or Incredulity, in
things Natural, taken in that general sense, before spoken of, and this will be
our biggest Part. Now as a Corollary to it, not unbeseeming my profession, I
will take the Ninty First Psalm of David, or some words of it, into
consideration, which will afford us some useful considerations, not improper,
or impertinent to the subject we have handled. The subject of the Psalm, is,
the security of a godly man, who lives under the protection of Almighty God,
in times of greatest dangers. But whether intended by the Author of it, to set
out the security of all godly men, in general; and to all that are such,
equally appliable: or penned upon some particular occasions, and more
particularly appliable to some, than to others, may be a question. Some
superstitious Jews, from whom it is thought by some, that the custom, or
invention of such rings, did first proceed, as the fashion is of such that deal
in unlawful arts, to seek protection from the Scripture, by violent
applications; have made bold to interpret this security here promised to the
godly, of those magical rings, made under such and such constellations, which
have been, a little before spoken of. So I learn from that great Master of all
good learning, Josephus Scaliger, in some Epistles of his, set out in his
Posthuma. It is a great chance, if a bold Chymick will not say as much of the
mysteries of his art. But wishing them sounder brains, or better consciences;
whether the Psalm, according to the first, either occasion of it, or intention
of the Penman, be generally appliable or no; we need not be very solicitous,
since the substance of it, the security of the Godly, etc. is by other places
of Scripture, affirmed and asserted; though not so emphaticaly, yet plainly
enough, to make good all herein contained. Du Muis, late professor of the
Hebrew tongue, in Paris; who has learnedly vindicated the integrity of the
Hebrew Text, against Morinus, is so taken with the elegancy of the style, in
the Original Hebrew, and the sublimity of the conceptions, that he thinks no
Latin, or Greek piece, worthy to be compared with it. I shall not contest with
him about that; neither is this a place: but it is observable, that even
Heathen Poets have exercised their wits upon this subject, the security of a
pious, upright man: which to set out emphatically, they have used some
expressions as high, as any in the Psalm. Witness H^race his, Integer vitae
scelerisque purus: Non egit Maeuri ^aculis, neque arcu, etc. Yet I never heard,
that any body in those days, did quarrel with them for it, though it was then,
as it is now, a common observation, that honest upright men, were subject
(besides oppression, to which their integrity under a tyrannical government
does more particularly expose them) to all public calamities, or
irregularities of Heaven, or Earth, as Plagues, and Famines, or the like; as
other men. If thereof we take the words of the Psalmist, as appliable to all
godly men in general, which I think is the truest sense, and first intention;
they will not bear a literal construction; neither, in that sense, are they
reconcilable with Jeremie's, and diverse other holy men's complaints; even
David's, among others, in the 37. and 73. Psalms, concerning the prosperity of
wicked men in this world, and afflictions of the Godly. And though, as in all
ages of the world, so now, there may be many, who are ready (in their secret
thoughts, at least) to quarrel with God Almighty for it, and tell him, in the
language of these days, That he was bound in his Justice, to have ordered it
otherwise; yet my opinion is, except God to allay the complaints of insolent
wretched men, would new mould the world; and retract or annul the mysteries of
our redemption by such a Savior; (which to fancy, were both ridiculous, and
damnable) it was, and is expedient, if not necessary, (a word not very fit to
be used, when we speak of Gods counsels) it should be as it is. For, what shall
we say? That in times of public calamities, as Pestilence, Inundations, and
the like; Godly men should be exempted, and they only perish, that have not the
fear of God before their eyes; known unto themselves and others, for such, by
their lives and conversations? They only, but, not all, that are such, for then
the world would soon be destitute of inhabitants; that is apparent. Well, they
only: but if not all; would not this give ground to them, that escape, to think
themselves, though nothing less perchance; righteous, and godly, and in the
favor of God? And so harden them in their wicked courses, as justified by God
himself, in their preservation? Certainly, besides professed or secret Atheism
and infidelity; there is not, among them that profess to believe; there is not,
I say, any greater cause of miscarrying, than presumption; so prone we are, if
we keep not a very strict watch, and make it our daily business, over our
actions, to think better of our selves, than we are, or God does think, and
know. What then would it be, if we had this further inducement of presumption
of our goodness, and Gods favor, that when others perished, we escaped? But
again, would it not, if none but such perished, give ground to them that are
really godly, and upright in their lives and conversations; even to them, to
think better of themselves than they are; and as men out of danger, to grow
proud and secure; highly conceited of themselves; despisers of others, (witness
the late Saints, as they did call themselves) than which no greater misery can
befall a godly man. And then, how can it stand with that grand mystery of our
faith, that we must be saved by faith; if this present world apparently were a
place of reward to good and evil? Or a place, where good and evil are
discriminated and discerned, by such apparent, as I may call it, partiality?
How can St. Paul's inference be justified and verified, that the prosperity of
wicked men in this world, is a sure evidence unto us, of a day of Judgment,
because we know, which even ordinary reason does prompt, if we believe there is
a God; that God is just?

HAD these things been well considered of, and much more, though not able to
give an account of, we may think our selves in duty bound to believe, some both
ancient and late, might have written more warily, than they have done. Of the
Ancients, I could name some that write suspitiously, but none that I remember,
more peremptorily, than Lactantius: a professed Rhetoritian, and an elegant
writer, but a raw Christian; who maintains, that it is not possible, that
either at Sea by tempest, or at Land by war, (or Pestilence, he intended also
certainly, though he does not express it) any just man should perish; but that
either God, for his sake, will preserve the rest, or when all the rest perish,
that are not what he is, he alone shall be preserved. So he the more excusable,
because, as I said before, but a raw Christian. I am much deceived, if among
the Protestant Commentators on the Psalms, some one might not be found, who
does maintain the very same opinion. Bodinus, I am sure, whether a Protestant,
or a Papist, says little less, concerning the power of Magicians and Witches;
when he says, that they cannot delude, or blind the eyes (an ordinary thing
with them) of them, that fear God; to represent things unto them as true and
real, which are not so, but in appearance only: which if true, we may upon the
same ground conclude, they have no power at all upon their bodies, to annoy
them: which indeed, without Gods permission, we know they have not; but that is
not to the purpose, for neither have they upon the bodies of others, till God
permit, and give them leave; so that, in that, there is no difference. But to
believe that none are possessed, or otherwise annoyed by the Devil, but wicked
men, is a very uncharitable, and erroneous opinion; easily confuted by the
Scriptures; besides what has been said before, of Godly men, being subject to
public calamities, as well as other men. They that desire further satisfaction
in this point, may, if they please, and be able, read St. Chrysostom his large
discourse, in three several books, to one of his time, that was possessed, and
had already been so, when he wrote, for the space of three years; whom he
accounted, and so describes, as an exemplary man, for his holy life and
conversation.

THERE was a tradition anciently, so ancient, that Gregory Nazianzen, and
Prudentius were, and many more since, have been deceived by it; that S. Cyprian
had been a great Magician, before he was converted to the Christian faith: The
occasion of his conversion some say, was, that being passionately in love of a
chaste Christian Virgin, and out of all hopes to speed any other way; he had
recourse to his Master, the Devil, that by his means he might obtain his
desire. I find it in Vair, that the Devil should presently reply unto him, that
against them that did truly and sincerely worship Jesus Christ, no power or art
he had could prevail: at which Cyprian being surprised with great astonishment,
resolved presently to become a Christian. But this part of the story, I do not
find either in Prudentius or Nazianzen; but in Prudentius only this, that
whilst he was of that profession, among other things, he made use of Magic,
to compass his lustful desires; and in Nazianzen thus, that the Devil having
done what he could to work upon the Virgin, in vain; at last (he has done so,
upon like occasions, more than once, as later stories bear witness) did
acknowledge so much to Cyprian, and put him out of all hopes of obtaining his
desire: at which Cyprian was so troubled, that he made bold to revile the
Devil, (there be too many that will revile God himself, when they miss of their
ends) who in revenge, entered into him, and grievously tormented him; which
forced him to apply himself to Christ for help, which having found, that so he
became a Christian. The best is, if this be not true of our St. Cyprian, whose
learned and pious works are extant; it may be sure, and probably is very true,
of another, somewhat later Cyprian, who died a Martyr too; so that it is
probably, but a mistake of the name.

BUT if Vair were mistaken in his account, as to the particular we are upon,
grounded upon St. Cyprian's authority, to prove that a good Christian is
exempted from the stroke and smart of the Devil's persecution, in general, and
personal possession, particularly: yet it may be supplied, partly out of
Celsus, in Origin; and partly out of Origin himself. Out of Celsus, in Origin,
lib. 6. page 312. where Celsus does declare, that he had learned from an
Egyptian Musician, ((...): so Printed, and so translated, Musicum, by the
Latin interpreter: But I propose it to the consideration of them, that are more
at leisure, whether (...), be not the more likely word; there being so much
affinity between Macus and Aegyptius, in those times, at least, that the bare
word, Aegyptius, as Baronius, Anno Chapter 327. Par. 17. does well observe, is
sometime taken for Magus: And besides, why should Celsus regard what was said,
or affirmed by a Musician, in this particular, being altogether out of his
element and profession) that Magic could not hurt them that were Philosophers;
that is, as the word is often taken, moral virtuous men; but only those that
were (...), undisciplined men; (...) corrupt in their lives and conversations.
Out of Origin himself, who there does very peremptorily deliver it, as a thing
approved by good experience, that none that served God according to the
prescript of Christ, and lived according to his Gospel, and diligently applied
themselves night and day, to those prayers that were prescribed (by which I
understand the Morning and Evening Service of the Church) could receive any
harm by Magic, or by Devils. All this if taken precisely, and limited to this
present world and life, except it be restrained to some particular times, and
occasions, is, I think, spoken with more confidence, than truth.

YET I will not deny, but that probably, pious upright men, whom the
consciousness of their piety and probity, has not (as it often does happen)
made them secure, and presumptuous, or proud, and arrogant, and despisers of
others; are not so subject to this kind of trouble, as wicked lend people.
Neither will I be afraid to say though ridiculous, I know, to the wits, and
wise of these times; that it may be true enough, which by some Witches has
been acknowledged to Remigius, that they had not the same power to execute
their malicious designs upon those, even little children, who daily and duly
said their prayers, as they had upon others. But withal, I would have that
remembered and thought upon, which out of Pliny, where we treat of Prodigies,
was observed before, of a natural kind of faith, and the efficacy of it, which
may in part satisfy, why some, sometimes, though not so religious otherwise,
may be less obnoxious to the attempts of Devils and Witches, than some others,
though more innocent and deserving, for want of this kind of faith, (which, in
some things, may supply the want of a more perfect, or Christian faith) are.

NOW for them that are scandalized, that the Devil (with Gods permission)
should have such power over men, as well the good, as the bad: first of all,
let them remember, that even St. Paul, that chosen vessel, so great and
gracious with God, was not exempted from the common condition of other Godly
men; and what Gods answer was, when St. Paul addressed himself to him, for
relief, and release: and leaving to God, the secrets of his will, and his
providence; let us consider, what is, or may be manifest of it unto all men, to
prove that there is a providence, which does take care of the world, and all
men in general; first, in restraining the power of the Devil, so that he that
as an Angel, by nature, is able to do so much, can do nothing at all, without
his permission. In what case do we think the world, this sublunary world,
(though but a very little and inconsiderable point or piece, a man would think,
in comparison of the higher world, which he has nothing to do with) this
sublunary world, I say, would be, if the government of it were left unto him;
who nevertheless for the great power he has in it, is styled in the Scripture
(...), or Governor of the world: For what he does to some, who partly seek
unto him themselves; or for some hidden reason, besides their sins, by Gods
permission, become obnoxious unto him; he would do unto all, who doubts it,
even to the destruction of all, (his great ambition) were not his power
restrained. And it is observable, that he has most power, where God is least
known, and ignorance and brutishness most reign; as in the most Northern parts
of the world, as by many is observed. But again: O the goodness, and mercy of
God toward men! that though the Devil have such power in the Earth, that all
the treasures of the Earth, may in some respect, be said to be in his hands,
and at his disposing; yet he has no power, or very little, to gratify them,
who by covenant, tacit or express, have entered themselves into his service;
which if he had, for one sworn vassal, or servant that he has, (such is the
madness of most men, lest to themselves, because they do not seek unto God) he
would have a hundred, if not a thousand. But again, what miserable ends they
make commonly, that have served him most faithfully, (an account whereof is
given by more than one) and how basely, he does usually forsake them in time of
greatest need; leaves them comfortless, desperate and despairing; yea
sometimes, betrayeth them himself, and seems to rejoice openly, (which we know,
though he does not show it, he does always secretly) and to insult at their
calamities. How many have been torn in pieces, by himself: or unmercifully
snatched, and carried away, God knows whether? Others, with many curses, stoned
by the people; others some other way, not natural; helpless and hopeless ended
their miserable life? So have many of Gods servants too, as to bodily pains and
torments; (some Atheistical wretch perchance, will be ready to reply) as those
the Apostle, in his Epistle to the Hebrews speaks of, who died cruel deaths:
yea, cruel as to the world, we grant it, but not comfortless, even in greatest
pains; and honorable after their deaths.

BUT lastly, is there not a providence, yea a miraculous providence, though
little understood, and therefore less thought of, in this, that the Devil by
the privilege of his nature being endowed with such power, and bearing such
hatred to mankind; yet cannot do one half, yea one quarter of the hurt, he does
unto men, were it not for the help of men, as employed, and set on by men. A
great and incomprehensible mystery, to the wisest that write of it, that their
power should be so limited; but an effect, certainly, of Gods love, and respect
toward men.

FOR these things therefore that are manifest, it well becomes all good
Christians to praise God, and to acknowledge his good Providence toward men;
and for those things we can find no satisfaction from reason, to submit unto
him with humility; which is so great a proof of true Religion, and
Christianity, that for this very thing we may believe many things are not
revealed, for a trial of our submission and humility in this kind.

NOW to return to our Psalm; It argued a noble mind in Plato, and does relish
of some kind of inspiration, (I did think so, where I treat of it more largely,
in the Annotations upon the Psalms, before mentioned; upon the 37. Psalm) who
would have in his Commonweal, all happiness, by law, so annexed to goodness,
and righteousness; that it should not be lawful for any man, young or old, in
any discourse, public or private, to speak otherwise. And some pregnant
arguments he has, to prove it so, that such only are truly and really the
happy men of the world, who are upright honest men. But however, what opinion
soever men might have of his arguments; it should not be lawful for any man to
speak otherwise, hoping that in time such language in all places, and
companies, would breed in young people, an honorable esteem of virtue and
probity; and so dispose them the better to the pursuit of it. Which, though
some men may slight and deride, as they are ready to do every thing, that does
not fit their own fancy; yet to men of better judgment, and experience, may
appear very considerable. And who can doubt, but that, when children, and young
people, never hear the dead spoken of, (such as died in wars, especially, for
their Country) but in the phrase of (...), or happy men, which in those days,
was the proper expression for a dead man: it did much conduce to breed in
people a contempt of death, without which there can be no true generosity?
Whereas now, the common phrase of, poor Man! poor Father! poor Mother! and the
like; (which I could never hear without some kind of secret abhorrency, that
Christians should come so short of Heathens wisdom) what can it breed in
children, and weaker people, but a fear and detestation of death?

COULD I be persuaded, as many anciently, and some of late have been of
opinion, that Plato was acquainted with the Scriptures of the Old Testament; I
should make no doubt, but when he Commented that Law, he had in his thoughts
the words of Ecclesiastes, which to me, in times of greatest desolation, when
violence and oppression were at their height, always proved a very comfortable
cordial; Though a sinner do evil a hundred times, and his days be prolonged,
yet surely I know, that it shall be well with them that fear God; which fear
before him: But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong
his days, which are as a shadow, because he fears not before God, Eccles.
8.12. What is the effect of all this, Though he prolong; yet he shall not
prolong, etc. but this; that though wicked men, in, and by length of days, and
other worldly prosperity, may seem to ordinary reason and judgment, to be
happy; yet really, they are not so, but in their very happiness (as supposed)
miserable, and unhappy: a kind of contrariety, but not to faith. And what is it
Plato would have, but this very thing; and that it should not be lawful to
speak otherwise? But as to Solomon's words, let me add by the way: I conceive
some wrong is done unto them, by breaking the coherence with the foregoing
verse, by a new Paragraph. For having in the eleventh verse, pointed at one
main ground of wickedness, and Atheism; which is, the not speedy execution of
Justice, in this world; and Gods suffering of wicked men, to thrive by their
wickedness, (for, God is known by the Judgment he executes: says the
Psalmist) he does oppose this noble confession, or profession of his faith, to
vulgar judgments; which would be more clear, if, as often, supplied with a But:
But I, though a sinner, etc. Theognis, nay Homer, have said the same, in
effect: but I will not digress so far.

NOW to apply this to our Psalm: It is the opinion of some learned men, that
this Psalm was penned of purpose for a formula, or pattern of praying, in time
of danger. And indeed, I account it a most excellent, and Divine form of
prayer, to that end; provided that we take St. Paul's exposition along with it,
which is, not to think our selves secured by those words, that we shall not
suffer any of those things, private or public, which are naturally incidental
unto all men, as men; but to secure us, that if we put our trust in God, and
have a lively apprehension of his Goodness, Power, and Mercy, the end of our
sufferings shall be comfortable, and glorious. St. Paul's words are: Who shall
separate us, etc. from verse 35. to the end of the Chapter. Certainly, if in
all these, more than conquerors; then in all these happy, (as Plato would have
it) truly, and really; though not always, nor all equally, so sensible, of our
happiness. Neither I think did the Prophet Habakkuk, by those words, Yet we
will rejoice in the Lord: we will joy in the God of our salvation, Hab. 3.18.
promise himself much joy, in a time of public famine; such a time Jeremy
speaks of, when he says, His eyes did fail with tears, etc. because the
children and sucklings swoon in the streets, etc. or altogether presume, when
others round about him died for want of bread; God would miraculously feed and
preserve him: but only this, that no calamity can be so great, and grievous,
but if we trust in God, and patiently submit, we may find comfort in this
confidence; That (to use St. Paul's expression) the sufferings of this present
time, are not worthy to compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us,
Romans 8.18.

I HAVE said what I intended upon this Psalm: More perchance might be expected
by some, concerning the several kinds, or orders of Spirits, which, by some,
are supposed to be alluded unto, by the Psalmist in those words; Thou shall not
be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flies by day, nor
for the pestilence that (...) darkness, nor for the destruction that wastes
(...) Ve^se 5. and 6. That there be different kinds (...) of ^pirits, all evil,
and enemies to mankind ^^shy v^e^d, though not so ready perchance, to subscribe
to every thing that Psel^us, that learned Platonist (whether so sound Christian
in all things, I cannot tell) has written of them. And besides them, there may
be, perchance, some other substances or Spirits, (so called, because not
discernable by bodily eyes, in their own nature; but whether immortal, or no, I
do not know) which have no quarrel at all to mankind, nor any particular
interest in the affairs of men, but as they are casually provoked or molested;
and sometimes, invited, and allured perchance, as some are of opinion. But all
this, more than God by his Word has been pleased to teach, and reveal, is to
me but perchance, and, it may be, nothing that I know, or believe, with any
certainty. And for my part, such speculations and enquiries, if pursued with
much ambition and eagerness; and without some special occasion, incident to any
man's office or duty; I hold to be much more curious, if not dangerous, than
profitable, or convenient, as elsewhere I have had occasion more largely to
declare my self. As for those words of the Psalmist, there be, Delrio, and
others, that will give a further account, if it be desired. My purpose did not
engage me, and I am very willing to let it alone.

FINIS.
OF CREDULITY AND INCREDULITY IN Things CIVIL. The Second Part.
HERE I shall desire the Reader, in the first place, to take notice, that
though we distinguish between things Natural and Civil; by Natural,
understanding properly such things, as are the work of Nature, immediately,
without the concurrence, or intervention of man's will or counsel: and by
Civil, those which owe their production to the will or counsel of man: yet, in
many things, Nature, and the will of man do cooperate, so that the same thing
may in different respects, be reducible to either of the two, Nature, or the
will of man. For example, some things that are done by Art, or commonly
ascribed unto Art, and of the same kind, apparently, as artificial things: yet,
in truth, the effects of Nature, more than Art. So many actions of men, which
flow originally from the natural temper, or present constitution of the body;
or from some other natural cause, moving and inciting, but not constraining;
except the present temper, or distemper have so far prevailed, as to force.
Besides, the very will of man may, in some respects, be reduced to nature; and
all actions that proceed from it, in some respects, I say, not unfitly, be
termed natural. For in very deed, God excepted, (whom nevertheless the Stoics
termed (...)) there is nothing but in some sense, is natural; even Monsters,
the greatest that are, and most wondered at; as Aristotle has long ago taught
us. If therefore in this Second Part, we insist upon any thing, that might as
well have been spoken of in the first, that the Reader might not rashly
censure, or condemn, as though we had forgotten our text, or ignorantly
confounded matters; this warning, I thought, would not be amiss.

BUT now I must meet with another objection, which may be as considerable, if
not more. Of Credulity and Incredulity, in things Civil: what need of this, in
this age; among us, in England, at least? If ever there were a time, when those
verses of the Poet, Omnia jam fient, fieri quae posse negantur;
Et nihil est, de quo, non sit habenda fides:
In English, more to our purpose, thus: All wondering, cease: such things our
Age, our eyes have seen;
Nothing now incredibl' which incredibl' has been:
If ever a time, I say, when appliable, and true, in this our England, at
least: surely this is the time. Have we not seen a most godly religious Prince,
and King; not by one single Rogue, as two late Kings of France, one after
another; but by his own Subjects, in multitude, pretending, not to Christianity
only, in general; but to the Protestant Religion* (or Reformation rather) upon
pretenses of Justice and Religion, massacred in cold blood, upon a Scaffold,
erected in triumph before his own House, or ordinary place of abode; with the
applause and Hallelujahs, not of the said multitude only, but of some others
also, whom by their birth and education, no man would have thought capable of
such savageness and immanity? Have we seen this, and wonder to hear, that there
was, or is yet, any such people, or Nation, who when their Parents, Fathers and
Mothers, are grown old and crazy, knock them on the head, or some other way,
hasten their death, and feast themselves, their Waves and Children, with their
flesh? Or if we be told (of which more afterward perchance) of a certain
People in the North, men and women, who for some time of the year, of creatures
that are naturally rational, and made after the Image of God; turn into very
Wolves; of all wild Beasts, the most cruel and ravening: can we wonder at it,
and think it incredible? But again, we have read with wonder, (if we believe
it; though, truly, some later stories, well attested, may incline us, not to
think it incredible) of a R^mus and Remulus, two Brothers, preserved by the
milk and nursesery of a she-Wolf; and with no less wondering, but more
certainty, of a Prophet, fed by Ravens, in a Cave. Should we well ponder that
connection, and concatenation of providence, which attended our present
Gracious Sovereign; and among others, by which (...) he was led, lodged, and
fed in a Tree, whilst his ^mies round about did hunt and pursue him; to
preserve him to as miraculous (because without blood, and by those hands, in
part, that had been active in his Father's ruin) a Restoration: we need not
make such a wonder of either, to think the one (that of the two Brothers)
incredible; or the other, of the Prophet, not credible, but as we have
Scripture authority for it.

BUT thirdly: the burning of Cities; by enemies, especially, and chances of
war, to them that have read stories, cannot be very wonderful. Yet, such is the
nature of man; who would have believed, that he should live, to see the burning
of London? Especially, when not by any public Enemy? But that which makes it
most wonderful, is, that though, to our great horror and amazement, we see it
is done; yet how, and by whom, we do not yet certainly know: though, if reports
be true, it was known and talked of by more than one, some days before it
happened. And, who knows, had not our Gracious Sovereign, and his Royal Brother,
both by personal attendance, and by wise contrivances, appeared so zealous, as
they did, for the quenching of it; whether any part of either London or
Westminster had been to be seen, at this day? All these, some as mercies, other
as judgments; (not to mention the late dreadful Plague, the like whereof, for
the continuance, and number of the dead, has not been known in England) great
wonders, as I suppose; and such, as to, if not immediate, yet more remote
posterity may seem incredible. But the greatest wonder, not to be uttered
without deepest sighs and groans, is yet behind. Such mercies, such judgments,
were enough to have made dissolute Heathens, if not Christians, (without some
preaching also) yet moral honest men, religious, in their kind, and sensible of
a Deity. And, behold! they have made of Christians, in outward profession, real
Atheists, in their opinions; and worse than Atheists, for all manner of
licentiousness, in their lives. Epicurus, who generally, in former ages, among
all accounted sober and wise, Heathens and Christians, learned and unlearned,
for his life; but more for his impious doctrine, and outrageous opposition of
whatsoever pretended to God, or godliness, was a name of horror and
detestation; is now become the Saint, of many Christians.

BUT lest this by some, may be thought to be spoken more Rhetorically, and in
opposition to the times, than truly and conscionably: it will not be amiss, nor
impertinent to our present theme and task, to pause awhile upon this subject,
and to consider, how this man (which in former ages, among sober wise men, that
had any sense of piety, would have been thought so prodigious, and incredible)
came of late years, among other late discoveries of the age, by some accounted
none of the least, to be so well thought of amongst us. But I began this, of
the wonders of our age, in an objection: let me first answer it, lest I forget
it. It is very true, that this age beyond former ages, has brought forth such
things, which they that have seen and believe, may, in a manner, think nothing
incredible. But first, all men are not of one temper. And then, what we have
seen, posterity must believe, upon relation: and there will be a time, when
what we know, to be true, because we have seen it, to many, may seem so
strange, that they will, if not deny, yet doubt the truth of it. In a word
therefore, whatever our luck may be, it is our desire, that more than one age,
or some that are not yet born, may reap the benefit of what we write. Now to
Epicurus.

FIRST, for his life, of which more afterward. But we will suppose him, for a
time, to have been a sober temperate man: or rather, his life to have been,
sober and temperate, externally. For it is a true observation, both of
Philosophers and Divines, that not the outward actions barely, is that that can
denominate a man truly sober and temperate, or just and righteous, and the
like; but the opinions ((...)) from which those actions do proceed. So
nevertheless, that we, who do not see the hearts of others, judge charitably of
all men, by their actions, which we see; except themselves reveal their hearts,
and make open profession of their opinions. Epicurus his opinion, did very much
engage him to a sober temperate life; who, as he did acknowledge no humane
felicity (I know what I say, and shall make it good, before I have done)
present, or future, but in bodily pleasure; so, knew well enough, and to that
end, has many specious profitable memento's and advices to others of his crew;
that the right and sober management of such pleasures, was the way to enjoy
them long, and to make them more pleasing, at the very time. Besides, I would
ask, if the Devil have a design to infect men, with some impious execrable
doctrine; will he choose (if he have choice) an open riotous lend man, to be his
instrument, or a sober man, in show at least, if he can have him? Which makes
me remember, what I find in the Margents of a Lucretius, which once belonged to
a very learned and judicious man. Over against those words, at the beginning of
the fourth book, Deus ille fuit, Deus, inclute Memmi, etc. he writes; Epicurus,
Deus judicio Lucretii: meo, Diaboli (...) nequissimus: that is, Epicurus, in
Lucretius his judgment, a God: in my judgment, a wicked Proctor, or Minister of
the Devil. Let us therefore, in the first place, look into his opinions out of
his own writings, whereof no question can be made. First, that the world
(Heaven and Earth) came to what it is, not by any Providence, but by a casual
jumbling of atoms, (I need not comment upon that: some men I believe would be
well pleased, to have them in childrens Catechisms instead of somewhat else,
that does not so well please them) that Sun and Moon, were not intended, either
for light, or for any other use, for the benefit of men; nor the eyes made to
see, or the ear to hear, or the feet for motion; but all by chance, without any
forecast of providence. This is horrible: and there is more of it. But by the
way, that the Sun and Moon were but just so big, and every Star, as they
appeared unto us, and our eyes. There is no impiety in this, perchance, some
will say: but I pray, has not this man well deserved, that his Philosophy
should be inquired into, with so much care, and diligence? But we go on: That,
what men call right and wrong, justice and injustice, virtue and vice, were but
fancies, and empty sounds; nothing, truly real, and worthy our pursuit, but
what was pleasant and delightful, which also was profitable. Is not this
impious? can any thing be more? Was he a man, or a monster, a Devil that could
harbor such thoughts, and take such pains to seduce others, to the same
persuasion? But I know it will be said: Did not the same man explain himself,
that by pleasure, he did understand chiefly, a virtuous life, without which
there could be no true pleasure? And again, Does not the same, though he
acknowledged no Divine Providence, yet acknowledge and profess to believe, that
there is a God; and that he thought it very convenient, that God, (whether one
or more) for the excellency of his nature, should be reverenced and worshipped
by men? But I beseech you, can any man be so foolish, so sottish himself; or so
far presume upon the ignorance and simplicity of others, as to plead this for
Epicurus in good earnest? What is before objected to him, is written, and
maintained by him, very positively, without any exception, or qualification, in
diverse of his writings: as shall be more fully declared afterward. But
Epicurus knew, what had happened to other professed Atheists before him: it did
concern him no less than his life, not to deny positively, the being of a God,
or Gods. But what Gods I pray, did he acknowledge? How does he describe them?
Homunculis similes, lineamentis duntaxat extremis, non habitu solido, etc. that
is, Like men and no men: having all the members of a man's body, but not the use
of any: in the shape and outward appearance, but not substance of a body. So
Cicero out of him, who, though he liked not his Philosophy, yet did much favor
his person, and never, or seldom speaks of him, but very tenderly; not so much
for his sake, I believe, as for theirs, some of his best friends, that were of
that Sect. Neither could he mistake him, or misreport him, than whom no man of
those times was better versed in the writings of Greek Philosophers. Seneca
also, who did study to the utmost of his power, to acquit Epicurus, and to
advance the credit of his sentences; not without some respect to himself,
probably, (whereof more afterward) yet when he speaks of his God, what a
creature does he make of it? Epicurus, says he, did disarm his God, as from
all manner of weapons, so from all kind of power too: and that no man might
have any cause to fear him, he has thrown him far out of the world: (Extra
mundum: for which some Editions, metum: others, motum: which Lipsius would
have, metam: but mundum, the right certainly: confirmed by what follows; In
medio intervallo hujus and alterius coeli, desertus, sine animali, sine homine,
sine re, ruinas mundorum, etc. as also by the same expression, in another
place, Alius illos extra mundum suum projicit) out of the world, both
Terrestrial and Celestial, as he does explain himself afterward: Nulla illi,
nec tribuendi, nec nocendi materia est: Non exaudiens vota, nec nostri
curiosus, etc. De benef. 4. cap. 18. Any man that reads that whole passage, may
easily see, that Seneca does but make himself sport with Epicurus his God, and
thereby does give us to understand plainly enough, what Epicurus his true
intention was, by making such a God. And yet, strange, though that whole fourth
book of Seneca be written against Epicurus his brutish opinion, that no man
should be kind, or loving to any other, but for his own sake; and that, the
only end of all friendship among men; and that he speak very roundly of his,
and their sensuality, that were of that Sect, in some places, as in the second,
and thirteenth Chapters particularly: yet some of his late Patrons are so
shameless, as to produce some words out of this book, as spoken in good earnest
by Seneca, to commend him, and his admirable piety; than which nothing can be
more senseless and impudent, and more contrary to the drift of the whole book.
And so, when he would seem to explain himself sometimes, that by pleasure, he
did chiefly intend such, as did proceed from a virtuous life; what sober man
that has read his other writings, or such passages out of them, in best
Authors, whereof no question can be made, where he does so punctually, so
expressly deliver himself, and argue the case, but must think, except he had
formally recanted, and disowned those writings, that he did but basely, and
impudently abuse the world, by such palliating glosses and explications? Might
not he fear here also, that they (we call them Heathens: I wish there were no
worse Christians) who were once ready, as Seneca does somewhere record, to tear
an Actor, upon the Stage, in pieces, for extolling the happiness of wealth or
money, so much, as to make it, Summum humani generis bonum: that is, The thing
wherein man's happiness does chiefly consist; would meet with him, some time or
other, in the streets, for setting up pleasure, and voluptuousness, as the only
good, the only God, unto men? And such an enemy to God and Providence was this
wicked man, that in his writings now extant, when his atoms could not help
him, and he does acknowledge himself at a stand, and does beg of others, that
they would study and find somewhat, that has any show of probability, to help
him out; yet he makes it always his condition, that they would not fly to God
and a Providence; he had no patience to hear of that. And so much for the
Doctrine of the new Saint: Now for his Life.

WHAT was laid to his charge, whilst he lived, even by some of his own
disciples, who professed they left him merely for the leudness of his
conversation; and by others after his death: Diog. Laertius, who has written
his life, does, in part, at the very beginning of it, declare. But then he
tells you, they were all lies; and that such and such Epistles, and other
writings, evidences of his wicked life, were but fictitious writings: and this,
Gassendus his friend, the great reviver and abettor of Epicurism, in this
unhappy age, does take for a very sufficient refutation. But I pray you, what
was Diog. Laertius, that his authority, so many ages after Epicurus his death;
when all the world almost, had consented in their judgments against him; should
be opposed to the authority of so many worthy men, of all professions,
Philosophers, Historians, Mathematicians, Poets, of his, and some precedent
ages? Of which numbers some were so far from being Stoicke, that they wrote
against them. Was he not, himself, this Diogenes, not to (...) of his defects
otherwise, which have been observed (...) learned men; a professed Epicuraean?
(...)^ not therefore, among indifferent impartial men, in reason, to be
admitted as a witness; or if admitted to speak, yet not so to be trusted, as
Gassendus does him, in every thing, though there be never so many witnesses, of
far better worth and credit, to the contrary. And yet we may observe, how
Gassendus does stretch his words sometimes, to make them serve his turn, beyond
all reason and equity. For example: Where Laertius, after that he has related
the accusations of many, of several heads, or crimes, against Epicurus; he
concludes, (...). This Gassendus (page 140.163.) would have to belong to all,
that went before; whereas it will appear (to say nothing of the (...), which
may be here a pregnant word, opposed to (...) that is, those before spoken of;
including a tacit concession) that it belongs to the last accusation only,
(though that also, most true, by the attestation of more ancient and
considerable witnesses, than ten such as Laertius: as Cicero, Plutarch, etc.)
whereby Epicurus is censured as one, that despised all men, but himself; even
those to whom he did owe what he was, and whose writings he had usurped, and
substituted for his own. To which Laertius does oppose many things, to prove
his (...): his Parents, his Friends, his Disciples, his Country; and then goes
on to the refutation of other crimes. And indeed, how could Laertius say, that
all the former accusations were false, when some were taken out of his own
books, and writings, acknowledged by Laertius, and whereof no question was ever
made, but that that they were his? As for example, that he should write in his
book, (...), (or, of man's felicity) (...), etc. that is, For what to call good,
if you take away the pleasure of taste, and of the ear, and those pleasures,
which arise from beauty, and carnal copulation, I know not. Which words to be
Epicurus's, is attested by diverse Ancients, (whose attestation we shall not
need, because not denied by Laertius) but especially by Cicero, very
particularly; first in his II. De finibus, where he translates him thus; Qui
testificatur, ne intelligere quidem se posse quid sit, aut ubi sit ullum bonum,
praeter illud quod cibo and potione, and aurium delectatione, and obscaena
voluptate capiatur: but more fully in his third Tusculan, where he has a long
Comment upon the words, taken out of that book of Epicurus, De summo bono: of
which Cicero says, that it does fully comprehend their discipline or doctrine;
and is full, he says, of such sayings, in commendation of voluptuousness, and
carnal pleasures. Durst Cicero oppose these things, to his Epicuraean friends,
who were many, and of the best he had, had there been any ground at all, in
those days, of suspicion for that, which Gassendus would have us to believe,
that those were spurious writings, or interpolated, and corrupted by the
Stoics, Epicurus his enemies? If we take that liberty, we shall not know what
to say of any man, what he believed or maintained, by his writings: What Plato;
what Aristotle, what any Fathers or Heretics; if it will serve to say, those
writings are spurious, or adulterated and corrupted. But observe, I pray, how
earnestly, how ingenuously Cicero does express himself, and appeal to the
consciences (if they had any) of those men: Number fingo, number mentior? cupio ref.
etc. Do I feign or forge? Do I lie? I rather wish I could be confuted. For what
do I labor, but that the truth (O Christians hear this) in every controversy
may prevail, or, be understood, and come to light. Here Gassendus should have
fixed, could he have found or devised any thing, to help his friend out of the
mire. But such convincing passages, not to be eluded by any art, or
sophistication of wit, he wisely passes over: but with all possible diligence
ransacks all kind of Authors, to see what he can find, that may with the help
of his sophistry, and false dealing, have a show of somewhat, to make that
beastly swine, to appear in the shape of a rational man. Were it my business
now, or could I stand so long upon it, without trespassing too much either
against my Readers patience, or my present weakness of body, as to examine all
his allegations, I am very confident, there is scarce any thing considerable in
his whole book, but would be found, either impertinent, or false: as if it had
been the privilege of that cause, (as indeed it is the necessity, because not
otherwise pleadable) and for which he hoped no man would blame him. I should
say so too, could any necessity oblige an honest man to undertake so wicked a
cause. However, that I may give a taste to the Reader, I will take one of the
most considerable Chapters in the whole book, the seventh of the third book,
where he does examine Plutarch's authority, or testimony concerning Epicurus: a
Chapter, one of the most considerable, I say, because of that high Elogium
which he does give unto Plutarch, Nullum authorem omni memoria extare, quem cum
viro illo eximio comparandum existimem; That no age (without exception) has
born any Author, whom he can, for true worth, compare with him. I have a very
great opinion of Plutarch too; and if instead of so many foolish Romances,
Stage Plays, and the like; such a serious Author, who has variety enough to
please every palate, were read; it is not likely, that the Gentry and Nobility
could degenerate so much every where, as they are generally reported. But
except he were read in his own tongue; (which to do, were he the only Greek
Author, now extant, I think three or four years study to learn that tongue,
would not be misspent) I wish he were better translated. But I must except the
French translation of the Lives, which is excellent. Such an opinion I have of
Plutarch; yet I should hardly go so far, as Gassendus does. Now let us see how
he does deal with this worthy man, and how with his Reader. That Plutarch does
generally (always I might say) speak of Epicurus, as an infamous and senseless
man, that is not denied. Such a lover of reason, and virtue, could not but
heartily compassionate the phrenzy of so many men, who in all ages have been
glad to find a patron of their sensuality. Though diverse books he wrote against
him, are not now extant; yet there be enough to satisfy any man, what he
thought of Epicurus, and his doctrine. This could not but grievously pinch
Gassendus, and deeply wound the cause that he had undertaken. But what if he
can show from Plutarch himself, that he rather followed the common opinion, in
what he wrote of Epicurus, than his own judgment, or the truth? I must needs
say, that in my judgment he had done much, and more than any ten or twenty
Chapters of his book, if well examined, will amount unto: though very strange,
if not incredible, that so grave a man, so serious, would not only occasionally
speak of him, as others did, generally, whether right or wrong: but would write
books of him, and against him, of purpose, which nothing did oblige him to do;
only to countenance a public false fame. But let us hear. Plutarch, says he,
in one place after he has mentioned what those crimes are, which made Epicurus
and his followers infamous to the vulgar, to wit, want of friends, (that is, to
admit of no friendship among men, but such as is grounded upon present profit,
or gain, and selfishness, if I may so speak; which to have been Epicurus his
opinion, Laertius himself does not deny) an idle life, Atheism, voluptuousness,
neglect of all things: (but pleasures, or sensuality) well, what then? Then,
says he, Plutarch does object to himself; but these things unjustly,
perchance; (are objected or laid to their charge) to which he does answer; yea,
but it is not truth, but opinion that we look after. And so concludes, that
Plutarch by his own confession in those things he did write of Epicurus, was
(...) not (...): a follower, or lover of opinion, and not of truth. And if
Plutarch, so grave, so serious; why not we, as elsewhere he does argue, believe
it of others also? Is not this enough, think we, to make Epicurus victorious,
in despite of all testimonies, and evidences? For if Plutarch, who was no
Stoic, (the common exception, as if all Stoics had been Epicurus his sworn
enemies, which is most false) nor friend to Stoics, he has written against
them it is well known: But if Plutarch also, was carried with the general fame,
though he knew the contrary to be true: what may we expect from others, though
very numerous, yet, with Gassendus, not of equal credit and authority, as
Plutarch; according to that judgment which he made before of him? But now look
upon Plutarch, and we shall see (for he was too learned and diligent, that we
should think it a mistake) what conscience this man made, of lying for
Epicurus. Among other books that Plutarch did write against Epicurus, one is
(...): that is, That in following Epicurus and his doctrine, (though pleasure,
the only thing that he did seek) a man cannot live with pleasure. This to
prove, he does use many arguments, and does allege diverse passages out of
Epicurus his own writings. All this while, nothing, as doubting, or following
the common opinion, but very positively and peremptorily. At last, two or three
parts of the book already spent, still pursuing his purpose, that according to
Epicurus, men cannot live with pleasure; he proceeds to another proof, or
argument, which is this: Epicurus did believe, that from a good report, or
name, ((...)) some pleasure was to be reaped. Himself, as Plutarch out of his
own writings does prove; a vainglorious man, if ever man was, and covetous of
praise and reputation. But so it is, says Plutarch, that (...), etc. that
Atheism, voluptuousness, etc. which things all men, (I desire the Reader to
observe) but they that profess it, ascribe to that Sect, are things generally
odious, and infamous, in the highest degree; whence it must of necessity
follow, that from this consideration also, Epicurus does not go the right way
to pleasure. This to make yet stronger, and to prevent all subterfuges or
evasions, Plutarch, as from one of them, does answer: O but these things are
laid to our charge wrongfully: (the basest of the world generally, would be
accounted honest, if they knew how) what is that to the purpose, replieth
Plutarch, whether true or no? The question is not now, whether deservedly, or
undeservedly; whether truly or falsely; but what reputation, ((...)) you have in
the world. For who does not see, that if a man, (which was proved before of
Epicurus, and his adherents) place happiness, or part of happiness, in a good
name; and become, whether justly or unjustly, infamous; he does thereby
undoubtedly lose some part of his happiness. Therefore says Plutarch, arguing
from their own suppositions and opinions; (...): reputation, and not truth, or
true desert, is the thing we here enquire into. And indeed had Plutarch upon
this their answer, gone about, by good proofs and evidences (which elsewhere he
does plentifully) to make good, that what was laid to their charge, Atheism,
etc. was very true, and real, as it was generally believed; he had, in that,
wronged his cause, and made an unseasonable digression; since, it was nothing
at all to the question proposed, what man Epicurus had been really, or what his
followers were, or had been; but what fame ((...)) they had in the world. And
could Gassendus, grounding upon the ambiguity of the word (...), and concealing
the occasion, and the coherence, (a notorious kind of juggling, and
falsification) could Gassendus, I say, from these words infer that, as
Plutarch's acknowledgment, that what he had written of Epicurus, was all in
compliance to opinion, ((...)) and not according to truth? Or did not Gassendus
more probably rely so much upon the favor of the times, and those that did set
him on work, that he thought any argument that had but any slender appearance
of truth or probability; if but favoring Atheism, and sensuality, would pass
currently enough, and get him fame and good will, to boot?

BUT we have not done. Plutarch in the same book, a little before, does mention
that famous Letter (mentioned by so many) of Epicurus, when upon his deathbed:
by which he makes himself a notable stout man, who in such extremities of
bodily pains, (as he does express) could enjoy himself with such peace and
tranquillity of mind. In which peace and tranquillity to preserve him, that
which, by his own words and acknowledgment, as set out by Plutarch, did most
conduce; was, (...): that is, the remembrance of those (according to the
propriety of the words, fleshly) pleasures, he had formerly enjoyed. This
Plutarch thinks very strange, and almost incredible: (wicked varlet! as though
he intended with his last blood, to seal the truth of his abominable doctrine)
But here Gassendus does insult: At hic Plutarchus, etc. But Plutarch, to the
end that he might more effectually traduce Epicurus, has depraved and changed
the words, etc. who can excuse Plutarch, if guilty of so great a crime: or
Gassendus, if it prove an arrant falsehood, and calumny? The question is,
whether Epicurus wrote, (...), as before exhibited, and translated: or (...)
that is, The remembrance of our former discourses and reasonings: as exhibited
by Diog. Laertius, and translated by Cicero, II. De sinibus; memoria rationum
inventorumque nostrorum. And this, Gassendus thinks is enough (himself, I
doubt, did not think so: he had read Cicero better than so) to prove Plutarch a
falsary. I must acknowledge, that Cicero's translation is a great evidence, for
that reading, exhibited by Laertius. But had Gassendus looked further into
Cicero, or rather ingenuously told us, all that he knew, Vna eademque manus,
vulnus opemque: he would have told us, that as the reading exhibited by
Laertius, is found in Cicero; so, that exhibited by Plutarch, in the same
Cicero, more than once, I am sure; as particularly, V. Tuscul. Sed una se dicit
recordatione acquiescere praeteritarum voluptatum: and again in the same book,
from whence that other reading is produced, more punctually, and emphatically;
sed vobis (speaking to men of that Sect) voluptatum perceptarum recordatio
beatam vitam facit, and quidem corpore (according to the proper signification
of the word, (...)) perceptarum. And this enough, I think, to acquit Plutarch
from all suspicion of any falsification: what can be said for G^ssendus, to
acquit him of false and injurious dealing, except this, that it was for so good
an end, as to promote Atheism or Epicurism, I profess I know not. Well, it must
needs be, that either in Cicero's time both those readings were in the Text of
that Letter, (which may be thought the more probable, because C^cero in the
same book, or place, takes notice of both) or, that there were two different
Copies of that one L^tter, and that Cicero made use of either reading, as he
saw occasion. This is certain: to which I will add, as to me not improbable,
though I will not affirm it, that some of Epicurus his friends, or disciples,
when that letter came first abroad, being much ashamed of those words,
exhibited by Plutarch, did make that alteration, of the reading exhibited by
Laertius: which probably, that reading I mean, never came to Plutarch his
knowledge. But see the force of conscience, sometimes, let a man resolve
against it never so much. After Gassendus had charged Plutarch with two such
foul crimes, the one, of conforming himself to the opinions of the vulgar, to
take away an honest and worthy man's good name, against his own conscience: the
other, of adulterating writings, of purpose, that he might have some ground to
calumniate: (what could be said more, of the arrantest rogue of the world) yet
at last, a sudden qualm takes him; (Ne Plutarchum accusare videar) lest I may
be thought to accuse Plutarch, says he, and so does end: whether pricked in
his conscience, because he knew he had accused him falsely, as I rather believe:
or ashamed of his own inconstancy, that he had commended one so highly, whom
afterward he had charged with the greatest baseness and dishonesty, that can
be laid to any man's charge; for either, or for both, let the Reader judge: but
a fit man (observe we that, by the way) to make a Saint, of a rogue; that could
make a rogue (to serve his turn) of such an incomparable person, according to
his own testimony, in the beginning of the Chapters. And as he has dealt with
Plutarch, in this, just so, in effect, by false glosses and interpretations,
does he deal with Galen, in the next Chapter. Galen, no Stoic, but a true
lover of virtue and sound reason; and upon that score, a mortal enemy of
Epicurus his phrensies, and lewd doctrine: and let me add, one, (and so
Plutarch, and Cicero) who was better able to judge, what was falsely adscribed
to Epicurus, what not; than a hundred such, as Diogenes Laertius ever was.

WELL, but was not Epicurus however, a valiant man, who in such pains, as he
was then in, could write so courageously, as in this, and in some other
Epistles of his, written at the same time, he does? I answer briefly: It is no
wonder at all, that a very wicked man, should die in his wickedness, very
resolute and undauntted. There be many examples in all Histories: and some
reasons might be given, were it our business here, why it is so. But secondly,
we are not bound to believe whatsoever he says of himself, that he was in such
pain, when he wrote those Letters; whom we know to have been a most vain,
self-conceited wretch, as covetous of praise, as ever man was; so far as may be
learned by his own writings. A vanity (such is the force of it in some men) for
which men have endured great torments, wilfully; and have undergone strange
deaths. I could say more, but this is more than I needed. But I may not omit,
that this Letter of Epicurus is mentioned by Seneca also, more than once: as
particularly, Epist. 9^. which I think Gassendus would not have omitted, had he
been pleased with Seneca's words and judgment about it. For Seneca there, as a
Stoic, arguing that bodily pleasure, or ind^lency, was not a thing
considerable at all, to true virtue: These things may seem incredible, says
he: but is it not as much incredible, that any man in extremity of bodily pain,
should say, I am happy. And yet this v^ry word (or speech) has been heard in
the shop or wardrobe (officina) of pleasure. I am at my last and happiest day,
says Epicurus, when on the one side, great difficulty of making of water, on
the other, the uncurable dolor of an ulcerated belly, did t^rment him. How
then should these things we have said, seem incredible to them, that apply
themselves to the study and practice of virtue; when even among them, who are
lead altogether by pleasure, they are found? Even those degenerate, low (or,
base) minded men, cay say, we see, that a wise man in greatest pains, greatest
miseries, can be happy. And is not this incredible, yea much more incredible,
than any thing we have said of true virtue? But I cannot conceive, how true
virtue being once cast down from its true height, or eminency, (of being able,
of it self, to make men happy, without the accessories of fortune, bodily
pleasure, etc.) can keep it self from sinking to the very bottom: (of scorn and
contempt) So Seneca of Epicurus, and his doctrine, in that place. What,
elsewhere, somewhat shall be said of that too, by and by.

I HAVE done with my Chapter, and if any be so much at leisure, to follow this
example, in all the rest; I durst promise them, if judicious, and diligent, no
worse success in all the rest. But it may be, though I chose this, as the most
considerable Chapter, yet some will think St. Gregory Nazianzen his authority
much more considerable, even in this, than Plutarch's; whose testimony, and his
only, of all the Fathers, or Ecclesiastical writers, as I remember; Gassendus
does produce to prove Epicurus his innocence, and chaste life: De vita, etc.
lib. 7. cap. 4. Quem merito, says he, innumerae obloquentium turbae
praeferendum censeas. Well, be it so. What says this godly Father? The sum
is: (it is in Verse) that Epicurus did maintain pleasure to be the chiefest
good of man; but lest he should be understood to speak this of base bodily
pleasure (so Gassendus his translation: but the words rather imply; lest he
should be thought to commend pleasure unto others, because of the pleasure
himself had taken; or because himself had indulged unto pleasure: which makes a
very different sense; for it does not acquit Epicurus, of making bodily
pleasure the end or happiness of man; but this only, that himself for bare such
pleasures, of purpose, to acquire the more authority to his doctrine) himself
lived (it is falsely printed, (...) in my book, for (...)) chast^ly and soberly,
helping his doctrine by his practice. So Nazianzen. And this may seem somewhat.
But had Gassendus dealt ingenuously with his Reader, besides the true sense
which he has concealed; he would have told him, that Nazianzen in that piece,
and place, does profess to relate, (...), things that were ordinarily reported
of ancient Philosophers, not engaging himself for the truth. He says indeed,
(...): that is, That he would not deny them, or be incredulous; for that it is
possible to find examples of temperance and sobriety, even among Heathens. That
he must be understood tenderly, not of perfect belief, does clearly appear even
by the examples which he does relate. For after Epicurus, the next he does
mention, is, Polemon, of whom, among other things, he does relate (from public
fame, as all the rest) that a public whore, being sent for by a young gallant;
as she was come to the door, by the sight only of Polemon's picture, was turned
back. Nazianzen does call it, (...), a wonder, or miracle; which I think we may
read, and suspend our belief, without any breach of that respect, which we owe
to that holy Father. But Gassendus might have told us withal, what the same
Nazianzen, elsewhere, not in Verse, but in Prose, does object unto the same
Epicurus; (...), Atheism: (...), his Atoms: that is, the denying of a
Providence: and (...), the commendation, if not pursuit (which is more likely)
of a voluptuous life, (or pleasure) unworthy the name (or profession) of a
Philosopher: Naz. Orat. 33.

BY this may appear, how Gassendus may be trusted, in this cause. Yet we deny
not, but Epicurus, what ever his life was, has many fine sayings, which might
make Seneca to judge, at least, to speak the more favorably of his life; and
the rather, because it was, in part, his own case. I have a better opinion of
Seneca, than to compare him with such a lend man. Yet it cannot be denied, that
he also gave too much occasion to the world to upbraid him, that he did not
live, as he spoke, and taught others. Which troubled him not a little, as may
appear by that passionate Apology that he makes for himself, and all
Philosophers in general, to whom the same was objected, in some of his books.
Yet for all that, though some men can distinguish between doing, and saying;
who may be more scandalized, where they observe such contrariety between
speeches and actions, than edified; yet generally it has always been the
propriety of the multitude, to be led more by words, than by deeds; by
appearance, than reality: which made that grave Historian, Polybius, to
pronounce the generality of men, much inferior to bruits, in point of forecast
and judgment. And to this, we may ascribe factions, and rebellions, and
schisms, and almost all the evils, by which the public peace and tranquillity
of either Church or Estates is disturbed, and infested. And so in Epicurus his
case: Atque his (fine sentences of Epicurus, and his Mates) capiuntur imperiti;
and propter hujusmodi sententias istorum hominum est multitudo: Cicero's true
judgment, and observation in a place.

NEITHER is it impossible, or improbable, that Epicurus and others of his
company, either by fits, through mere mutability of mind, which is observed, of
many: or of certain deliberation and purpose, after great debauches and
surfeitings of pleasures; did betake themselves to more than ordinary
temperance, and frugality, for awhile: not out of any love to virtue, which he
does absolutely deny in his writings, to have any real being, or existence; but
that they might return to their wallowing, more fresh and vigorous: and (as
before said) that they might hold out the longer. So that, as his writings
(observed by some Ancients) were full of contradictions, so might Epicurus his
life be; and thence proceed that variety of judgments concerning it, which
Gassendus, but very partially, has set out. To this purpose Lactantius his
words De Div. Inst. lib. 3. c. 17. having first proved the effect of them, by
sundry particulars of Epicurus his doctrine, are very pertinent: Hic homo
aestutus, ex variis diversisque moribus, circulum colligit, and dum studet
placere omnibus, majore discordia secum ipse pugnavit, quam inter se universi:
that is, Epicurus, being crafty, out of several and different manners, or
dispositions of men, he did gather unto himself (the Congregational way, as I
take it) a number, or company; and whilst he does endeavor to please all men,
he did dissent from himself, no less, or more, than his promiscuous company did
from one another.

THERE is a Letter of one of his whores, yet extant, which does set out his
abominable leachery, and jealousy withal, even in his old age. What says
Gassendus to that? That certainly, if Laertius had seen it, he would have said
of that also, that it was a counterfeit Letter. So, he takes it for granted,
that whatsoever Laertius the Epicuraean, has said, or might have said, as he
does surmise, to defend Epicurus, must be true: and indeed, deny him that, and
all his book does come to nothing. But to do him no wrong; he says moreover,
that that whore was dead, before Epicurus died. What is this to the purpose?
Might not she write, as she does of him, and yet die before him? But she makes
Epicurus eighty years old when she wrote; and he was not so old, (true, or not,
I do not enquire at this time: I need not) when he died. As though it were not
ordinary, in such exprobrations of unnatural lust, to make a man somewhat
elder, than naturally, and in exactness of computation, he is? But the style of
the Letter is affected, and studied. The more likely, to be hers. For she was
Epicurus, not his whore only, (one of them) but also disciple; and mentioned by
others, as a piece of a Philosopher. Let any man read it: it is a pretty long
Letter. If he find so much affectation in the whole Letter, as may be found in
three or four lines of Epicurus, acknowledged to be his; I must acknowledge,
that my judgment in such things, is very small. However, this Letter, though
acknowledged for a true Letter, by two learned men, who have written upon
Diogenes Laertius; yet, were it the worst thing that can be objected to
Epicurus, I should not speak of him, with so much confidence, as I do; because
I do not remember any thing of it in Cicero, nor any other Ancient; which to
me, is a greater argument to suspect it, than any thing that Gassendus does
object against it. But though I remember nothing of this particular Letter, in
any ancient Author; however, he that shall read what Plutarch (that
incomparable man, as Gassendus does style him) out of Epicurus his own books,
does record of ways devised and commended by Epicurus, to prolong and maintain
lust and leachery (that is, happiness, in their sense) in old age, when nature
is spent; he will either believe, this Letter, probably, a true Letter; or that
they, that made that strumpet of Epicurus as she does, did Epicurus no great
wrong. Plut. (...). etc. as before: not very far from the beginning: Edit. Gr.
in 8. page 2008.

BUT that which, in my judgment, is, beyond all exaggeration of words, wicked
and impious, is, that not content to clear Epicurus (so well as he could) from
the imputation of an Atheist; he does endeavor to make him a very religious
man; yea so religious, as I doubt few Christians, were it true, as it is most
false, can be compared unto him. For, says he, ordinary men serve God, either
for fear, or for a reward, which is a servile worship. But Epicurus did not
fear God; that is, believe that God could, or would do him any hurt; nor yet
expect any reward at his hands: if therefore he did nevertheless honor, and
worship God, merely for the excellency of his nature; (as he would have us to
believe) it does follow, that his service did proceed from mere filial love and
affection, which is the truest and noblest worship. But before we speak of the
impiety, let us observe a little, the absurdity and incongruity of this
assertion. Was not Epicurus the man, who peremptorily maintained, that a wise
man loved no body, but himself; did nothing, but for his own sake, his own
profit, and interest? What more frequent than that, in his writings? Insomuch,
that he would not allow of any love or friendship, between man and man, but
such as was, (...), as Laertius has it; that is, such as is grounded upon mere
profit and utility. How probable then, nay possible, that he should love God,
for his bare conceited excellency; who professed to love nothing, and so taught
others, but for his profit? He that loves not his brother, whom he has seen,
how should he love God, whom he has not seen? He that could not believe, that
God could be so good, as to take any care of men, because men could not do any
thing for God, by way of requital: (witness Lucretius, that perfect Epicuraean,
and such an admirer of his doctrine; Quid enim immortalibus atque beatis,
Gratia nostra queat largirier emolumenti, Vt tantum nostra causa gerere
aggrediantur) could he be so good and ingenuous himself, as to honor, love,
and serve God for nothing? This therefore was a great oversight, in a learned
man; a great soloecism, as I may call it, or incongruity. And whereas he does
quote some words of Seneca, and is very proud of them, (and well he might, in
so uncouth, hidious, and paradoxical an opinion) as though Seneca had been of
the same opinion; let the whole passage be read, and if the contrary do not
appear, that what Seneca says of Epicurus his piety or voluntary worship, he
speaks it ironically, in derision both of his God, and his pretended worship; I
shall acknowledge my self very much deceived: who not only think so of the
place, but am also very confident, that Gassendus thought no otherwise of it
himself, whatever he was willing his well-affected Reader to the cause should
think of it. But, absurdity, be it so or no, I make nothing of that, in
comparison of the impiety. For besides many pregnant testimonies of the Old
Testament, where, among other things, we shall find, that, that which does not
profit, is the periphrasis of an Idol; (and so Epicurus his God, not a God, but
an Idol upon that account) how shall we excuse St. Paul, who every where,
almost, lays it for a ground of his exhortations to Godliness and Piety;
that, Religion is profitable? For therefore we both labor and suffer, etc. For
as much as you know, that your labor is not in vain; and, for the hope that is
laid up for you in Heaven, etc. and, looking for the blessed hope, etc. and,
the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls: and, for he had a respect
unto the recompense of the reward. And yet more positively: He that comes to
God, must believe, that he is; and that he is a rewarder, etc. and how Christ
himself? What does it profit, etc. for your reward is great in Heaven: and the
like. And what is it, that the Deists, as they call themselves; such Deists as
Epicurus was; who pretend that they believe a God, and that they worship him,
not for any fear, or hope of reward, which they exclaim against, as servile
worship; (witness their wicked Catechism in Verse, set out, and refuted by
Mersenius) but for his goodness, (in that he suffers men to live as they will,
and do what they will, and takes no notice) and for the excellency of his
nature: what is it, I say, that they more uphold themselves with, or entice
others more effectually by, than this wicked and abominable; but, to weak
carnal men, very plausible plea and pretense?

THAT Gassendus himself was an Atheist, really, I would be loath to say; I hope
not. He has written against some of Epicurus his opinions. But in discharge of
my duty to God, and religion, I shall say, and my conscience does oblige me;
that had he had the advice of all the Atheists that ever were: had he advised
with Hell it self, he could not have lighted upon a more destructive way, to
all religion and piety; to all goodness and virtue, than this, of Epicurus his
filial fear, or love of God. For what inference will carnal men, (in such an
age, as this, especially) will, or can make of it, but this? that they may
believe, as Epicurus believed; no God, I will not say, (though it be true
enough) but, no providence, no conscience, no difference of good or evil, (in
nature) of what is just, or what is not: I might add, and live as Epicurus
lived; but I will only say, believe as Epicurus believed; and yet flatter and
comfort themselves, that they are religious, nay more religious than many, nay
most Christians, accounted religious, are? Was there ever a more wicked and
pernicious device? The Reader will excuse me, if in all this discourse, I have
dealt with Gassendus somewhat roundly, more than I would have done with a man
of his learning, and whom I believe to have been a civil man; besides a
particular respect I have to him, for laying open the vanity and falsity of Des
Carts, and his Philosophy, some part of it at least: which I think was a very
good work, and may prove very useful, when once that malignant humor of
innovating, which does now so greatly prevail, will wax more cold and remiss. I
wish he had not had so much of that (...), in him, as Galen calls it, (...),
which I believe was the chief thing, that did put him upon this Unchristian
project, of magnifying Epicurus. Wherein, how much he went against his
conscience, we need not appeal to God, who is the only (...): any man may
quickly find it by his book, who shall but look into it: any man I say, that
has not, according to the current of the times, more affection for Epicurus,
than the truth. But what if any man shall reply for Gassendus, that all this
may be, and yet Gassendus not so much in fault; who does in the same book
openly profess, that whatsoever he had said, or should say for Epicurus, was
but, Exercitationis gratia? Absit alia mente id praestem, quam exercitationis
gratia: his own words: that is* God forbid I should do it to any other
intention, but by way of exercise, or exercitation only. And why not as f^ee
for him, to praise Epicurus, as others have done ^he quartan Ague, the Gou^, an
Ass, a Louse, and th^^ Monster of men, as described by Homer, (...)? Had he
rested there, it had been better and more justi^^able. Upon the same grounds,
for ought I know, a man (though I should not commend it) might write the
pr^is^^ of the Devil. For many things might be spoken, o^ the excell^ncy of his
nature, as he is a Spirit, a good Spirit, by his first creation: then, his
improvement, by his experience, since that time: his wonderf^^ (...) and
projects, from time to time, to bring himself into credit among men: and if a
man would say, th^^o^^ of his love to men, he tempted our first Parents, (...)
might be the occasion of a further good unto them, in (...), and by Christ; and
therefore to be honored, and worshipped by men: were it but for the conceit,
(and in very deed, somewhat I think to that purpose has been said by some
ancient Heretics) and novelty of the opinion, there would be some, I make no
question, but would embrace it. But Gassendus goes on, and when he comes to
that, as indeed he was bound, or he had had no thanks; that he did it bona
fide, though ready to recant, when better informed; yet, this bona fide does
spoil all. But whatever himself thought, or knew; what amends can he make to
such, who (some, good Christians, I make no question, and learned enough,
perchance, to have found out his juggling, had they but suspected him) upon his
credit, without any farther disquisition, have espoused his cause, and think it
no disparagement to Christianity, (if Christians indeed) to speak with honor,
and respect of that monster of men, and spiteful enemy of God, and all
Godliness.

I HAVE been somewhat long upon this subject of Epicurus: somewhat longer
perchance, than some would have wished. But I shall not apologize. I have not
forgotten that Credulity and Incredulity, in Civil affairs, which does include
the judgments, as well as actions of men, is my subject. And truly, of all
things of that nature this age has produced; this of Epicurus seems to me, and
I believe to many others, the most prodigious, and incredible. Not, that any
one man, for some particular end, or merely to show his wit, (which I know has
been done by more than one) should attempt such a thing: but that so many,
professing Christianity, should entertain the attempt with so ready an assent,
and applause: an argument to me, with many others, of the inclination of the
age. God avert the event.

SINCE this written, I bethought my self, that Gassendus happily, in those
large Comments and Animadversions upon Epicurus his Philosophy, (if we may so
call it, which deserves better to be called, dotage and madness) set out some
years after, in three Tomes; might retract some of those notorious mistakes, if
any man can think them so. I have searched, but I find, that instead of
retracting, he does repeat, and endeavor to confirm: and that, especially, by
the addition of two testimonies, which I shall take notice of. The first of St.
Jeromes, out of his second book against Jovinian, Chap. 8. where he does say,
with this Preface, Quod mirandum sit, a thing to be wondered at, because
assertor voluptatis; an assertor, or patron of pleasure, (bodily, certainly,
else it had been no wonder) that Epicurus did fill his bocks with the
commendations of a spare diet. That Epicurus did it, all the wonder is, that
the man should be so inconstant to himself, if in so doing, he does make any
mention of virtue, or seems to have any regard unto it, it being sure enough,
that in this, he does but abuse the credulity of his Readers. But if he commend
a sober life in general, and highly extol it, before a riotous and lewd: this
he might well enough, without any repugnancy to his doctrine, in placing the
happiness of man, in bodily pleasures. Though the practice of it, a rare thing,
in men of that profession; yet the commendation of it, might as well become a
professed Epicuraean, as any other. Besides, it should be considered, that St.
Jerome his purpose, there, being to collect out of all profane Authors,
whatsoever he had read in any of them, tending to the commendation of a spare
diet; which he does very copiously, as a very learned man, and excellently
versed in all ancient Authors; any man may see, that he does relate many
things, as in such a case is ordinary; which it is not probable, that he
believed, or did expect his Readers should, (I could instance in many
particulars) but only to serve his present subject, upon a supposition
nevertheless, that many things, though not so probable, yet might be true; the
truth whereof he does not stand to examine, which every Reader, as he should
find himself concerned, might do, better at leisure. Not therefore to add any
credit to Epicurus, but more forcibly to shame them, that lived riotously, or
discommend a spare diet, or spoke slightly of it; is that passage of Epicurus
produced by St. Jerome. And let me add, that Gassendus does make that
quotation, by adding some of St. Jerome's words to it, as may easily appear,
somewhat longer, than in it self it is, or can well be: but I make no great
matter of it.

HIS other long quotation, is out of Porphyrius his excellent book ((...)) of
abstinence, etc. Porphyrius, a Magician, it is well known; and as great an
enemy to Christianity, as ever it had any: yet Porphyrius, of abstinence, etc.
an excellent book, as I think ever was written of that argument. I wish we had
the old translation of it more common, than it is; out of which many corrupt
places in the Author, might be corrected, at least, understood. Well,
Porphyrius in that book, just as St. Jerome upon the same occasion, and to the
same purpose: A wonder, says he, that even they that make pleasure to be the
end, the Epicuraeans; even they, etc. It is a long passage, and it will appear,
if well examined, that here also Gassendus does ascribe somewhat to the
Epicuraeans, which does in Porphyrius his Text, belong unto them. And which is
worse, so unlucky shall I say, or so bold, is Gassendus, (such confidence he
had in himself, when he saw how currently every thing did pass, that he had
written in that wicked cause) that he does deprave as excellent a passage, in
the Text of that long quotation, as any is extant in any Heathen writer; I will
not say, because it has too much Christianity; nor yet can I say, because it
is very obscure; but truly, (as he does in Epicurus his life, many) through
unadvised rashness, and temerity. The Author there does say, very piously, if
sincerely, whoever he was, that we should not first provide for the world, (and
he gives an excellent reason for it, afterward) and then make Philosophy.
((...) the very word used by Christ, upon the same occasion, if the Greek be
authentic, (...)) an addition, or an accessory: (according to that of the
Poet: O Cives, Cives, quaerenda pecunia primo est; Virtus post nummos) but
first provide (by good instruction, I suppose, and Philosophy) for a generous
confidence, (in God) and then content our selves with what every day does
afford. This, Gassendus, by correcting (or corrupting rather) the (...) (which
is in the Gospel also, or the effect of it: well expressed in the English: But
seek ye first, etc.) into (...), turns it quite into another sense. I shall not
proceed to any further examination. But if any body will make it his business,
he will, without much trouble, find matter enough.

CIVIL affairs and actions, the proper object of Credulity and Incredulity,
which we propose to our selves in this Part, come to be known to us, either by
our own experience, or by the relation of others; private, as Friends and
Travelers, or public, as the Historians of present, or past ages. Our aim is,
by some instances and observations, (it is an ordinary thing for men to forget
their Text; this often repetition, may help to prevent it) to direct them that
may want such help, in point of Credulity and Incredulity. Wherein, our first
observation, for a caution to some, how they take upon them to judge, before
they be thoroughly versed in the world, shall be that old saying with little
alteration, appliable to many occasions: Homine imperito nunquam quicquam
injustius: Qui nisi quod ipse fecit, nihil rectum putat* we say, Qui nisi quod
ipse credit (or vidit, if you will) nihil verum putat. It is a sad thing, to
converse with men, who neither by their own experience, nor by the relation of
others, Historians and Travelers, are acquainted with the world. How they will
stare, and startle at things, as impossible and incredible, which they that are
better acquainted with it, know to be very true, or judge, by what they have
known in like cases, to be very possible and credible. It were great wisdom in
such, who are so happy as to know their defects, though they suspend their
belief, yet to be very wary, how they contradict, or oppose; and as much wisdom
in men, that are better acquainted with the world, when they meet with such, to
be very sparing of their stories, which have any thing of strangeness; nor yet
to be very peremptory, or forward to contest, lest that, besides the offense,
that unseasonable pertinaciousness may give, they wrong their own reputation,
and be accounted liars, or wonder-mongers, though unjustly. Others there be,
who because they have seen somewhat themselves, or are not altogether
unacquainted with Histories, or the travels of others; ground upon that
somewhat, so much, that they will not believe, or acknowledge to be true,
whatsoever is beyond their knowledge, or hearsay: when God knows, a man had
need to be almost as old as the Devil, before he can take upon him to know, or
peremptorily to determine, what the world does afford. Though not born, yet I
have lived a long time in England, a very small portion of the world, for
extent of ground: sometimes in one place, sometimes (but necessitated partly by
the late troubles) in another: always studious to observe, or to learn from
others, what every place afforded, worthy the knowledge; besides what might be
learned by printed books, without much pains. Yet to this day, I think my self
but a stranger in it, daily meeting with many things, that I never heard of
before. But I have often admired at the confidence of some Travelers, who if
they have been but six months abroad, (it may be, less) say France, or Italy,
they think and talk of it, as though they knew it as perfectly, as the Country,
or Parish, where they were born, and bred a great part of their life. Nay, some
be so simple and ignorant, that whatsoever they have observed in an Inn, or
single house, as they passed by; they will tell you confidently, that so and
so, such is the fashion in France or Italy; when it may be, that they that have
lived in either Country all their lives long, never met or heard of any such
thing. Does not every Country, as England particularly, consist of several
Shires and Provinces or Counties; and has not every County, their particular
rites and customs, not only different, but even contrary? He therefore that
shall ascribe the particular customs of any one County, as Yorkshire, or
Devonshire, to England in general; does he not expose himself to the just
censure and indignation of those, that shall believe him, when they shall come
to know their error, and make themselves ridiculous to others, that have better
knowledge of the Country? Hence proceed variety of reports and relations, even
in printed books, which may be true perchance, of such a place, at such a time,
particularly; but generally, for want of wit and more experience, delivered,
are most false, and happily, ridiculous. In a great fight, ordinarily, men
think their relations very creditable, that can say, if honest civil men; they
were at it. Whereas it is very possible, (and I have known such a thing, in my
time more than once) that one man, of the same fight shall report a flight, and
the other (both, present and actors) a victory, and both truly enough; but not
so wisely, because what they have seen in one part of the Army, they rashly, or
ignorantly apply unto the whole: and perchance call that a victory, (so, for
the time, perchance) which before the day be over, may be the occasion of a
total rout. It is the observation of learned Cambden: Ita in pugnarum ratione,
qui rebus gerendis adfuerunt, etc. Englished by Bishop Carleton: Thus it is in
Bateel, they who are present, and actors, report not always the same thing,
each reporting what himself observed. This is very appliable to the relations
of Travelers, concerning the same places, or Countries. A man therefore had
need to consider well, (if truth be his end, and aim) whom he does believe in
such things, or how he speaks himself, upon the credit of others; honest men,
perchance, ^^d such as have no intention to deceive; but, of what judgment,
what experience, yea, and moderation; that also must be taken into
consideration, or we may miss our end. I add moderation, because some men,
naturally passionate, are so swayed by their interest, whether of profit or
mere affection; that they think they speak truth sometimes, when they speak
that, which to others, of the same judgment, as to the cause, but without
passion; does appear notoriously false. These things observed, many seeming
contradictions in Histories may be reconciled, and we the better prepared, when
we read or hear strange things, to judge and discern, what, upon grounds of
probability, we may believe, and what not. I rather say so, than what credible
or incredible: because (as in the First Part has been declared) I allow not of
many things, besides what is against the faith, as absolutely incredible,
because what is really impossible, is beyond our skill, absolutely to determine.

WHAT may be required of an Historian, in general, to deserve credit, many have
treated of it. Of late writers, among others, that offer now themselves to my
remembrance; Bodinus in his Methodus Historiae, (a book well deserving to be
read) and by Melchior Canus, sufficiently known, in his Common Places, are two.
But I have nothing to do with History, or Historians here in general, but only
as they relate strange things, which in their own nature may be thought, by
some, incredible. Of which nature, every man knows, Herodotus, the Greek
Historian, (so much admired, for the sweetness of his style, and the ancientest
Historian now extant) in the judgment of many, to be. Insomuch, that of all
Historians, whereof any account is made, he has got the name, of a fabulous
writer. Indeed, he had not the luck to write of things of his own time, or
Country, for the most part, as Thucydides did: except it be, in the last books:
and what is worse, not of things, which many others, now extant, have written
of: so that most things must be believed, upon his credit, if we see cause; or
may be rejected, as fabulous, or incredible, if we think fit, because not
confirmed by any other. But they do him great wrong, that ascribe all that he
tells of that nature, generally accounted fabulous, or incredible, as though he
were the Author, or inventer of such things; or did deliver them unto us, for
things which himself believed, or did expect that others should. For, for the
first, there is no probability, that he, who to satisfy himself of the truth
of those things, which he had heard, would take such pains, to travel into
Egypt, yea all Egypt, in person, with so much diligence, as himself tells us
in many places; and not Egypt only, but some other more remote places, as
Syria, Palestina, and the like, would make so bad use of his travels, (though
some have done it, I must confess, Thovetus, of late, for one) as to abuse his
Readers with stories of his own devising, when his own travels could furnish
him with such admirable relations, whereof no question could be then made, or
now can, rationally; whereof more afterward. And that he did not deliver most
of those other strange things, as things that he did himself, or would have
others, absolutely to believe; himself does profess so often, and sometimes
does openly testify his own disbelief, that none can lay that to his charge,
but they, that have not read him. Now, if St. Jerome was in the right, when he
determined, (more than once, if Melchior Canus, does him no wrong) that, Lex
verae historiae est, etc. One Law of a true Historian, is, to write those
things that are generally believed, though not really true: in this Herodotus
has not offended, as, in those very words almost, or equivalent, he does
express himself: so that St. Jerome (whether in the wrong or right) may not
improbably be thought, to have taken it out of Herodotus. In matters of Oracles
and Predictions, I must confess, he is very copious; so that they, who do not
know what the condition of those times was, may think many of his relations,
more like the dreams and fancies of some doting old women, than the reports of
a sober Historian. But those were the Enthusiastic times, as Plutarch, and
others call them; when not only public States, but even private persons,
sensible of any religion, in all actions almost, of any consequence, were
governed by Oracles and Divinations, more, than by any humane judgment or
direction: which though subject to much imposture, whereof Herodotus does give
diverse instances; yet, generally, thought and approved so beneficial, that the
most grave and sober, as Plutarch for one, long after that humor of men (or
power of darkness, shall I say) was well over, did acknowledge, that the State
of Greece was much advanced, or advantaged by them: as elsewhere has been more
particularly declared.

NOW, before I come to any particular instances of his strange, and generally
accounted fabulous relations; I must not conceal, that a very learned man, by
whose labors the commonweal of learning has been benefited as much, as by
any's, that I know, has written a book, entitled, Apology, pour Herodote: to
prove, that no actions of men, mentioned by Herodotus, are so strange and
incredible; but have been equalled, if not exceeded, by some of later times.
But it does appear too plain, that under this title, his only aim was, to
inveigh against some men, who indeed have given too much occasion, it cannot be
denied; but, against them, whether more, or less deserving it; not, to justify
or vindicate Herodotus, which the accumulation of so many strange tales,
whereof a great part grounded upon bare report, he knew, well enough, could not
do. Some other title therefore, might have become that book better; or indeed
that book, another man better, than him, that had been the Author of so many
noble and serious achievements, for the benefit of learning. Now before I look
upon Herodotus as the most considerable Historian we have, (both for his
antiquity, and for that conformity of sundry relations and customs, with those
of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, observed by some, in part, but in part
only, that I know of) I will take some of his strangest stories into
consideration; for the truth whereof, after such a revolution of ages, though I
cannot, no rational man will expect, that I should undertake: yet if we obtain
so much, that they are not incredible; it may not only dispose many to think
better of that Noble Historian, than they have done; but also make them more
wary, how they pass their judgments hereafter, in the like cases.

ONE of the first strange relations in Herodotus, (himself calls it a miracle)
is the story of Anion, the Musician, his deliverance; who, when forced by
covetous Mariners, to cast himself into the Sea, was saved by a Dolphin, who,
delighted with his music, offered himself, and carried him upon his back, to
land. Few Children, I think, but have heard of it, at some time or other; but
not many men, that think of it otherwise, than of a mere fable. Which if
granted, yet Herodotus is in no fault, who tells us, without interposing of his
own judgment, what was then said, when he lived, and averred for truth, by the
people of two several Towns, Corinthus and Lesbos. Had he omitted it, he had
been too blame certainly; and, since Herodotus, no Chronologer, (I think, or
few) have omitted it. Neither was it then a relation of the old times, as we
may say, and out of memory; such, as without good attestation of some, that
lived at the same time, or shortly after, may rationally be suspected, even for
the antiquity: but, as yet, of fresh memory, when Herodotus lived: 100. or say
200. years, because Chronologers do not precisely agree in their computation,
was the utmost interval of time. But what ever any other may think of it, there
is so much to be said, if not for the truth, yet probability of it; that I must
suspect their ignorance, or condemn their incredulity, that peremptorily
censure it as fabulous. But, this I mean, of the substance of the story, that
such a man, Arion, a Musi^ian, was saved by a Dolphin, who carried him upon his
back to land. Besides others, that are not so well attested; Pliny the elder,
in his Natural History, has two stories; the one of Au^ustus his time, (not
far from his own, who wrote in Vespasian the Father, his reign) of a Schoolboy,
who grew so familiar with a Dolphin, and the Dolphin so much at his command,
that no Horse can be more to any Master by Land, than he was to this Boy, by
Sea; and this for many years, in the sight of all the Country; which makes the
matter indubitable. At last, it so fell out, that the Boy fell sick, and died.
After which the Dolphin also, after he had several times showed himself about
the sho^e, as he was wont, and no Boy appeared, ^e also for very grief, as all
men thought, died, and was no more seen. Pliny does name three eminent men, who
had written the story at large, in Augustus his time, when the thing happened.
And besides them, Appion, or Apion rather, surnamed Grammaticus, (but I know
not why, except we take the word in a very general sense: for he deals
altogether in History, for which he got the name of Polyhistor, also) who also
lived about the same time, or soon after, under Tiberius, did write it: whose
testimony, besides some others to the same purpose; and very words, are to be
found in Aulus Gellius; who also has the relation of Arion, out of Herodotus,
at large. Where perchance some body, not much versed in the Latin tongue; as
once by some ignorant Monks, learned Erasmus was charged, he had turned the
Gospel into a fable, for using the word fabula, or confabulari in his
translation; may stumble at the word fabula, which by best Latin Authors, is
often used for a true story. I think it will be granted, no man can reasonably
doubt of a thing, so very well attested: But if any do, Pliny, his second
story, if he be not set upon contradiction, will certainly satisfy him. For I
think, next to ocular evidence, nothing can be more certain. It is a story of
his own time, ( intra hos annos) of another Boy, in Africo littore, Hipponis
Diarryti: (for there was two Hippo's, in Africa: Hippo Regius, or R^gia; which
St. Augustine was Bishop of; and Hippo Palustris, or (...), as Pliny himself,
elsewhere, does teach) who using to swim with others in the Lake, or
aestuarium, subject to Tides, and very convenient for that purpose; a Dolphin,
after some wooing by caresses and gesticulat^ons, such as nature afforded him;
got his good opinion and will; so that he durst venture himself upon his back,
in the Lake; and out of the Lake, into the main; and out of it, back again, as
far as the shore, yea, and beyond the shore. For, as if they had strived, who
should show more confidence, the Dolphin would follow his beloved, even to the
land, and suffer himself to be touched, and caressed, by others also, men and
boys, that had the confidence; so long as he was able, which was not long, to
subsist upon dry land. And this lasted not days or months only, but years: one
year, at least, as I gather, though not expressed, by the tenor of the story.
Insomuch, as the noise of this miracle (as generally apprehended) being spread
far and near; there was daily a great concourse of all kind of people, from all
places. The Governor of the place under the Romans, moved, or struck with a
kind of religious horror, at the sight; and among so many Gods, they worshipped
in those days, apprehending, probably, some kind of Deity in that Dolphin,
attempted to do him divine honor, according to the religion then in use, by
pouring some kind of odoriferous confection, or ointment upon him; which the
poor Dolphin annoyed with the scent, and otherwise too, probably: ( Sopitus,
Pliny says, if he do not mean it metaphorically) resented as an injury, or
affront, and absented himself, per aliquot menses, says Pliny. But at last,
appeared again, and by degrees, became as loving, and familiar, as before. This
lasted till the inhabitants round about, to whom the miracle was now no
miracle, by reason of its frequency; overcharged with the frequency of guests,
which flocked thither from all parts, to be spectators of this strange sight,
to them that had never seen it before; cruelly, but secretly, conspired against
him, and (what will not men do, to save their money) killed him. I have this
from Pliny, the elder, the Author of the Natural History: but confirmed and
enlarged with sundry particulars, by Pliny the Second, ( Epist. lib. 9. ep.
33.) who makes no mention at all of his Uncle, but had it from others, of whose
fidelity, in the relation, he bids us, as he was himself, to be confident. And
indeed, what we may believe, besides what we have seen, with our own eyes; if
we believe not this, I do not know, Pausanias, who lived under Marcus Aurelius,
the Roman Emperor, and has written that excellent book, of the Monuments and
Antiquities of Greece, remaining in his time; does profess, that himself saw a
Dolphin, in Perosoline, (the true name was Pordoseline: but, for modesty sake,
made Peroseline) a little Island by Lesbos; who for some kindness he had
received of a boy, did wait upon him, so far as by nature possible, and would
carry him upon his back, whither soever the boy did direct him. Aelianus, who
lived a little before, writes of another, that was bred and brought up (as a
Fish could be) by a poor woman, with her son; whom afterward he loved
entirely, and rewarded both him, carrying him upon his back, whither he would,
and his Nurse, the mother, plentifully, by his services, when he was bigger. He
also names the same Island, but that he names it Pleroseline: whether he
intended it of the same Dolphin, I know not. It is very possible the same thing
might be acted, by more than one Dolphin, in more than one place; one Dolphin
taking example of another. And I remember, in that accurate relation of Pliny
the Second; it is observed, that with that miraculous Dolphin, the subject of
the story; always another accompanied, who certainly was pleased with the
sight; but accompanied only, and did no more, durst not perchance, fearing the
others jealousy. To these that offered themselves unto me, more like stories,
of other ages and places, might be added, I make no question: but the two first
are very sufficient, in my judgment, to ground a confidence of the truth,
without seeking any further.

NOW, because it is my business here, to help such as may want help, in such
disquisitions; it will be worth our hearing, what is objected by some, against
the truth of this story. Which yet to make more probable, before I come to
objections, I must not omit, besides what was before intimated, that all, or
most Chronologers, both ancient and late, whom I have seen; among others, St.
Jerome, out of Eusebius, take notice of it, without any opposition to the truth
of it: that the memory of it, as of a true story, was preserved by a brass
Statue; by a temple; and by an inscription noting the time, or Olympiad; and
that in Aelianus, besides the Epigram or Inscription of the Statue, we have a
fine Hymn, said to be composed by Arion himself, as a monument of his
miraculous deliverance, and thankfulness to God, for it: all this besides
instances of the like.

BUT what says learned Natalis Comes, in his Mythology, to this of Arion? Quae
quod fabulosu sint, nemini obscurum est: That all is fabulous, all men, he
thinks, must believe. Why so? Nam quae de Delphinis dixerunt antiqui, etc. that
is, For what some Ancients have written of some Dolphins, as if some men had
been saved by them, I accounted it mere dreams. For the nature of animals (or
beasts) is always the same; and from that time to this, though the number of
men, that have perished in the Seas, is infinite; we do not hear of any, that
have been preserved by Dolphins. Here is first a great and gross mistake, (it
would be so in a Philosopher) in the word nature or natural. It is natural to
men to speak, to read, to write, to learn arts, etc. that is, Men are naturally
capable of such things, if they be taught: for without some teaching, none of
these things will be learned; not so much as speaking, though it be done
unsensibly, as it were; yet not learned without long study. And though some
other creatures, as Parrots, and the like, may seem capable of that, and not
men only; yet their speaking, is not a true speaking, because it does not
proceed from any (...), or inward reasoning, which does engender outward
speech. Some things men are naturally capable of, as men; as the Sciences,
which yet some men can never attain unto, though they be taught, by reason of
some accidental defect. But for more clearness, because it is to our purpose,
to instance in somewhat that has more affinity: There is no man, I think,
where Dogs are, but are acquainted, more or less, with their nature, and
conditions. Of all creatures, generally, they love and know their masters best:
this is common to them all, more or less, to be loving naturally. But what if I
should tell a story of one, or more Dogs, that loved their masters so well,
that they would needs die with them? Would it be a good argument, that it must
be a fable, because all Dogs do it not? Lipsius has one, of a Dog of his own
house, that loved his mistress so well, that when she died, and he saw her
dead, run into the Garden, dug himself a hole, and there ended, soon after,
his life: Haec, tota familia nostra test, sunt gesta. He does appeal to all
his family, who were present, and saw it, for the truth of it. Scaliger has
another in his Exercitations against Cardan, every whit as strange. What if I
should tell of Dogs, that have pursued the murderers of their Masters, so
constantly, so vigorously, that notice being taken publicly, it came at last,
by order of justice, to a duel, or combat, wherein the murderers being overcome
by the Dogs, they confessed the crime? We have the story of one in Scaliger;
and out of Scaliger, in Lipsius: the History of another, out of St. Ambrose,
Giraldus Cambrensis in his Itinerary, does transcribe. So he professes. But if
faithfully, then the Editions we have of St. Ambrose, (that which I have not at
this time, I am sure) are defective. For the latter part, (of the Duel) is
there wanting. And indeed the story seems to me but imperfect, as it ends
there: no sense, I think, can be made of the words, to bring the relation to an
end; without which it is not probable that St. Ambrose would have left it. But,
if for, persecutus, as printed in my Ambrose, set out by Erasmus at Bazil, Anno
Dom. 1567. we read it, as I find it in an old Manuscript I have, perpessus;
some end may be made of it, though not so full, or so clear, as in Giraldus. I
wish I were in better case, were it but for St. Ambrose's sake, to look into
it. For I shrewdly suspect, because I have known it done in many books, long
ago; that some, who were scandalized at the story, as absurd, or impossible;
(as many things, through mere ignorance, to the prejudice of truth, are often
suspected) did cut off St. Ambrose his relation, with those words of their own
devising, Itaque quod erat difficilius, ultionem persecutus est, (so printed,
but perpessus, certainly, as in my Manuscript, to make any sense of it) quia
defensionem praestare non potuit: which words are not in Giraldus. I hope, (if
not already done, though unknown to me) some body will take the pains, who is
better able than I am, at this time, or ever like to be.

HOW many more strange things, from good Authors, or certain experience, even
of our times, might be added; which if a man should deny, because all Dogs do
not so, or not one of a thousand, or a million, or scarce one in an age; how
ridiculous were it? I remember when I lived in Sussex, I heard of one Dog
there; of another, when in Sommerset, but in another kind, from persons of
credit: I make no question of the truth: which nevertheless I might live fifty
years longer, and not hear the like. Great pity it is, that no memory is kept
of such rare accidents, whereof, besides the improvement of the knowledge of
nature, good use might be made upon several occasions. Did we understand the
nature of Dolphins perfectly, we might give a reason, probably, how some come
to do so, and so, sometimes; and how suitable it is to their nature; and yet
how, through the defect of some one circumstance, or more, in themselves, or
the party they would pitch upon; or some circumstance of time, they come to do
it no oftener, though much oftener, I believe, than is generally known; or, for
want of good records, remembered. But upon Boys, all stories do agree, that they
commonly pitch upon such; and that they are (some of the kind at least) great
lovers of music. Which does make well for Arion's case.

THIS objection therefore, that it is not natural to Dolphins, because all
Dolphins do it not, or that we read of very few, who have done, or reported to
have done the like, rejected as invalid and weak; in Arion's case, I should
rather object, how a Boy or Man could sit a Dolphin, I will not say, playing
upon an instrument: (for there is no need of that) but sit him, or ride him for
a considerable time, through so many waves, and not be washed off, or drowned.
To me, it does seem very strange, to another, it may be, not so much. But if we
suppose the Sea, as some Seas are known to be, ordinarily; or at some times of
the year, very still and calm; then there is no further question, as to this.
And indeed Pliny tells us of one of these Dolphin-riders, who being surprised
by a tempest, was drowned: which the Dolphin (but I warrant it no further, to
the Reader, than he shall like his authority) apprehending himself the cause
of, did end his life upon the Land, for grief. Another question would be, how a
Boy can sit a Dolphin without danger; and whether a Dolphin be naturally shaped
for that use. Pliny indeed does express, in the relation of his first story,
that the Dolphin had the providence, p^nnae aculeos velut vagina condere; and
Apion writing of the same, (...): and Aelianus tells the story of another such
Boy, who riding a Dolphin, did unadvisedly run his belly against the thorns, or
prickles of his back-fin, whereof he died, and the Dolphin after him, for
grief. Had I ever seen a Dolphin, I could judge better; or had I, at this time,
either Gesnerus, or Rondeletius; or could any where, so far from all Libraries,
that I can call Libraries, but mine own, (and that a sorrowful one too, at this
time: a remnant of a Library, rather than Library) come to the sight of either.
I have the pictures of Dolphins, in some books: but they do not satisfy me.

I FIND in the books of a very learned man, which I have, out of Rondeletius,
that a Dolphin has no prickles in his back; who thereupon does infer, that
therefore Apion did impose, and might as well, in the whole story, as in that
particular. But that is somewhat a hard judgment, by his favor. I believe
Rondeletius, that they have none, ordinarily. But as the Camels of some
Countries, differ from the Camels of others, by the number of their bunches, as
Pliny, and some others tell us; and so many other creatures, of one Climat, or
Country, or of different perchance, but of one kind, by some notable
difference; some have horns, some not, and the like: why may not we believe, as
possible, at least, that there may be a kind of Dolphins, more rare, and seldom
seen, who have such prickles? Possible also, that those, (that kind, I mean)
are the Dolphins, most subject to this kind of love. Not, that I would have any
body to ground any truth, upon bare conjectures: but because I think such
objections, against certain experience, to be of little validity. Neither is
Apion the man, that we trust too: I know what the judgment of many Ancients was
of him. Yet, though Apion might make bold in his relations concerning Egypt,
and other remoter places; it is hard to believe, that Apion, who was well known
to Tiberius, Augustus his immediate successor, durst write a story of Augustus
his time, for a truth, (whereof, if a truth indeed, many thousands must have
been witnesses) which was fabulous, and either invented by himself, or lightly
believed by him, upon the report of some idle people. Add, that Augustus his
time, was not a time of ignorance, such as have been seen before, and since
him: but a time, C^m humana ingenia ad summam solertiam perdu^ta essent, as
Seneca, I think, does some where speak, of those times: When humane wit, and
ratiocination was come to its height, such a height, both for Po^ts, and
Orators, and Artists, I am sure, as has not been known since. Which is the
credit of Christianism, that it prevailed at such a time; not as Mahometism, in
times and places of greatest darkness and ignorance, and is still maintained
with the same, and the power of arms. What the ignorance, and want of good
learning, that these times do threaten, may bring, God knows. However, though
Apion had never written concerning that Dolphin, in Augustus his time, diverse
others did, men of credit, whose books were extant in Pliny's time: and had
that Dolphin never been, yet that other in Pliny's time, so attested by him,
and by his Nephew, that other Pliny; a man of such learning, such authority,
and dignity, as he was, (yea and integrity, abundantly approved to Christians,
by that relation he made, of the Christians of his time) had been enough with
me, with the consideration of all circumstances, which he does relate at large,
had been enough with me, I say, to make me believe it as certainly, as if I had
seen it with mine eyes. No reason therefore, that any question should be made
of the truth of a story so well attested, because of that one circumstance of
the prickles, on Dolphins backs, in case it be a mistake. Which yet perhaps, if
a mistake, may prove the mistake of Rondeletius, and not of Apion. For Solinus,
where he writes of Dolphins, does attest, that those prickles do not appear,
but when they do, through anger, or some other extraordinary occasion,
inhorrescere, and that at other times they are hid.

BUT after all this, Lipsius his caveat, who was no very superstitious man, it
is well known, though being set upon it by others, he did write in defense of
some superstitious miracles: (an argument rather: but I will say no more, for
the respect I bear to his memory) his caveat, I say, will not do amiss; who
having told somewhat, very strange, of a Mountebanks Dog, (I could say much
more of Mountebanks Dogs, and Horses, which I partly know to be true) he adds,
Desino, and vereor ad genium eum, qui profecto potuit hic misceri: that is, But
here I stop, (or end) as fearing that from Dogs, I shall be forced to go (or
fly, for a reason; that is) to the Devil: (he did not mean an Angel, I suppose)
who in this might have a hand, or, mix himself. It is sure enough, that as
there be magical Hares, whereof we have spoken in the First Part: so magical
Dogs also, and other creatures, actuated by another Soul or Spirit, than their
own, (irrational, and sensitive only) whereof none are able to judge rightly,
but they that are well versed (no light study) in the contemplation, or
experience of use and custom: as in our First Part has been declared. However,
this caveat though not unseasonable upon such an occasion; yet no man, I think,
will have, or can have any just ground of suspicion, that it does concern us,
in this case of Dolphins, and their love to Boys: which, as I conceive, must be
referred to their nature, or natural disposition; Natalis Comes his reasonings
against it notwithstanding. But if we take genius, in a more general sense, for
another kind of Spirits, that are neither Devils nor Angels; I cannot tell what
to say to it. The same Pliny, but now commended, has a strange example, which
we have mentioned in another place, our Preface, to Dr. Dees's Revelations, (or
Illusions rather) as I remember. As for their love to Music, I think it very
probable, by those relations that are extant: but of that, we have no like
certainty, as of their love to Boys, and mankind in general. The same (their
love to Music) is reported of diverse other creatures besides, but I have no
certainty.

BEFORE we end this point, somewhat might be added, of that famous American
Fish, or Monster, called Monati; one whereof, a young one was bred and brought
up by one of their petty Kings, in his Court, and grew to a vast bigness: very
kind, and serviceable he was, to all that craved his help, but to Christians,
or Europaeans, (whom, probably, he might distinguish by their voice, and habit,
not by their faith) of whom he had received an affront. This Fish they write,
has carried at once upon his back, no less than ten men; who in the mean time,
sung and made merry, with all possible security. This perchance, in some men's
judgment, may add somewhat of probability to Arions case, and to those other
relations, that have been mentioned upon it: which, in my judgment, needs no
further confirmation. The History of this American Fish (mention, at least) is
in all that have written of the discoveries of those Countries: Peter Martyr, I
am sure, a very sufficient witness, were there no other.

I THOUGHT I had done: but I have not; I shall make some use of their relations
concerning this Fish, as not doubting at all of the truth; to confirm somewhat
in the relations of the Ancients concerning Dolphins, which has occasioned
some wonder, but more mistakes. They write that some Dolphins did seem to
rejoice at the name Simon. I believe it, because ordinarily then so called; and
when once used to the name, what wonder, when tame and frolic, if they seemed
to know their name, and to rejoice at it? And the same thing we find attested
of that American Fish, we now speak of, which was brought up in the King's
Court. The common name of the Fish, we said before, is, Manati: but they had
given to this, a proper name, Matum: that is, in their language, noble or
gener^us* and the Fish knew his name so well, that had any (whose voice he
knew, especially) but called at the River side, Matum, Matum: he would
presently hold up his head, and offer himself. But if any write, that Dolphins
generally, loved to be called by the name Simon, more than by any other, as
Pliny does intimate; this is but to say, that there is somewhat in the sound of
that word, that does better please them, than any other ordinary sound: which
is not impossible. The truth is, Pliny does seem to say much more, as if
Dolphins loved the name Simon, because so agreeable to their nature: being
called, Simones, a simis naribus, that is, from their flat nose: such, both in
Latin and Greek, being usually called, Simones. This ridiculous conceit I find
Pliny charged with, by a very learned man, who therefore well objecteth; Sed
quis credat, etc. But who can believe that Fishes should understand, either
Greek or Latin? Nay, they must be pretty good Grammarians too, to know the
Etymology of the name, that therefore called, Simones, a simis naribus, from
their flat noses. Can any man believe, that Pliny was so stupid, as to believe
any such thing himself; or so careless of his credit and reputation, as
wilfully to expose himself to the scorn and derision of his Readers? Yet this
Salmasius also does pass over, as though Pliny had really believed it. Ita
appellari gaudere quod simi sint, dicit. Pliny's words, as ordinarily printed,
are, Dorsum iis repandum, rostrum simum. Qua de causa, nomen simonis omnes miro
modo agnoscunt, maluntque ita appellari. It cannot be denied, that from those
words, scarce any other sense can be made. But whether ever Pliny did write so,
a thing so horrible and so prodigious, that he that believes, may as well
believe all Aesops Fables, to be true stories; deserved, I think, before we
charged him with it, to be taken into some consideration. For besides Pliny, if
Pliny, I do not find any Ancient, that does write any such thing, but only that
they delight in the name Simon: and Solinus, who ordinarily does transcribe
Pliny, says no such thing, but only this; Certum habent vocabulum; quo
accepto, vocantes sequntur: Nam proprie, Simones nominantur. And Aelian who
has written a whole Chapter, to prove that Dolphins have some understanding,
he has no such thing. What then? I am very confident, that what Pliny wrote,
was, or is; Dorsum iis repandum, rostrum simum, qua de causa, nomen Simonis:
quod omnes miro modo agnoscunt, maluntque ita appellari. So, Pliny says no
more, than what others say, and may very well, as before showed, be very true.
I never affected to be a Critic: my profession found me work enough, and would
yet, had I many more years to live, and had my health. If I affected any thing
besides, it is, to understand nature, to which I ever had a great inclination.
Yet this I could show, by hundreds of instances, that both Divinity and
Philosophy* and all kind of learning, has suffered much, for want of true
Critics. But, rara avis: that age must be a happy age, that produces two or
three, that truly deserve that name. The labor is great: but if there be not
somewhat more of nature in it, than labor; the more labor, the more danger.

THOUGH Cardan with me, be of no great authority, for reasons before expressed:
yet he was a learned man, and I would do an enemy right, if he came in my way,
as soon as to a friend. For in that case, he becomes my neighbor, and I bound
by the laws of Christianity, to look upon him, as a friend. The same learned
man (whom I did not name before, nor shall now; but a very learned man, and my
good friend, when he lived) I thought he did Pliny some wrong, because, if he
had better considered of it, he might have found, that that sense, and
therefore those words, could not be his, which he did ascribe unto him; but
unto Cardan, he does much more, adscribing that sense unto him, which his words
will not bear. Having said of Pliny, that he believed Dolphins understood
humane language; a prodigious opinion: Fidem tamen habuit Cardanus; he adds,
Yet Cardan did believe it; and then produces a passage of his, out of his VII.
De varietate, cap. 37. Delphines simonis quodam consueto nomine gaudent, etc.
It is a long passage, but not one word in the whole passage to that purpose,
for which it is alleged. Cardan does give, or endeavor to give a reason, why
Dolphins, according to the tradition of Ancients, delight in the name Simon,
more than any other. The first Dolphins, or former Dolphins, having been used
to that name, says he, and, (through the force of use and custom) delighted in
it: that delight became hereditary to their posterity. This is the sum of
Cardans conjecture, or opinion; if I understand, either Latin or sense. And
there may be more Philosophy in this, than every man will be ready to believe,
or understand. For I have thought sometimes, (I thought I had some reasons for
it) that the very thoughts of Parents, sometimes, are propagated to their
posterity; how much more delights, and passions, or strong affections? If
therefore any Dolphin have been long used to the name Simon, (any other name, I
think, would have done the same) and taken pleasure in it; I think it is very
possible, that another Dolphin, of his brood, (and so others, after) should
naturally affect that name, more than any other. However, there is nothing in
Cardan, in the whole passage alleged, of Dolphins understanding humane
language, either Greek, or Latin, or any other: or any thing tending to that
purpose. So that I must needs say, that great wrong is done him, by that
learned man; who, though a very judicious man; (I will say so of him, though he
has in my judgment said more of Cardan elsewhere, to his justification, than I
think, if well weighed, can be made good) yet he was too great a writer, to
digest well every thing that he did write. By these instances, let the Reader
consider, how much it concerns men, younger men especially, who really seek
after truth, not to take things upon trust, without sound examination; nor
rashly to believe, or unbelieve, till they have good ground for either. I have
now done with Herodotus his Arion.

IN the next place we shall take notice of three relations, in Herodotus, which
he thought himself bound, as he often professes, by the law of an Historian,
to take notice of, though he did not believe them, as he does expressly profess
of some of them. We shall but mention them. The first is concerning some people
in the North, which were reported to sleep part of the year, in Caves. This
Herodotus does protest against, as incredible: yet we know it is believed, at
this day, by many, neither fools nor children, as very true; whereof we have
given an account in our First Part. The second is of a people called Neurii,
who are reported once in the year, to turn into Wolves: not into their shape, I
believe, or but in part, at least; but into their conditions and qualities,
absolutely, and very literally. But Herodotus, though affirmed by many with
great asseverations, yea execration, or oaths; he says, did not believe it.
But what shall we say to some of our time, both learned and grave, who write of
it, and commend it unto us, for a truth? So does Gasper Peucerus, a learned
Physician, I am sure, whom we have spoken of in our First Part: who describes
the manner and the time: and a very learned man, once Prebend of this Church,
(who, though dead many years, yet lives in his learned Son, one of the Prebends
of this Church likewise) in a book of his, inscribed Vates; seems to ascribe
much faith to Peucerus. Delrio the Jesuit, in his laborious Disquisitiones
Magicae, writing of the same thing, does absolutely determine it, that the
Devil cannot, really, change substances or forms; to whom I willingly
subscribe: but that he may so qualify the bodies, even of men, as that they
shall produce the same effects, as if they were Wolves, or Lions, or the like:
and transform, or transfigure rather, the bodies into the shapes, or
appearances of such brutes. And it is St. Augustin's determination also, De
Civitate Dei, lib. 18. cap. 18. Delrio does quote Herodotus; and with
Herodotus, Cambden: Et hodie ex vulgi opinione, quidam Hiberniti, in altera
part Hiberniae.

THE third relation of Herodotus, is, of a certain people, whom he does call
acephali, that is, headless, because their heads and eyes are in their breasts,
or upper parts of their breasts. I take no notice of the other reading in
Herodotus, (...), because not acknowledged by diverse ancient Manuscripts*
though both Pliny, and Aulus Gellius, and St. Augustine, and some others,
mention them also among the strange Nations of the North. Whether any such
people or no, as these acephali, Herodotus does not affirm, nor deny; but
delivers it upon the report of the Country, in the description of Lybia. If I
be not mistaken, Munsterus in his Cosmography, some where, (for I have not the
book, at this time) does deliver it for a truth. Sir Walter Rawleigh, I am
sure, in his reports concerning Guiana, set out in Latin, with Notes, at
Norimberg, Anno Dom. 1599. by Levinus Hulsius, with diverse Maps and brass-Cuts;
does deliver it for a truth. St. Augustine also, does mention such, as from
others; and from some public pictures, very artificially carved, in Carthage,
when he lived there. And that such a child was born in Misnia, in the year of
our Lord, 1554. is recorded by Fincelius, De miraculis nostri temporis; though
indeed I do not find in the picture, either nose or mouth, but eyes only. But
that might be the oversight of the Painter, or Carver, rather.

IN all these three particulars, till further confirmation, as I do my self, so
should I advise others, that know no more than I do, to suspend their belief.
Though truly, I must acknowledge, this, no small inducement to yield assent,
because such a belief, or tradition, has been in so many ages; where there is
no ground of suspicion, that they have taken it one from another, (a strong
objection against the Phoenix, and some other miracles of antiquity) as, for
example, that they that believed, or carved the acephali, to be seen in Saint
Augustine's time, had it from Herodotus, who speaks of it so doubtfully; nor
they that made report to Henry the Third, King of France, before spoken of,
concerning the sleepers, ever had it from the said Herodotus, who does protest
against it, as incredible: or lastly, that they that persuaded Peuceres of
late, or St. Augustine long before, that there were such transmutations of Men
into Wolves, before spoken of, for a certain time, did ground it, at all upon
Herodotus his relation, or testimony; or perchance ever so much as heard of the
name: and as little, I believe, upon St. Augustins. However, all this is not of
force with me, to engage me to a belief upon grounds of reason, as I conceive.
But to censure them that believe it, so they leave others, to the liberty of
their own judgment; I should not do that neither, because there is so much to
be said, to make it not improbable.

I HAD somewhat of Oracles before, in the relation of which, Herodotus may seem
beyond measure curious, if not superstitious. Some reason has been given
before, yet I will not take upon me to acquit him of all superstition: by which
I understand, an excess of that worship, which was in use, where, and when he
lived. But besides the religion, or superstition of the place; he was also not
little infected with the Egyptian superstition, as by many places does appear.
But what shall we think of those strange judgments, he does very particularly
record, against those, that attempted to rob the rich Temple at Delphi; the
chiefest seat of Oracles then known (to Heathens) in the world? This indeed
Herodotus does relate with more than ordinary confidence; and it were strange,
if he could be ignorant of the truth of so memorable a story, which was acted,
(if true) if not when he was a man, yet when born, and of some years. I know
not of any, that does except against it, upon any Historical, or Chronological
account: but against the probability of the story, in general, somewhat may be
objected. Would God do such miracles, to preserve a Heathenish Temple; which he
has not done to preserve his own, at Jerusalem; as in the days of Antiochus,
etc. nor so many Christian Churches, that have been spoiled, and robbed from
time to time, in several Countries? And when more; or, more execrable
profanation of holy things; when very Churches were turned into Stables; then
in these late days, during the reign and rebellion of the Fanatics! Another
man would add perchance, and Presbyterians: but I would hope better things of
them. They have declared against Sacrilege very roundly, many of them: and if
the same men, should not oppose profanation of holy things, being things of the
same nature, as vigorously; they would give men just occasion to believe, that
what they have spoken, or done, against the other, was but for their own
interest, or some other worldly end. But why then does not God show himself, at
all times, as well as then, in Herodotus his time, and many times since? For it
cannot be denied, but that every age will afford some dreadful examples, of
horrible judgments against Sacrilege and profanation of holy things: but that
it is so always, or so visible; especially, upon the actors themselves, we
cannot say. But the greatest objection is, not so much, why not, always; as,
why such indignation, such judgments, for the Temples, and holy things of
idolaters; of Devils; as St. Paul does call them? I would not have any man too
bold, and I dread it my self; to call God to an account, of his judgments
especially, which to men are most inscrutable. And I think, it is the greatest
Sacrilege that can be committed, for any man, who perchance would scorn, that
a child, or a Pesant, should aspire to penetrate into the reasons of his own
counsels; to presume, that he can understand, or should understand the reason
of all God does; and not rather, when it is certain, that God has done it,
adore with humility, what God has done. That such things happened about the
Temple of Delphis, as Herodotus does relate, though very strange; (so they
seemed to Herodotus himself) besides other reasons, I am the more apt to
believe, because as strange things (miraculous, indeed) did happen again about
the same Temple, and what did belong unto it, not long after; when the Galli,
or Gauls of those times, under the command of Brenuus, did attempt to rob it;
which I know not any man, whom at this time I can call to mind, Heathen or
Christian, that ever did question the truth of. Yet I should hardly say, as I
find some do, that God himself was the immediate author of those miracles: So I
hope I may speak with St. Augustine, and the Schoolmen, though I know, that in
some sense, God is the only author of true miracles. S^d quamvis execrandum
idolum Delphis coleretur, etc. But though it was an execrable Idol, that was
worshipped at Delphi, yet being it was worshipped by the Gauls for a God, no
wonder, if, as sacrilegious wretches, they were chastised by the true God, with
strange Thunders, and other prodigious events, (one was, the rending of a hill
at the top, which rouled down upon diverse of them, and oppressed them. See
other particulars, in the late Reverend Archbishop's Chronology, page 479.)
which did dash some of them, and drive the rest away, so that few of them (the
Army consisted of diverse hundred thousands, whereof not a third part escaped)
did escape the punishment, due to either attempted, or executed Sacrilege. So
a learned, and pious Chronologer of our days. But, first I make a question,
whether the God, or Idol, worshipped at Delphi, were really acknowledged by
them (the Gauls I mean) for a God. I rather believe, that they were a
desperate kind of Heathens, that scarce acknowledged any Deity. Aristotle
writes of them, (and upon that account, will not allow them true fortitude,
but brutish stupor only) that they neither feared tempests nor earthquakes: and
some body else, as I remember, that they were wont to brag, all they feared in
the world, was, lest the Sky should fall, and bruise their bodies. To which,
that of the Thraces, recorded by Herodotus, for boldness, and contempt of all
Deity, is not unlike; that when it lightened, or did thunder, they would cast
arrows up, as it were, to Heaven, to threaten God; because, says he, they
would have no other God, but their own, or a God of their own making. Now, that
God should permit the Devil, who can do much more, by his own power, given him
by God, when God does permit, than cause thunder and lightning, and strange
tempests; to use his power, to uphold his own Kingdom, his principal aim, we
doubt it not; but withal, to confound (Gods intention) the insolency of
profane wretches, and to maintain an opinion among men, (the interest of a
Deity, in the opinion of ordinary men, being most concerned, in the vindication
of Sacrilege and profanation) that there is a God; this, I think, cannot be
matter of much wonder, to any sober, intelligent man. But absolutely to say,
that the true God, who in Job's case, life excepted, left the Devil to his own
power; did it, or was the immediate author of those miracles; I do not hold so
safe.

IT may further be objected, that even in those days, 2(for why God now does
not, commonly, show such examples, much may be said to it, upon grounds of
reason, and probability) but even, in those days, God did not punish Sacrilege
always, though committed with the greatest contempt, and insolency, that
impiety, according to the religion of those days, and profanes, could possibly
devise. So Dionysius, the tyrant, the first of the two: who notwithstanding all
his Sacriledges, and impious scoffs, died wealthy, and potent, and upon his
bed; (though reported otherwise by some, but I follow the best Authors) and
left a flourishing Kingdom (if under a tyrant, it may be said of any Kingdom)
to his Son and Heir. This objection is made by Heathens, of those times, but
answered by them, that it is not always the way of Providence, or Divine
Justice, to punish the offenders in their own persons, or presently: but that
the vengeance lighted upon his Son, who of a wealthy potent King, once guarded
with a standing Army of a hundred thousand foot Soldiers, and ten thousand
Horse, besides too, (some write, five hundred) Ships at Sea; became after many
revolutions, a poor wretched School master; yea, plain beggar: the scorn and
contempt of all men, even the most miserable, and so died: not to mention, what
happened to his wife, and two daughters, before he died, which no man can read,
without horror. A good answer, from such. For, of another world, and of a day
of Judgment, the truest answer, no body could expect it from them. This wisdom,
it seems, they learned from long and approved experience: except some of them
had it immediately from the Scriptures, which we know by many testimonies, were
not altogether unknown unto them. And who knows, but those horrible
Sacriledges, and profanations lately committed, in London, especially; where
also the rebellion, by tumults, and seditious Sermons, first began; may not,
through Gods just judgment, have contributed much, to this late dreadful, and,
in some respects, miraculous Fire? But, this of Sacrilege, by the way only, to
give some light to Herodotus his passage, in point of Credulity and
Incredulity, which is our business. For though it might be a seasonable
subject, otherwise, yet it is a subject, that has very lately, so learnedly
and so solidly been handled, by a very learned pious man; that to meddle with
it otherwise, than upon such an occasion; I should think I did, (as the Proverb
goes) falcem, in alienam messem injicere.

HERODOTVS has some strange relations of one or two notable Thieves, which may
deserve to be taken into consideration. For Thieves and Robbers are men, and as
men they may do actions, which deserve, if not commendation, yet admiration,
and so objects of Credulity and Incredulity. Another use may be made, the
better to escape them, or discover them, which sometimes, is hard to do, either
to find them or master them. Witness that noble Claudius, who did so affront
((...), History styles it, A most incredible thin^) Severus, the Roman Emperor,
( both for valor and wisdom, inferior unto none, Dio says) that even then
when greatest care was taken, for his apprehension, durst nevertheless, offer
himself to the Emperor, kiss his hands, talk with him, and then give him the
slip, and after this, keep out of his hands and reach, in despite of all
means, that the Emperor, or those he employed, could use, or devise. And
another in the same Severus his reign, named (...), or (...), (for he had two
names) of whom some particular acts are related, how he came to Rome himself,
delivered some of his followers, when already condemned, (as the manner was) to
be cast unto wild beasts: how he accosted the Captain, or Centurion, that was
sent against him; took him by craft, judged him, shaved his beard, and sent him
back with an errand, which I shall forbear. Generally it was said of him, that
(...) which, I think, I may English more plainly, and not lose much of the
emphasis; That, when he was seen, he could not be ^^und; when he was found, he
could not be taken; when he was taken, he could not be held. But yet he was
taken, ^t last, not by force or policy of men, but by the treachery of a
Concubine; the less to be pitied, that being so wise and wary otherwise, he
would trust himself to such creatures. Some years before the happy (which made
us all happy) restoration of our Gracious Sovereign, (whom God preserve) in a
Booksellers shop; I remember I lighted upon a book, in two Volumes, entitled,
L' Histoire des Larrons, etc. that is, The History of Thieves, in France, from
what time, I know not. I am sorry I did not buy it: it may be, I was not so
well furnished: which at that time, when forced to sell a great part of my
books, could be no discredit. I look upon it, as a very useful subject, the
better to understand the world; and if the same were done of the Thieves of
England, so it were done with judgment and fidelity, which from an ordinary
hand can hardly be expected, I think it would be well worth the labor. Here it
may be observed, that there always has been a kind of men in the world, who
naturally, as I may say, are fitted with a mavelous kind of audacity, to
attempt strange things; and by a strange constellation, or fatality, are
attended with luck, and success; for a long time, at least, in their boldest
attempts, beyond all imagination. The Greeks have many names for such kinds of
men, as (...), and the like; some of which have an intimation of somewhat above
men; and if we should say, beyond what is supernatural, ordinarily known; there
is a more natural kind of possession, not so known; it may be there were no
great error in it. When I lived (some years before our Restoration) with Sir
John Cotton, grandchild to famous Sir Robert, (where, besides that inestimable
Library, known far and near; his noble and learned company, was a daily
comfort) I remember well: I could tell the day and the year, but I forbear:
that, as we were together by the fire, not long before dinner; a well spoken
Gentleman, and though not a professed Scholar, yet well acquainted with good
learning; came to him, and made relation of what had passed at
Westminster Hall, that day, in the cause of a Lady, between her, and her
husband; how, among the witnesses, that were to depose for the Lady, exception
was taken against one; in the prosecution of which business, such things were
there publicly, without any reply, declared against him, that he had done in
England, in France, and elsewhere; as in all my reading I could scarce parallel,
either for the quality of the things, or for the success, and confidence of the
person, that he, that had done such things, durst show himself, in a public
Court.

BUT to return to Herodotus his relations; The first of them (in his second
book) does consist of many parts. The first and second part, the contriving of
a stone in the building, that might be taken away at their pleasure, that knew
the secret, whereby they might have an entrance into a Treasury-house: and the
craft, and courage of the Son, after his Fathers death, (the Author of the
contrivance) when he was fallen into the trap, without any hopes of getting
out; to advise his Brother, and fellow-Thief, to cut off his head, lest he
might be known by it; so far, is credible enough. The third part also not
altogether incredible; by such a device, diverse Towns, some within our memory,
have been taken. But for the fourth, of the prostitution of the Kings daughter,
and the manner, how she was eluded; has too much of improbability, and
somewhat of impossibility, to be believed true, as Herodotus well judged; which
is more than I can say of the fifth, and last; it being very possible, in those
times, and in that place, when, and where, so many brute beasts were worshipped
for the benefit they afforded unto men; very possible, I say, that the King
should apprehend somewhat of a Deity in that man, that could effect such
strange things: his very curiosity, to find the truth of what he so much
admired, might provoke him to do such a thing, more probably, than that the
incomprehensibleness of the Euripus, should be the cause of Aristotle his
death, or the unsolubleness of the Fisher-mens riddle, should of Homers.

ANOTHER relation he has in the same book, of much affinity, concerning
Thieves, who by long and tedious digging under ground, did rob another Kings
Treasury, which we may wonder at, that any should be so confident, or so
resolute, to attempt such a thing, in so much improbability (for it was a long
way, that they were to dig) of success; but have no reason, otherwise, as set
out and explained by Herodotus, to think it incredible. This digging under
ground, puts me in mind of the Gunpowder-plot, such a Plot, as for the horror
and immanity of it, I know not whether any History can parallel. But this has
been sufficiently set out by others, both Papists and Protestants. I have
somewhat to say of it, which to me seems as horrible almost, as the Plot it
self; what it may do unto others, I know not. I was once in the time of the
rebellion, at the table of one, that was very great then, but must not now be
named. There was at the table more than one or two, whether Priests, or
Ministers, rightly ordained, I cannot tell: (for, even of them, some, though
not many, did basely temporize) but by their habit, and some other
circumstances, of that sort of people, that were Preachers, in those days. How
it came to be talked of, I know not; but talked of it was, I am sure, and
confidently affirmed, that there never was any such thing really, as the
Gunpowder Plot, but that it was a Plot of King James his contriving, to endear
himself unto the people. I do not remember that my patience was ever more put
to it, though I never came into such company, (which was not often, nor without
great necessity) but well armed with patience. I did not think such Bedlam talk
was to be answered with words. But wanting power, indignation made me reply so
much; It was strange we should doubt of it, at home, when Papists, yea Jesuists
abroad, had acknowledged it. Yet I deny not, but I have heard more than once,
that King James knew of the Plot long before it was publicly discovered; which
if true, does take away nothing of the horror and wickedness of it; or of our
obligation to God Almighty, for disappointing it, sooner or later. But even so
much, is more than I can find ground for, from any printed relation, or more
private information, (to me considerable) to believe. But such was the
antipathy of those men, to Monarchical Government, and their succesful
rebellion for many years, had so besotted them with a conceit of being the only
favourets of Heaven, that by their good will, no man, no people, must be
believed to have, or to have had any share, or portion of Gods mercies, or good
providence, (which did so eminently appear in that deliverance) but such, as
were, or had been of their own crew. How well such men are like to use that
liberty, which they sue for, when they have it; I submit to their judgment, or
judgments, to whom it does more properly belong.

OUR last subject, before this short digression, was of Thieves, occasioned by
Herodotus his relations; who has had the name among Historians, generally, to
be the relator of incredible things. The subject, it may be, as either too
vulgar or too vile, some may think not so worth the consideration. Though I be
of another opinion, my self; yet that consideration has made me the shorter
upon it. I shall now the more willingly pass to the consideration of somewhat,
that may deserve, I am sure, the attention of the most serious, if they be not
too much of the humor of the times, that is, professed Atheists; or, which is
worse, such, as would seem to acknowledge a Deity, but as Epicurus did, that
they may not want a subject to scoff, and to blaspheam. Herodotus in his second
book, where he treats of matters belonging unto Egypt, of one of the Kings of
Egypt, Sethon by name, he has this relation: First, that the King was a
Priest; so religious, and so confident in his God, or of his God, whom he
served, that he made no reckoning at all of the Soldiers, and Captains, whom
his predecessors had set up, and allowed them liberal maintenance; (...) as not
at all fearing, that he should ever need them. But, how contrary to his
expectation, Senacherib, King of Arabia, and Assyria, comes with a great Army
to invade his Kingdom; and he, forsaken by the military men of his Country, had
recourse unto his God; before whose Statue (prostrate, you may be sure) he did
weep, and lament, and expostulate with his God, what things (without his help)
he was like to suffer. That thereupon, his God appeared unto him in a dream;
bid him not fear to encounter his enemy, he would provide him assistants. In
confidence whereof, that Sethon, without any Soldiers, accompanied only with
Tradesmen, and Artisans, and Court-men, or Lawyers; did go out to meet the
enemy, and came in sight of them the first day, before it was night. Who
certainly (though not expressed by Herodotus) could not but anticipate in his
thoughts with joy, the success, and the fruits of an easy victory. But that
very night, says the Historian, an host of field Mice, did know their Bows and
Bucklers, (their strings, I suppose) and Quivers, (or Arrows in their Quivers)
so that in the morning finding themselves destitute of arms; having lost many,
the rest run away. So far Herodotus: I think no man that has read, in the
Scriptures, both in the book of Kings, and in the Prophet Esaias, the History of
Ezekias, that pious King, not of Egypt, but of the Jews; who being invaded by
the same Senacherib, intended by Herodotus* and Jerusalem the royal City,
hardly besieged; being in great distress, and in no capacity to make
resistance; did both by himself in person, and by the Prophet Esaias, with many
tears and lamentations, address himself to God, in his house, (Herodotus says
(...)) and there spread the threatening letter, before the Lord: upon which God,
in a dream, or vision, (though not expressed) having appeared to his Prophet,
sent him a gracious answer, of many words, but to this effect, that he should
not fear; Senacherib should do him no hurt: And that very night, not Mice, but
the Angel of the Lord, smote in the Camp of the Assyrians, an hundred fourscore
and five thousand: no man, I say, that has read all this in the Scripture, but
at first hearing, will take notice of the affinity, and somewhat wonder at it.
But if he observe more particularly; first, Senacherib, King of Assyria; the
same in Herodotus, and the Scripture, invading: A King and Priest, in
Herodotus; a King and Prophet, in the Scripture: the King, in Herodotus, so
confident in his God, that he thought he should need no Soldiers: Ezekias, in
the Scripture, upbraided of his confidence, by the enemy: Let not thy God, in
whom thou trustest, etc. and publicly declaring it himself, 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8.
Their lamentation, and their application, each to his proper God, almost the
same. The true God in the Scripture, and the supposed God in Herodotus, their
answers, in effect, the same. The event, for the time, the night, the same, and
for the main, a miraculous victory, in effect the same. And I must add, that
for the time, in point of Chronology, what the Scripture does record of
Ezekiah, King of Judah; and Herodotus, of Sethon, King of Egypt, is supposed
by all Chronologers, and Historians whom I have seen, to have happened about one
time: I would ask; Can any man, that has any knowledge of the Heathenish
ancient story, and has observed how usual it is with them, (as in stories that
come by obscure tradition, it must needs) to detort, and adulterate, and
misapply Scripture stories; make any question, but that what Herodotus, by
tradition from the Egyptians, does relate of Sethon* King of Egypt, is
nothing else, but what the Scripture does record of Ezekiah, in that
particular, of Senacheribs invasion, and the event of it? Yet I must confess,
and at the same time profess my wonder, that neither Josephus of old, who takes
notice of Herodotus his relation, where he has the Bibles, concerning Ezekiah:
nor any of our late Chronologers, not Josephus Scaliger, Calvisius, Helvicus,
Capellus, Torniellus, etc. nor the late learned Archbishop, in his Chronology;
nor Hugo Grotius, upon the place, take notice of it, as derived from the Bible.
Yet Vignier, by many accounted the very best and most accurate of late
Chronologers, has some intimation to that purpose, that it is possible the
Egyptians might have the first ground of their story out of the
Scripture-story: and that is all, which to me seems not possible only, but
certain. But indeed Sir Walter Rawleigh, who I hope stands not in need of mine
or any man's testimony, in England; has gone much further, and seems absolutely
to determine it, as I do. And it is very remarkable, that this story of
Ezekiah's miraculous deliverance, is no less than three times related at large,
in the Scripture: (the second of Kings 18.13. Isaiah 36. 2 Chronicles. 32.) so
careful was the Author of it, that the memory of it might be propagated to
posterity. And why should we not make much of this confirmation of it, from the
ancientest of profane Historians? Especially when some Christians have made
bold, as Torniellus does tell us, if not to deny it, yet to speak of it very
doubtfully? Now against Herodotus, if it should be objected by any, that he is
a fabulous writer; though somewhat has already, and much more may be said, to
vindicate his credit; yet in this particular, their needs no answer at all. For
it is confirmation enough, that in those days, when the thing happened, and for a
long time after, the miracle was acknowledged, and the fame of it abroad,
though mistaken, and misrelated in some particulars.

HERODOTVS does add, that to his days, Sethon his Statue was to be seen in the
Temple of Vulcan, holding a Mouse in his hand. Which Mouse might be an ancient
Hieroglyphick, such as are to be seen in that famous Tabula Isiaca, or
Aegyptiaca, which I once had in an entire piece; but is now, I hope, to be seen
in the public Library of the University of Oxford: exhibited in parcels by
Pignorius, with explications. In that Table, strange figures of men, and
monsters, are exhibited, holding all somewhat in their hands; Birds, Flowers,
Cups, and I know not what; all which, to unriddle certainly, (for wild
conjectures and phansies, may be had) would require a better Oedipus, than any
later ages have afforded. And it is very probable, which by the late Reverend
and learned Archbishop of Armagh, is hinted, that those* Egyptians, who
informed Herodotus, as some before had them; took the opportunity of that
Hieroglyphick, the better to countenance their story of that miraculous, if
true, deliverance afforded to their King, by Mice; because of a tradition
current in many places, in those days, that Mice had done some such thing, some
where: mentioned by Aristotle, in his Rhetoricks, and by diverse others, since
him. Whence also they write, that Apollo (the Deliverer) by sending those Mice,
came to be called, (...) because (...), in some Country, did signify a Mouse.
Another reason also, besides this, why Mice were sacred in some Countries, is
given by Aelian, in his twelfth book, De animalibus. Were there no other
considerable story, (there be many more, and some, that have reference to the
Scripture) in Herodotus, but this; yet this one would make me to prize the book
not a little: which has made me the more willing to take notice of it. And so,
of a fable, an incredible thing; as, of a King of Egypt, if not altogether
incredible, yet not very probable; we have brought it to a credible, nay
certain, and sacred story.

I SHALL now proceed to the consideration of those great works of men, which
were to be seen in Herodotus his time, and are very particularly described by
him: which subject, the great work of those ancient times, in general; I have
observed to ordinary men, who know little more, than the things of this age; or
have looked into former times, but perfunctorily, is a principal object of
incredulity. I remember I had a speech of Seneca in my First Part, Homine
imperito, etc. I might English it with little alteration: That man is a silly
man, that knows no more, than the things of his own days, or age. However, they
that are well acquainted with the state and stories, past or present, of China
or America, will not, perchance, have much occasion to wonder much, at any
thing in the Roman or Persian story, or any other, of former times: out of
which nevertheless, I make no question, but we shall produce such things, which
many, when they see the evidences, though they will not know how, or will be
ashamed to oppose; yet will hardly be brought to believe. So much is the world
changed, in these parts at least, best known to us, from what it has been, in
former times. I remember, when I was a young Student in Oxford, I know not by
whose recommendation, it may be, my own Father's; for he had a great opinion of
it, and publicly professed it: but so it is, that I was very busy upon
Apuleius his Apology, for himself: a serious Apology indeed: for it was for his
life, being accused of Magic, before the Governor of the place, and answered
for himself in person. Happy therein: for I think scarce any, then living, for
eloquence, (wherein he is much unlike himself in all his other writings) wit,
and all manner of learning, could have performed it as he did; so that he got
off, more for his excellent parts, than for his innocence, in that particular.
But whilst I was upon that book, both with delight and admiration; I met with
one passage amongst the rest, which I did much stick at. About the end, where
he does endeavor to clear himself of that, which among other particulars was
laid to his charge, that he had bewitched a rich woman, to get her love, and by
her love and marriage, her means; among other things that he does answer for
himself, one is, that though her wealth was great, (for a private woman, of no
power, or dignity) yet the dowry agreed upon, was but small; very small: and
secondly, that wealth was not the thing he looked after, in marrying her, he
does argue, because soon after, he persuaded her to make over a considerable
part of her estate, to her sons: among other particulars, part of her family,
that is, (as the word is usually taken in the Civil Law) part of her slaves and
servants. Now the number that she parted with, there expressed, is, four
hundred: and I could not but think in reason, that she would keep one half at
least, to her self. So that upon that account, this woman, rich indeed, and so
accounted; yet a private woman, and such a one, as Apuleius does maintain, that
had no reason, being somewhat in years, to despise him, a young man, neither
for his person, nor estate, nor endowments of mind, despicable: this woman, I
say, must be mistress of no less than seven, or eight hundred servants. This,
then, to me seemed strange and almost incredible. But afterward, when better
acquainted with the state of the world, at that time, and for many ages before;
I thought nothing of it. The truth is, some thousands of servants and slaves,
in the estate of a wealthy Roman, was no very extraordinary thing. But then we
must add, the multitude of servants, or slaves, was that, which made many rich,
in those days; which they that do not understand, wonder many times, where
there is no cause. But to hear of thousands kept merely for attendance, and
that by private men too, Roman Citizens, and the like, this may seem more
strange and incredible; and yet so well attested, both by writers of several
ages, and by so many evincing circumstances, that how rationally to doubt it, I
know not. I shall content my self with Athaeneus his testimony, in his sixth
book of his Deipnosophists, where with his collocutors, having spoken of the
multitude of servants, that were kept by the Ancients, and what use they made
of them; he makes one of them to reply: Good friend, Massurius, you cannot but
know very well, that the Romans, most of them, were wont to keep very many
servants; many, to the number of ten thousand, some others of twenty thousand,
and more; and these, not as that rich Nicias, the Grecian, for their labor,
and their own profit, but for the most part, for their attendance, in the
public. To this, pregnant passages of Seneca, and Ammianus Marcellinus, and
some others might be added, which I shall forbear, because done by others.
Besides, Pil^nerius, a learned Italian, has written a book of this argument,
De servis, from whom it is likely the Reader may receive what satisfaction he
will desire. It might be well worth the enquiry perchance, of men that are
(...) men and Politicians* how it comes to pass, that in former times, a very
small portion of land, for wealth, power* and all manner of magnificence, yea
and martial exploits; has been more considerable, than whole Kingdoms are now,
or have been these many years. Sicily, for example, but a small Island, in
comparison of England. It may be a rich soil, to this day: I believe it is. But
to keep it self, and to afford those supplies of Corn to other Countries, to
Rome especially, (wherein those days, the greatness of the City, and
populousness considered, more Corn was spent in one day, than is now, in three
or four Cities, the biggest of Europe, take them together: I might have said,
five or six, I believe, and not exceed) to be reputed the Granary of such a
City; (one of Sicilie's titles, in those days) I believe is far above the
present estate, or ability of it. Dionysius the Father, spoken of before, who
was King of but one part of it, kept a standing Army of 100000. foot, and
10000. horse, besides a very considerable Navy. Hieron King of Syracuse, the
second of that name, who lived when Anniball invaded Italy, maintained a
grandeur beyond all imagination. All Towns of Greece, did ring of his bounty
and munificence. He did assist the Romans, and supply, if not uphold them, in
all their wants, plentifully: assisted others, even the Carthaginians, in their
great need, though rather enemies otherwise, than confederates. There were in
that little Island, in Pliny's time, above seventy considerable Towns and
Cities: But whether more or fewer, for the number, there were two, I am sure,
Syracuse, which consisted of four Cities, built at several times; set out by
Tully and some others, eye witnesses, as the mirror of Cities, (of Greece
especially, so well stored at that time) for all manner of sumptuousness and
magnificence: and Agrigentum, when in its flower, not inferior to it; which is
recorded to have had eight hundred thousand inhabitants, at one time; either of
those, I believe, far above the present estate of Sicily. We might observe the
same of diverse other places. But I shall not take upon me now, to enquire into
the reasons. But certain it is, that they that judge of all things, reported of
former times, by what they know, or have heard, since the world, though always
the same, in effect, yet, in many things, that refer to men, and their actions
and fashions, and the Civil government of Countries and Cities; has put on a
new face, much different from what it had in most places; they that do,
certainly, must needs stick at many things, as fabulous, and incredible* which
others think they have reason to believe, as certainly, as what they read in
best Historians of this, or the former age; and which are generally believed,
and pass every where, without any contradiction. Not that I think we are bound,
in reason, to believe whatsoever is written of ancient times, though by some
approved Authors and Historians. There is no question, but they were men, as we
are: favor, and hatred, and proper interest, might sway them too: subject to
the same vanity, to magnify their relations; their habitation, and Country:
what the Graecians call properly, (...), and (...), (a worse vanity) so often
observed by Tacitus; that is, a desire, or pleasure to tell strange things,
might possess them; and whatever else men are now subject unto, they might
also. But when men of good judgment and capacity write of things, which, if not
eyewitnesses of, yet might very well be known unto them: where, not one alone,
but two or three, of several Countries, of whom there is no ground of reason to
believe, that they blindly followed one another; not engaged, so far as can be
found, or discerned, by favor or otherwise, purposely to disguise the truth;
write and attest the same thing: when those things that are written, examined
by other circumstances, and particularities, of that age, or Country, whereof
they write, are found to agree well, and to become probable enough; though, of
themselves, or of another Age, or Country, not so probable, or perchance
incredible: add unto all this, though, all not to be expected always, yet found
sometimes; if the Authors lived in an age, which afforded many sober and
intelligent men; when good learning, and noblest arts, did flourish, which of
many Greek and Roman Historians we know to be true: in such a case, where all
or most of these do concur; I shall as soon believe those things, that are
written by such, though one, or more thousand of years have passed since, as
those things that are written by the most approved Author or Historian of this,
or the former age.

WHO would or could believe, that is not very well acquainted with the state of
the world, in general; and of the Romans particularly, that a Citizen of Rome,
in some office perchance, and in order to a greater; but a Citizen of Rome, in
public sports and sights, to last some days perchance, or some weeks, at most;
should spend as much, as some great King of our time, his revenues may come to,
in a whole year? And proportionably, either the same man, or some other, in
buildings, in apparel, in feastings, or the like: which things singly related,
no wonder, if they be not believed, they do so far exceed modern examples and
abilities. Yet somewhat in that kind was seen in the days of Henry the Eighth,
(whose story is full of glory and magnificence, till he had taken the greatest
part of the Churches goods into his hands) when five hundred Carpenters, as I
remember, for I have not the History by me, and as many Painters, and I know
not how many other workmen, are recorded to have been employed, to build a Tent
or Tabernacle, where he was to entertain the King of France, not many days, if
more than one. The King of France, his Pavilion, all Velvet, might be as costly
perchance, as to the substance; but that the materials might better be
preserved for other uses afterward; whereas the vast cost upon gilding and
painting upon bare boards, could be of no further use, as I conceive. I desire
the Reader not altogether to trust my relation, in this; for I trust my memory,
which in so many years, since I read that History, may deceive me. But what
shall we say, to the temporary Theater of Mar. Scaurus the Roman, who was but
Aedilis, none of the greatest offices in Rome, but indeed greatly allied; of
which Pliny, who was well acquainted with the world; his judgment is, that it
was the costliest, and most magnificent piece of work, that the world (upon
record) ever saw? His description is but short, let the Reader judge. Neither
is it possible he could mistake, I would not say in the valuation; but, in the
description of a thing, so fresh, so notoriously known, whereof the relics,
though they use to continue but for a while, did long remain. But yet I must
confess, the next man Curio, who though upon another occasion, had an ambition
to do some great work, for which he might be admired, though not in matter of
cost, (for he was not of that ability) yet in his main end, to cause
admiration, did in my opinion go beyond him. He made two great Scaffolds or
Theaters, with convenient seats, which hung in the Air, as it were, having no
foundation in the ground, but two single pins, or hinges, upon which, when they
had taken their lading, (which I cannot conceive could be less, than some
hundred thousands of people: Vniversus Pop. Romanus; Pliny says; which must be
understood very favorably, if but of one, or two hundred thousand men) as
either they closed, or continued apart, they were to turn into several forms,
or shapes, either as two distinct Theaters, or, one perfect Amphitheater. As
two distinct Theaters, in the forenoon: inter sese aversa: back to back: so,
that what was done in one Theater, could be heard or seen by them of the other:
different Stage Plays being exhibited in each of them. But in the afternoon,
(so I understand Pliny's, postremo, and, novissimo jam die: except we should
understand it of many days; and that he speaks this, of the last day, which is
not so probable) turning about, ( circumacta, cornibus inter se coeuntibus) and
closing, they made a perfect Amphitheater, wherein, or upon which,
fencing-games ( gladiatores) were exhibited; in common, now, to those, who
before had been distinct, or divided spectators, of different Plays and Actors.
This whole wooden frame, or structure, though it touched no ground, which was
the wonder of it; yet could not, I believe, enclose, or cover, less than a
hundred, or six-score Acres of ground. A man would think, this could not be
done, without some cost: and Pliny says directly, that Curio was no very rich
man; ( non opibus insignis: his wealth consisted most, in plundered and
confiscated goods) that is, for a Roman Citizen of those times: but however,
not without cost, I believe; but in comparison of Scaurus his charge, before;
or that of Agrippas (but not all, in such trifles, and gambols) after
mentioned: not great, we may say with Pliny; who could, and does give an exact
account. And how many thousand Carpenters, do we think, were employed about
this work? But was not he a brave Ingeneer, that undertook such a piece of
work, and acquitted himself so well, that no man in all this winding and
turning, by the miscarrying of any board, plank, or pin, had any hurt? Pliny,
who is very elegant and witty, upon this subject, does profess, he did not know
whom to admire more, the confidence of the projectors, or undertakers, ( Curio
and his prime Carpenter, or Architect) or the madness of the people, who durst
trust their lives to such a loose, groundless, and versatile a device. But, a
rare sight, (says he) to see that people, who were the Governors of the whole
Earth; whom so many Nations and Kingdoms served, and obeyed, to hang upon two
pins, and to turn about (like a Weathercock; but Pliny does not say so; I know
not whether there were any, in his time) upon a pageant. Pliny in the same
place has diverse other things to the same purpose, which it may be some may
more wonder at, than what I have mentioned: besides what the same Author has
elsewhere of the same argument. But they that desire more full satisfaction in
this point of excess, in general, to save themselves the labor, of searching
into ancient Authors; they may, if they please, read Lipsius, De magnitudine
Romana: or Meursius, De Luxu Romano: not to name others.

I COME now to Herodotus again, to me, as considerable an Author, as any I know
of all the Ancients. The first great work I shall take notice of, is the Tower
that stood, as he describes it, in the midst of Belus his Temple, the
cirumference of which Tower, being square, was just eight stadia, that is, a
mile. The height cannot be perfectly known by Herodotus his description, but
only this, that it consisted of eight several stages. St. Jerome certainly, was
much abused by them, pretended eyewitnesses, who reported it, four miles in
height. This Tower stood entire, in Herodotus his time, and he speaks of it
with as much confidence, as if he had seen it, or rather indeed, as if he had
traveled so far, of purpose to see it. Best Historians follow the description
both of the City Babylon, and of the Temple and Tower, which is made by
Herodotus. But, which is more, very learned men do take this Tower described by
Herodotus, to be the Tower of Babel, mentioned in the Scripture. So Pererius, I
am sure, that learned and judicious Jesuit, and so very lately, Samuel
Bochartus, sufficiently known (though, to me once known very familiarly)
without my recommendation. He is very large upon it, and does very accurately
consider the words of Scripture, that might be objected. But I for my part,
though I favor Herodotus, and honor the worth of them I have named; yet I
must profess, I see not ground enough to move me, to be of their opinion. Why
was their language confounded, but to confound that they were about, the
building of a Tower and City? And the Scripture says plainly, they left off to
build the City: and is it likely, they were suffered to finish the Tower, the
more daring and defying work of the two: and not more likely, that in the City,
the Tower also, which it is not likely they would begin with, as less useful or
necessary, must be understood? Some may, with Pererius, suppose, that what was
extant of it in Herodotus his days, was but part of what was intended, by the
first builders. But then a man would think, had they laid a foundation for such
a height, and the work left imperfect; Herodotus, or some after him, had taken
some notice of it: whereas the account we have of the height, then extant, and
to be seen, is rather incredible, than gives any ground of suspicion, of any
imperfection. I should rather think, that the foundation being laid, when the
work began to rise, and to make some show, it was interrupted, and in after
ages (not many ages after I believe) brought to that perfection, in which it
was to be seen in Herodotus his days. Yet again, I must confess, that if the
platform of the top of this Tower was so large, as to contain a large Temple,
or Chapel ((...) are Herodotus his words, which may signify either) it may be
not unlikely, that some further or higher structure was intended, (if not this
very Temple, or Chapel) from the beginning, if the builders had not been
interrupted. So that in the conclusion, I think there may be as much said for
it, as against it, that this Tower of Herodotus, was the very Tower of the
Scripture. Should any man object, the long continuance of it, fourteen hundred
years, as Pererius does cast it, from the first erection; a long time, for so
high a structure; it will be answered, that the Pyramids of Egypt (as great,
or greater a miracle, in my judgment, all things considered, than this Tower
was) have already stood twice as long, and are yet in case, according to the
best account we have of them, to stand some thousand years, if the world last
so long.

AND by the way, let us take notice that the account Herodotus, full two
thousand years ago, has given of these Pyramids, is yet most followed by them,
in our days, that have had the curiosity to view them; and the skill withal, as
able Mathematicians, and Geographers, to examine every circumstance of his
description, with accurateness. We may therefore the better believe him, in the
account he gives of other great works, extant in his days, which himself, not
trusting the relation of others, had the curiosity to view, that he might
satisfy himself, and posterity the better. As first, his account of that
miraculous Labyrinth, which, he says himself, though he judged the Pyramids,
when he first saw them, far to exceed whatever was most admired in Greece, as
the Temples of Ephesus, of Samus, or the like: yet the Labyrinth, he thought,
went beyond even the Pyramids. That Labyrinth, where he saw twelve great Halls,
with a multitude of Pillars, and stone roofs. A thousand five hundred rooms
above ground, he saw; and as many, he was told, and believed, under ground,
answerable to the others: but those he was not admitted to see, as repositories
for the body of the Kings, the founders of the Labyrinth; and some sacred, or
consecrated Crocodiles. Out of the rooms, ((...)) he passed into ((...))
chambers, out of chambers into ((...)) closets, and so into other Halls: so
that he was ravished, he professes, with the sight, above measure. The walls
that enclosed the Labyrinth, were engraven with many figures; and at the end of
the Labyrinth a Pyramid, adorned with variety of Animals. Truly, I make no
question, but there was enough, really, to be seen, to ravish him, or any man,
that had seen it. Yet we must remember, that he was in a Labyrinth, and might
easily lose himself in his reckoning: besides, that his very admiration and
astonishment, might make him less able to observe so diligently, as otherwise
he might have done. And that his leaders and informers, the Egyptian Priests,
who knew the certainty, might of purpose, to make their miracle more
miraculous, (as they did in then years, and some other things) add somewhat, is
very possible. This may be thought, and not improbable: yet we may not conclude
from bare probability, that so it is certainly. Now to say, that after this
Labyrinth, he saw the Lake, called the Lake of Marios, which he yet admired
more, than all he had seen before, as himself does profess, to some may sound
like a fable: it does not so to me: who am very confident, that the description
he makes of it, is very exact, according to the truth of what he saw, with his
own eyes. The same, I may say, of all those other strange things, which either
of Babylon, or any other place, are recorded by Herodotus, as certain and true;
all, or most, attested by some others, and by later Chronologers, not
questioned; though to many, who by what they now see, or is to be seen, judge
only, I doubt incredible.

BUT I may forget my self, and whilst I tell of strange things, that were
once, pass by the miracles of our time, that are now, to be seen. Such is
Coenobium B. Laurencii, or, St. Laurence his Hospital, in Spain, according to
Bertius, a learned Geographer, his description, and testimony. Truly, I should
think so of it, by his description. And for his testimony, the words are very
significant, and express; Opus istud praestantissimis nobilissimsque operibus,
quae vel extant usquam, vel unquam fuerunt, adnumeratur, ab iis, qui cum
judicio spectare nova, iisque vetera confer queunt. This is more than I have
heard of it, by any Travellor; yet not more, than may very well be true. For it
is a true observation of Pliny, both of great wits, and of great works: Alia,
esse clariora; alia, majora. If there be any other such great work of our
times, which I do not mention, it is not, because I dote upon antiquity, but
because I know it not; not my partiality, but my ignorance. Neither am I of
that opinion, that all great, or costly works, deserve truly to be admired, but
such only, as are as profitable, (publicly) as they are great: or such at
least, as for their beauty and magnificence, are so ravishing, that they teach
us withal, less to admire ordinary petty sights, and objects, which vulgar
souls are so taken with. If Aristotle may be heard, (I hope he will, when men
return to sobriety) that is truest magnificence, and deserving highest
commendation, which is bestowed upon the Gods, as in the erection of
magnificent Temples, and the like: not because they need it; but the better to
set out their majesty, unto men: and next unto this, that magnificence, which
is beneficial unto the people. So he. Not to mention the Temple, consisting of
one stone, the roof excepted, which Herodotus does tell us of, not without some
admiration of it: he tells us of a large and miraculous edifice, hewn out of a
rock, consisting of one simple stone; which to transfer from Elephantina, the
native place of it; to Sai, where Amasis, King of Egypt, did appoint it to be
placed, for a rare sight; two thousand expert mariners were employed, for the
space of three years. Herodotus, I confess does tell us of it, as much
admiring: which I profess, of all great works I have read of, I least admire;
except it were at his prodigious vanity and prodigality, who would bestow so
much money, upon so idle a work. As if a man abounding with wealth, would be at
the charge of removing (if it can be done) some great rock, such a rock as
Hooky-rock in Sommersetshire is, consisting of many concamerations; wherein,
when I was there, I observed some things, which I thought, and still think,
might deserve consideration, as well as many things, which make much more
noise: such a rock, I say, to remove it, from whence it stands, to some place,
many miles distant. But I said, if it can be done. Archimedes, I believe, or he
that undertook to cut the great mountain Athos, into the form of a man, which
should have born in one hand a City of 10000. inhabitants; and in the other, a
river, emptying it self into the Sea, if Alexander would have set him on work;
would have undertaken it, and for ought I know, brought it to pass, if any man
would, or could be at the cost. But to what end I pray? Only to show unto the
world, that he can cast away so much money upon nothing, and yet continue rich:
which I shall sooner believe, than either wise, or truly magnificent.

IT is time that I should have done with Herodotus. Yet to end in somewhat that
may be more pleasing, or more considerable, at least, than this last of the
great stone; he has one story, that I neither know how to deny, being a story
of his own time, or little before, and which I do not find contradicted by any
other; nor yet very well how to believe. It is concerning Pythias, the Lydian;
neither King nor Prince, nor any thing else of either power or authority, that
I can find; but only a very rich private man. What authority he had, was over
his slaves and servants, which indeed must be very many? Is it credible, as is
reported of him by Herodotus, that he could be so rich, as to entertain Xerxes,
as he passed by, to invade Greece, and all his Army? In saying, all his Army,
therein consists the incredibility of the thing; the number of which Army,
according to the most contracted account that we have of it, is almost
incredible. Though Herodotus say, (...), and Xerxes seem to acknowledge as
much; yet I would not be so precise, as to press the words rigorously. We will
first abate his Sea-forces, many hundred thousands: and of the Landforces,
that marched with him, we may abate many thousands, and still leave him diverse
hundred thousands: four or five, at the least. These, so many, Pythias did
entertain, at his own charge, how many days I know not, because it is not
expressed: but I believe, more than one. Besides this, he did offer, the story
tells us, to Xerxes, in ready money, as a voluntary contribution toward the
charges of his Army, in gold and silver ready told: so much, as comes by
learned Brerewood his casting, (which I shall not take upon me to examine at
this time) to 3375000. English pounds, and this according to the less valuation
of talents, as himself does tell us. But he mistakes, when he says, Pythii
Bithinii opes. So much he did offer unto Xerxes: his wealth, as himself
professed, did consist in his lands, which in that sum are not at all valued.
It may be, he did offer this to Xerxes, as Seneca did his estate (not less I
dare say, if not much greater) to Nero, to save his life, which he feared was
in danger, by it. And truly, as it fared with the one, so with the other. Every
body knows, out of Tacitus, how nobly Nero refused Seneca's offer; and how much
more, as he professed, he thought him worthy of. But at last, and it is a
question, whether Seneca had not given some occasion, whilst he did desire to
prevent it, he was commanded to die; but indulged the choice of his death.
Xerxes answered Pythias as nobly, and because there wanted some thousands, to
make the sum that Pythias had offered him, a round perfect sum, according to
the calculation of those days; Xerxes made up, what it wanted, and bad him keep
it all. But then afterward, when Pythias was an humble suitor to him, that of
five sons of his, that followed him, he would be pleased to discharge the
eldest, to look unto his Fathers affairs; Xerxes, as a right tyrant, fell into
a rage, and had that Son cut in two, that the Army on both sides, as they
passed by, might have a sight of his body, (or one half, at least) to be a
terror unto others. Yet, to speak truth, I do not find, that he took away any
of his money, or goods; but for the good that he had done, spared, as he
professed, his life, and his four sons, that remained, besides his estate.

I HAVE been the more willing to make use of Herodotus for instances, because
of the respect I bear unto him for his antiquity, and because the times and
Histories he does write of, have more relation, and afford more light to the
Scriptures, than any other Author, or History does. But Herodotus was not my
business, but this, that different times and ages of the world make many things
to seem incredible, and not only to seem, but in very deed, impossible: which
have been formerly very possible; and of such a time, such an age, if well
understood, at any time credible: And whereas great works, great sights, have
hitherto been the subject of our instances, and examples, which many other
subjects might have afforded; it has not been, without some choice, or
particular end. It is far from me, to believe, that the world is grown vain,
since I am grown old: which is noted by many, as a vice or reproach of old age.
Had I never read any thing of the old world, but what we read in the third
Chapter of the Prophet Isaiah; though it cannot be denied, that some ages have
exceeded others, in this kind; yet I find enough there, to make me think, that
to wonder at any thing, in point of wordly excess or vanity, as new and never
seen before, is great folly. But this is no argument to me, not to commiserate
the blindness and wretchedness of mankind, so apt to degenerate from the glory
of their first creation, and the end of their making; because it has been so
always, ever since sin, by the disobedience of our first Parents, entered into
the world, and made it subject unto vanity. Though therefore it has been so,
and will be so, generally, as long as the world does last; yet since in the
worst times, and most corrupted places, some there have been, and will always
be, more or fewer, that have been, though not altogether free themselves, yet
sensible, and earnestly, both for themselves, and others, striving against it:
Why may not I hope, that even now, in the crowd of Ladies and Gentlemen, going
the broad way, as fast as they can; who have fixed their admiration hitherto,
and their ambition, in their modes (the invention, commonly, of some lend
Tailor, or fantastic Courtier) and fashions; the pomp and gaudiness of the
world; that even among them, who for want of better education, in these unhappy
times, are as proud of their Patches and Pedlers-ware, as some would be of
Crowns and Diadems; or some noble achievements for the public good: when they
see, or learn by such instances, how vile and vulgar, those things are, which
they so much admire, and dote upon, which often fall to the share of the
unworthiest of men: some may begin to think, there is, certainly, somewhat
else, wherein true honor, and glory, and felicity does consist; and that God
and Nature have not made them capable of highest contemplations, to think Gold
and Silver, Silks and Sattins, and what depends of them, the best of things? To
this end, though somewhat without the trouble of long seeking, where there is
so much variety, has been brought: yet let me add, that of all I have read in
any Greek or Latin Author, I do not remember any thing more effectual, to make
a man that has any thing of a man in him (a rational, I mean, and ingenuous
creature) more sensible of the vanity of all wordly pomp and glory, (such
especially, as this age does afford) than what Polybius, of all Historians, the
most faithful and serious, in those Fragments of his, first set out by Fulvius
Vrsinus, does relate of Antiochus his pomp and magnificence, in public sights
and entertainments, at Daphne; a fit place for such excess and riot. The
occasion of which, was, a frolic or vanity, to out-brave Aemil. Paulus,
General of the Romans, who had exhibited some games in Macedonia, not long
before conquered by them. Had Antiochus done it of purpose, by his example, to
teach men contempt of worldly pomp; for whilst his servants servants, by
thousands in a company, road in Chariots, and upon Horses, all decked with Gold,
and Silver, and Purple, and whatsoever is most precious, in the account of men;
himself rode by, meanly attired, upon an ordinary Jade, and did, at the same
time, perform many vile offices; but, had it been, I say, to show his contempt
of worldly pomp, he might have been thought an admirable man. But the truth is,
that what he did, he did it as a madman; which, with some other such pranks,
got him the name of Antiochus the mad; and in his affected personal vulgarness,
had no other end, but that he might be the more admired, and looked upon. But
missed of his end, when the spectators of all this bravery, for above a month
(for so long it lasted) notwithstanding that their bellies, with no less cost,
than their eyes, had been fed; glutted and surfeited, both in their eyes and
bellies; (such are the pleasures this world affords) began, at last, to
despise, first his person, then his pomp, and forsook him. I wish my self so
good an Englishman, (for there is no great difficulty in the Greek) that I were
able to translate the whole narration in good and proper English, which without
more knowledge of the world in matter of pomp, and gaudiness, than I have, can
hardly be: I cannot but think, that it would do good. But, lest this might be
looked upon, not so much as an argument of excessive, or incredible wealth,
which I must not forget my primary intention; as of extraordinary madness,
which, as before said, got him that surname of Antiochus the mad: I would have
the pomp of Ptolemaeus, surnamed Philadelphus, who was a Prince of credit,
joined with it: both to be found in one book, Athenaeus his fifth of his
Deipnosophists: part out of Polybius, and part out of Callixenes, an Historian
of those days.

OF excess in fare and feasting, not used by Kings and Emperors, which (except
we should put down the sums of the expenses, as cast up by others to our
hands) might seem less incredible; but of ordinary Romans, I have had no
instances, because there is so much of it, in all kind of writers, that though
they that are altogether illiterate, may wonder and not believe; yet they that
have looked into them, but superficially, will easily believe any thing, that
can be but thought possible. For certainly there is no kind of excess, in that
particular, that the whole earth (then known) could afford, but has been
tried, and was, in those days, ordinary.

BUT I must do Herodotus some right: out of whom Athenaeus does relate, that
one Smindycides, a Sybaritan, (noted every where, unto a Proverb, for their
luxury) did carry along with him, where he hoped to speed for a wife for his
Son; Cooks for all sorts of meat, a thousand; which, by Aelian, is increased to
three thousand; whereof a thousand Cooks, a thousand Faulconers, and a thousand
Fishermen. Whereas in Herodotus, no such thing is to be found, either of Cooks,
or any other company; but this only, that among others, who appeared suitors to
Clisthenes, for his daughter Agarista; (who though no great Prince, entertained
them all, in a most Princely manner) this Smindycides was one. Now if Herodotus
wrote no more, I think they do him wrong, who impose that upon him, which has
too much of improbability, even of those times, to be believed. Or if he wrote
so indeed, (not probable to me) yet even so, some right we do him, to perfect
his Text: though I am somewhat confident, that if he did write any such thing,
it was not without his ordinary proviso, in things so improbable; that such a
thing was reported, but by himself not believed.

WE have spoken of many things, which to some, (I have found it so more than
once) might seem incredible. I thought I had made an end. But I remember my
self, that we live in an Island, as other Islands are, compassed with the Sea:
the chief glory and security whereof, are, those wooden walls, commended unto
the Athenians, by the Oracle, when Xerxes invaded the land; good Ships, and
expert Mariners. And God be thanked, I think there is no Nation of the world,
but will yield to the English the precellency of that glory, in point either of
Ships, or Men: God continue it. But though, for use of service, which is the
principal end of Ships; we may challenge precellency of any that are, or have
been in former ages; yet in point of credibility, which is our business, they
are greatly deceived, who think there never were greater or fairer Ships, than
those that have been seen in these later times, since Navigation has been so
much improved by the discovery of that secret of the Loadstone, not known to
former ages, of always turning to the North. If they limited it, for service of
war, or long journeys, I should not be against it. But for greatness, or
sumptuousness, what comparison? Let the description of two Ships, built by
Philopator, King of Egypt; made by able Authors, who were eyewitnesses, (and
besides them, how many thousands) or the description of a later Ship, built by
Hieron, King of Syracuse, before spoken of; concerning which, one Moschion,
wrote a particular Volume; the truth of which descriptions made by skilful men,
eyewitnesses; when so many thousands, who had seen them, were able and ready
to attest, or to contradict, as they should see occasion; no man can rationally
doubt of: let them be read, and I think I may be allowed, by those that have
read them with any judgment, to say, that the least of those Ships, might be
bigger than any ten (it might be true of twenty, for ought I know) of those
Spanish Ships, which in Eighty Eight, appeared like so many Castles; put
together; and exceed the cost of them too. I say the least of them: which, as I
take it, was King Hieron's Ship: which had this above the two others, that it
was made for use of war also. And let me add, that I make a question, whether
any Ships now, or lately made, carry any piece of Ordnance so great, as to do
that annoyance, that some Engines of that Ship, made by Archimedes, that noble
Ingeneer, as they are there described, could do. If I have exceeded in my
valuations, or proportions, I desire to be pardoned. I had no intention, I am
sure: those that are better versed in such things, may soon find it, and
correct my error, for which I shall thank them. And it is to be noted, that
this Ship of King Hieron, was built only for a present, to one of the Kings of
Egypt, whereby we may guess at the wealth, and magnificence of that petty
King, if the extent of land, over which he reigned, be considered. But many
such Kings there were in those days, even of single Towns, or Cities, very
rich, and some, very potent. And whereas one of the Ships made by Philopator,
is reported, or recorded rather, to have contained forty several ranks, or rows
of rowers, on a side, the one above the other; which since that, Ships of 8. or
10. or 12. rowers, some have thought could hardly be made, to be serviceable,
will be thought by many, not possible, and therefore incredible; all that I can
say to it, which I am sure I can, is, that had my Father (of Bl. M.) his
Commentaries upon Polybius, upon which he bestowed a great part of his life,
been finished and Printed, he would have made it clear, how it might be, and
answered all objections: And it is sure enough, that the invention of many
things practiced by the Ancients, through ignorance of former times, now
thought impossible, is lost. Though I deny not however, that I also believe,
that such a vast Ship could not be much serviceable. And the rather, because
Livy does mention one that had been Philip's, King of Macedonia, which was of
sixteen ranks, ( Quam sexdecim versus remorum agebant) so big, he says, that
it was almost unuseful. The story says, that vast Ship before spoken of, had
to the number of 400. rowers, and soldiers, to the number of 2850. All which
is attested by Plutarch also, in his Demetrius. All these, in the out, or open
places of the Ship. How many more, in that numerous ample buildings and
edifices of the said Ship, which though neither by Athenaeus, nor by Plutarch
specified, or particularized; yet by that description of the two other lesser
Ships, we have in Athenaeus, we may probably guess at: how many more those
large buildings might contain, I say, God knows. I believe, as many more, as
all the rest put together: which will exceed the number of some considerable
towns. But Plutarch does add, that this Ship was built more for show, than any
service; and that it never moved from the place, where it was built, without
much danger, and difficulty. The biggest or longest Mast of one of these Ships,
which was looked upon as a great providence, by the discovery of a Shepherd,
was found, (...) that is, In some mountains of Britany, now England: if that
reading could be warranted. But it cannot: (...), much more probable, if not
certain. For which, good reasons are given by learned men. Not therefore for
much service, I say, such vast Ships: yet in the account Athenaeus does give
us, of Philadelphus his store, or provision of Ships, he does mention Ships of
30.20. and 14. rows, which certainly were intended for use. But I have done
with this: And yet now we are upon Ships, somewhat of our times, or not long
before, for the incredibility, besides usefulness, if true and real, may
deserve to be taken notice of. That a Boat, not to be sunk by any tempest, in
all weathers, very nimble and serviceable, may be made, if we may believe
Fiorananty, notwithstanding his usual cracking and vapouring, we may believe it
true. But of the two, I should give more credit to Trithemius, that learned
Abbot, who does name the man, by whom a book or discourse was published in
Print, wherein for a hundred thousand Ducats, he did offer, first the Pope,
Innocentius the VIII. then the Venetians, and lastly the Genuenses, (so I
remember was the discovery of the New World, for the price or charge of a very
small Navy, offered to diverse Princes, who did but laugh at it, but repented it
afterward) to teach them the invention of a Ship, unoffensable (if I may so
speak) to all dangers of the Sea; and by which (or by some other invention)
Ships ready to sink, might be preserved, and any goods out of the bottom of the
Sea, easily recovered. The loss of this invention, or inventions, when to be
had and purchased at so easy a rate, Trithemius does seem very seriously to
condole, as though he really believed it: if in it, he had not a respect to
himself more, who promised such mighty things, which should have made the world
happy, but never came to any thing, but to busy distempered brains, or to
distemper theirs, which were sound before.

BUT since England as an Island, gave me this occasion of Ships, which though
true, may seem strange and incredible: I will take this occasion, to tell
somewhat that I have read of England, which may justly seem as strange, as I am
sure, it is false, and ridiculous; but that the occasion of the mistake
(difference of customs) may be considerable, to prevent the like of another
Country. In Ortelius, or Mercator, I know not which, but one of the two, I am
very confident, some Greek Author, or Historian, speaking of England, gives a
reasonable good account of it, as I remember; for it is many years since I read
it; but a reasonable good account I say, otherwise; but this, most falsely; that
they make their wives common to their guests. It is so false, that to go about
to refute it, were ridiculous, if not scandalous. Yet they that know the
fashions of other Countries, in the East especially; where to look upon a
woman, that passes by, veiled; or to look up, if any be at a window, or in a
Balcone, is the cause of death unto many: where a man may be acquainted, and in
dealings, with another man; often go to his house, eat and drink with him, and
yet not know, not so much as dare, to enquire, whether he have a wife or no: he
may acquit the Author of that false report, from any intention of either lying
or slandering; if he were a stranger and bred in one of those Countries; only,
blame his simplicity, or want of judgment, that he would judge of other
Countries, which he did not know, by those that he knew, and was acquainted
with: who might himself have known, if a Scholar, or a piece of a Scholar, that
somewhat much more strange, than such ordinary salutation, used in England, and
some other Countries, had been once in use, even among Christians, when I
believe chastity, and continency was not less in request, than it is now in any
place; but indeed so unhandsom, and uncivil otherwise, in my judgment,
(worthily condemned both by the laws of sundry Heathen Princes, and by the
Canons of the Church) that I will not so much as name it.

BUT if this man have done England wrong against his will, upon a false
supposition, I know not how to excuse them, Englishmen born, I believe; who
have endeavored to persuade the world, that English men were born with tails,
such as brutes have naturally: or, indeed, how to excuse him, who though he
would not seem to give credit to it, yet speaks somewhat doubtfully of it,
Novit Deus, etc. when he could not but know, that it was a base, ridiculous
untruth, the device of some Popish Fanatics, (much like the calumnies of our
Protestant Fanatics, and, of late, wicked Atheists, against the Church, and
the Clergy) which no sober man would give the hearing to. True it is, that
Polydore Virgil, who long lived in England, in his History of England, (as
Delrio does observe) did write something of the people of one Parish in Kent,
which he would have, to have happened unto them, as a miraculous judgment, for
some affront offered by them to Thomas of Becket his Horse, as he passed by:
and it is possible, that the public reproach of Kentish-long-tails, raised
upon another occasion, mentioned in the Histories of England, might be some
occasion of that foolish report; or, to speak more properly, tale. But Polydore
does add, that they had been all gone long, and extinct, to whom this happened.
Delrio makes a doubt, whether he speaks this of a truth, or in favor to the
Nation. God knows, says he: and adds, The reproach is passed upon the whole
Nation, and does yet continue among bold people, who will adventure to say any
thing, whether true or false; But, if true, (Delrio goes on) will. Tooker might
have done well, to ascribe to his Queen that virtue also, etc. a base
scurrilous jeer, for which the Jesuit deserved to lose his ears, to teach him,
and others, to make so bold with persons so sacred, as Kings and Queens are.
But the quarrel is: This Will: Tooker, wrote a book, it seems, (I have it not)
De Strumis: whereby he does ascribe to Kings and Queens of England, a power
derived unto them by lawful succession, of Healing, etc. If he deny it to the
Kings of France, as Laurentius does lay it to his charge; or derive their
power, from England; I think he was too blame. And Laurentius, and some others,
( Sennertus among others) too blame also, who writing of that subject, would
appropriate it to the Kings of France. I remember well, that when I was in the
Isle of Weight, being earnestly invited thither by some of the chiefest of the
Island, (though then, under a cloud, for their Loyalty) I was told of some
extraordinary cures done by Charles the First, (since a Martyr) whilst he was
a Prisoner there; not only upon some that had the Kings Evil, (as we call it)
but upon some others also, who labored of other diseases. Which, if true, and
certain, (as, because told me by persons of quality, I am apt to believe) it is
pity, it should not be more known; if not more known; (if, I say, because of
late, since I left off going to London, by reason of sickness, such a stranger
to new books, and so little conversant with those, that I have) than I know it
is. But I say, if true and certain. We need no counterfeit miracles; his death,
and his book are sufficient miracles to canonize him: and they that could not,
cannot yet be converted from their rebellion and schism, (I may now add,
Atheism) by either; I think I may say of them, that though one rose from the
dead, or an Angel did appear unto them from Heaven, they would not be
converted, or believe.

HITHERTO, since the examination of Epicurus his late Saintship, or
Canonization, tending to the undermining of all piety and godliness; our chief
business has been by sundry instances, rationally discussed, to rectify the
incredulity of many; all tending to the vindication of truth, wherein the
happiness of man, and the honor of God, is so much concerned. Now though the
clearing of one of the two contraries, must needs (as before said) imply the
illustration of the other also; yet the better to acquit our selves, let us
consider of rash belief also, and so what means, or cautions some instances of
that also, will afford us, to prevent it. Not, that we may never be deceived,
for which I know no remedy, whilst we continue men, but to believe nothing; a
remedy much worse, and more pernicious than the disease: but to prevent, as I
said before, rash belief, which is all, that humane prudence does pretend unto.
What I observed in the First Part, upon those words of St. Augustine, that,
Multa credibilia, falsa, etc. must here be remembered also. That all men are
liars, is the speech of one, who could not lie, or be deceived, in what he
delivered absolutely, in the authority of a Prophet, or a man inspired by God.
It may be answered, that it was in his haste, (his own confession) that he said
it; in the same haste, or impatiency, that made him to utter those words, I am
cut off from before thine eyes, though he lived and reigned many years after
that. This might be said, had not St. Paul the Apostle, made a general
application of the words, to all men. But granted that all men in some sense,
or other, are liars; yet that some men, accounted otherwise sober, and serious,
should, with much labor, devise and study lies, not for any profit they hope
to reap by it, but only for the pleasure of deceiving others, and to triumph,
as it were, in their error and ignorance, or rather in the common calamity of
mankind; this would hardly be believed, by them especially, who are more
ingenuous themselves, had not all ages afforded some pregnant examples. But
though some might do it so, merely, as we have said; yet other considerations
might move others to do the same thing, besides what we have said, or what is
most common and ordinary, gain or profit. If a man be passionate for a cause,
his religion, his friend, his Country, his trade, or calling; all these, or any
of these, may induce him, to devise lies, or frauds; which in that case, for a
public end, some men account no lies, or frauds, but a meritorious act. Which
yet might have more color, when it is done for a public good, which seldom
does happen: whereas for a little vainglory, an imaginary title, to advance
the honor, and reputation of a tongue, of a town, of a family, or the like, it
has been done by some, without any regard at all of their own shame or
conscience, or forecast of the issue, which probably may prove contrary to what
is intended, or expected; shame and ignominy, instead of honor and glory, when
such base means are used to procure it. What a world of lies and counterfeit
books, monuments and evidences, the conceit of piae frauds, in former times
did produce; and how many have been gulled and deceived by them, who does not
know, or has not heard? Which kind of counterfeit books, monuments and
evidences, as they are able to confound right and wrong; to overthrow whole
States and Governments, Civil and Ecclesiastical, as by many instances might be
proved: so is there no work, either of it self more noble, or more advantageous
to mankind, than to be able to defery and discover them, and by good and
satisfactory proofs, to assert what is genuine and sincere. But a work of great
difficulty, which does require perfect knowledge of the learned tongues, of
times, (which, without being well acquainted with the Authors, not professed
Historians only, but others also, of every age, learned and unlearned, is not
attainable) of fashions and customs, and all antiquity: besides a good
judgment, without which nothing can be done, in this, or any other useful work.
They therefore that would reduce all learning, to natural experiments; or at
least, would have all learning (not to speak of them, who account all other,
altogether useless; who I doubt are not few) regulated by them, and those that
profess the trade, whether mere Empiricks, or others; how well they provide for
Religion, the peace and tranquillity of public Estates, the maintenance of
truth, whether in matters Civil or Ecclesiastical; and what will be the end of
such attempts, (without any disparagement of any thing that is done, in
England, or out of England, for the further discovery of Nature, which I
honor, as much as any can do, be it spoken) but as some men project it, and
give it out, what will be the end; though such men cannot, or will not; yet all
wise men may easily foresee, and is no difficult speculation. But to go on.
There is not any body I think, who deals in learning, who has not heard of
Annius Viterbiensis his bold and wicked attempt, by counterfeit Historians of
greatest antiquity, to confound all true Chronology, to the great prejudice of
all History, and the truth of the holy Scriptures themselves. And had not this
impostor lighted upon a time, which did not long precede the restoration of
good learning, and that happy age, which afforded so many able men in all kind
of literature; it is very possible, that those abominable forgeries and
fopperies, had passed every where for Oracles, and undoubted truth. For to this
day, or very lately, notwithstanding so many learned Censures, of Papists, and
Protestants, of all professions, that are extant against him, and have laid the
imposture as clear and visible, as the light of the Sun, when he is in his
strength; there be yet, or were very lately, men of no small fame and credit in
the world, who could not digest, or be persuaded, that so many fine Titles,
should be cast out, as mere baubles, or forgeries. Who knows, had the times
continued in that ignorance, and this impostor sped, as he did for a while; but
another might have been encouraged, by some suppositious writings, and bold
fictions, to advance the credit of the Alcoran, above the Bible? Much about the
same time, or not long after, a learned Court- Spaniard, had the boldness to
obtrude to the world the inventions of his own brain, for the writings of the
most learned of all Emperors, (known unto us) that ever were; Solomon only, for
the testimony the Scripture does give him, excepted. And though the genuine
writings of that incomparable Prince, (but indeed so adulterated by false
Copies, that little of them was to be understood) were published not long
after; yet did that forged and adulterous stuff, translated into most languages
of Europe, Printed and reprinted, with large Comments in Folio; in Quarto:
pass currently, with great applause, for a long time after; and had I never
done any thing more in my life time, than that I was the first, that undertook
that great task; to restore that worthy Prince to himself, by making him
intelligible; I should not repent that I was bred a Scholar, or that I lived
where, or when, good learning was in request.

IT is not yet full forty years, when in a Booksellers Shop, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, I lighted upon a Book entitled, Etruscarum Antiquitatum
Fragmenta: Printed some where in Italy. A fair large book it is, of the largest
size of books, full of Inscriptions, many cut in Brass, and many others. I
confess that the first sight of the book did so ravish me, that I scarce knew
where I was, or what I did. Yet, that day, with good company, I was to go to
Gravesend, in a Barge or close Boat, which we had hired of purpose. It was not
possible for me to settle to any reading, (except here and there, as I went
along, by snatches) until I was got into the Boat: and then excusing my self to
the company, and alleging for my excuse, that I had got such a treasure, as if
I had gone a hundred miles for it, I should not think it dear bought, or
sought; or to that effect, I fell to reading. But my pride and boasting, was
soon over. I had not read a quarter of an hour, I dare say, but I began to
suspect, somewhat. But in less than an hour, or thereabouts, my judgment was so
altered; or rather my joy, and my hopes so confuted, and confounded; that what
book a little before I did not think dear at forty shillings, (that was the
price set, as I remember) I now valued, as so much waste paper, and no more.
The truth is, when the heat or violence of my expectation (which did almost
transport me) was once over; I began to wonder at my self with some
indignation, that I had had the patience to read so much. For I was then verily
satisfied, that there was scarce a line in the whole book, from which either by
the Latin, or by the matter of it, a man not altogether a stranger to such
things, might not have discovered the fraud. Yet a fraud otherwise contrived
with great art and speciousness, to take them that are apt to be taken by the
outward appearance. Having then a book at Press, which was almost ended, before
I knew what any man else did; I could not but let the world know, what I
thought of it. Since which time I have seen diverse pieces, some for it, of men
I believe, who themselves were engaged in the fraud; but more against it; by
which I was glad to understand, that the fraud was, not only detected, but
also, as it well deserved, detested in all parts of Italy, Rome especially.
Among them that have contributed that way, Leo Allatius is one, who though he
may be thought over sedulous in a thing so notoriously discernable; yet his
book well deserves the reading, because it will furnish them, who are not much
versed in such things, with many arguments, (whereof some may be useful in
diverse things, as there proved by some instances, that have no reference to
learning) how such frauds may be discovered. Yet for all this I know that since
I had published my judgment, and for ought I know, since some of these
censures, or confutations were published; diverse in England did show much zeal
for this precious book: and I was told by the late most Reverend and truly
learned Primate of Ireland, that some in Ireland did go to Italy of purpose
that they might bless their eyes with the sight of those precious Monuments, or
Relics. So prone are many men, not only, inconsiderately to entertain an
imposture; but also loath to forge the opinion they have had of the worth and
truth of it, when once they have entertained it. What wonder then, if
Christianism was so soon turned into Mahometism, in a great part of the world;
when so much force was used to bring in the one, and so little learning found
(such was the sad condition of those times and places) to uphold the other, and
to discover the impostures of pretended Enthusiasts? But now I have commended
Leo Allatius to the Reader, I must give him a caution, how he does give credit
unto those words of his, Page 152. Aegyptiorum quoque cadavera bituminis
beneficio post viginti aut plurium annorum myriades perpetuitatem adepta
quodammodo fuisse, viderunt alii, and nos ipsi, etc. by which he does seem to
make the world elder by many thousands of years, than it is; or ever, I think,
any man, those that make it eternal excepted; made it before: which, I am very
confident, was not his meaning; though, how to rectify it, as a fault of the
Printers, I know not. Had these Antiquities been received generally, as a true
piece; besides that they contradict the Scriptures, in some places; I think
half the world would have been Conjurers, and Enthusiasts by this time; for
that is it, which they chiefly advance. Here again I may say: God preserve the
Universities: without other learning, great and various learning, besides
natural experiments, all things must necessarily come to confusion, in a short
time.

IN those kind of things which pretend to antiquity, as I would not have a man
peremptorily to reject any thing, upon light suspicions; for so, he may bereave
himself of many rare things; and most true it is, that things almost
incredible, (the discovery of the new world, I reserve for another place) are
discovered sometimes: So on the other side, not very suddenly to believe, nor
to ascribe much to his own judgment, (which all men are apt to overvalue
naturally) till he have made trial of it many times; and till he perfectly
understand (so far as may be, by labor and diligent inquiry) both the nature
of the thing, and all circumstances of the story, which he is to judge of.
There is nothing so slight almost, but does require some experience: and there
is nothing so hard, almost, wherein long experience, where there is a natural
pregnancy, may not breed perfection. I have heard of some men, (but heard it
only) who by the bare handling and smelling, would judge better of old Coins,
(which is a great trade beyond the Seas, and concerning which many books are
written) than others, not altogether strangers unto them, could by the sight:
The more precious every thing is, the more subject it is to imposture; though
to me, there is nothing so mean, but the truth of it, is precious. The worst
is, (which should teach men humility) let a man be never so careful and wary,
or so judicious and well experienced; yet either through the obscurity of
nature, in some things, or the cunning of men, whose study is to cheat, and to
impose; he may be to seek sometimes, even in those things, wherein he thinks
himself most perfect, and, either caught, by some cheat, or at a stand, and
nonplust. I read in a good Author, of a stone sold to Jewish Jewellers, who
make a trade to deceive others, in such things; for a good Diamond, for the
price of 9000. Crowns, which proved but a Crystal, of little worth: and of
another, sold for a Ruby, for 300. Crowns, which proved (let no man wonder; for
the same Author does teach, there be red Diamonds, as well as white: Abr.
Ecchel. in Hadarrhamaum, de proprietat. etc. Paris. 1647.) a good Diamond, and
was sold for 7000. Crowns. One of the best (some will say, the best) Anatomist
late ages have produced, began to dissect a Spanish Lady, of great rank, for
dead, when she was alive: but she died, and he too, for shame and grief. And a
skilful Surgeon being to open a vain in the arm (that invincible arm) of
Henry the Fourth, King of France; cut a Nerve, or Artery, which had almost cost
him his life. No man therefore so skilful and wary, but may err sometimes: and
in matter of impostures, which are generally the contrivance of men; it may be
a question, whether somewhat, besides man, does not concur sometimes, of
purpose to illude, and to frustrate men in their most sedulous inquiries.

WHEN I read the relation of those bones found in Daulphine, in France, in a
Grave made of Brick, 30. foot long, 12. broad, 8. deep. 18. foot in the ground,
with some Inscriptions, and old Coins about it; the Bones, or Sceleton, that
was found in the Grave, being 25. foot and half in length; I do not know what
to think of it. Riolanus indeed, who professed both Physic and Surgery in
Paris, at that time, wrote somewhat, to persuade the world, that it was a
cheat. But I know Riolanus out of a humor, or somewhat else, would sometimes
oppose, where there was no great ground: the same, I suppose, who would
persuade the world, that there is no such thing in the world, as
Hermaphrodites, of which more in our First Part. The relation of those Bones,
first set out, does import, that the Sepulcher once opened, most part of the
Sceleton, having been in the Air from eight in the morning, to six in the
night, fell into dust; some of the thicker bones, and some that were well nigh
petrified, by reason of a little spring, that did run over and wash them,
excepted. Those that were left, were, by the Kings order, brought to Paris, and
by him bought, to be kept in his Cabinet of rarities, as the very bones of a
Giant. This Riolanus does not deny. Peireskius, that great and famous
Antiquary, upon accurate examination of all circumstances, did at first pass
his verdict, that probably, they might be true bones of some great Giant, of
the old time: but afterward, did rather incline, to think them the bones of an
Elephant. Riolanus, after some conjectures, does pitch upon that at the last,
to make them fossilia; bred, and begot in the earth; because, says he, it is
the property of some grounds, to produce some bony stones, or stony bones,
which have all the properties of true bones. Or, that they might be made by
art, which may be done, he says, and in time thus metamorphosed by the water.
He has more conjectures, but in this particular case, (for as to the nature of
the Fossilia, in general, and the mavelous works of nature, in this kind, I
believe much) but in this particular case, in my judgment, so improbable, that
it does, to me, clearly appear, that he had more will to oppose others, than
ability, to give better satisfaction himself. His exceptions, from the
dimensions, or properties of the bones, as first related; I shall not take upon
me to examine, or to control, it is not my trade. Only I can say, there might
be some mistake in the relation; or somewhat besides the ordinary course of
nature, which does happen, we know, sometimes. I my self, when I was young, did
see a grave in Spittle-fields, two or three days after it was opened. The skull
was broken in pieces, by him that dug the ground, and the pieces scattered,
and some carried away. But by some pieces that were found, and put together,
the whole skull, by the Kings appointment, (as I was told) being drawn out
according to art, did equal a bushel, in the compass of it. So I was told, and
I think, by one of the Court, and a Scholar: but I am not certain. I my self
was then sick of a disease, which, I think, caused more wonder, than the Giants
bones. It was but a pin, but a very costly pin, it proved, in the compass of
seven years: for so long it was, not before it came out of my body; but, before
my body was well of it; so that I was seldom out of the Surgeons hands. But
Physicians, I thank God, cost me little: Sir Theod. Mayerne, and Dr. Raphael
Thoris, I had in London, where most of my sickness was, who were my very good
friends, as they had been my Fathers. But to return: I had some of the Coins
that were found in this Spittle-field's Grave. But, that other Grave, is my
business: That that Grave, should be the Grave of Teutobochus, that Giant, or
Gyant-like man, mentioned by diverse Ancients, (who according to Peireskius his
casting, must have been some 10. or 12. foot high) according to an old
inscription, pretended to be found in the said grave; besides other reasons
that have been given, I less believe it, for that very inscription; which I am
sure, cannot be of that antiquity: except we should say, that such a grave
being dug up, many hundred years ago; which by a constant tradition, or by
some much worn inscription, did appear to be Teutobochus his grave; to increase
the miracle of his height and bigness, it was of purpose so rebuilt, and the
inscription also, according the wit and genius of that age, so renewed. This is
possible, a man may say: and somewhat of that nature, I am sure has been done
in more than one age. Witness the old Statues, which with changing of their
heads, became the Statues of diverse men; or perchance, of Gods and Men,
successively; and many other things done in that kind: which I will not stop to
call to mind, because there is no need, except I had more confidence, that it
is so, indeed. I shall conclude nothing, but as I begun: when I have well
considered of all particulars in the relation of these bones; what I account,
certain in it, what doubtful, and perchance fabulous; and read what others have
thought and written of it: and not of this only, but of many such relations of
graves and bones, well attested: I am at a stand, and suspend my belief. But
therefore to conclude, that all such relations are false, because we cannot
absolutely resolve, or answer all doubts, and Queres: I hold that a very
preposterous way, and very unworthy the profession of a Philosopher, or one
that seeks after truth: (time may reveal many secrets, which are now hid; and
diligent searching may find some) but well agreeing with the dull and sottish
Epicuraean humor, which to prevent the trouble of inquiry, and withal, fearing
that we may be forced sometimes, to go to a higher cause, than the sanctuary of
Atoms, has found a compendious way, to reject all as fabulous; any evidence
of truth to the contrary, notwithstanding, which it cannot give a reason of. We
have their own words, out of Lucian, a great friend, if not professor of the
Sect, in our Preface to Dr. D^e's. Plato therefore said well: (...), that, To
wonder and to admire, was a quality, that well became a Philosopher; and was
indeed, the beginning and foundation of all Philosophy. And so Aristotle too;
more than once, very rightly. For to wonder and admire, does cause inquiry and
diligence: it also sharpens the wit and brain. But to believe nothing true,
that is strange and admirable; does well become such infidels, who make their
ease and their pleasure, their God. If any except, that rather to wonder
little, (Nil admirari, the Poet says) may become a Philosopher better, as he
whose work is, to dive into the causes of things, which cause wonder to the
ignorant, that may be true too, rightly understood: since that, not to wonder,
or to wonder but little, is the fruit, of having wondered much: and that too
from Aristotle, (that true master of reason, indeed; a title lately usurped by
some, who have as little right to it, as any men of the world, I think) (...).
But what if the deceitfulness of men, more than the obscurity of nature, or any
other cause, be the cause of our admiration? That also must, upon such
occasions, among other things, be remembered; and those Etruscae Antiquitates,
before spoken of, may serve for a pregnant example, what pains some men, though
they get nothing by it, will take to contrive a cheat; and what admiration they
cannot, by true, to raise it by false miracles. What if some men, though they
cannot contrive any thing, that will be ripe to work whilst they live; yet can
be so base and unworthy, as to solace themselves whilst they live, with the
presumption of deluded posterity, by their means? So indeed it might happen,
that four or five hundred years before that grave was opened in Daulphine, some
such conceited man, (if man to be called, and not Devil rather) having lighted
upon some Whales, or other fishes bones, which they write are, or have been,
very frequent in that Country; might out of them contrive somewhat, toward the
resemblance of a Sceleton of a mighty Giant; bury them in a formal Coffin, or
Grave, which might endure many ages; cast in Coins, and other convenient ware,
not doubting but revolution of times, and accidents, sooner, or later, would
bring them to light. What remedy, in such a case, but patience, and good
circumspection, before we yield full assent, or be too confident, where such a
thing may be suspected, though not easily discovered?

I REMEMBER I have read of a monument found in China, the rarest thing, if
true, that ever came out of the earth, in that kind. Abrahamus Kirkerus, in his
Prodromus, gives a large account of it. I know what account some make of it,
that it is a counterfeit thing, forged by the Jesuits of those parts. It is
easily said. But upon due consideration of circumstances, (so far as has yet
appeared unto me) not so easy to be believed. For what was their end in it? To
promote the Christian Religion, in China: or to abuse us here in Europe, with a
false report? Truly, it is very hard to believe, that so much pains should be
taken, to so little purpose, when there was so little likelihood, that the
imposture could so long hold undiscovered. It is a very long inscription, and
the stone that contained it, must be very large; and many hands, if not horses,
used to convey it too and fro. But if, which is more probable, to promote
Religion in China; then certainly such an inscription, such a stone was there
found, dug out of the earth before many witnesses, and afterward so
disposed of, as the story does tell us. How could the Jesuits prepare and
convey such a stone thither* in a Country so full of people, so near one of the
chief Cities? And if once discovered in their juggling, was it not more likely,
to do them more hurt and their cause; than they could expect advantage, in case
it had passed for a true story? Besides, what Kirkerus writes of it, I suppose
is written and attested by more than one; though I can name but one, Alvarus
Semedo, the Portugal, (who I think was no Jesuit) in whom I remember to have
read it. I profess by what I have read of it, I cannot find ground of reason,
to make me believe it an imposture: neither has it been my luck hitherto, to
meet with any body (that I can remember) that has gone about, upon grounds of
reason, to refute what is written of it, but only in the way of Seneca's
Sapientissimi, by which any thing may be false or counterfeit, which we do not
like, or understand; fabula est, mendacium est. In Emanuel Dias his Epistle,
which Kirkerus does exhibit, I find Trigaulsius mentioned, as being then in the
Country, when, and where that happened; who in his relations of China, first set
out, could say nothing of it, because they end many years before, and the book
Printed, Augustae Vindelicorum, 1615. But it seems, he made a second Voyage,
and happily a Relation of that too, which I have not seen. They that have read
more, may give a better account perchance; but this does serve our purpose, to
ground such observations upon, as have reference to credibility, or
incred^bility. But now I have mentioned Kirkerus: I have not any of his books,
at present, and therefore shall say less: but by what I have read, or seen of
him, I should not advise any man* that loves truth, to take all for good and
merchantable ware, which he does offer. I shall not insist in any particulars,
but only this in general; as I know him a man of great parts, so a great
undertaker, and a very confident man; two suspicious qualities, and I am sure,
he has deceived, or has been deceived more than once.

I HAVE done with particular instances, not because the stock of my matter,
which I proposed to my self, is spent; but because the time, which I have, or
can allow my self for this employment, is out. I shall now have other things to
think of, if my health will give me leave to think of any thing else, but
death. But before I end what I am now about, I think it requisite, that I add
one word or two, concerning History, in general. Some taking the advantage of
some notable discordance, yea manifest contradictions among Historians, of best
credit; have made that use of it themselves, and commended it unto others, to
discredit all History; ancient especially, even where they agree. And truly, if
upon that account, we do not think our selves bound in reason, to believe them
in things more ordinary; it is not likely we shall, in things that may be
thought very strange, and (but for their authority) incredible. This, to them
that are not acquainted with the world, may seem somewhat: to them that are,
nothing at all. For so are all things in the world, liable to some defects, and
irregularities: which notwithstanding, few, or none are laid aside, upon that
account. That it is so, we may be sorry: but History must not bear the blame
only, since it is the general case of all things, or most, that we deal in. I
must confess, it has troubled me not a little, when I have met with such
contradictions, in best Historians. For example: What Herodotus, and after him,
Diodor. Siculus, and diverse other Historians write of Cyrus, that great
Monarch, (styled Gods servant, in the Scripture; of whose salvation, through
faith in the promised Messiah, Melancton made no question) his violent death by
the hands of a woman, far from his own Country, or Dominions, who has not
heard? Yet X^nophon, a grave, and famous both Philosopher and Historian, who
lived not long after, and served another Cyrus in his unfortunate (...), or
Expedition against his brother, Artaxerxes, (the History, whereof, he has
written) does give a quite different account of his death: to wit, that he died
in his bed, in his own Kingdom, (which comprehended many Kingdoms) in much
peace, with many other particulars, tending to the same purpose. Wherein
nevertheless we have more reason to wonder at the thing it self, subject to so
much obscurity, than at the different account of Historians. For it does appear
by Herodotus, and we are beholding to him, for giving us so much light, that
even in his time, there were several reports, concerning this great Cyrus his
death: so that, what he does deliver of it, he delivers as the most probable
(in his judgment) tradition; not as certain, and indubitable. I could instance
in diverse such particulars. But what is this to the body of the History of the
World, for some two thousand years, (besides the Scripture History) to be
gathered out of the generality of Historians, of all Ages and Nations: which
reading, (where men are not too far engaged into sensuality and profaneness) by
the knowledge and consideration of the many revolutions of the world, the sad
chances and alterations, which public Estates, and private persons and
families are subject unto, producing commonly, (as in Solomon, and Aurelius
Antoninus, another Solomon, for this kind of wisdom) a right apprehension of
the vanity and contemptibleness of the world and all worldly things, without a
reference to God, and immortality: they that make this good use of it* though
they die young, yet may be said to have lived longer than any Epicuraean
Sectary, though he should live two hundred years, who can give no other account
of his life, but that, he has eaten and drunk, and enjoyed bodily pleasure,
with perfect (we will suppose it so) contentedness, so long: which things have
nothing at all of a rational soul in them, but of a beast, (of a dog, or a
swine) much more, than of a man. They therefore that despise History upon that
account, might as well deprive themselves of the light of the Sun, because it
is subject to some Eclipses.

BUT we must add, that many of these contradictions, which we charge upon
Historians, proceed not from the Historians, but our ignorance: our ignorance,
I say, either of the tongue, not perfectly known, (wherein many are deceived,
as they that think themselves very good Grecians, because they have read, and
can understand two or three Greek Authors) or of the times, or of the thing it
self, which is spoken of; which may have reference to some of the Sciences, or
some secret of Nature; or for want perchance of that light, which a diligent
comparing, and consulting with good books of ancient, or later times, would
afford. That it is so; so many, once thought apparent contradictions, both in
the Scriptures, and other good Authors, besides Historians; now by the labor
of learned men, happily cleared and reconciled, are sufficient evidences. I
think there is not a book, of any age, or profession, extant; but ancient,
especially; but may give some light to a judicious Reader, toward the clearing
of some obscurity, either in matter of fact, or science, or work of nature. Two
Universities, in one Kingdom, are little enough for such a work, if a man go
the right way to work. But many run, where one only carries the prize. And if
but one in a hundred, or two hundred that run, happen to speed, (as God be
thanked, the Universities have always been stored with able men, in this kind,
who have been a great ornament to the whole Nation) the cost is not ill
bestowed upon one or two hundred, that do not, (so that it be not for want of
labor, and industry) for that ones sake. (...). Er. p. 1668. Quam pauci, qui
capiunt magnitudinem literarum; was a speech very frequent in the mouth of one,
whom I knew very well; and I might have been the better for it, but for
frequent sicknesses, and the loss of twenty years, during these late troubles
and confusions.

BUT besides, many contradictions proceed also from a humor, in some men, or a
malignity rather, to contradict others. So Ctesias, of old, was known to set
himself to contradict Herodotus. To make him fabulous, and himself a
considerable man, he pretended, because he had lived in Assyria, and served one
of those great Kings; to sacred records. But it fell out much otherwise, than
he expected; for Herodotus, in most things, wherein he dissents from him, is
followed; and he, generally, accounted a fabulous foolish Historian. From what
humor it proceeded, I know not. But I knew a Gentleman of great worth, who
would very stiffly argue, that Constantine the Great, never was a Christian. I
do not remember, I ever heard him allege any thing for it, which I thought of
any force. But this he might, as well as Pomponius Laetus, a late Italian
compiler of History, (suspected by some, to have had more affection for old
Heathenism, than he had for Christianity) made bold to write, that Constantius,
one of Constantine's Sons, died a Heathen.

OTHERS again, though they have no humor to contradict; yet they will hardly
believe any thing, that does contradict, or not well suit with their humor,
and proper temper. So that a man had need, if possible, to know somewhat of the
temper of his Historian, before he know what to think of his relations; such
especially, as have somewhat of incredibleness in them. We heard a learned
Physician, of our times, (in our First Part) deny, that there are Witches. One
great argument is, because he did not believe, that any woman could be so
cruel, or wicked; so that he does not stick absolutely to profess, that should
he see with his own eyes, any woman commit any of those horrible things, that
are laid to their charge; he would not believe his eyes, that it is so, truly,
and really; but believe it a delusion. Yet this the man, that does tell as
horrible stories of men-Sorcerers and Conjurers, without any scruple of
believing, as any I have read in any books of that argument.

OF all women I have read of, ancient or late; I know not of any that stands
upon the records of History, for cruelty, and all manner of wickedness, more
infamous, (or indeed comparable) than two women, that lived at one time in
France, better than a thousand years ago: Fredegonde, and Brunichild. Queens
both, but the one a Kings daughter also; the other, ascended to that height, by
her baseness, first; and then, cruelty. Medea, of old, was nothing to either of
these, as set out by some of those times. If I were to judge, I should be much
put to it, which was the worse of the two. For he that reads the acts of either
by themselves, will find so much, that he cannot but think, that either of them
went to the height, of what can be thought possible. But however, though for
their lives, never so well matched; yet in their deaths, great inequality may
be observed: Providentia, apud imperitos, laborante: says one, that writes of
them: that is, To the no small prejudice, or reproach of Gods providence; but,
apud imperitos, well added: that is, with men that must know all the secrets of
God, and the reasons of all his dispensations, or else they will not believe,
that there is a God, if men (such blind wretches, even the wisest that are, in
comparison; acknowledged by divine Aristotle, but not by the wits and wise men
of our time) could understand the reasons of all he does. It is enough, that he
has been pleased to arm us against this kind of temptation, by his Revealed
Word; so that to judge of men, by what happens unto them in this world, is
little better, than absolute apostasy, from the right faith. But, as the story
goes; Fredegonde, of whose wickedness we have more pregnant testimonies, than
of the others; died in peace, and was happy in her Son, who made all France
happy, as even any King did. Brunichild died much after the manner of
Ravailack's death, being tied to the tail of a wild Horse, who soon scattered
her brains, and put her out of her pains; though the rest of her body was
scattered afterward, as bad as her brain, by the said wild Horse, piece after
piece, in a great compass of ground, according as his wildness directed his
course, over hedges, and ditches; over hills and dales? This in public: too
much, I think, for a Queen, and the daughter of a King; though some think, too
little, for her wickedness. But this is not all. For before that, she was
tortured three days in prison, with exquisite torments, the worst that could be
invented, to preserve her to public judgment. And which is worst of all, this
was the judgment upon her of a King, famous for many Princely parts; but, for
none more, than for his goodness, and clemency, which must needs aggravate her
guilt very much. Yet for all that, and the judgment of so many writers since,
that have passed against her; some have been found, long ago, who whether of
mere compassion, or some kind of incredulity, began to question, whether all
that had been written of her was true; and since that, that famous French
Antiquary, Paschier, in his learned Recherches, has taken great pains to make
her a perfect Innocent, if not a Martyr. He is so long upon it, that it
requires a good time, to read him; much more, should any man attempt it, to
confute him. I will leave it free to them that read him, to judge as they
please. But I have some reasons, to incline me rather, to Baronius his censure
of one, that had begun to justify her, before Paschier; that he did but
laterem lavare; that is, wash a Blackmoor, to make him white. Besides Baronius
his authority; Vignier, not inferior, I dare say, to any in knowledge of
Antiquity, and a very judicious man, makes her guilty. Strange indeed, that any
woman should be so wicked, and cruel; or live so long, to act so much
wickedness. But again, her death, and judgment, (her person, a Queen, and the
daughter of a King considered) is so full of horror, that some have attempted
to make a fable of that too, as well as of her wickedness, as altogether
incredible. But I do not find that any body takes any notice of their attempt,
against such public evidences, whilst they have nothing to say for it, but
because they think it incredible. Her wickedness, is another thing. One
particular of her indictment is, that she had been the death of ten Kings. So
is the indictment: but it must be understood, of some actual Kings, partly; and
partly, of other Princes of the Royal blood, who might have been Kings. Of ten,
such; hard to believe, even of a man: much more, of a woman: whom some still
look upon, as the weaker Sex, and upon that score will think it an uncharitable
credulity, to harbor such cruel thoughts of them. But in very truth; If a
virtuous woman, that is chaste, religious, discreet; especially, if of a
gracious and beautiful aspect, (for that also, is the gift of God, and does add
much) may be compared to an Angel: to whom can one, that has none of those
good qualities, and is set upon wickedness; more fitly be compared, than to a
Devil? And in that case, the more Beautiful, the arranter Devil. Corruption
optimi, pessima; Philosophers and Physicians say: and our late learned King
James, of Glorious memory, (whom I had the happiness, more than once, when very
young, to wait upon, and can truly say, that I never parted from him, but in
great admiration of his learning and piety) by the authority of his judgment,
which was excellent; and by sundry pregnant instances, has taught us, that for
that very reason, women, because the weaker Sex, therefore the apter they are,
naturally, to be cruel and revengeful.

THUS, truth may be tossed up, and down, sometimes; though all this, that has
been mentioned, is nothing to the masterpiece of our age: Epicurus, his
Saintship, and filial fear, or worship. But tossed up and down (I say)
sometimes, I deny it not. But they that will take the pains, prepared first
with humility, (which to Saint Augustine, is all in all, in this great
business) to dig for it, may find enough of it, to comfort them, that they
shall not loath to live. Nihil est tanti, nisi verum, was the speech of a
Heathen, upon what occasion, I shall not inquire: but a speech, in the most
obvious sense, well worthy the mouth of a Christian: What live we for, but to
learn what is truth? Or if you will, somewhat more Paraphrastically: What is
the reward, proposed unto a rational Creature, of this, otherwise, miserable
life; but truth; or, the knowledge of what is, truly, and really? But should we
have perfect truth here upon earth, we might say, What need of Heaven? For,
where perfect Truth is, there God is.

I WOULD end in Simplicius, the Philosopher, his Prayer; an excellent Prayer to
this purpose; and well would become a Christian Litany, but that it ends in a
Verse of Homer's; though that, an excellent Verse also. But I will not do that
Infidel, (for he lived some ages after Christ) so much honor. There is enough
in the Lords Prayer; which all true Christians, I hope, say more than once, in
a day. For it comprehends all that we can, or should, at least, wish. I shall
willingly end in the commendation, or recommendation of that excellent Prayer;
which, in the late confusions, was in no small danger, (the public use of it)
to be banished out of the land, had not the happy Restoration of our Gracious
King, Charles, the Second; (whom God bless, and preserve) and by Him of the
Church; happily prevented it.

FINIS.
ADDITIONS.
PAge 119. line 30. I should not, the wonders of thunder and lightning, as set
out by Seneca, and others, well considered, make any great wonder of them,

Page 220. line 14. after these words, Then his promiscuous company did from
one another. Add,

That Epicurus notwithstanding that specious allegation, That true pleasure
could not, or cannot be purchased, without a virtuous life; did still keep to
his first, and fundamental assertion, that the happiness of man consisted in
bodily pleasure; and that as they did explain themselves, there is no such
contradiction between these two propositions, as many do fancy; any man, that
shall but read them; or read Cicero, or Seneca, to name no others, will easily
understand. Besides, their great and chiefest argument used by them to prove,
that it is so, that pleasure is the end, because even children, as soon as they
are born, and all other creatures, without any teaching, seek after pleasure,
(not mental certainly, but bodily) will easily evince. Add to this, their
definition of pleasure, wherein they placed happiness, (...), a constant well
settled constitution of the flesh, or body; what can be more plain. But because
they maintained, or pretended at least, that such a constant well settled
constitution of the flesh, or body, without temperance and sobriety, (who knows
not, that from intemperance, riotousness, etc. all, or most bodily diseases do
generally proceed) could not be attained, or maintained; nay, they would say,
not without innocence, and a good conscience, so far, (so they did explain
themselves) as may preserve a man from fear of the laws, and public
animadversions, and infamy, likewise: which things, in ordinary language, are
commonly adscribed unto virtue; therefore they also, to speak as others did;
sometimes commended virtue, and a good conscience; with many specious words, it
cannot be denied, and plausible reasons, but still upon that account, and no
otherwise. For they still plainly maintained, that there was no difference
between what was called virtue, and vice, but in conceit; and that a wise man
would refrain no manner of pleasure, or voluptuousness, but for the evil
consequence to his bodily health: nor no manner of injustice, or wickedness,
which his fancy did lead him unto, but for fear of the laws, and that he
could never be secure, that it should not be known. This is acknowledged by
Ding. Laertius, and by Gassendus also. By these fine devices and pretenses,
many were caught: so that, they that had a mind to it, or natural inclination,
might live soberly, (and some did, certainly) and innocently, and yet profess
themselves of their Sect. But others, (the far greater number, God knows)
gladly entertaining what they were taught, and was inculcated unto them as a
main principle, that, might but a man secure himself, that he should not be
known, or shake off all fear of the laws, there was no difference between
virtue and vice, in nature, but in opinion only; if they did rob, and kill;
prostitute themselves to man or beast, to satisfy their lust, and the like;
(promising themselves secrecy, as many are apt to do) what reason had they, by
this doctrine, to think the worse of themselves for it?

There is a Letter of one of Epicurus his Whores, etc.

Page 224. line. 4. etc. Where I say; That Gassendus himself was an Atheist,
really, etc. I desire it may be read: That Gassendus himself, though we have
too much occasion to fear, that he has made many, was an Atheist, I will not
say; God forbid; neither of him, nor any other particular man, who does not
openly profess it. I will say more; I believe not. He has commended Piety in
others, as in that incomparable Patron of learning, noble Peireskius, whose
life he has learnedly set out. Learnedly, I am sure; but whether so
faithfully, always, or every where: that is, whether he do not sometimes impose
his thoughts and sentiments, or happily, mistakes, upon that worthy man; by
what was objected to him whilst he lived, by a very learned man, in Paris,
Jean Tristan, Commentaires Historiques, Tome primier, page 108. etc. we may
very well doubt. He has taken good pains, when many much nearer, and more
concerned, (as now, God help, in these times, too many) were silent, to set
out, and lay open, the horrible impieties, and blasphemies, of Robert Flud, a
Welsh, or English (I know not which) Chemist: with a show (if he did not
afterward fall from it) of much zeal, for the Catholic Faith. Lastly, he has
written (though still showing too great desire, and vainly endeavoring, to
extenuate grossest enormities) against some of Epicurus his opinions, very
well. I said therefore, I believe, not. But in discharge of my duty to God, etc.

Page 229. line 7. and then content our selves with what every day does afford.
Add, It is in the Greek, (...): which may also be translated, So, to take care
((...), for (...)) of every days necessaries: or, what may be fit and requisite
from day to day. Which will well agree with those words of our daily Prayers,
(which have troubled many) (...). I do rather incline to this sense, because of
the words that follow, (...): that is, For these also (daily necessaries) must
be taken care of, provided that the care of better things (or Philosophy) go
along, (or, be not intermitted) and those no longer, or further cared for, than
may stand with the vigorous pursuit of the former. Gassendus is much mistaken
in the sense of these words. And so he is, in the sense of those, (...): which
need not any correction. And yet worse, in those, (...) (...), etc. But besides
these, there be other words in the same passage, produced by Gassendus, as the
words of some Epicuraean, (which, I am sure, cannot be true of all he
produces) wherein I find my self as much grounded, as it seems he was. They
that have the old translation of the book, may do well to have recourse unto
it. But to return to those first words, which have given us this occasion;
Gassendus by correcting, etc.

ERRATA: whether of the Press, or Copy.
PAge 2. line 21. read, grounded upon D. 9.5. The Cont. 18. examples 13.31. or
app. 18.26. Galeotus 19.3. But to return to our spiritual rose: the test.
22.20, 21. nature, only 23.10. Series* 32.1. Augerius Ferr. 37.30. writings
39.16. to have c. 40.4. those sup. 50.22. Abstinens Con^ol. 52.13, 14. Sure I
am, in m. 53.20. so much adm. 21. any, whon. 56.33. were comm. 57.7. (...).
58.13. goes on 59.19. particulars 60.25. tempestatib. 28. Querolus 62.33. in
those d. 68.27. to the art. 30. (...) 69.18. Merl. 71.22. Odyss. 74.3. irrupt.
29. So he. Bes. 84.1. in the firmament 87.13. So G. 16. of hair: others, (
trib. 18. it must needs) of th. 89.29. how much m. 90.2. mistake, that it is
not alw. 96.12. nor certain r. 99.6. But upon a pr. 100.3. at least 31. ^eras
102.10. otherwise: of w. 14. thing else; but 103.21. no where 104.2. has m.
ass. 110.18. after I rem. 112.7. Cogn. 114.2. (but not unjust) ag. 12. leni^nd.
116.29. refused 119.1. Vella 7. vulgaria 120.23. worn out 122.19. rugged.
125.3. where I.K. 129.4. Medicam. 5. Archig. 134.33. of what 0.136.33. in ext.
142, 39. does app. cease 144.23. The manner 145.26. of Rome, sent 146.21. ly,
and n.h. of more) 150. last l. was commendable: w. 151.15. Civ. wars 153.6. no
hard thing to a. 157.30. generation only: 160.10, 16, etc. Naudaeus 161.32.
ocular 165.32. Empiricks 167.15. read it 169.20. would I 170.26. dealt with
174.17. vine tend. 175.30. Pipinus 176.4. datum 6. corus^. 18. contrect. 22.
dict^^ mir. 25. ma cum ut. 28. ut te 178.16. Eve. 35. Veron. 179.9. played
180.23. Levinus Lemn. 184.5. eget 185.3. that are such: f. 186.18, 19. So he,
the m. 188.7. it may be true 8. true, as some learned men are of opinion, of
an. 192.29. nev. heard 206.32. number 215.28. chapter. 217.2. can say 2^1.23.
to speak of Ep. 224.15. this, that they m. 24. The R. therefore w. 28, 29.
futility of D. 225. last l. that w. 228.2. discommended 22. does not in P.
233.28. The 234.22. or discret. 235.30. Arion 238.18. sent 241.34, 35. I have
at this t. 250.7. no great account, or auth. 25. quond. 254.6. Peucerus 256.11.
Brennus 258.10. besides 400.260.24. besides w. 265.22. and a Pro. 266: last l.
storians, now extant 268.16. works of th. 271.5. where in th. 275.3. could not
be h. 279.21. Maer^is 285.19. teach others cont. 30. Mad 286.16. of better or.
34. Smyndir. 289.9. which, since th. 10. rows 26, 27. had four thousand
rowers, besides mariners 400. and s. 31. the number. 290.25. ^iorouanti 293.11.
Will. T. 294.23. and see w. 298. 6. and when 291.31. forgo 300.17. or Euth.
304.18. to the wit a.


