(...)


(...). OR, THE GOVERNMENT Of the WORLD In the MOON: A COMICAL HISTORY.
Written By that Famous Wit and Cavaleer of France, Monsieur Cyrano Bergerac:
And Done into ENGLISH By THO. StSERF, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. Cottrel, and are to be sold by Hum. Robinson at the
three Pigeons in Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord George Douglas, and Lieutenant General Andrew
Rutherford, and to all the Noble Officers in those two Renowned Regiments of
Scots, in service of the most Christian King of France.
Right Honble and Noble Gentlemen:
I Have looked round my self, and find among all Noble Persons who preserve
Honor and Loyalty (in its splendour, as well as integrity) there is none so
proper for my Address, as your Noble selves: Were it otherwise, I should not
step forth of our own Island; which though it have yet (blessed be God) many
Heroical and Excellent Souls, yet their Liberty and Fortunes are so clouded and
besieged by the iniquity of our distractions, that their Thoughts are took up
rather to seek then bestow Protection. And (to lay my soul naked) I confess I
do not send this Book to your Honors because I knew not to whom else to
inscribe it; but I first undertook it, to testify to the world, how happy the
name of Scotland is (even now when the waves seem almost to cover her) by the
fame and flourishing estate of your Regiments. For though that Nation be
Eclipsed at home, yet she shines bright in France. Should I now offer to
marshall particulars, who will pity me for falling short, when they see me
enterprise things almost impossible? I confess I was so vain to entertain some
such thoughts, and was beginning with the Great name of Douglas; but I found my
self plunged in such a Gulf of Honorable Actions, as all my life would not
serve for the History of that Glorious Family; because at all places and
occasions, where the work is Magnificent, they are Jamais Arriere. The Motto of
the Douglasses.


I offered then at the noble Rutherford: but his vast Intellectuals (with the
weight of his Acquests on the Austrian powers at Arras, Montmedy, Gravling and
other places) did so overpress me, that (without more Forehead then Wit) I
could attempt no further. And therefore I sat down with this safe resolution,
that it was little less then frenzy to grasp at all, when I saw the
Principals were grown incomprehensible. You are so many, and there are so few
Noble Families in Scotland to whom you are not allied, that to speak of you
all, were to undertake the whole Nation. The Scots Achievements in the French
Wars are legible in all their Histories; and were it possible to be expunged,
you would record it over again by your personal Actions. And (which is the
grand comfort of nowdrooping Scotland) your two Regiments are the Nurseries of
all future and succeeding Honor that belongs to our Country.

As for my self and Book (I call it mine, though I be but its Translator) I
made particular choice of this, as well for the Subject Matter, as for the
Author. I see the world so shuffled here below, that I thought it safest to
present the Government of a World above, drawn by the hand of Monsieur
Bergerac, who was not only of your Profession, but also of your Army.

My chiefest aim (next to my particular Devotion to your Honors) is to mind the
World, that the Lilies of France never flourish with more security, then when
guarded by the Scots Thistle; for whose prosperity (especially in your Noble
Persons) no man alive is a more absolute Votary, then

Your Honors most Humble admirer, and most obedient Servant. THO. StSERF.

A COMICAL HISTORY Of the WORLD In the MOON
THe Moon was at the full, the Sky unclouded, and the hour of the night was
nine; when returning from Clamard, not far from Paris (where Monsieur Cuigy's
son, who is Lord of the place, had nobly treated some of my Friends and my
self) the different opinions that Saffron-Circle caused, served largely to
entertain us upon our journey: Fixing our eyes on that great Star, some took it
for the Loop-hole of Heaven; others protested, it was a French Platine whereon
Diana smoothed Apollo's Bands; and there were some, who would rather have it
the Sun, who having disrobed himself of his glorious Rays, peept through a
hole, to spy what the World was doing in his supposed absence: and I said, I
who am willing to mingle my Enthusiasmes with yours, do believe, without
amusing my self with those sharp conceits with which you tickle the time into a
speedier pace, that the Moon is a World like this, and by which ours is
interchangeably believed a Moon. Some of the Company presented me with a loud
laughter: May be, said I, now there is some one, who is as much jeered in the
Moon for believing this Globe a World. But it was in vain to allege many
grave Authors who were of the same opinion; it did but more efficaciously move
their splenetick lungs to a louder merriment.

In the mean time, this opinion (the boldness whereof) went half against my
stomach; but confirmed by contradiction, plunged it self so deeply into my
fancy (the rest of the way) that I conceived a thousand definitions of the
Moon, whereof I could not well be delivered; so that striving to enforce this
odd fancy, by almost serious Arguments, I wanted but little of being quite
confirmed in my opinion; when by miracle or accident, Providence, Fortune, or
what one may term a Vision, Fiction or Chimaera, or folly if you please, I was
opportunely furnished with occasion for this discourse: for being come home, I
went into my Study, where I found upon the table, a Book opened without my
help, written by Cardan; which though I had no design to read, yet as it were
forcibly, I cast my eyes upon a story of that Philosopher, who relates, that
studying one night by a Candle, he saw two great old men come through the
doors, though bolted; who after many Questions he propounded to them, answered
finally, that they were Inhabitants of the Moon, and then vanished. I was so
surprised, First, to find a Book brought thither of it self: Secondly, at the
time and leaf, where I found it opened; that I took the connection of Accidents,
for an inspiration to learn Mankind the truth of the habitable Moon: What Is
this, said I, after having talked of a thing all day, and a Book which may be
the only one that treats so particularly of that matter, to fly from my
Library upon my table, and be so far capable of Reason, as to open it self,
just where so wondrous an accident is related; to have mine eyes as it were
forcibly attracted upon it; and finally, to furnish my Fancy with reflections,
and my Will with the designs I hold!

Without doubt (continued I) the two old men which appeared to that learned
man, have taken down this Book, and opened it in this place, that they might
spare themselves the trouble of so long a conference they had with Cardan: But
straight added I, I can never be fully cleared of this doubt without ascending
thither. But I presently asked my self, Why not? Prometheus heretofore durst
steal fire out of Heaven it self; Am I less daring then he? Then why should I
fear a less favorable success?

To these conceits (which may be perchance called the effects of a feverish
distemper) succeeded the hopes of effecting this fine journey; so that I shut
my self up in a Countreyhouse, distant from any resort, to accomplish my
wishes; where having flattered my Fancy with some means proportionate to that
subject, at last I resolved upon these for my Heavenly voyage.

I had fastened about me a many small vials filled with Dew; upon which the Sun
darting most violent Beams, the heat whereof attracting, as it does the
grossest Clouds, drew me insensibly above the middle Region: but as this
attraction was somewhat too rapid, and in stead of approaching the Moon, as I
pretended, I found my self further off, then at my departure; I began to break
some of my glasses, till I found that my weight had mastered the attraction; so
that I began to descend toward the Earth. I was not mistaken: for a little
after I landed; and to reckon the hour I departed at, it should have been
midnight; yet there I perceived the Sun in the height of the Horizon, which
made it noon: I leave you to imagine how my astonishment was really so great,
that not knowing to what I should attribute this wonder, I was tempted to
believe, that in favor of my boldness, God had repeated that Miracle, and once
more fixed the Sun to the Hemisphere, to give light to so worthy an enterprise:
but what more amazed me, was, that I knew not the Country where I was; for
ascending in a direct line, as I thought, I did imagine, that I should have
fallen just where I took my rise: yet equipaged as I was, I walked toward a
kind of desert ground, from whence I perceived some smoke; I was hardly within
pistol-shot, when I saw my self surrounded by a number of naked men; they
seemed much startled at the rencountre, for I believe I was the first they had
ever seen garnished with bottles: and to overthrow all interpretations might
have been given to that clothing, they saw that in my march I scarce touched
the ground; for they did not know, that with the least shake of my Body, the
ardor of the Midday-Beams, drew me and my dew upwards; and had not most of my
bottles been broak, I might have soared into the Air before their eyes. I would
have accosted them; but in a moment, as if their fear had lent them wings, they
flew into the next forest; yet I caught one, whose legs betrayed his heart: I
asked him with a great deal of trouble (for I was quite out of breath) how far
he reckoned it from thence to Paris, and how long people had gone naked in
France, and why they so frightfully avoided me? This old man to whom I talked,
was of an Olive-colour, who presently cast himself at my feet, and joining his
hands behind his head, opened his mouth, and shut his eyes; he mumbled a great
while betwixt his teeth, but I could perceive no distinct articulation; so that
I fancied his discourse to be like the confused blattering of a dumb-man.

A small while after, I perceived a company of Soldiers marching toward me,
to the sound of a Drum, some of which did separate themselves to take a view of
me: when they were near enough to hear what I said, I humbly interrogated where
I was: You are in France, answered they; But who the Devil has put you in this
condition? and how comes it, that we are not acquainted with your Worship? Are
the Ships arrived? and are you going to advertise the Governor? And pray why
have you divided your Aquavitae into so many bottles? To which I answered, that
it was not the Devil that had put me in that condition; that they did not know
me, because they could not be acquainted with all men; and that I never knew
that the River of Seine was navigable to Paris; that I had nothing to say to
the Marshal de l'Hospital; and that I was not laden with aqua-vitae. Ho, ho,
Blade, cry they, You're a merry Gentleman; the Governor will go near to know
you in faith. Then they conducted me to their squadron by the arm, where I was
given to understand that I was really in France, but with the addition of
Novella: so that some while after, I was presented to the Viceroy, who enquired
of my Country, my name, and quality; and after I had satisfied him in all, and
related the agreeable success of my Voyage; whether he believed me, or whether
he only seemed to believe me, however he had the goodness to command me to be
lodged in his own Appartement: it was no small addition of my good fortune, to
meet with a man capable of lofty imaginations, and who was not amazed when I
said, that the world had turned about in the time of my elevation, being that I
rose within two leagues of Paris, and fell as it were in a perpendicular line
in Canada.

At night, when I was just going to bed, he came into my chamber, saying, I
should not have come to disturb your rest, if I had not believed that a man who
had found out the secret of riding so much way in half a day, could not be
ignorant of a means not to be tired. But you know not (continued he) the
pleasant quarrel, which I have had about you with our Fathers, who will needs
have you to be a Magician; nay the greatest favor they can allow you, is to
believe you an Impostor: and in effect, that Notion which you attribute to the
Earth, is a nice Paradox: and for my part I tell you truly, the reason why I am
not of your opinion, is, that though you parted from Paris but yesterday, yet
you might arrive as you did in this Country without the motion of the Earth:
for the Sun that drew you up by the means of your bottles might bring you
hither, since (according to Ptolomy and the modern Philosophers) he has that
Circular motion which you attribute to the Earth: and what solid Reason can you
give for the Suns stability when we see his motion; or for the rapid motion of
the Earth, when we find it so firm under us? Sir, (answered I) these are the
reasons (as near as I can judge) which tie us to this belief. First of all,
Common sense obliges us to believe, that the Sun is placed in the Center of the
Universe, being that all the Bodies which are in nature, have need of that
Radical heat; and that he inhabits the heart of the whole, that he might the
radier satisfy each part; and that the cause of Generation is placed in the
midst of all Bodies, to act with more equality and agility: So Wise Nature
placed the Privities of man; the cores of apples in their Center, the kernel in
the midst of all fruit; and the Onyon conserves (with an hundred rindes) the
precious germe, from whence ten millions of others must draw their Original.
For this apple is a little Universe of it self; and the kernel thereof, hotter
then any of the other parts, is its Sun, which casts round about it the
conservatory heat of that Globe; and the Germ or sprout of the Onyon, is the
little Sun of that small World, which does warm and nourish the vegetive salt
of that body: which being supposed, I say, the world having need of the light,
the heat and influence of that great fire, turns round about it, to receive the
virtues which conserves it, equally in all its parts: for it would be as
ridiculous to believe, that great Luminous Body should wheel about a Punctum,
which it has no need of, as to believe when we see a roasted Lark, that it was
turned by the Chimney: otherwise for the Sun to Carracole thus, would look as
if the Physician had need of the Patient; and that the strong ought to submit
to the weak; and the great serve the little; and that in stead of a Ships
coasting round an Island, the Island should turn about the Ship. If it be
difficult for you to comprehend how so heavy a Mass can move; Pray tell me, are
the Heavens and Stars which you affim so solid, lighter? nay, it is easier for
us (who are assured of the World's roundness) to conclude its Motion by its
Figure. But why must we suppose the Heaven's round, and we do not know it; and
that of all Figures, if it have any other, it must want that motion? I do not
reproach you, your Excentriques, nor your Concentriques, nor your Epicycles,
all which you can but confusedly explicate, and I save my Systeme; let us only
speak of the Natural Causes of this Motion: you are fain to fly to
Intelligences, which move and govern your Globes; but I without disquieting the
most Sovereign Essence (who without doubt, has created Nature perfect, and
with whose Wisdom it must stand to have finished it; so that having
accomplished it for one thing, it would not leave it defective in another) say,
that the Beams of the Sun, and his influences, coming to strike upon it by
their Circulation, makes it turn, as we do a Globe by a stroke of our hands;
or as the fumes which it breaths from its breast continually on the side the
Sun is of, repercussed by the cold of the Middle Region, breaths back upon
their mother, whom they cannot hit but slopingly; by which means she is turned.

The explication of the other two Motions, are less knotty: for pray consider a
little: -- At these words the Viceroy interrupted me. I had rather dispense
with you for that trouble (for I have read some Books of Gassendi upon that
Subject) but upon condition that you will hear what one of our Fathers answered
me one day, who maintained your opinion; in effect, said he, I imagine that the
Earth turns, not for the Reasons which Copernicus alleadges, but because the
fire of Hell being enclosed in the Center of the Earth, the Damned, who would
fly the ardor of its flames, crawl up against the vault, and so turn the Earth,
as a turn-spit Dog does when he is shut up in a wheel.

We were some while praising the zealous conceit of the good father; and in the
end the Viceroy told me, he wondered much, that the Systeme of Ptolomy (being so
unlikely) should be so generally received. Sir, answered I, the greatest part
of mankind, who judge by their senses, let themselves be persuaded by their
eyes; and as he who sayls in a bounding Ship, believes himself fixed, and that
the land moves; so men wheeling with the Earth about the Heavens did believe
that it was the Heavens that moved about them. To which we may add the
insupportable arrogance of Mankind, which fancies, that Nature was only
created to serve it; as if it were likely, that the Sun, whose Body is four
hundred and thirty times bigger then the Earth, should only have been lighted
to ripen their Medlars, or enlarge the Sphere of their Cabbages: For my part
(far from consenting to their insolence) I believe that the Planets are Worlds
above the Sun, and that the fixed Stars are Suns which have Planets about them,
which is to say, Worlds which we see not: from hence, because of their
smallness, is the cause that their borrowed light cannot reach us. And in good
faith, why should we imagine that such spacious Globes as those, should be
uninhabited deserts; and that ours, because we live in it, has been built for a
dozen of little proud things? Must we, because the Sun directs our Days and
Years, believe that it was only made, that we might not break our heads
against the Walls? No, no, If that visible Deity give its light to mankind, it
is by accident; as the Kings torch may light a beggar, that is passing the
street at the same time. But Sir, said he, if the fixed Stars are so many Suns,
as you assure me, one may conclude from thence, that the World is infinite;
being that it is probable, that the People of that World which is above a fixed
Star, which you take for a Sun, do discover above them other fixed Stars; which
we cannot perceive from hence, and that in this sort we may judge ad infinitum.

Do not doubt it, answered I; as God could create the soul immortal, he could
in the same manner make the World infinite; if Eternity be nothing else but a
lasting without limits, and infinity an unbounded reach: and God himself would
be limited, supposing the World not infinite, being he could not be where
nothing is; and he cannot increase the World, without adding somewhat to his
own existence, by beginning to be, where he was not before.

We must therefore believe, that as we behold Saturn and Jupiter from hence; so
if we were in either of them, we should discover many Worlds of which we are
ignorant; and that the infinity of the Universe is thus formed. 'Faith,
answered he, you may say what you please, but I cannot comprehend this
infinity. Why, pray, answered I, do you comprehend that Nothing, which is
beyond it? No certainly, for when you think of that Nothing, your imagination
represents it to you like Wind or Air, and that is something. But infinity, if
you do not comprehend it in general, you do at least in parts, being that it
is not difficult to suppose to our selves, other Earth, Air, or Fire, then what
we just see; now infinity is nothing but an unlimitted contexture of all these.
But if you ask me, how these Worlds were created, since the Holy Scriptures
mention but one of Gods making: my answer is, that I dispute no longer; for if
you will oblige me to give you an account of my imaginations, that stops my
mouth, and makes me confess, that in such things, I shall always submit my
reason to faith. He told me that his Question was to be blamed; but I reassumed
my Idea, and added, that all those other Worlds which we do not see, or which
we but imperfectly believe, are nothing but the froth or foam of the Suns
purgations: for how could those great fires subsist, if they were not fastened
to some matter capable of their nourishment? as fire rejects the ashes that
smother it; or as gold does separate it self in the crucible, when it grows to
perfection, from the Marcasite which lessens his Carat; or again, as our hearts
disingage themselves by vomit from the indigested humors which assault them: so
those Suns every day disgorge, and purge themselves of all matter obnoxious to
their fires; but when they have quite consumed that matter which entertains
them, you need not doubt but they will scatter themselves about to seek a new
pasture, and fasten upon the Worlds they have formed heretofore, and
particularly, to the nearest: then those great fires confounding afresh all
those bodies, will eject them higgledy-piggledy from every part as before; and
so purifying themselves by little and little, begin to serve for Suns to those
little Worlds they have created by the vomit of their own spheres; which was
certainly the cause why the Pythagoreans foretold the general confusion. This
is no ridiculous imagination; for this new frame where we are, produces a
convincing reason; the vast continent of America, is the one half of the Earth,
which in despite of our Forefathers, (who had rounded the Ocean a thousand
times) was not discovered. Neither was it any more then many Isles and
Peninsula's, and mountains, which have swelled in our Globe, when the Sun has
purged himself of Rusts, which have been rejected, and condensed into bodies
capable of attraction from our Center, may be a little after in less particles,
or may be all together in a mass: this is not so unreasonable, but that St.
Augustine would have given his applause to it, if these countries had been
discovered in his days; since he, whose genius was very clear sighted, assures
us, that in his time, the Earth was flat like an Oven, and that it swam on the
water like half an Orange. But if I have ever the honor to meet you in France,
I will let you see by the means of an admirable glass, that certain obscurities
which from hence seem spots, are Worlds that are framing.

My eyes which were almost closed with the period of this discourse, obliged
the Viceroy to leave me: the next day, and some other days following, we had
entertainments of the like nature; but some while after, the troublesome
affairs of the Province disturbed our Philosophy, and I revived my curiosity of
visiting the Moon.

As Soon as she appeared in our Nocturnal Hemisphere, I went musing up and down
the Woods, my fancy still agitating my propounded enterprise; and at last, one
Midsummer Eve, when they were at Counsel in the Fort, to determine whether they
should succor the Savages of the Country against the Europeans; I stole
behind our habitation, to the top of a small hill; where you shall hear what I
executed: I had framed a Machine, which I did suppose capable of raising me as
high as I pleased; so that nothing of what I thought was necessary being
wanting, I placed my self in it, and precipitated my self from a Rock into the
Air; but because I had not well taken my measures, I rudely saluted the valley
with my Bulk; yet all bruised as I was, without being abashed, I returned to my
chamber; where I took beef-marrow, and anointed my Body; for I was mortified
from the Noddle to the Heel: and after having fortifyed my heart with a bottle
of cordial Essence, I returned to seek my Engine, but in vain, for cerain
Soldiers who were sent into the Forest to cut wood for the Bon-fire of that
day, having found it by chance, had brought it to the Citadel; where after many
explications of what it could be, and at last having found out the spring, some
were of opinion that fireworks should be fastened unto it, being their rapidity,
and the springs agitating its large wings, would elevate it mightily; so that
none should see it, without believing it a fiery flying Dragon. In the mean
time I sought it with all diligence; and for a period to my labor, found it in
the Market place of Lebee, just as they were giving fire to their squibs. The
grief of finding the labor of my hands in so imminent danger, did so transport
me, that I 'gan to seize the arm of the Soldier who was to be engineer; I
snatched his match from him, and flung my self furiously into my Engine, to dash
in pieces the Artifice with which they had adorned it: But I arrived too late,
for scarce were both my legs in, when I was snatched up in a Cloud: the horror
with which I was surrounded, did not so much confound the faculties of my soul,
but that I remember every thing that happened in that instant: for as soon as
the flame had devoured one rank of crackers, which they had disposed by six and
six, and a priming to each half dozen; another rank began to play the Devil,
and another; so that the Saltpeter taking fire, did by increasing, avoid the
danger: the consuming of the matter was the reason that the Artifice failed;
and when I thought of nothing but leaving my head upon the top of some
mountain, I found (without stirring my self at all) my Elevation continued; and
my Engine taking a farewell of me, I perceived it to fall toward the Earth
again. This extraordinary adventure did swell my heart with so high a joy, that
ravished to see my self delivered from certain danger, I had the impudence to
Philosophy upon it; so as examining with my eyes and thoughts, what should be
the cause, I perceived my skin all puffed up and greasy, with the Marrow I had
applied to the bruises of my last plunge: I found that the Moon being in the
decline, and in that quarter using to exhale the Marrow of Animals, she sucked
mine (with which I was anointed) with so much the more force as her Globe was
nearer to me, and that no interposition of Clouds did weaken her vigor.

When I had shot through, according to the calculation, I had more then three
parts of the distance betwixt the Earth and the Moon; I found my feet turn over
of a sudden, without any apparent jerk; nay, I had not perceived it, if I had
not found my head laden with the rest of my body: truly, I found that I did
not tumble toward our World, for though I found my self betwixt two Moons, and
that I noted, how I in going from the one, approached the other, yet I was
certain that the biggest was our Globe; because that after a day or two's
voyage, the distant refractions of the Sun coming to confound the diversity of
bodies and climates, it appeared to me like a large Holland-Cheese gilded.

This made me imagine, that I biased toward the Moon; and I confirmed my self
in that opinion, when I remembered that I had but begun to fall after three
quarters of the way; for, said I, that mass being less then Ours, it must
follow, that the Sphere of its activity is of less reach, and that consequently
I felt the force of its Center later.

In fine, after having been a great while falling, as you may judge; for the
violence of my precipitation did hinder me from marking it; the last effigies
of my memory was, that I found my self entangled upon a tree, with two or three
large boughs which I in my fall had broken, and my face plaistered with an
Apple: so that you may easily guess, that without this hazard, I had been dead
a thousand times. I have often made reflection since upon the vulgar report,
which affirms, that precipitating ones self from a high place, one is
suffocated before he comes to ground; and I concluded from my adventure, that
they ly'd, or that by the means of that efficacious juice of the Apple which
had watered my mouth, my soul was recalled, who could not yet be far from my
carcass, which was tyte, and well disposed to the faculties of life: in effect,
as soon as I touched the ground, my pain vanished, before it could be imprinted in
my memory; and the hunger which I had sustained during my voyage, left nothing
behind it, but a slight remembrance of having lost it.

I was scarce got up, and had observed the largest of certain great Rivers,
which finally compose a Lake; when the spirits or invisible souls of the
simples exhaled in that Country, came to re-gall my smelling; and I found that
the stones were not hard nor craggy, but did carefully soften, when feet
oppressed them: I straight lighted upon a star-like Platform of five Avenues,
whose trees kissed the Heavens with their lofty Foresterial tops; sending my
eyes post from their feet to their heads, and then recalling them the same way
back, I was in doubt, whether the Earth bore them, or whether they did not
rather hang by the Roots: their elevated fronts seemed to groan under the
weight of the Celestial Globes, and their arms stretched to Heaven, embracing
to beg of the Stars the pure benignity of their influences, and to receive it
in the bed of the Elements, before it had lost any thing of its innocence:
there on every side, the flowers, without the help of any Gardener, but Nature,
breath so rich (though wild) a sent, that it would awaken the most dull, and
satisfy the nicest smell. There th'incarnadine color of a Rose, lolling upon
the Eglantine, or the bright azure of a Violet lurking under the rushes, leave
us no liberty of choice, but make us judge them both handsome. There the Circle
of the Year's composed of an endless Spring; there no venomous Plant is bred,
for its breath betrays its conservation, and the Brooks with a delightful
murmur, relate their voyages to the Pebbles; there a thousand plumed Choristers
fill the Forest with Echoes of their melodious tunes; and the tottering
assembly of those Divine Musicians is so general, that one would believe each
leaf in the wood had assumed the tongue and figure of a Nightingale: Nay, Echo
pleases her self so much in their Aires, that to hear her repeat them, one
would imagine she had a great desire to learn them. On the side of this Wood
there are two Meadows, whose continual greenness composes an Emerauld, which
outlasts your sight: the confused paintings that the Spring bestows on a
hundred little flowers, disperses their shadows into one another, with such an
agreeable confusion, that one knows not whether being agitated with sweet
Western winds, they are in chase of one another; or whether they fly the
embraces of the wanton Zephyrus: Nay, one might take this Meadow for the Ocean,
for it was like a Sea, which affords no shore to the sight; so that my eye
frighted to have wandered so far without finding a harbor, I presently sent my
thoughts to its succor, which did believe it the end of the World; persuading
themselves that such delicious places were capable of charming Heaven to their
conjuncture. In the midst of so vast and pleasant a Carpet, runs a silver
Brook, whose shore is crowned with a verdant Bank, stuck with violets and
Primroses, and a hundred other little flowers, that seem to crowd which should
first behold themselves in that Crystal stream: it was yet in the Cradle, for
it was but new born, and that young and polished Visage retained no srown; the
large Circles it makes, in returning still to its self, show how unwilling it
is to leave its native country; and as if it were ashamed to be courted so
near her its Mother, it is murmuring thrust back my hand that would have touched
it. The Beasts that came thither to quench their thirst (more rational then
those of our World) seemed surprised to see day break toward the Horizon,
whilst they might behold the Sun with the Antipodes, and durst not bow forwards
upon the shore, for fear of falling into the Firmament.

I must confess that at the sight of so many splendid things, I found my self
tickled with those agreeable pains, they say, the Embryon feels at the effusion
of its soul: my old hair fell off, to give place to other hair, which grew
thicker, and was softer; I found my youth restored, my face changed to a
vermilion hue; and my natural heat by little and little, to mingle with my
Radical humidity; in fine, I retired into fourteen years of age.

I had scarce gone a mile through a Forest of Jessemins and Myrtles, when I
perceived lying in the shade, something that stirred; it was a young man, whose
Majestic beauty almost compelled me to adoration; but he rose to hinder me,
crying out, It is not to me, but to God you owe these humiliations. Sir,
answered I, you see a person amazed with so many Miracles, that I know not how
to repel my wonder; for coming from a World which you here without doubt take
for a Moon, I thought that I was arrived in another, which those in my Country
call also a Moon; when I find my self in a Paradise, and (to appearance) at
the feet of a God, who will not be worshipped.

Except what you say of a God, whose Creature I am, the rest is truth; for this
Land is the Moon, which you behold in your Globe, and this place you stand
upon, is -- For in those times the imagination of man was so strong, being not
yet corrupted, neither by debauches nor the crudity of his sustenance, nor by
the alterations of sickness; and he being excited by a violent desire of
approaching this Sanctuary, and his Mass growing light, by the fire of this
Enthusiasme, he was elevated in the same sort, as some Philosophers have been
seen, whose imagination was strongly fixed upon something, carried into the Air
by ravishments, which you term Ecstasies.

The Woman, th'infirmity of whose sex rendered her weaker and less hot, would
without doubt not have had th'imagination vigorous enough to overcome, by the
contention of her will, the ponderousness of the matter; but being there was
very little -- The sympathy by which this half was tied to its whole, drew her
to him as he ascended, as Amber does a straw; as the Loadstone turns to the
North, from whence it was dig'd; so he drew that part of himself, as the Sea
draws the floods which are issued from her.

When they were arrived in your Land, they inhabited the Country betwixt
Mesopotamia and Arabia; some people knew them by the name of --; and others,
under that of Prometheus, whom the Poets feign to have stole Celestial fire,
because of the Posterity he begat, endued with as perfect a soul as that he
possessed himself; so that to inhabit your World, this Man abandoned Ours: but
the Most Wise would not permit so happy a Mansion without inhabitants,
permitting some Ages after --: wearied with the company of men, whose primitive
innocence was corrupted, was willing to leave them: yet this Person thought no
place a secure retreat against the ambition of his kindred, which was already at
daggers drawing, about the partition of your World, but the happy abode his
Great Grandfather had so often spoke to him of, unto which no body yet had
observed the way; but his imaginations supplied that, for as he remarqu'd, --
He filled two great vessels, which he glew'd closely up, and fastened them under
his armpits; the smoke presently (whose property was to ascend, and which could
not penetrate the Metal) raised those vessels (and with them, that great man)
into the Air: when he was come so far as the Moon, and had cast his eyes upon
this fine Garden, an usual shivering with joy, made him easily see, that this
was the blessed abode his Great Grandfather had so often mentioned to have
lived in; he quickly unloosed the vessels which he had fastened like wings about
his shoulders, and that so happily, that he was scarce four fathoms in the Air
above the Moon, when he dismissed his Fins; yet this was high enough to have hurt
him, without the great compass of his Robe, which the Wind swelled, and so
sustained him in a gentle descent to the Earth; for the two vessels, they flew
to a certain place, where they have remained yet, and it is those which you
this day term, The Balance --.

I must now relate unto you in what manner I came hither; I believe you have
not forgot my nurse, in regard it is not long since I told it you: you must
then know, that I lived by the Bank of one of the famousest Rivers of the
World, where amongst my Books, I led a life unreproved, although it glided
away: in the mean time, as the light of my understanding augmented, so did my
knowledge of what I was ignorant of before. Our Wise men never put me in mind
of The Illustrious Mada, but I sigh at the remembrance of his high and perfect
Philosophy; I despaired of ever acquiring it, when one day, after having muz'd
a great while, I took a Loadstone about two foot in square, which I put in a
small Oven, and after it was well purged, precipitated, and dissolved, I drew
the attractive calcined, and reduced it to the bigness of an ordinary sized
ball.

After these preparations, I caused a Machine to be made of Iron, but very
light, into which I entered; and being well seated in the seat, I cast my
Magnetique Bowl into the Air. Now this Machine which I had purposely made more
heavy in the middle then in any of the extremities, was presently elevated in
an equal balance; for the middle was the most efficaciously attracted; so that
as soon as I arrived whither my Lodestone had drawn me, I cast it up again into
the Air. But Sir, said I (interrupting him) how could you direct your bowl so
justly, that it did not fall on one side of your Chariot? I do not at all
wonder at that, replied he, for the Lodestone being cast into the Air, did
draw the iron to it directly; so that it was impossible to mount on the one
side thereof; nay, give me leave to tell you, that holding my bowl in my hand,
I ascended, sin ce the Chariot it self followed the bowl that was above it: But
the jerk of the iron, to unite it self to the bowl was so violent, that it made
me bend double, so that I durst but once attempt this new experience. Really,
it was a most admirable sight to behold, for the steel of this flying house,
which I had carefully polished, did so dartingly and briskly reflect Apollo's
beams, that I thought my self all on fire. In fine, after often flinging and
flying, I at last arrived (as I doubt not but you did) to a condition of
tumbling toward this World; and because in that instant I held my bowl in my
hand, my Engine (the seat whereof pressed me to approach its attractive) did not
forsake me; all that I now feared was, the breaking of my neck; to hinder the
which, I now and then would toss up my bowl, so that my Chariot (stayed by this
Magnetique virtue) did mitigate the fall; for in effect, as it happened
afterward, when I perceived my self within two or three hundred fathoms of the
Earth, I launcht my bowl on all sides of the Chariot, sometimes here, sometimes
there, till I perceived my self within a certain distance; then did I fling it
up with all my force, and my Engine following it, I gently slipped on one side,
to fall as softly as I could upon the sand; so that my fall was no ruder, then
if I had fell my own height: I need not tell you the amazement that the sight
of so many Wonders procured me, being it was so like that I lately beheld you
possessed withal, etc.

I had scarce tasted of it, when a thick cloud involved my soul, I saw not any
one near me, and my eyes could not grow acquainted with the least tract in all
the Hemisphere of my Voyage; and yet I forgot nothing of what had happened
unto me: when I have since made reflection upon this Miracle, I did fancy to my
self, that the fruit which I had bitten, had not quite rendered me brutish, for
my teeth piercing it, found themselves moistened by the liquor, whose efficacy
had dispersed the malignity of the rind. I was extremely surpised to find my
self in an unknown Country all alone: I gained nothing by eagerly viewing the
fields about me, no creature presented me with the consolation of their sight:
in fine, I resolved to travel till Fortune should direct me to the company of
some Beasts, or the period of my days.

She graciously heard my prayers, for within half a quarter of a league I met
two mighty Beasts, one of the which stopped just before me, the other fled
swiftly to its den (at least as I then thought) because I saw him return a
while after accompanied with more then seven or eight hundred of the same
kind, which environed me: when I beheld them near hand, I perceived they
were formed like unto us; this adventure made me remember stories I had heard
my Nurse relate of Sirens, Fauns, and Satyrs; ever now and then, they raised
such shouts (caused I suppose by the admiration of my sight) that I believed my
self almost grown monstrous; at last, one of these Beast-like men taking me by
the neck (as a Wolf that plunders a Sheep) flung me upon his back, and so
carried me to their Town, where I was more confounded then before, when I knew
them to be men; and yet I met not one, which did not walk upon all four.

When these people saw me so little (for the most of them are twelve cubits
long) and my body only sustained by two legs, they could not believe me a man;
for they held, that Nature having bestowed upon man (as well as Beasts) two
legs and two arms, they ought as well as they to make use of them: and in
effect, when I have since made reflection upon this subject, I did not find this
situation of the body very extravagant, when I remember that Children who have
no other tutors then Nature, would march upon all four, and do not erect
themselves upon two feet, but by the busy care of their nurses; who (to that
effect) use little Chariots, and swath them in such sort, as they should not
fall upon all four, the figure or aptest seat for the repose of our bodies.

I have since demanded the interpretation of what they then said, which was,
that I was certainly the female of the Queens little Animals; so I was in that
quality carried to the townhouse, where I observed by their murmurings and
postures, that they were consulting what I was: when they had a long time
conferred, one of the Burgers, who had the keeping of all the extraordinary
Beasts, did beseech the Mayor and Aldermen, to commit me to his charge, till
the Queen should send for me to accompany my Male; which was easily granted
him: who straightway carried me to his lodging, where he instructed me in many
odd tricks, as tumbling, and making of mouths; and in the afternoons, he would
fix a certain price at the door, for those that would see me: but the Heavens
pitying my griefs, and angry to see the Temple of their Master profaned,
permitted me one day, as I was tied to a chain (with which that cursed
Mountebank made me whisk up and down to divert the company) to hear the voice
of a man, who demanded me in Greek, who I was. I was extremely astonished to
hear him talk there, as they did in our World; after he had questioned me some
time, I answered him, and in fine, I related to him in general the whole
success of my enterprise and voyage; he did consolate me; and I remember he
said to me, Well, my son, in short, you must submit to the Errors of your own
World; the vulgar sort here as well as there, will not be acquainted with what
they do not understand: but know, that you are but justly served; for if any
of this World had ascended into yours, with the confidence of stiling
themselves humane, your learned men would strangle him for a Monster: after
which he promised me to advertise the Court of my disaster; and added he, as
soon as I heard the rumor that run of you, I came to see you, whom I found to
be (what you said) a man of the other world, wherein I have heretofore
traveled: for he had frequented Greece, where he was called the Spirit of
Socrates; and after the death of that great Philosopher, he had governed and
instructed Epaminondas at Thebes; after which (passing over to the Romans)
justice obliged him to fix upon young Cato; after whose decease he dedicated
himself to Brutus. All these great Persons leaving behind them nothing but the
Fantasms of their virtues; he had retired with the rest of his companions into
Temples and solitary places. At last, said he, the people of your World became
so gross and stupid, that I and my Companions lost all the pleasure ve took
heretofore in instructing them: I believe you have heard discourse of us, for
they called us Oracles, Nymphs, Genius's, Fauns, Foresterial Gods, Lemur's,
Larva's, Lamias, Farfadits, Nayades, Incubus's, Shades, Manes, Visions, and
Chimera's: we abandoned your World in the Reign of Augustus; a little after, I
appeared to Drusus, son to Livia, (who waged war in Germany) and forbid him to
proceed. It is not long since I arrived the second time; within this last
hundred years, I had a commission to make one voyage more: I have roved up and
down Italy, and conversed it may be with some persons of your acquaintance: One
day amongst others, I appeared to Cardan, as he studied, I instructed him in a
great many things; in recompense whereof, he promised me, to leave to Posterity
the knowledge from whom he learned those secrets he treated of in his writings:
I visited Agrippa, the Abbot Triteme, Doctor Faustus, La Bross, Caesar, and a
certain Cabal of young Fellows, who were vulgarly called, The Knights of the
Red Cross, whom I instructed in a great many knacks, and Natural Sciences,
which without doubt has made them believed to be great Magicians: I was
acquainted with Campanella; it was I that counseled him, whilst he was in the
Inquisition at Rome, to frame his face and body to the ordinary postures of
those whose interiors he had need of knowing, that he might raise in himself by
the same figure, the thoughts that the same situation had raised in his
Adversaries, and so that he might better manage their Souls, being acquainted
with them; and he at my request began a Book, which he styled, De Sensu Rerum.

I likewise frequented in France, La Mothe, Le Vayer, and Gassendi; the second
is one who has writ as much in Philosophy, as the other understood: I have
known many more, whom your World call Divines, but really I find nothing in
them, but a great deal of babble and senseless pride.

In fine, as I past from your country to England, to study the manners and
disposition of the inhabitants, I met a man, the shame of his country, for it
is a shame to the great ones of your World, to find so rich a virtue enthroned
in one man, without adoring him: for, to abridge his Panegyricks, he is all
Wit, all Courage, and possesses all those qualities which speak a worthy Hero:
it was Tristram the Hermit; really, when I beheld such great virtue, I
apprehended it should not be acknowledged; wherefore I endeavored to make him
accept three little Vials; the first was filled with oil of Talk; the other
with Powder of Projections; and the third with Aurum Potabile: but he refused
them with as generous a disdain, as Diogenes did the Complements of Alexander:
to be short, I can add nothing to the Eulogy of this great man, except, that he
is the only Poet, the only Philosopher, and the only Freeman, you have amongst
you. These are the considerable persons I conversed withal; all the rest, at
least that I knew, are so much below humanity, that I have known beasts
something above them. Now I am not born, neither in your Country, nor this;
for my birth I owe to the Sun: but because that sometimes our World is
over-peopled, in respect of the length of the inhabitants lives, and that it is
almost exempted from Wars and Diseases; from time to time our Magistrates send
Colonies to the World about them: for my part, I was commanded to go to yours,
and declared Chief of the people that did accompany me: I since came to this,
for the causes I told you; and the reason why I actually stay here, is, that
the men are lovers of Truth, and that no Pedants are seen, and that the
Philosophers will not be persuaded but by reason, and that the Authority of a
Wise man, nor a multitude, will not confute the opinion of a Thrasher, if he
reason as well as they: in brief, in this Country none are counted mad, but
Sophisters and Orators. I asked, how long they lived? he told me three or four
thousand years, and in this sort continued.

Though the inhabitants of the Sun are not so numerous, as those of this World;
yet the Sun makes frequent emissions, because that the people are of a very hot
temper, stirring and ambitious, and digest much: what I tell you, need not seem
strange; for though that our Globe be very vast, and yours little; and though
that we die but after two or three thousand years, and you in half an Age:
Know, that in the same manner, as there is not so many stones, as clods of
Earth; nor so many plants, as stones; nor so many Animals, as Plants; nor so
many rational, as irrational Creatures: so there ought not to be so many
Spiriti as men, becouse of the difficult conjunction of things fit for the
Generation of so perfect a Composition.

I demanded of him, if they were bodies like us: He answered me, that they were
bodies, but not like us, not any thing which we did believe were bodies: for we
vulgarly only called them so which we can touch; besides, there is nothing in
Nature, but what is material; and though they be so of themselves, yet they
were forced, when they would represent themselves to us, to take bodies
proportionate to what our senses are capable to conceive; which was without
doubt the reason, that a great many believed, that the stories which are told
of them, was an effect of an idle fancy, because they appeared but in the
night: to which he added, that being forced to form those bodies (they intended
to make use of) in haste, they had not time often to accommodate them proper
for above one sense at once; sometimes the Hearing, as the voices of Oracles;
sometimes the Sight, as Fires and Visions; sometimes the Feeling, as
Incubusses: and these bodies being but condensed Clouds, in this or that shape,
the light by its heat disperses them, as we see it dissipate a Mist.

The explication of many fine things, gave me the curiosity of interrogating
him about his Birth and Death; and if in the Country of the Sun the Individuum
came to light by the ways of Generation? And if it were extinguished by the
disorder of its Temperament, or the fraction of its Organs? There is too little
alliance (said he) betwixt your senses, and the explication of these Mysteries,
that you imagine, that what you cannot comprehend, is spiritual, or that it is
not at all: but your consequence is very false, and it shows, that may be there
is in the Universe a million of things, which would require in you a million of
different Organs to be understood. I, for example, know by my senses the reason
of the sympathy betwixt the Lodestone with the Pole; and of the flowing of the
Sea; and what becoms of a Beast after his Death: you cannot arrive at these
high conceptions but by faith, because the proportions of these Miracles are
unknown to you; a blind man may as well imagine the beauty of a pleasant
Meadow, the colors of a Picture, or the streaked Rainbow; for he will fancy it
sometimes palpable, as something of eating, or hearing, or a fragrant smell; in
the like manner, if I should go about to explicate things to you, which I
behold by senses you want, you would imagine it something that might be heard,
seen, smelt, or tasted; and yet it is none of all these.

He was in this part of his Discourse, when my Juggler, who perceived that the
company was weary of my gibberish, because they did not understand it, and that
they took it for a grumbling not articulated; he began to pluck the cord again,
to make me leap and skip, till the spectators were satisfied with laughing; who
affirmed, that I had almost as much wit, as the Beasts of their country; so
they retired to their homes.

The visits of this officious Spirit, were singular solacements to the
hardships of my usage, for to entertain my self with those that came to see me;
besides, that they believed me but for an Animal of the cunningest sort, in the
Cathegorick of Beasts; neither could I speak their tongue, nor they mine, and
by that you may judge the proportions: for you must know, there are two Idioms
used in that Country; one the great ones make use of, the other is generally
used by the vulgar: that of the great ones, is nothing else but different tones
not articulated, almost like our Music, when the words are not added to the
Air: and really, it is an invention which is both useful and pleasant: for when
they are weary with talking, or when they disdain to prostitute their throats
to that use, they take a Lute or some other instrument, with which, as well as
with their voices, they communicate their thoughts to one another; so that
sometimes you shall have 15 or 20 of them in company, who will discourse a
point of Divinity, or the difficulties of a Process, by the most harmonious
consent of Music that ever tickled the Ear.

The second, which the Common People use, is by the motion of the Members, but
not may be as we imagine; for some parts of the body signify a whole
Discourse: as for example, the agitation of a finger, of a hand, of an ear, of
a lip, of an arm, of an eye, or of a cheek; each will signify an Oration in
particular, or at least a Period, with all these members; the rest do but serve
to design the words, as a wrinkle upon the forehead, the several quiverings of
the muscles, the reversion of the hands, the stampings of the feet, the
contorsion of the arms; so that when they Dialogue with the custom they have
of going quite naked, and their members accustomed to gesticulate their
conceptions, they stir with such alacrity, that it is not like a man that
speaks, but like one that trembles.

My Spirit came almost daily to see me, whose excellent entertainment made me
forget the rigor of my captivity: at last, one morning I perceived a man
entering my cabin, whom I did not know; who having lickt me all over, took me
with his mouth up by the breech, and with one of his paws lifted me upon his
back, where I was so easily and softly seated, that with the affliction that
the usage of a Beast caused in me, I had no desire of escaping: and withal,
those men that go on all four, are much swifter then we, seeing that the most
indisposed of them, make nothing of running down a Stagg.

But in the mean time, I was mightily afflicted to have no news of my courteous
Spirit: and the first days Journey ended; and coming to our purposed lodging,
I walked the Court of the Inn, whilst supper was making ready; when a young man
very beautiful came smiling to my face, and casting his two fore-leggs about my
neck, (after I had a while considered him,) What, says he in French, have you
so soon forgot your friend? I leave you to guess at my astonishment; which
really was so great, that from that time, I imagined all the Globe of the Moon
that had happened to me, and all that I saw to be nothing but enchantments;
when this Beast-like man, who was the same I had rid all day, continued
speaking in this manner: You promised me, that the good offices I did you,
should never be forgotten; and yet you look as if you had never seen me before
now: But seeing that I remained in my astonishment; in fine, said he, I am that
Spirit of Socrates, who diverted you in the time of your imprisonment, and who,
to continue my service to you, did take upon me the body which you mounted to
day: But I interrupting him, How can this be, seeing that this day you were of
an excessive long stature, and that now you are very short? That to day you had
a feeble broken voice, and that now it is clear and vigorous? And that in
short, you were to day an old rawbon'd man, and now you are a youth. How Is
this? As in our climates, we from our cradles begin a progress toward death;
the Creatures of this World from old age retrace the steps of youth. As Soon as
I had spoken to the Prince (said he) and had received order of conducting you
to the Court, I went to you where you were; and having brought you hither, I
found the bulk I inhabited so overcome with wearisomness, that all its Organs
refused me their ordinary functions, so that I enquired the way to the
Hospital; which when I entered, I found the body of a young man newly expired,
by a mad accident, and yet common enough in this Country; I approacht him,
feigning to perceive some motion, and protesting to the assistants that he was
not yet dead, and that what they believed had killed him, was nothing but a
lethargy; so that without being perceived, I approached my mouth to his, and so
entered him as through a trunk: then down fell my old Carcass, and I rose, as if
I had been that young man, and came to seek you out; leaving the people,
crying, A Miracle, a Miracle: Upon which, they came to fetch us to supper, and
I followed my conduct or into a parlor richly furnished, but where I saw no
preparation for the belly; so great a scarcity of meat (when I was ready to die
with hunger, obliged me to ask him where the cloth was laid: I did not hear
his answer; for at the same time three or four young Boys of the house
approacht me with a great deal of civility, and stripped me to my shirt: this new
Ceremony did so astonish me, that I durst not ask the reason of my lovely Valet
de Chambres, and I wonder my Guide, who asked me where I would begin, could get
these two words from me, Un Pottage: But I had scarce pronounced them, but I
found the Odor of the most admirable bisk, that ever fumed into Dives his
Nostrils; I would have risen from my seat, to find out by the sent, the
Original of that favor, but my bearer hindered me; Where will you go? said he,
we will go a walking by and by; but now it is fit to eat a little: make an end
of your Pottage, that we may call for something else. And where the Devil is
this Pottage? answered I, half angry) have you resolved to jeer me all this
day? I thought, said my guide, that you had seen at the Town from whence you
came, your Master, or some other at their Meals, which is the reason I did not
inform you they sed themselves here: being then that you do not know, I must
tell you, we live here by fumes. The Art of our Kitchins, is to shut up in
Vessels made for the purpose, the exhalations which proceed from the Meat when
it is dressing; and when they have ramast many of several kinds and tastes,
according to the appetite of those they treat, they open one vessel, and then
another, and so till the company be fully satisfied.

And if you have not been accustomed to live in this sort, you cannot believe,
that a Nose without Teeth or Throat, could do the office of the Mouth, to
nourish its Master; but I will let you see it by experience: he had no sooner
ended, but I found enter into the Parlor so many agreeable and nourishing
vapors, that in less then half quarter of an hour, I found my self quite
satisfied before we rose. This ought not, said he, to be any wonder to you; for
you cannot have lived so long without observing, that in your World the
Pastry-Cooks, who eat less then people of other Vocations, yet are much fatter;
and whence do you believe comes their good case, but by the fume they are
continually environed with, and which penetrates and nourishes their Bodies?
Now the People of this World enjoy a health less interrupted, and more
vigorous; because that their nourishment ingenders hardly any excrements, which
are commonly the Originals of all Diseases. May be you were surprised, that
they uncloathed you before our Meal, because in your Country they do not use
this Custom; but it is altogether the Mode here, that the fumes might the
easier invade the pores: Sir, said I, there is great likelihood of what you say,
for I my self have lately experienced it; but I must confess, that not being
yet quite unbruited, I should be very glad to feel a bit grinded betwixt my
teeth: which he promised me; but it was the next day; for he said that eating
so soon after our Meal, would procure me an indigestion: we discoursed a while
longer, after which, we went up into our chamber to take our rests.

A man presented himself to us at the stairs head; and after having eyed us
attentively, he brought me to a chamber, whose boards were strawed with
Orange-flowers three foor deep; and my Spirit into another, which was likewise
strawed with Gilly-flowers and Jessemin: he told me (when he saw that I
wondered at this magnificence) that those were the Beds of that Country. In
fine, we coucht each of us in his Cabin; and as soon as I was stretched upon my
flowers, I perceived by the light of about 30 Glowworms which were enclosed in
a Cristal ( Charon makes use of no other candles) those 3 or 4 boys who had
disrobed me for supper, one of which began to tickle my feet, the other my
thighs, another my flanks, the other my arms; and all with such delicate
wantonness, that in a moment sleep had mastered me.

The morning beams had not wakened me, before they propitiously had lighted my
guide to my chamber; who entering, said, I will keep my promise with you, of
treating you more solidly at your Breakfast, then last night. At these words I
rose, and he conducted me by the hand, by the garden of the house, where one of
the children waited our coming, with an Engine in his hand, much like our
fowling-peeces: he asked my guide, if I would have a dozen of Larks, because
Baboons (whereof he believed me one) nourisht themselves with that sort of
meat: I had scarce answered, Yes, when our Fowler discharged his piece, and
twenty or thirty Larks ready roasted fell at our feet. 'Slife there is a Proverb
with us (cried I straight) of a Country where Larks fall ready roasted; sure
the author came from hence: Well, Sir, do you eat; these people have the wit
to mingle with their shot and powder a certain composition, which kills plumes
ready roasted, and seasons the foul: I gathered some, with which, upon his word,
I made bold; and really, in all my life time, I never eat any thing more
delicious. After this Breakfast, we prepared for our journey; and with a
thousand mops and mews, which they use when they would testify any great
affection, our Landlord received a piece of paper from my Guide: I asked him if
it were an obligation for the payment of our reckoning; he answered me, No, for
he owed him nothing, and that those were verses: How? verses, said I? are the
Innkeepers here very curious of Rhymes? Sir, said he, it is the money of this
country; and the expense that we made here, amounted to a Stanza of six
verses, which I now paid him: I did not fear over-shooting our selves in the
reckoning; for though we should here Epicurize a week together, we could not
spend a Sonnet, and I have four about me, with two Epigrams, 2 Odes, and an
Eclogue. I wish to God (said I) it were so in our Country; I know many an
honest Poet, that is ready to starve, and would make good cheer, if they might
pay the treat in this money. I then asked him, if those verses would always
serve if they were transcribed; he answered me, No; and continued in this
manner: The author having composed them, goes to the Mint, where the sworn
Poets of the Kingdom hold their places; there these versifying officers put the
compositions to the proof; and if they be judged good Metal, they tax them not
according to their prizes (that is, a Sonnet is not always worth a Sonnet) but
according to the merit of the piece; so that when any one starves, it is a sign
he is a block-head; for people of wit make good cheer: I admired in an
extrasie, the judicious policy of that country; and he proceeded in this sort:
There are others, that keep taverns at anothergessrate then there; for when one
is going from them, they demand according to the proportion of the expenses, an
acquittance for the next World; which when one has given them, they write in a
great Register, which they call the accounts of the great day, in this manner:
Item, the value of so many verses delivered such a day, to such a one, who is
at the sight of this acquittance to pay me out of the first cash he has: and
when they find themselves in danger of death, they chop these Registers into
pieces, and so swallow them; for they believe, if they were not thus digested,
they would be of no use to them.

This entertainment put no obstacle to our making way, my guide going on all
four, and I bestriding him. I will no more particularize the adventures of our
Journey; but in fine, we arrived at the Town, where the King makes his
residence: I was no sooner arrived, but I was conducted to the Court, where the
Grandees received me with more moderate admirations then the people had done,
as I past in the streets; but they, as well as the people, concluded, that I
was the female of the Queens little Animal: which my guide interpreted to me;
and yet he himself did not understand this AEnigma, and knew not what that
little Animal of the Queens might be.

But we were both quickly satisfied, for the King after having a while
considered me, commanded it to be brought forth; and half an hour after, I
perceived amongst a troop of Monkeys and Apes (who handed his Ruff, Cloak, and
Breeches, a little man entering, almost like to my self, for he went upon two
legs: as soon as he beheld me, he accosted me, with a Criado de Vuestra
Merced; and I retorted his salute almost in the same terms.

But alas! they no sooner saw us tattle together, but believed they had guest
right; and it was impossible this conjecture should have a better success, for
he of the Spectators that made the most favorable construction of us,
protested, that our conversation was a grumbling, which our natural instant
meeting together made us mutter. This little man told me, he was an European,
native of Old-Castile, and that he had found a means by Birds to arrive at the
Moon, where we then were; and being fallen into the Queens hands, she had taken
him for an Ape; for as Fortune would have it, they cloth their Apes in that
Country in Spanish clothes; and finding him at his arrival in that habit, she
doubted not but that he was of the same kind. You may even as well say,
answered I, that having tried all fashioned clothes upon them, they found none
so ridiculous as those; and for that reason, they accoutre them in this sort,
since these Animals are entertained but for divertisement: This shows, said he,
that you know not our Nation, in favor of which the Universe produces men, to
afford us slaves, and for whom Nature cannot engender any thing, but subjects
of laughter. After which, he entreated me to tell him, how I durst adventure to
scale the Moon with the Engine I had told him of: I answered him, that it was
because he had prevented my journey with the Birds I intended to use: he
gravely smiled at this Rallery; and the King about a quarter of an hour after,
commanded the Ape-keepers to lead us back again, with an express order, to make
the Spaniard and me lie together, that we might multiply our species in his
Kingdom. They exactly executed his Majesty's commands; of which I was very
joyful, that I might have some body to entertain me in the time of my
brutification. One day my Male (for they looked upon me as the Female) did
relate to me the reason of his travels about all the Earth, and what at last
obliged him to quit it for the Moon; which was, that he had not found one
Country, where the imagination it self was free: for look you, says he, if you
have not a Cornered Cap, whatsoever you say, though never so witty, yet it is
against the Doctors opinion, and you are an Idiot, a Fool, and something worse:
they would have put me (in my Country) in the Inquisition, because I
maintained to all the Pedants teeth, that there was a Vacuum, and that I knew
no matter in the World heavier then another. I asked him upon what foundation he
built so little received an opinion: Oh, says he, to compass it, you must
suppose there is but one Element; for though we separately see Water, Earth,
Air, and Fire, yet we never find them so perfectly pure, but that they are
interchangeably engaged one with another; as for example, When you see the
Fire, it is not Fire, but Air mightily extended; Air is but Water much dilated;
Water is but Earth dissolved; and Earth it self, is but condensed water: and
thus seriously to penetrate the matter, you will find it is but one, who
(like an excellent Comoedian) plays all several parts, under all diversity of
habits; otherwise we must admit as many Elements as there be sorts of Bodies.
And if you will ask me, Why the Fire burns, and the Water cools, being it is
the self-same matter: I answer you, That this matter agitates sympathetically,
according to the disposition it is then in. Fire (that is, nothing but Earth
more dilated then when it is to constitute air) endeavors to convert to it self
by sympathy what it meets with; so the heat of a coal being the subtillest and
fittest to penetrate a body, slides through the pores of our bulk: and in the
first place, because it is a new matter that fills us, it causes a breathing
sweat, which sweat dispersed by the fire, converts it self into fume, and
becoms Air; this Air being moreover melted by the heat of the Antiperistass or
adjoining Stars, is called Fire; and the Earth abandoned by the cold and
humidity which were ligaments to the whole, fall to Earth: Water on the other
side, though it differs not from the matter of Fire, but in being more closed,
it does not burn us, because that we being closed, it sympathetically closes
the body it meets with; and the cold that we feel, is nothing but our flesh
rallying in a less compass, drawing with it part of the neighbor water of
Earth; from whence it proceeds that those that are sick of a dropsy, convert
all their nourishment into water; and Choleric men change the blood their
Liver creates, into Choler: suppose then that there is but one Element, and it
is most certain, that all our bodies, each according to its quality, equally
incline to the Center of the Earth.

But you will ask me, Why that Iron and other Metals, Earth and Wood, have a
swifter descent toward the Center, then a sponge; but that it is fuller of
Air, which naturally tends upwards: but that is not at all the reason; and thus
I answer you: Though a Rock fall with more rapidity then a feather, yet the one
and the other have the same inclination for that voyage: as for example; a
Cannon-bullet (if the Earth were pierced quite through) would precipitate more
furiously toward its Center, then a bladder filled with Air; and the reason
is, that that mass of the Metal is a great deal of Earth crowded into a little
compass; and that Wind a little Earth in a large compass: for all the parts of
the matter which are lodged in the Iron, being joined one with another, augment
their forces by that Union, because being thus closed, they are a great many
fighting against a few, since that parcel of Air equal to the Bullet in
bigness, is not equal in quantity.

Without proving this by a multitude of arguments; in good faith, How do you
believe, that a Pike, a Sword, or a Dagger wounds us, if it be not because the
steel is a matter where the parts are closer together, and more within one
another, then our flesh, whose poriness and softness demonstrates, that it
contains a very little matter spread into a large compass, and the point of the
sword being an innumerable quantity of parts against a little flesh, forces it
to yield to the strongest; as a well-knit squadron, will easily break a
scattered Batallion? for, why should a bar of red hot iron cast a greater heat,
then a log of the same bigness thoroughly lighted; but because that more parts
are lighted, or burn in a little space, then in the wood; which because it is
spongeous, includes a great deal of emptiness or Vacuum within it: and a Vacuum
being nothing else but a privation of being, cannot be susceptible of Fire? But
may be, you will object to me, that I suppose a Vacuum, as if I had proved it, and
that it is that we dispute of: Well then, I will now prove it to you and though
that difficulty be the labor of the Gordion-knot, yet my arm is strong enough
to become its Alexander.

Then let that vulgar beast (who would not believe man to be man, but that it is
told so) answer me: Suppose that there is but one matter, as I think I have
sufficiently proved; How comes it, that according to its appetite or
disposition, it restrains or swells? How comes it that a piece of Earth, by
condensity becomes a stone? Is it that the parts of that pebble are retired one
into another, in such sort, that where one grain of sand is lodged, in the same
point or place, another can be intruded? all this cannot be, nay, according to
their own principle, since bodies cannot penetrate one another. But this matter
is got closer together, or, if you please, grown less, in filling some place
that was empty before.

To say, that it is incomprehensible there should be a Nothing in the World,
that we in part are composed of Nothing, pray, why not? Is not the whole World
encompassed with Nothing? since you will grant that Article, confess that it is as
easy for the World to have Nothing in it, as about it. I foresee you will ask me,
why that water, being restrained by frost in another vessel, should crack it,
if it be not to hinder a Vacuum. But my answer to it is, that the Air above it,
which tends as well as Earth or water to the Center, if it find in its journey
an empty place, presently lodges it self; if it finds the pores of this
vessel, that is, the ways to this chamber of Vacuum too strait, too long, and
too crooked, it by breaking it, satisfies its impatience to arrive at its Inn.

But without troubling my self to answer all their Objections, I dare boldly
say, that if there were no vacuum, there would be no motion, or we must admit
penetration of bodies; for it would be ridiculous to think, that when a fly
beats back with her wings a parcel of Air, and that parcel another, and that
other another; and so by the stirring of a flea's little toe, there rises a
bumb behind the World. But when they can say no more, they fly to rarefaction:
But in good faith, How comes it, that when a body scarifies it self, that one
particle can be separated from another, without leaving an empty place? Must
not these two bodies that were just now separated, have been at the same time,
in the same place of this; and that in this sort, they must be all three
penetrated? I expect you will ask me, Why through a hollow trunk, a seringe, or a
pump, they force the water up against its inclination? To which I answer you,
It is by violence; but it is not the fear of a Vacuum that diverts it from its
way; but being joined to the Air by an invisible conjuncture, it is elevated
with the Air which holds it embraced.

This is not very difficult to comprehend, when one knows the perfect Circle,
and delicate contexture of the Elements: for if you attentively consider the
slime which marries the Earth to the Water, you will find, that it is no more
Earth, nor Water, but the interposers betwixt these two Enemies: the water and
the Air reciprocally form a Mist, which penetrates the one and the others
humors, to conclude a Peace; and the Air is reconciled to the Fire by an
Exhalation, their Mediator. I believe he would have pursued his Discourse, but
that our commons were brought; and my body being very hungry, closed my ears to
his Discourse, and opened my mouth and stomach to the welcome meat.

I remember another time as we were Philosophying, (for neither the one nor the
other delighted to discourse of mean things) I am very sorry (says he) to find
a wit of your temper, infected with vulgar errors; you must know, in spite of
Aristotle's Pedantism, of whom all your Schools in France ring, that all is in
all, that is, for example, that in Water there is Fire, and in Fire there is
Water; in Air, Earth; and in Earth, Air; and though this opinion make your
Scholars open their eyes as big as sawcers, yet it is easier to prove, then to
persuade them to it. For, I will first ask them, if Water will not engender
fish; which if they deny, digg a pit, and fill it with water, which if they
please they may strain, to avoid all blind Objections; and if in some time you
find not fish there, I will be bound to swallow all the water you have put
in it: But if any be found, as I do not doubt but there will; it is a convincing
reason, that there is both fire and salt. Now to find Water in Fire, as I take
it, is no hard enterprise; for let them pick out Fire that is most separated
from the matter, if they please; as Comets, in which there is a great deal,
since that unctious matter of which they are engendered, converted to Sulphur
by the Antiperistass that light them, if it should find no obstacle in its
violence, in the humid cold which tempers and opposes it, it would briskly
consume it self like Lightning, Now that there is Air in the Earth, they will
not deny; or else they never heard of the horrible Earthquakes, wherewith the
mountains of Sicily are agitated: And besides that, we see the Earth all vary,
to the very grains of sand that compose it, and yet none says those pores
contain a Vacuum: I hope then, they will not be angry, that I say, Air lodges
there. Now I must prove, that in Air there is Earth; but I will scarce take the
pains, since you are convinced as often as those legions of Atoms fall upon
your head, which are so numerous that they choke Arithmetique.

But let us pass from Simples to Compositions, which more frequently furnish me
with subjects, that all is in all, not that they change into one another, as
your Peripateticks tattle: for I will maintain to their beards, that the
Principles do mingle and separate, and mingle again; in such sort, that what
was made Water by the Wise Creator of the World, will ever be so. I will not
(as they do) suppose a Maxim without proving it. Wherefore take a Log, or any
other combustible matter, and set fire to it; they will say when it is
thoroughly lighted, that what was wood, is now become fire. But I will maintain
the contrary, and that there is no more fire in it, when it is inflamed, then
when it was first lighted; for what before the cold and humid part hid (and
hindered to agitate) succored by the stranger, that has rallied his forces
against the phlegmatic humor which choakt it, and now possesses the field his
Enemy before was master of; which he demonstrates without obstacle, triumphing
over his Jailer. Do you not see how the water flies out at the two ends of the
logg, yet hot and smoking from the Combat? The flame you see ascend, is the
subtillest of the Fire, the most separated from the matter, and that which is
consequently the most ready to return to its self; yet it unites it self
Pyramidically to a certain height, the better to pierce the thick humidity of
the Air which resists it; but as in mounting, it begins more and more to be
separated from the violent company of its Landlords, it then begins to fly at
large, meeting no more Antipathy to its passage: but this negligence is often
subject to a second imprisonment; for voyaging separately, it sometime rangeth
into a Cloud, where if the juncture be of quantities enough to head a vapor,
they join, they grumble; and from thence they thunder, they lighten; and the
death of innocents is often the implacable effect of the irritated Choler of
dead things. If when it finds it self entangled in the crudity of the middle
Region, and being not strong enough to dispute its liberty, or to defend it
self; it straight abandons it self to the discretion of its enemy, which
constrains it by its weight, to fall again to the Earth; and this unfortunate
ranger being enclosed in a drop of Water, will be fallen at the foot of an Oak,
whose Animal fire will invite this poor stragler to lodge with him; and thus he
returns to the same Prison he had so lately broke. But let us examine the
Fortune of the other Elements which compose this Logg: the Air retires to its
quarter, yet mingled with vapors, because the conquering fire in great Choler
did briskly expel them pell-mell together. Now you see it the Winds Tennisball,
serve Beasts for breathing, fills up the empty places Nature framed; and may be
after all this, being condensed into a drop of Dew, it may be drunk by the
thirsty leaves of the same tree, where our fire was retired, before the Water
which the furious flames had extirpated from that Throne, elevated by the heat
to the nursery of Meteors, will fall in rain upon our Oak, as soon as on
another; and the Earth which was burnt to ashes, now cured of its sterility,
either by the nourishing heat of scattered dung, or by the vegetative salt of
some neighboring Plants, or by the foecundious water of some River, this also
may be near this Oak, which by the heat of its germ, will attract it, and
convert it to a part of its whole.

Now here you see these four Elements, which had the same destiny, which return
to the condition they had some few days before quitted: so we may say, that in
a man there are all things necessary to compose a tree, and in a tree to
compose a man. And in this manner, all will be found to be in all: but we want
a Prometheus, who would rob Natures breast, and render us sensible; which I am
willing to call Materia Prima.

These were the entertainments we past the time withal; for this little
Spaniard had a pretty wit, yet our discourses were all by night: for the
multitude of people, which from six a clock in the morning till night, came to
see us at our lodgings, would have interrupted us; for, some threw stones at
us; other, nuts; others, grass: there was no talk but of the Kings Beasts; we
were every day duly served at our hours, and the King and Queen did often take
the pains to feel my belly, to try if I grew big, for they burnt with an
impatient desire to have some of the race of these little creatures. I know not
whether it was by being more attentive then my Male, to their Apishness and
tones, but I learnt sooner then he to understand their language, and to tattle
a little; which made them consider us after another manner then they did; and
presently the news run, that there were two Savages found, who for want of good
nourishment, were less. then others, and by a defect in their Parents seed,
wanted force in their fore-leggs to rest their bodies upon them.

This belief began to take root, by spreading it self, without the Doctors of
the Countries opposition; saying, that it were a terrible impiety to believe,
not only Beasts, but Monsters were of the same species as they: there were
more likelihood (added the less passionate) that our native Beasts participated
the Privileges of humanity, and immortality, by the consequence of being born
in our Country, then a Monstrous Animal, who speaks of being born I know not
where, in the Moon: and then observe the difference which is betwixt us and
them; we walk upon four paws, because that God would not trust so precious a
thing, upon a less firm situation; and he feared that going otherwise, there
might some ill happen to the man; for which reason he took the pains for to
seat him upon four pillars, that he might not fall; but disdaining to trouble
himself with the Fabric of these two Bruits, he abandoned them to the Caprice
of Nature; who not fearing the loss of so small a matter, rested them upon two
legs.

The very Birds have not had such hard measure as they; for at least they have
feathers to balance the weakness of their legs, with which they cast
themselves into the Air, when we chase them; when as Nature depriving these two
Monsters of two feet, have rendered them incapable of scaping our justice.

After which, see how their head is raised toward Heaven; it is the scarcity
that God has inflicted them with of all things, which are so placed; for that
supplicant posture shows, that they complain to Heaven of their Creator, and
that they beg permission to accommodate themselves after our fashion: but we
have our heads downwards, to contemplate the blessings we are masters of, as if
there were nothing in Heaven that we need envy.

I every day heard such discourses as these at my lodge; and in fine, they did
so bridle the peoples opinion, concerning this Article, that it was decreed, I
should at most but pass for a Parrat without feathers; for they confirmed those
that were already persuaded, that like a bird, I had but two legs; which was
the reason they put me in a Cage, by the express order of the Privy Council.

Where every day the Queens Bird-keeper had the care of teaching me to whistle,
as they do here your Stares or Black-birds. Indeed I was happy in not wanting
food: in the mean time, among the Sonnets with which my Spectators daily broke
my head, I learnt to speak as they did: in short, when I had past the
difficulty of expressing my thoughts, I related fine conceits: the companies
already entertained themselves with nothing, but the gentleness of my words;
and the esteem they had of my wit, arrived to that point, that the Council was
forced to publish an Edict, by which it was forbidden to believe, that I had
any Reason; with an express commandment to all persons, of what quality or
condition soever, not to imagine, but that it was by instinct, whatsoever I
did, though never so rational.

In the interim, the definition of what I was, divided the Town in two parts;
that which was of my faction, grew greater and greater every day: and in fine,
in spite of the Anathema wherewith they frighted the multitude, those that
held with me, demanded an Assembly of State to end this controversy. They were
a great while about the choice of who should judge the business. But the
Arbiters pacified their animosity, by equalling the number of both interests,
who ordained, I should be brought into the Assembly as, I was: But I was
treated as severely as you can imagine; my Examiners amongst other things,
questioned me in Philosophy: I sincerely told them, what heretofore my Regent
had taught me; but they made nothing of confuting me with more powerful
reasons: so that not being able to answer them, I alleged the Tenants or
Principles of Aristotle; which stood me in no more stead, then my Sophisms had
done: for in two words, they discovered to me the falseness of them.

This Aristotle, said they, (whose Science you so largely boast) did without
doubt accommodate his Principles to his Philosophy, instead of accommodating
his Philosophy to his Principles; and at least, he ought to have proved them
more reasonable then those of other Sects, which you have mentioned to us.

Wherefore I hope, the good Gentleman will not be angry, if we humbly kiss his
hands. In fine, when they saw that I did nothing but bawl to them, that they
were not wiser then Aristotle; and that I was forbidden to dispute against any
that denied his Principles; They all concluded unanimously, that I was not a
man, but a certain kind of Estridge, being that like to them I bore my head
straight, and that I marched upon two legs; and in short, that but for a
little down, I was in every thing else like to them. So that the Bird-keeper
was commanded to carry me back to my Cage; where I past my time pleasantly
enough, because of their Tongue, which I had perfectly learned: the whole Court
esteemed it a great recreation, to make me prate. The Queens Women, amongst
others, did always thrust some bribe into my basket; and the prettiest of them
all, having conceived some kind of friendship for me, was so transported with
joy, when I entertained her in private, concerning the manners and
divertisements of the people of our Country, and principally of our Clocks,
and other instruments of Music, that she professed to me with tears in her
eyes, that if I were ever in a condition of flying back into our World, she
would willingly follow me. One morning betimes, having started out of my sleep,
I found her rattling against the sticks of my Cage; Cheer up your self, said
she, for yesterday they resolved a War against the King; and I hope, in the
confusion of their preparations, whilst our Monarch and his Subjects are
absent, to find a means for your escape. How? a War, answered I? Do then any
quarrels happen betwixt the Princes of this World, as amongst those of Ours?
Pray tell me their manner of fighting.

When the Arbiters (answers she) chosen by consent of both parties, have
designed the Time accorded for the levying of their forces, that of the March,
the number of Combatants, the day and the place appointed for Battle, and all
this with so much equality, that there is not one single man more in one Army,
then in the other; the maimed Soldiers of one side, are all in one Company; and
when they come to join, the Marshals of the field have a care to expose them to
the maimed of the other side: The Giants encounter Colosses; Fencers, those
that are expert in their weapons; the valiant, the courageous; those that are
debilitated, the weak; the indisposed, the sick; and the robustious meet those
that are strong; and if any one happens to strike another then his designed
enemy, without he can prove it a mistake, is condemned for a Coward: after the
Battle is ended, they number the wounded, the dead, and the prisoners; for
there are no fliers: if their loss be found equal, they draw cuts who shall be
proclaimed victorious.

But though one Kingdom had defeated their Enemy in a lawful war, yet there is
hardly any thing advanced; for there be other Armies, less in number, of
Learned and Wise men, of whose disputations, depends wholly the Triumph or
Servitude of their States.

One learned man is opposed to another learned man, and one wit to another wit;
one Judicious man, to another Judicious Enemy: and in fine, a Triumph gained in
this War, is reckoned as three victories by open force. After the Proclamation
of the Victory, the Assembly is broke, and the Victorious Nation choose for
their King, either their Enemies, or their former.

I could not forbear laughing, at this scrupulous way of combating; and I
alleged for an example a stronger Policy, the Customs of our Europeans,
where a Monarch will wave no occasions to overcome his Enemy: to which she thus
answered me.

Pray tell me, if your Princes do not pretend Right, for their levying of
Arms: Yes, answered I, and a great deal of Justice in their cause. Why then,
continued she, don't they choose Arbiters unsuspected of partiality? and if they
be found to have as much in the one as the other, let them remain as they were,
or play a game at Pickquet, for the Town or Province which bred the dispute.

But why have you so many circumstances in your way of Fighting? Is it not
sufficient, that the Armies are composed of equal numbers? You have not much
judgment, answered she. Why, do you really believe, if you had overcome your
Enemy hand to hand in the open field, if you were in a coat of Male, and he
naked; if he had but a Dagger, and you a Tuck; in fine, if he were deprived of
Arms, and you had both yours; that he were truly vanquished? in the mean while,
with all the equality you so much recommend in your Gladiators, yet they never
fight upon equal terms: for the one will be a tall, the other a little man;
the one a skillful, the other may be never handled a sword; the one robustious,
and the other weak: nay, when all these disproportions should be equalized,
that they were as skillful, or as strong one as the other, may be, yet there
would be a disadvantage on the one side; for, the one may have more courage
then the other; by which reason this rash man will not consider the danger,
being that he may be Choleric, that he may have more blood, and that he may
have a more contracted heart, with all the qualities which create courage; as
if that, as well as a sword, were not a weapon his Enemy wanted. He furiously
frights the opponent, with desperately casting himself upon him, and takes away
the life of this poor man, who foresees the danger, and whose heat is stifled
in phlegm, and whose Heart is too copious to unite the Spirits necessary to
dissipate that Ice, which is called Cowardice. And now you praise this man for
having killed his Enemy advantageously; and praising his rashness, you praise a
sin against Nature, since such boldness tends to its destruction: and in order
to what we are talking of, some few years since, there was a Remonstrance made
to the Council of war, to invent some more circumspect Conscientions rule for
Combats; and the Philosopher who gave this advice, spoke in this manner:

You imagine, Sirs, that you have equalized the advantages of both parties,
having chose them, both great, both expert, and both full of courage; but this
is not enough, since that in the end the Victor must overcome by address, by
force and fortune: if it be by address, he without doubt, struck his Adversary
where he did not expect it, or quicker then it was likely; or feigning to hit
him on the one side, struck him on the other; and in the mean time, all this is
cunning treachery, cozenage; and cozenage and treachery are not the compounds
of a Gallant man: if he have Triumphed forceably, will you esteem his Enemies
overcome, because he was violated? No sure, no more then you would judge that
man overcome, who by the overwhelming of a Mountain, was made incapable of
gaining the victory; so he was overcome, because at that time he was not
disposed to resist the violence of his Adversary: if it be by hazard that he
overthrow him, it is fortune we ought to crown, he contributed nothing; and in
fine, the vanquished is no more to be blamed, then he that with three Dice,
throwing seventeen, yet lost by their all running sixes.

They all confessed he was in the right, but that it was impossible, according to
humane appearances, to remedy it, and that it was better to submit to a little
inconvenience, then abandon themselves to a hundred greater importances.

She did not entertain me this time any longer, because she was fearful of
being found so early alone with me: It is not, that impudicity is there a
crime; quite contrary, except convinced Malefactors, all men have power over
all Women, and in the same manner, a Woman may sue a man, who had refused: but
she durst not publicly frequent me, because some of the Council had said in
the last Assembly, that it was chiefly the Women, that published that I was a
man, cloaking with that pretext, the desire they had of prostituting themselves
to beasts, and shamelesly with me, to commit sins against nature; which was the
reason that I was a great while without seeing her, or any of her sex. In the
mean while some had renewed the doubt of what I was; for when I thought of
nothing but dying in my Cage, they came to fetch me once more to give me
audience: I was then interrogated in the presence of a great many Courtiers,
upon some point of Moral Philosophy; and my Answers, as I believe, did
something satisfy them, for he that did proceed, did largely expound to me his
opinions concerning the Structure of the World. They seemed very ingenious to
me; and if he had not proceeded to its Origin, which he held Eternal, I had
believed his Philosophy much more reasonable then ours. But as soon as I heard
him sustain an imagination so contrary to our faith, I quite broke with him, at
which he only laughed; which obliged me to say, that since they proceeded so
far, I began to believe that their World was but a Moon; but say they all, You
see Earth, Rivers, and Seas, and what can all this be? No matter, said I,
Aristotle assures us, that it is but a Moon; and if you had said the contrary
in the Schools where I was brought up, they would have hist at you: at which
they all burst into a great laughter; you need not ask, if it were out of
ignorance; but in the mean time I was conducted to my Cage.

But other Wits, more transported then these, who were advertised that I durst
say, the Moon from whence I came was a World, and that their World was a Moon;
did believe, that this would furnish them with pretext enough to condemn me to
the water; which is their manner of exterminating people that are so impious.
Wherefore they in a body went to make their complaint to the King, who promised
them justice, and ordered me to be brought again before the Court.

I was then uncaged the third time, and the most Ancient began to plead against
me: I do not well remember his Speech, because I was too much frighted, to
receive the notes of his Voice without disorder; as also, because he made use
of an instrument to declame with, which deafn'd me: it was a trumpet which he
had chosen, because the violence of that Martial sound, should excite them to
my death, and so to hinder by that emotion of their Spirits, that reason should
not act her part; as it happens in our Armies, where the noise of the Drums and
Trumpets hinders the Soldiers from reflecting upon the importance of their
lives. When he had done, I rose up to defend my cause; but I was delivered by
an accident, which will surprise you: As I had just opened my mouth to speak, a
man who with much ado had past through the crowd of the people, came and cast
himself at the Kings feet, and rowld himself a great while upon his back in his
presence. This action did not at all surprise me, for I knew it was the posture
they put themselves in, when they would discourse in public; I only forgot my
own speech, to listen the more attentively to his.

O ye Just, said he, hear me: You cannot condemn this man, this Ape, or this
Parrot, for saying that the Moon from whence he comes, is a World; for if he be
a man, though he be not come from the Moon, since all men are free, is not he
free to imagine what he pleases? What, can you constrain him, not to have
Visions as well as you? You may force him to say, the Moon is no World, but not
to believe so: for, to believe a thing, there must certain possibilities
present themselves to ones imagination, more inclining to the Yea, then to the
Nay; and except you furnish him with those likelihoods, or that they unforced
offer themselves to his Reason, he may tell you, that he believes it, though he
never does.

Now I will demonstrate to you, that you ought not to condemn him, if you place
him in the Catalogue of Beasts; for, suppose him a creature without Reason,
could you pretend to any your selves, if you should condemn him for sinning
against it? He said, that the Moon was a world; now Beasts only acting by
instinct of Nature, it is Nature says it, and not he; and to believe that wise
Nature, who has made the World and the Moon, should not know what it is her
self; and that you who derive all your knowledge from her, should more
certainly know it, were very ridiculous. But if your passion should make you
deny your Principles, and that you should suppose that Nature did not only
guide Beasts, at least blush at inquietudes which are caused in you, by the
capriciousness of a Beast: really, Sirs, I believe if you saw a man of ripe
years busy himself with the Politic Government of Pismires, sometimes in
striking one who had overthrown his companion; another time in imprisoning
another, for the theft of a Barly-corn from his neighbor; then to arraign
another, for quitting her eggs; you would believe him mad, to trouble himself
with matters so much below him, and to pretend to reduce to Reason, Animals
that never had any: How then will you defend, most Venerable Assembly, the
interest you take in the capriciousness of this little Animal? Ye Just, I have
said.

As Soon as he had ended, a certain Musical applause made the hall ring; and
after all their opinions had for a quarter of an hour had disputed, the King
pronounced,

That hereafter I should be censured a man, and as such set at liberty, and
that the punishment of drowning, should be reduced into an ignominious forfeit;
for in that Country there are no honorable ones; by which forfeit I was
obliged to unsay publicly, that the Moon was a World, because of the scandal
it might have caused by the newness of the opinion in weak Spirits.

This sentence being pronounced, they lifted me out of the Palace, and clothed
me most richly, though scornfully; they carried me upon the Tribunal of a
sumptuous Chariot, in which I was drawn by four yoakt Princes, and they made me
pronounce this in all the public places of the town:

People, I declare to you, that this Moon is not a Moon, but a World, and that
the World below, is no World, but a Moon: this is what the Council thinks fit
you should believe. After I had cried this in the five great places of the
City, I perceived my Advocate, who presented me his hand to lift me down: I
wondered very much to find him; when I had well weighed him, that it was my
courteous Spirit, we were an hour in embracing one another: Come, come to my
house, says he; for to return to Court after a shameful sentence, were to make
your self be looked upon with an ill eye; and I must tell you, that you had
still remained amongst the Apes and Monkeys, as the Spaniard does, if I had not
in all Companies, published the vigor and force of your understanding, and
labored in despite of your Enemies, the Protection of the great Ones for you.

The period of my thanks was also that of our journey, for we were then entering
his doors: he entertained me till supper-time, with all the devices he had used
to force my Enemies, in despite of their most specious pretexts with which
they had gulled the people, to desist from so unjust a prosecution: but when we
were told that they had served in supper, he advertised me, that he had invited
two Professors of the Academy to keep me company: I will make them fall, said
he, upon the Philosophy which is taught in this World, by which means you shall
see the Son of our Landlord; it is a young man, as full of wit, as I ever met
any; he would be a second Socrates, if he could govern his Lights, and not bury
in vice, the Graces with which God continually visits him; for he affects a
Libertining, by a Chimerical ostentation, to acquire the reputation of a Wit: I
took my lodging here, to spy out the occasion of instructing him; he held his
tongue, to leave me in my Cue, the liberty of talking: then he made a sign that
they should disrobe me of my shameful Ornaments, with which I still glistered;
which was no sooner effected, but the two Professors entered, and we went to sit
down where the cloth was spread, where we found the youth he talked of, already
at his meal: they saluted him profoundly, and used him with an high respect, as
a slave uses his Lord and Master: I demanded the the cause, of my Spirit; who
said, it was because of his age; because that in that World, the aged bear all
sort of respect to the young; nay more, Parents obeyed their children, as soon
as by the advice of the Synod of Philosophers, they had attained to Reason. You
wonder, said he, at a custom so contrary to that of your Country, but it is
not at all repugnant to Reason; for in your Conscience, is not a young man, who
is hot in the force of imagination, of judgment, and execution, fitter to
govern a Family, then an infirm bundle of threescore years, besotted, whose
imagination is frozen by threescore winters, and who governs himself but by
what you call Experience of happy successes, which in the mean while, are but
mere effects of hazard, against all rules and Economy of humane Prudence? For
judgment there is also as little, though the People of your World make an Idol
of old Age. But to disabuse them, they must know, that what is called Prudence
in an old man, is nothing but a pannical apprehension, and a mad fear of acting
nothing but what they have already seen done: so that when he does not hazard a
danger, where a young man had lost himself, it is not that he fore-judged the
Catastrophe, but that he wanted fire to warm the noble parts, which make us
dare; whereas the boldness of that young man was as a pledge of the
efficaciousness of his design, because that order which makes the promptitude
and facility of an execution, was that which thrust him upon that enterprise.
For execution, I should wrong your judgment, if I went about to convince you
with proofs; you know, youth only is fit for action; which will enough persuade
you to it: Pray tell me, why do you respect a courageous man, but because he
can avenge your injuries, and repel your oppressors? and is it for any
consideration, but mere habit, that you consider him where a Battalion of
seventy Ianuaries has frozen his blood, and killed with cold all the noble
Enthusiasms that young men are warmed with? when you yield to the stronger, is
it not because that he should be obliged to you, when you know you can no
longer dispute the victory with him? But why should you submit to him, when
idleness has melted his muscles, debilitated his arteries, evaporated his
Spirits, and dried the marrow in his bones? If you adored a woman, would it not
be because of her Beauty? But to continue your adorations when old age had made
her a Phantasm, which represents nothing but the hideous picture of Death, were
very strange. In fine, when you love a man of Spirit, it is because by the
vivacity of his Genius, he penetrates into a turbulent business, and straight
untangles it; that he can defray by his good words the Assembly of the richest
Carat, and that he could digest the Sciences in one thought: and yet you would
continue your esteem, when his worm-Organs split his weak noddle, heavy and
inoportune to good company, and when he rather resembles a Fairy Deity, then a
reasonable man. By which (my son) you may conclude, it is fitter young men
should manage the government of Families then old; and the rather, because that
according to your Maxims, Hercules, Achilles, Epaminondas, Alexander, and
Caesar, the most of which died before fifty years of age, should have merited
no honors, being by your account too young; when their youth was the only
cause of their admirable actions, which a more advanced age would have
frustrated, because it would have wanted ardour and promptitude, the Authors of
such high Successes. You say true, all the Laws of our World, loudly proclaim
the respect we owe old Age; for those that introduced those Laws, were old men;
who justly feared, that the young men should depose them from their usurpt
Authority.

You owe nothing to your mortal Architecture but your Body; your Soul coms from
Heaven, and it was in the power of hazard, to have created your father your
son, as you now are his: Nay, how do you know, but that he has debarred you
the inheritance of a Diadem? May be your Soul departed Heaven with a design of
inhabiting the King of the Romans, in the belly of the Empress, where may be to
shorten her journey, she lodged: No, no, God would not have blotted you out of
the calculation he made of Mankind, though your father had died a little boy:
but who knows if you had not been the work of some great Captain, who would
have associated you with his Glory, as well as his goods? so that you are no
more obliged to your father for the life he gave you, then you would be to a
Pirate, who should chain you to the Bank, that he might there feed you: Nay, I
will suppose he had ingendered you a Prince of King; a Present loses its merit,
when it is not left in the receivers choice of receiving it or no; Death was
given to Caesar and to Cassius, and Cassius was obliged to the slave of whom he
begged it; so was not Caesar to his murderers, who forced him to accept that
unwelcome gift. Did your father consult your will, when he embraced your
Mother? Did he ask you if you had a mind to see this age, or to wait for
another? If you would be contented to be the son of a sot, or if you had the
ambition to derive your self from a gallant man? But alas! you who were most
concerned in the business, were he who was least consulted. May be then, if you
had been locked up in any place but in the Matrix of the Idea's of Nature, and
that your birth had been in your option, you had said to the Parca, My dear
pretty Lady, take the spindle of another in hand, it is a great while since I
am in the number of nothings; and I had rather remain so a hundred years
longer, then to be to day, to repent to morrow. And yet this you must pass
through; your begging to return to the long black house from whence you were
haled, signified nothing; for they seemed to understand you cried for the teat.

These are the reasons, my son, why fathers bear a respect to their children: I
know that I have inclined to the childrens side more then Justice required, and
that in their favor I have a little spoken against my Conscience; but being
willing to correct that pride with which some Parents brave their childrens
weakness, I have done as they who will straighten a crooked tree, draw it on
the other side, that between two contorsions, it may affect straightness: so I
have made fathers render to their children what they took from them, by taking
away something that belonged to them, that they might another time be contented
with what is their own. I know that by this Apology I have choked all the old
fathers: but let them remember they were children before they were fathers;
and that it is impossible but that I have spoke extremely to their advantage,
since they were not found under a Cabbage: But in fine, whatsoever happens, and
though my Enemies should range themselves in battalia against my friends, it
can be but well for me, for I have obliged all men, and have disobliged but the
half.

At these words he held his tongue, and our Landlords son began in this
manner: Permit me, said he, since by your care I am instructed in the Original
History, Customs, and Philosophy of the World of this little man, to add
something to what you said, and that I may prove that children are not obliged
to their fathers for their Generation, because that they were obliged in
Conscience to get them.

The most strict Philosophy of their World confesses, that it is more
advantageous to die, since to die you must have lived, then to have had no
being: then not to give a being to that Nothing, were worse then giving death.
I am more faulty in not peoducing it, then in killing it if it were produced.
Yet, my little man, thou would believe it an unpardonable parricide to
strangle thy son; really, it would be enormous: but it is much more execrable
not to give a being to what can receive it. For that child thou deprivest of
light for ever, would have had the satisfaction of enjoying it some while: Nay,
and we know that it is deprived but for some ages; but those poor forty
Nothings of which thou may have made forty good Soldiers for thy King, thou
maliciously deprivest of life, and suffer'st them to corrupt in thy reins, with
the hazard of an Apoplexy, which will be thy death.

But this did not at all satisfy me; which I witnessed with three or four
shakes of my head: But our Teacher held his tongue, for our supper was ready to
fly away.

We did then stretch our selves upon soft quilts, covered with great carpets,
and a young serving-man having taken the oldest of our Philosophers, did
conduct him into a little parlour apart, from whence my Spirit begged him to
come as soon as he had ended his meal.

This fancy of eating apart, inspired me with the curiosity of demanding the
cause he will neither accept the smell of meat nor herbs, if they do not die
of themselves, believing them sensible of pain: I do not so much wonder, said
I, that he abstains from flesh, and all things that have a sensitive life; for
in our World the Pythagoreans, nay, and some holy Anchorites use this rule: but
for example, not to dare to cut a Cabbage for fear of hurting it, seems very
ridiculous to me. But I (answered my Spirit) find a great deal of Reason in
this opinion.

For that Cabbage which you spoke of, had it not as well as you, an existent
being in Nature? And is she not mother to you both? Nay, and it seems she has
more necessarily provided for the vegetable, then the rational; since she has
remitted the Generation of a man to the capriciousness of his father, and can
according to his pleasure get him or not get him; a rigor with which she has
not treated the Cabbage; for instead of remitting it to the will of the father
to generate the son, as if she had more feared the loss of the Cabbages
species, then that of man, she constrains them, whether they will or no, to
give a being to one another; and not like men, who do fantastically generate
when the freak takes them, and who in their lifetime surpass not the number of
above twenty; whereas each Cabbage can produce forty thousand. And yet we
tickle our selves with the imagination, that nature is more affected to
Mankind then to this Cabbage: being incapable of passion, she can neither love
nor hate any thing; but if she were susceptible of love, she would rather
affect this Cabbage, which you know cannot offend her, then man, who would
destroy her if he could: to which you may add, that man cannot be born
guiltless, being a member of the first Criminal; but we know that the first
Cabbage did not offend his Maker. Now if you will say that we were formed ad
Imaginem Dei, which the Cabbage is not; which grant it be true, we have blotted
out that likeness in our Souls, wherein we resemble him; since there is nothing
so contrary to God as sin. Now if our Soul be no longer his Image, we are not
more like him in our hands, feet, mouth, forehead, and ears, then the Cabbage
is in its leaves, flowers, stalk, pith, or head. Do not you really believe,
that if that poor Plant could speak, it would say, Man (my dear Brother) what
have I done to thee to merit death? I only grow in gardens, nor am I ever
found in desert places, where I may live in security; I disdain all other
societies but thine, and I am scarce in thy garden, when to show thee my
complacency, I blow, I stretch out my arms to thee, and I offer thee my
children in grace; and for the requital of my courtesy, thou make my head to
be cut off: These are the discourses a Cabbage would hold, if it could express
its meaning. What, and because he cannot complain, may we justly do him all
the wrong he cannot resist? If I find a miserable man bound, may I kill him,
because he cannot defend himself? Quite contrary; his weakness would aggravate
my cruelty: and though this poor Creature be disrobed of all our advantages,
yet it deserves not death; and of all the gifts of being, it has but that of
increase, which we cruelly deprive it of; the sin of massacring a man, is not
so great, because one day he must revive, as that of cutting a Cabbage, who can
never hope another life: You annihilate the Cabbage in cutting of it; and in
killing a man, you do but change his mansion: Nay, I Will say more, since God
does equally cherish all his works, and that he has equally divided his
favors between us and Plants, we ought to have an equal esteem for them as our
selves. It is true, we were first born; but in Gods family there is no
birthright; and if the Cabbage share not with us in the blessing of
immortality, it has certainly something else to recompense the shortness of it
being: may be, it is an Universal Intellect, or a perfect knowledge of all
things in their Causes. For which cause, the Wise Director of all things has
not given them Organs like ours, who have but a simple reasoning, weak, and
often deceitful; But others, more ingeniously framed, stronger, and more
numerous, which serve for the operation of their speculative entertainments.
May be, you will ask me, when they ever communicated to us any of those high
thoughts: But then tell me, who ever taught us certain Essences, which we admit
above us, with which we have no relation or proportion, and whose existence we
as hardly comprehend, as the Intelligence; and the manner that a Cabbage is
able to express himself in, to his like, and not to us, is, because our senses
are too weak to penetrate so far.

Moses the greatest of all the Philosophers, and who drained the knowledge of
Nature, in Natures very source, signified this truth, when he spoke of the tree
of Knowledge, under which AEnigma he would teach us, that Plants did possess
the perfectest Philosophy. Remember then, O thou the Proudest of all Creatures,
that though a Cabbage says nothing, when thou cutst it, yet he pays it with
thinking. But the poor Vegetable wants Organs to howl as you would do, or fret,
or cry; yet it has those by which he complains of the wrong you do him, and
thereby draws the vengeance of Heaven upon you. If you insist asking me, How I
know that Cabbages have these fine thoughts? I Will ask you, How you know, that
they have them not; and that in imitation of you, one of them does not say, in
closing himself to his neighbor, I am, Mr. Wrinkled Cabbage, Your most humble
servant?

As he was in this part of his discourse, the young boy that had led out our
Philosopher, led him in again: Why, how now, supt already? cried my Spirit to
him: yes, answered he; and somewhat the sooner, because the Physiognomist
permitted me to take of yours. Our young Landlord staid not till I asked him the
explication of this Mystery. I see very well that this manner of living amazeth
you; Know then, though that in your World they are more neglectful of their
health, yet is not this rule to be despised.

In every house there is a Physiognomist entertained by the Public, which is
somewhat like that you call Doctors, but that he governs only the healthful,
and that he judges by what means he ought to treat us, either by proportion,
figure, Symmetry of our members, by the lines of the face, tincture of the
flesh, the softness of our skin, the agility of the body, the sound of the
voice, the color, force, and lastingness of our hair: Did not you lately take
notice of a man of little stature? it was the Physiognomist of the house, who
gazed upon you so; assure your self, that he diversified the exhalations of
your dinner, according to what he found in your Complexion. Do but consider
how different your Couch is from the rest of ours; without doubt, he judges
your temper of much another nature, since he so much feared the fume of these
little Birds should communicate it self to your nostrils, or that your fumes
should trouble us; and you shall see that at night he will choose your flowers
with as great circumspection. All this while I made signs to my young
Landlord, to oblige the Philosophers to fall upon some Chapter of the Science
they professed; who most friendly, straight offered the occasion: wherefore I
will not trouble you with the Discourse or Prayers, which were the Prologues of
this Treatise; and indeed, the medly of seriousness and Rallery, were too
excellent to be imitated. But in fine, friendly Reader, the last of the Doctors
that came in, continued in this sort.

I must now prove, that there are infinite worlds, in an infinite world:
Represent then to your self the Universe like a great Animal, and that the
Stars which are Worlds, are in that great Animal; as they being great Animals,
serve reciprocally to other Animals, as we our Horses, etc. And that we in our
turns are worlds to certain creatures, which are without comparison less then
us; as certain vermin, lice and little worms, which may be the ground for more
imperceptible ones; and so that we each in particular appear a great World to
this little People. May be, our flesh, our blood and spirits, are nothing but a
conjuncture made of little Creatures, who there entertain themselves, lend us
motion by their own, and blindly suffer themselves to be ruled by our will,
which is their Coachman, conduct us our selves, and altogether produce that we
call life: for, pray tell me, is it hard to believe, that a louse takes your
body for a World, and that when one of them has traveled from one of your
ears to the other, for his companions to say, that he has traveled to the two
ends of the World, or that he has made a course from one Pole to the other?
Yes, without doubt, this little people take your hair for the forest of that
Country; Pores filled with sweat or liquor, for fountains; Bubes or pimples,
for lakes or ponds; and Aposthumes, for Seas; and defluxions, for Deluges: when
you comb your self forwards and backwards, they take it for flowing and ebbing
of the Ocean. Does not the itching prove what I say? The worm that causes it,
is it any thing else but one of those little Creatures, that has deprived it
self from all society, to establish it self a Giant in its own Country? If you
ask me, Why they are bigger then other imperceptibles? I must ask you, Why
Elephants are bigger then we? or Irishman then Spaniards? As for the Blisters
or Dander, which you are ignorant of, they must either arrive by the corruption
of their Enemies, which these little Giants have massacred, or that the plague
has produced them, by the want of food for which the sedious have quarrelled,
and have left nothing in the field but mountains of dead Corpse; or that this
Tyrant, having chased all about him away, who with their bodies damned up his
pore, has given our liquid passage, which being strayed out of the Sphere of
our circulative blood, remains corrupted. May be, I may be asked, Why one louse
or worm produces so many more? which is not hard to conceive; for as one
revolt procures another, so these little people by the ill example of their
seditious companions, do each aspire to Empire, and kindle every where war,
massacre and hunger. But you will say, that some people are not so subject to
itching as others, and yet we equally possess these little things, since we
say, that it is these that compose our life. It is true, for we may perceive,
that phlegmatic people are less subject to scratching, then the Choleric,
because that the people sympathizing with the Climate they inhabit, are less
active in cold bodies, then others warmed by the temper of their Region, who
frisk and stir, and cannot quietly remain in one place; whence it proceeds,
that the Choleric man is more delicate then the phlegmatic, being animated in
more places; and the Soul being the action of those Creatures, he is capable of
feeling in all those places where this little Creature stirs; whereas the
flegmatique wanting heat, cannot by reason of his coldness, in many places at
once, give action to those little Creatures; and thereby is less Universally
sensible. And to prove more plainly this Universal worminess, do but consider
when you are hurt, how the blood straight flows to the wounded part; your
Doctors say, it is sent by provident Nature to succor the debilitated parts;
which should make us conclude, that there is besides the Soul and the
understanding, a third intellectual substance in us, who enjoys its functions
and Organs apart. Wherefore I think it more probable to say; that those little
Animals finding themselves assaulted, presently send to demand succor of their
neighbors; and being arrived from all parts, and the country being incapable
of so much company, they either die with hunger, or are smothered in the press:
this mortality happens, when the Aposthume is ripe: for to testify that these
Creatures are then dead, the rotten flesh becomes insensible; and if bleeding
often ordained for to divert the fluxion, does do any good, it is because having
lost much by the orifice which these little Creatures endeavored to stop, they
refuse to assist their Allies, having but enough wherewithal to defend
themselves at home.

Thus he ended; and when the other Philosopher saw our eyes fixed upon his, to
exhort him to speak in his time:

Men, said he, seeing you are curious to teach this little Animal (our like)
something of the Science we profess, I will now dictate a Treatise, which I
shall be willing to produce unto him, because of the light it gives to the
Intelligence of our Physic; it is the explication of the Eternal Origin of
the World. But being much pressed in the working of my bellows, you will pardon
the time, since I Will promise you as soon as ever it is arrived where it ought to
be, I will largely satisfy you.

At these words, the son of the house called his father to know what a clock it
was; who having answered, that it was past eight, he asked him in passion, why
he had not advertised them at seven, as he had commanded him; and that he knew
that the house removed to morrow, and that the walls of the Town were so
already: son, answered he, since you were at table, there is an express
prohibition published of parting till the next day after to morrow: no matter,
answered the young man, you ought blindly to obey, and not to penetrate into my
orders, and only to remember what I had commanded you: quick, go and fetch your
picture; which when he had brought, the young man took it by the arm, and whipped
it a whole quarter of an hour together. Thou good for nothing (he continued)
for punishment of your disobedience, I will make you, serve every one this day
for a laughing stock; for which effect, you shall go upon two legs: the poor
man went forth quite disconsolate, and his son excused his transport unto us.

I had much ado, though I almost bit my lips through, to forbear laughing at so
pleasant a punishment; wherefore to break off this mad Pedantism, which would
surely have made me burst out at last, I beseecht him to tell me, what he meant
by the voyage of the Town, of which he had lately spoke; and if the houses and
walls traveled? He answered me, Amongst our Towns, dear Stranger, there be
Motional and Fundamental; the Motional ones of that we are now in, are made as
I shall now tell you: the Architecture as you see of each Palace upholds it
upon light wood; we make it upon four wheels: in the thickness of one of the
walls, he puts ten great pair of bellows, whose snowts pass by an Horizontal
line through the last story from one pinnacle to the other; so that when they
would remove the Town to another place (for they change the Air each season)
each one unfolds on one side of his house large sayls, just before the pipes of
the bellows; then having bent a spring to make them play, their houses, in less
then eight days, by the continual gusts which those windy Monsters vomit, are
driven a hundred leagues: as for those we call stable, they are almost like
your Towers, except that they are of wood, and that they are pierced in the
Center, by a great and strong Vice, which goes from the top to the bottom, to
mount or dismount them at pleasure.

Now the earth is hollowed as deep as the house is high; and it is all ordered
in this manner, because that as soon as the frosts begin to harden the Earth,
they may sink their houses, where they are sheltered from the malice of the
Air; but as soon as the sweet breathing of the Spring begins to soften it
again, they mount into the light by the means of this great Vice I spoke of. I
entreated him, since he had already had so much goodness for me, and that the
Town was removed not till after the morrow, to tell me something of that
Eternal Original of the Worlds of which he had a little before spoke; and I
promise you, said I, in recompense thereof, as soon as I shall be returned into
the Moon, from whence my Governor (pointing to my Spirit) will tell you I am
come, I will sow your glory, in recounting the rare things you have told me: I
see that you laugh at that promise, because you do not believe the Moon I
speak of to be a World, and me an inhabitant thereof; but I can assure you,
that the people of that World, who take this for a Moon, will laugh at me when
I shall tell them, that it is a World, and that there are fields and
Inhabitants. He answered me with a smile, and thus pursued his Discourse.

Since we are constrained, when we have recourse to the Original of that Great
All, to fall into three or four absurdities; it will be necessary to take the
way where we shall be least apt to stumble: I then say, that the first obstacle
that stops us is, the Eternity of the Worlds; and the Wit of man not being
strong enough to conceive it, and being no abler to imagine it, then that great
Universe, so fine, so well ordered, being made by its self, they have recourse
to Creation. But it is like him that leaps into the River, for fear of being
were by the Rain; they save themselves from the arms of a Dwarf, to fall into
the mercy of a Giant; nay, they do not save themselves neither; for that
Eternity which they take from the World, because they cannot comprehend it,
they bestow upon God, as if he had need of that present, or as if it were
easier to imagine it in the one then the other: for, pray tell me, who did ever
imagine any thing could be made of nothing? Alas, between nothing and an Atome,
there are preparations so infinite, that the quickest Brain cannot penetrate
into it; therefore to escape this inexplicable Labyrinth, you must admit an
Eternal matter with Gods. But you will answer me, when I have admitted this
Eternal matter, How did this Choas range it self in this manner? Well, I will
now explicate it unto you.

My little Animal, you must after having Mentally divided each little visible
Body into an infinite many invisible Bodies, imagine that the infinite Universe
is composed of nothing but these infinite Atoms, most solid, most
incorruptible, and most pure; of which some are Cubiques, others
Parallelegrams; others Angular; others round; others sharp or pointed; others
Pyramidical; others Exagons, and others Ovals; all which act diversely according
to their figure: To prove which, put an Ivory Bowl very round upon a very even
place, at the least impression you shall bestow upon it, it will be a quarter
of an hour without lying still; to which I add, that if it were as perfectly
round, as some of those Atoms are, and the surface upon which it is put
perfectly even, it would never rest. If art then can incline a Body to
perpetual Motion; Why shall not we believe. Nature can do it? it is so of the
other Figures; some whereof, as the square, require a lasting repose; others, a
motion on one side; others, half motions, as trepidations; and the round, whose
being is motion, meeting in conjunction with the Pyramidical, may be makes what
we call Fire, because Fire does not only act without repose, but also pierces
and penetrates easily: the Fire moreover has different effects, according to
the overture and qualities of the Angles, when the round Figure is joined; as
for example, the Fire of Pepper, is another thing then the Fire of Sugar; and
that of Sugar, then that of Cinnamon; that of Cinnamon, then that of a Clove;
and this last, then that of a Faggot. Now the fire which is the constructor of
the parts, and the whole of the Universe, has pusht and gatheed into an Oak,
the quantity of Figures necessary to compose an Oak.

But you will say, How can hazard have gathered together in one place all
things necessary to produce this Oak? I answer you, that it is not strange,
that matter so disposed should produce an Oak, but that it would have been a
greater wonder, if things being so disposed, the Oak had not been produced;
some few less of certain Figures, it would have been an Elm, a Poplar, a
Willow; and some fewer then these, it had been the sensitive Plant, an Oyster,
a Worm, a Fly, a Frog, a Sparrow, an Ape, a Man. If having flung three dice
upon the table, two of them happen to be rafle, or all, three, four, and five;
or two, six and one; would you call this a great Miracle? to each Die, such
chance arrived, when there were so many others: O the great Miracle! three Dice
that made a sequence: O the great miracle! there is two sixes, and the bottom
of the third. I know that being a wise man, you would never make these
examinations; for since there is but a certain quantity of numbers upon the
Dice, it is impossible but some must happen: and after all this, you wonder how
this matter mingled pell-mell by the caprice of hazard, can produce a man;
since there is so many things necessary for his construction. Do you not then
know, that this matter tending to the forming of man, a million of times has
been staid? sometimes, in forming a stone; sometimes, lead; sometimes, coral;
sometimes, a flower; sometimes, a Comet; and all this, either because of more
of less Figures, necessary or unnecessary for the fabric of a man: so it is no
wonder amongst an infinite of matters that change and are incessantly stirring,
they have lighted upon the construction of some few Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals, which we see no more then if in a hundred throws with the Dice, we
should throw once in and in. It is also impossible that in this agitation
nothing should be formed; and yet this must be always admired at by some
fantastical fellow, who knows not how little he wanted of being something else.
When the great River ^ turns a Mill, conducts the of a Clock, and the little
River rowls away, and that sometimes incognito, amongst the thick reeds. You
will say, that this great River had Wit, because it met with things disposed
for these fine works; for, if the Mill had not been placed in this current, it
had never pulverized the corn; or if it had not likewise met the Clock, it
would hardly have marked the flowers; and if the little River had met the same
obstacles, it had without doubt, effected the same Miracles. Just so it happens
with the fire, which moves of its self; for having found the Organs fit for the
necessary agitation to reason, it reasoned; when it only found them proper to
feel; it onley felt, when proper to Vegetation, it Vegetated: to prove which,
burst the eyes of a man, the fire of whose Soul makes him see, and he will
leave seeing, as our great Clock will leave marking the flowers, if you
confound the wheels.

In fine, these first and indivisible Atoms, compose a Circle, upon which
without difficulty move the most cumbersome difficulties of Physic; nay, the
very operation of the senses, which no body yet could conceive, I will easily
explicate by these little Bodies; let us begin with our fight, which as the
most incomprehensible, deserves our first debate; I conceive it is occasioned
when the tunique of the eyes, whose pores are like glass, transmit that fiery
dust, which is called visual Rays, and that it is stopped by some opaque matter,
which casts them back again; then meeting in their way the image of what
repercust them, and that image being nothing but an infinite number of little
bodies, which are continually exhaled in an equal superficies with the subject
beheld, they throng it with them back to our eye. I know you will object, that
a Glass is an Opaque Body, very much closed; and yet instead of driving back
those other little Bodies, it suffers it self to be pierced: But my answer is,
that the pores of the glass is of the same Figure, as the Atoms of Fire, which
pierce it; and as a wheaten sieve is not proper to sift oats, nor an oaten one
to sift wheat; so a box of fit, though very thin, that lets sound penetrate it,
yet admits not the sight to do the same; and a piece of Cristal that is
transparent to the sight, will admit no penetration with your finger. I could
not hold interrupting of him; a great Poet and Philosopher of our World, said
I, has spoke after Epicurus, and he after Democritus, almost like you of these
little Bodies; wherefore you do not much amaze me with this discourse; and I
beseech you, in untwining of it, tell me, how you will by these principles
explicate the manner of representing your self in a glass: that is very easy,
replied he; for imagine to your self that those fires of your eyes having past
through the Glass, and finding behind it a Body not transparent, which rejects
them, they return the same way they came; and finding those little Bodies
traveling in an equal superficies upon the Glass, they recall them to our eyes;
and our imagination, warmer then any other of the faculties of our Soul,
attracts the most subtle of them, wherewith the shapes at home a picture in
little.

The operation of hearing is not harder to be conceived: and to be more
succinct, let us consider it only in the Harmony of a Lute touched by a Master
of that are: You will ask me, How it is possible I should conceive a thing so
far off me, that I cannot see? Is it that a spongeous matter goes out of my
ears, to enclose that Music, and so bring it back? or does that Player or
Musician engender another of the like species, and another Lute in little,
which like an Echo, has order to recant the same Ayrs unto me? No: But this
Miracle proceeds, that the string being drawn, strikes those little Bodies of
the which Air is composed, into my Brain, and these little corporal Nothings,
do sweetly pierce it; so that according as the string is stretched, the sound is
high, because it strikes the Atoms the more vigorously; and the Organ thus
penetrated, furnishes our fancy with wherewithal to frame a picture: if too
little, it happens that our memory, not yet having finished its Image, we are
constrained to repeat to it the same sound, to the end that of the Materials
which furnished it, as for example, the measures of a Saraband, it may take
enough to finish the Image of that Saraband. But this operation is nothing so
mavelous as the others, by which by the help of the same Organ, we are
sometimes stirred up to joy, or Choler, etc.

Which is done, when in that motion those little Bodies meet with others in us,
stirred up in the same manner, or which are susceptible by their own Figure of
the like emotions; for then the Newcomers excite their Landlords to move as
they do: and thus when a violent Air meets with the Fire of our Blood, it
inclines it to a violent motion, and animates it to an outward course, which we
call ardor of courage, or of the mind. If the sound be sweeter, and that it can
raise but a less flame, more shaken by conducting it through our Nerves,
Members, and Pores of our flesh, which causes that tickling we style joy: thus
it happens in the ebullution of the other Passions, which will according as
those little Bodies are flung more or less violently upon us, according to the
motion they receive by the rencountre of other motions, and according as they
find movable matter about us: thus much for hearing.

The demonstration of the Touch, I think is not more difficult; when we
conceive that from all palpable matters there is a perpetual emission of those
little Bodies; and according as we touch it, there is more evaporated, because
we press them from the subject, as water from a sponge: the hard make the Organ
sensible of their solidity; the supple, of their softness, the rugged, etc. To
prove which, we cannot but cunningly feel with hands used, or hardened in
labor, because of the thickness of the skin, which being no longer porous, nor
animated, hardly transmits these Atoms from the matter. May be some would fain
know where the Organ of Touching resides: for my part, I believe that it is
spread through all the superficies of the body, since we feel in each part: yet
imagine that we distinguish quicker, by how much we feel nearer the head, which
we may experience when with closed eyes we handle any thing; for we more easily
guess at it, then if we had felt it with our hinder-feet; which happens that
our skin being all over sieve-like, in little holes, our Nerves which are a
matter no closer, lose in the way a great many of those little Atoms, by the
little holes of their contexture, before their arrival to the Brain, the period
of their Voyage. Now I must speak of Smelling, and the Taste.

Pray tell me, when I taste a fruit, is it not because the heat of my mouth
melts it? Confess then, that being there is salt in a Pear, and that the
dissolution having divided it into little Bodies of another Figure then that
which composeth the taste or savor of an Apple, they must pierce our Palate in
a different manner; in the same sort as the wound made by a Pike, is not like
that which a Bullet suddenly makes me suffer; and as that Pistol-bullet makes
me suffer another pain then a slug of steel. Of the Smelling I have nothing to
say, since your Philosophers themselves confess, that it is framed by a
continual emission of little Bodies. But I will proceed upon this principle, to
explicate the Creation, Harmony, and Influence of the Celestial Globes, with
the immovable variety of Meteors.

He was going to continue, when our old Landlord entered, who advertised us,
that it was time to go to rest; he brought christals full of Gloworms, to
light the Parlour; but as these little insect fires lose their light, when they
are not newly gathered, these being ten days old, did hardly do us any service.
My Spirit waited not till the company was accommodated, but went up to his
study, and straight descended with two bowls of fire, so glistering, that we
all wondered he did not burn his fingers.

These incombustible torches (said he) will better light us, then these bundles
of worms; they are Rays of the Sun which I have purged of their heat, otherwise
the corasive qualities of the fire, would have offended your sight, in dazzling
your eyes; I have fixed their light, and have enclosed it in these transparent
Bowls which I hold: this ought not much to astonish you, for it is no harder
for me which am born in the Sun, to condense his Beams, which are the dust of
that World, then for you to gather together the Atoms of the pulverized earth
of this World: whereupon our Landlord sent a servant to conduct our
Philosopher, because it was night, with a dozen Globes of Gloworms hung at
their four feet; for us, that is, my Preceptor and my self, we lay by the order
of the Physiognomist; he put me that night in a Chamber of Violets, and Lilies,
and I was tickled according to the custom; and in the morning I saw my Spirit
come in, who said, he came from the Palace where one of the Queens Maids of
Honor had sent for him, to enquire after me, protesting, that she still
continued in the same design of keeping her word, that is, she should willingly
follow me where I pleased to carry her into the other World; which much edified
me, when I found that the chiefest motion was to become a Christian; so that I
have promised her to aid her in all her designs with all my power, and for that
effect to invent a Machine, able to hold 2 or 3 persons, into which this day
you may mount. I will seriously apply my self to this enterprise; wherefore to
divert you in the mean time, here is a Book, which I leave you; I brought it
from my native Country, and it is entitled, The State and Empire of the Sun,
with an addition, Of the History of the Spark; I also give you this, which I
esteem much more; it is the great work of the Philosophers, which one of the
greatest Wits in the Sun composed: He proves herein, that all things are true,
and declares the manner of uniting Physically all contradictories; as for
example, that white is black, and black is white; that one may be, and not be
at the same time; that there may be a mountain without a valley, and that
nothing is something; and that all things that are, are not. But note, that he
proves also, unheard of Paradoxes, without any Captions, or Sophistical Reason.
When you are weary of reading, you may walk, or entertain your self with the
son of the house; his wit is very charming, and all that I dislike in him is,
that he is a little impious; if he chance to scandalize you, or by some
Argument to shake your faith, do not fail presently to come and propose it to
me, and I will resolve your difficulties; whereas another would bid you break
company. But as he is extremely vain, I am sure he will take that flight for a
defeat; and he would believe your faith unreasonable, if you should refuse to
hear his. He left me (saying so,) but he was scarce gone out, when I began to
consider my Books and their boxes, that is, their coverings, which seemed to me
admirable, because of their richness; the one was cut of a single Diamond,
without comparison more lustrous then ours; and the second seemed a monstrous
Pearl cleft in two: my Spirit had translated these books into the Language of
that World; but because I have known of their Print, I will explicate to you
the fashion of these two Volumes.

At the opening of the Box, I found in one of them something of Metal, almost
like our Watches, full of little springs, and almost imperceptible Machines:
it is true, it is a Book, but a Miraculous one, which has neither leaves nor
letters. In fine, it is a Book, wherein to learn any thing, the eyes are
altogether unnecessary, and the ears are only to be used. When any one then
has a mind to read in it, he winds up with a great many little Springs this
Machine, then he turns the needle upon the Chapter he intends to peruse; and
straight, as from the mouth of a man, or some Musical instrument, there issues
forth distinct and different sounds, which the men of quality make use of in
the Moon for the expression of their thoughts. When I have since reflected upon
this miraculous invention, I no longer wondered, that the young men of that
Country were more knowing at sixteen or eighteen years old, then the gray
beards of our Climate; for knowing how to read as soon as speak, they are never
without Lectures in their Chambers, their walks, the town, or traveling; they
may have in their pockets or at their girdles, thirty of these Books, where
they need but wind up a spring to hear a whole Chapter, and so more if they
have a mind to hear the Book quite through; so that you continually possess the
company of all the great men, living and dead, who entertain you with living
voices. This present occupied me about an hour; and in fine, having hung them
like a pair of pendants, I went a walking; but I was hardly at the end of the
street, when I met a multitude of people very melancholy.

Four of them carried upon their shoulders a thing like a hearse covered with
black; I enquired of one what that Convoy like a Funeral pomp of my Country
meant; he answered me, that that naughty so named of the people, for a fall he
had justly received upon his right knee, who being convicted of envy and
ingratitude, was deceased the day before, and that the Parliament had condemned
him above twenty years ago to die in his bed, and to be after his death buried
in the ground. I began to laugh at this answer; and he asking me why? why, you
amaze me, said I, that what we count a blessing in our World, as a long life, a
peaceable death, and an honorable Sepulture, should serve in this World for an
exemplary punishment. Why do you, says this man, take burial for so precious a
thing? Good God! the mere imagination to have, though dead, a cloth laid upon
ones face, and upon that a Pike thick of earth, makes me hardly fetch my
breath: this miserable man whom you here see carried, besides the infamy of
being cast into a pit, was condemned to be assisted with 150 of his friends,
and an express command imposed upon them, for loving an envious and ungrateful
man, to appear with a sad countenance at his Funeral; and if the Judges had not
been merciful, in imputing part of his crime to his want of Wit, they had been
ordained to have cried: here we burn all but criminals, which is really a very
reasonable and decent custom; for we believe, that the fire having separated
the pure from the impure, the heat assembles sympathetically the Natural heat
which composed the Soul, and gives it more force to mount, till arriving into
some Star, the World of People more material then us, and more intellectual,
because that their temper ought to answer and participate to the pureness of
the Globe they inhabit.

Neither is this our finest way of burial; for when one of our Philosopher
arrives to an age wherein he finds his Wit decay, and the Ice of his years to
chill the motions of his Soul, he assembles his friends at a sumptuous Banquet;
then having expounded the motives which make him resolve to take leave of
Nature, and the small hopes the has of adding any thing to his great Works;
they either are gracious to him, that is to say, they permit him to die, or
they severely command him to live. But when by plurality of voices, they have
left his life at his own disposing, he advertiseth his dearest friends of the
time and place. These purge and abstain from eating four and twenty hours, then
being come to the house of the Wiseman, and having sacrificed to the Sun, they
enter the Chamber of the Generoso, who waits their coming, upon a bed of State;
each one embraces him; and when it comes to his turn whom he most affects,
after having tenderly embraced, leaning upon him, he joins his mouth to his,
and with his right hand sheaths the prepared dagger in his breast: his friend
parts not his lips from his, till he find him expired; then drawing the steel
from his bosom, and closing with his mouth the wound, he swallows his blood
till a second succeed him; then a third, then a fourth, and so all the company;
and four or five hours after, they bring each of them a wench of sixteen or
seventeen years old; and during three or four days, whilst they are tasting
the pleasured of love, they feed upon nothing but the flesh of the deceased,
which they eat raw, to the end, that if of an hundred imbracements any thing be
born, they may be assured that their friend is revived.

I interrupted this Discourse, saying to him that made it, that this manner of
doing had some resemblance with the fashion of our Climate: so I continued my
walk so long, that when I came back, dinner had been ready two hours: they asked
me, why I came so late? It is not my fault, said I to the Cook that complained,
for I enquired many times in the streets what a Clock it was, but they made me
no answer, only opened their mouths, shut their teeth, and held their faces
awry.

Why, cried out all the company, Do you not know that by that they showed you
what a Clock it was? 'Faith, said I, they might have held their long Noses in
the Sun long enough, before I understood them. It is a commodity, answered
they, which serves them in stead of a Watch; for of their Teeth they make so
true a Dial, that when they will instruct any one in the hour of the day, they
open their Lips, and the shadow of their Noses, like a Gnomon, denotes the
questioned minute. Now that you may know why in this Country they have all
great Noses, as soon as the woman is brought to bed, the Matrones carry
immediately the Child to the Master of the Seminary; and just at the end of
the year, those of experience being assembled, if their noses prove shorter
then a certain measure in the Syndick, he is judged Camas, and put into the
hands of some who geld them. You will ask me the cause of this barbarousness,
and how it coms to pass, that we who esteem Virginity a crime, should ordain
forced continence? But know, that we did it, after having observed for thirty
ages, that a great Nose denotes a wise man, courteous, affable, generous,
liberal, and that a little one is a sign of the contrary; wherefore of flat
noses we make Eunuchs, because the Republic had rather have no children, then
children like them: he was yet a speaking, when I saw a man enter stark naked;
I presently sat down and covered my self to salute him; for those are the marks
of the greatest respects you can testify in that Country: This Kingdom, says
he, desires before you return into your world, to advertise the Magistrates,
because that a Mathematician comes now from promising the Council, that if when
you are returned home, you will make a certain Machine that he will teach you, he
will attract your Globe, and join it to this; which I promised to perform. I
beseech you (said I to my Landlord when the other was gone) to tell me, why
this Messenger wore about him the Privy-Parts in brass, which I had often seen
when I was caged, but never asked what they were for, because I was always
environed by the Queens women, whom I feared to offend, if I had in their
presence begun so gross a discourse: so that he answered me in this manner; The
females here, no more then the males are ungrateful enough to blush at the
sight of that which forged them; and Virgins are not ashamed to love the only
thing upon us, which is the greatest memorial of nature, pricked thereunto by an
itching zeal: know then, that the Scarf wherewith this man is honored, on
which hangs the delightfullest Member of mankind, is the Symbol of a
Gentleman, and the mark to distinguish the Noble from the ignoble: this Paradox
seemed so extragavant, that I could not forbear to laugh. This Custom seems
very extraordinary to me; for in our World the mark of Gentility is to wear a
Sword. Why, my dear little man, said my Host, are the great ones of your
Country mad, to make a Parade of an instrument which denotes a Butcher, and
which is forged but for our Ruin, and in fine, the sworn Enemy of all living
Creatures; and on the other side, to hide an instrument without which we should
be in the rank of what is not the Prometheus of each Animal, and the constant
repairer of Natures feebleness? Unhappy Country! where the marks of Generation
are ignominious, and those of destruction honorable; and in the mean mean time
you call these members the shameful parts, as if there were any thing more
glorious, then the bestowing of life, or more infamous then the depriving
thereof. During all this Discourse, we still continued our dinner; which having
finished, we went into the garden to take the Air; and there taking an occasion
to speak of Generation and Conception, he said to me,

You must know, that the Earth being converted to a tree, that tree to a hog,
and that hog to a man; we must believe all beings in Nature tend to the most
perfect, and that they aspire to become man, that Essence being the Period, as
the best mixture, and the best imaginable in this World; since it is that which
joins life with Reason, all which none but a Pedantick Coxcomb will deny, being
we see that a Plum-tree, by the heat of its germ, as by a mouth, sucks and
digests the sod that invirons it; that a hog devours the fruit thereof, and
converts it to a part of himself, and a man eating this hog, warms again this
dead flesh, joins it to his own, and thereby revives the Animal under another
species: so that this man you see, may be was threescore years ago, a turf in
my Garden; which is the more probable, because that the Metempsicous opinion of
Pythagoras, sustained by so many great men, is likely to have come to our ears,
only to oblige us to search out the truth: as in effect we have found, that all
things that are, feel, or vegetate; and that in fine, when all matter is
arrived to that Period which is its perfection, it descends and returns to its
inanity, to reach the same parts again. I descended very well satisfied into
the garden, and I began to tell my Companion what our young Master had taught
me, when the Physiognomist arrived to lead us to supper, and afterward to rest.

In the morning as soon as I waked, I went to call up my Antagonist: It is (said
I, in accosting him) as great a miracle to find a great Wit like yours buried
in sleep, as to see fire without action. He smiled at this ill Complement: But
cried he, (with a Choleric kind of love) Will you never leave these fabulous
terms? Know, that these names defame the name of a Philosopher; and as the Wise
man sees nothing in the World but what he conceives, and judges may be
conceived, he ought to abhor all those expressions of prodigies and events of
Nature, which stupid puppeys have invented to excuse the weakness of their
understanding.

I thought then I was bound in Conscience to take up the disconrse, that I
might rectify his opinion. Though you be, replied I, very obstinate in your
Tenants, yet I have plainly seen things supernatural come to pass. You say so,
continued he, but you know not that the force of the imagination is able to
cure all Diseases you entitle by the name of supernatural; by reason of a
certain natural Balm, containing all the contrary qualities to each Disease
that molests us, which arrives when our imagination advertized by pain,
presently seeks out the particular remedy for the ill. For which reason a
learned Physician of your World counsels the Patient rather to take an ignorant
Doctor that he does believe otherwise, then a learned one, whom he shall
believe ignorant; because he thought that our imagination laboring our Cure,
if it have Medicines to help it, may effect its design; But that the best
Remedies were in vain without the help of imagination: Do you wonder, that the
first men of your World lived so long without skill in Physic? No: And what do
you think was the reason, that their Nature was yet in its force, and that
Universal Balm not yet dissipated, by the Drugs wherewith your Physicians now
consume you? needing as then nothing to regain your health, but strong wishes
to that effect, and imaginations that you were cured. And so their vigorous
fancies plunging their selves into that Vital Oil, did attract the Elixir; and
applying the Active to the Passive, they found themselves as well as before,
almost in the twinkling of an eye; which in despite of Natures depravation, is
seen now a days, though I must confess but seldom: But the vulgar call it a
Miracle, whereof for my part, I believe nothing; and I ground my self upon
something more, then that wherewithal these Doctors are cozened, that it is so
hard to be done: For I will ask them, he that is recovered of a desperate
Fever, did heartily wish, it is likely, in the time of his sickness, to be
cured, and may be made vows to that effect, so that necessarily he must have
died, remained sick, or be cured; if he had died, they would have said that the
Heavens had put a period to his pains; nay, and according to the Deceased his
prayers, they would have said, he had been cured of all Diseases: if he had
remained infirm, they would have said, he wanted faith: But because he is
cured, they straight cry, that it is a visible Miracle. Is it not likelyer,
that fancy, being excited by the violent desires of health, has done its
operation? for, yield that he escaped, why must it be a miracle? since we see
many people who had made as large vows, die miserably with all their promises.

But at least, said I, if what you say of this Balm be true, it is a sign of
the discussive faculty of the Soul, since without using the instruments of our
Reason, without relying on the conjunction of our Will, she acts of her self,
by applying the Active to the Passive, as if she was separated from us: then if
being separated from us, she is reasonable, she must necessarily be spiritual;
and if you confess her spiritual, I conclude her immortal, since death happens
to the Animal, but by the change of forms, of which only matter is capable.
The young man then gracefully placing himself upon his bed, and making me sit
down, discoursed after this manner: For the Souls of Beasts which are
corporeal, I do not wonder they die, since they are composed harmonically of
four qualities, a force or vigor of blood, and a Proportion of Organs well
converted; but I much wonder that ours, being intellectual, incorporeal, and
immortal, should be forced to dislodge by the same cause, that makes that of a
Beast perish: Has he contracted with our bodies, that when they received a
thrust through the heart, or a Bullet-shot into their Brains, or through their
bulk, she should then quit her mansion house?

And if this Soul be spiritual and subsistent of its self, so reasonable that
she is as capable of intelligence being separated from us, as joined to our
mass; Why cannot blind men, born with all those lively advantages of an
intellectual Soul, imagine what seeing is? As if, because they are not deprived
thereof, by the death of all their Senses; why then I cannot make use of my
right hand, because I have a left. --. And in fine, to make a just comparison,
and what will destroy all you can say; I will content my self to lay before you
the example of a Painter, who cannot work without his Pencil; the Soul is the
same deprived of Corporeal senses, --. Yes, but answered he, --.

But yet they will have it, that the Soul which can but imperfectly act, having
lost one of her tools in the course of life, can hereafter act with perfection,
when after our decease she has lost them all: yet you will tell me, that she
has no need of those instruments to perform her functions. I Will answer you,
that the Hospital of blind men ought to be extirpated for counterfeits. He
would have continued in these impertinent Arguments, when I closed his mouth by
praying him to leave them off, as he did, for fear of quarrelling, for he
perceived I began to grow warm; after which he went away, and left me admiring
the people of that World, in whom amongst the meanest sort so much natural wit
is found, whereas those of ours have so little, and which costs them so dear.
But at last the love of my Country loosened me from the desire and thoughts I
had of staying there; I thought upon nothing now but my departure: but I saw so
much impossibility in it, that I became very melancholy. Which my Spirit
presently perceived; and having asked me the reason, why I was not as I used to
be, I freely disclosed the cause of my ill humor; but he made me such fair
promises of my return, that I wholly relied upon him: I sent word thereof to
the Council, who straight sent for me, and made me swear, that I would rehearse
here the things I had seeen there: after which, my Pasports were drawn; and my
Spirit having furnished himself with necessaries for so long a voyage, asked me
in what part of my Country I would land: I answered him, that most of the
young Gentlemen of Paris, do once in their life propose to themselves a voyage
to Rome, imagining that after that, there is nothing worth doing or seeing; and
I begged of him that I might imitate them: but added I, in what Machine shall
we perform this journey? and what directions do you think that Mathematician
will give me, who talked the other day of joining these two worlds together? As
for the Mathematician, said he, do not trouble your self, it is a man who
promises much, and does nothing; and for the Machine which shall carry you
back, it shall be the same, which brought you to the Court: how? said I, will
the Air become as solid as the sand, to fasten your steps? I can hardly believe
that. And it is much, said he, that you believe, and that you do not believe;
and pray why should the Witches of your Country, who march in the Air, and
conduct whole Armies of Hail, Snow, Rain, and other such stuff from one
Province to another, have more Power then we? I beseech you, be a little more
credulous in favor of me. It is true, said I, that I have received from you so
many favors, as well as Socrates and others, for whom you had so much
friendship, that I ought to confide in you, as I do in abandoning my self to
your will with all my heart. I had no sooner spoke this word, but a kind of
Whirlwind rose; and holding me in his arms, he made me pass without any
incommodity, that great space, (which our Astronomers speak of, betwixt us and
the Moon) in a day and a half: which made me know, that they lied, who said
that a Millstone would be 360. and so many years a falling from Heaven; since I
was so small a time in falling from the Globe of the Moon to this. In fine, at
the beginning of the second day, I perceived I was near the Earth, since I
already distinguished Europe from Africa, and both from Asia; when I smelt the
Brimstone which proceeded from a very high Mountain, which so incommodated me,
that I swoon'd: I know not what happened to me afterward, but when I came to
my self again, I found my self entangled amongst some Briars upon the side of a
hill, in the midst of some shepherds that spoke Italian: I knew not what was
become of my Spirit, and I demanded of those shepherds, if they had not seen
him: at which words they made the sign of the Cross, and looked upon me as if I
had not been my self; but telling them that I was a Christian, and desiring of
them to conduct me to some resting place, they brought me to a Village about a
mile off; where I was scarce arrived, when all the Dogs of the Place, from the
meanest Curs, to the greatest Mastiffs, flew all upon me; and had certainly
devoured me, if I had not found a house wherein I sheltered my self: but that
did not hinder them to continue their Conventicles, so that the Master of the
house began to look upon me with an ill eye; and I believe the scruple those
augurious people in such kind of Accidents have, would have made this man have
abandoned me to the fury of those cursed Animals, if I had not bethought my
self, that the thing that made them so fierce after me, was the World from
whence I came: for being accustomed to bark at the Moon, they smelt I came from
thence, having the smell about me, as those that come from Sea, smell of that
briny Element. To purge me from that evil Air, I exposed my self upon a Tarras
three or four hours together in the Sun; after which coming down, and the Dogs
smelling no longer the dangerous influence which had created me their enemy,
did no longer bark at me, but sneakt home quietly. The next morning, I
traveled for Rome, where I saw the Relics of the Triumphs of some great men,
past and present; I admired the beautiful ruins, and the rich reparations made
by the Moderns. In fine, after having staid there fifteen days in the Company
of Monsieur de Cyreno my Cozen, who lent me money for my return; I went to
Civita-Vecchia aboard a Gally, which brought me to Marseilles. During all this
voyage, I thought upon nothing, but of that I had so lately made. I began the
memorials of it then, and have since my return, put them as much in order, as
sickness (which made me keep my bed) would permit me: but foreseeing that they
would be the end of my studies and troubles, to keep my word with the Council
of that World, I did beg of Monsieur le Bret, my dearest and most inviolable
friend, to put them forth in Print; with the History of the Suns Republic, and
that of the Spark, if those that have stolen them from us, do render them unto
him, as I do most earnestly conjure them to do.

FINIS.

