THE CASE Of a Standing Army ARMY Fairly and Impartially STATED. IN ANSWER To
the late History of STANDING ARMIES IN ENGLAND: And other Pamphlets writ on
that Subject.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, School.

THE CASE Of a Standing ARMY Freely and Impartially STATED, etc.

THE PREFACE.
I Cannot but with Grief behold, how active some persons have been of late, in
contriving ways to divide us into Parties and Factions. It Is wonderful to
imagine how many Arts and Stratagems they daily make use of to promote their
Ill Designs. In the War time they were continually bellowing, the French would
be too hard for us, and spin out the War, till we were ruined by the expense of
it; and that, talk what we would, it was impossible we should ever bring our
Potent Enemy to terms of Agreement, either safe or Honorable. This was their
Trick they used then, to compass the Nation's Ruin, by discouraging the People
from assisting with their Purses, the endeavors of his Majesty; but God be
thanked, the Wisdom of our Parliaments, and the Love the People bore his
Majesty, caused us cheerfully to carry on the War, to the wonder of our Enemies
both at home and abroad, and Confusion of all their devilish Designs.

And now, that we have bravely gained an Honorable Peace; they as
Industriously wrack their wicked Inventions, to find means to rob us of the
benefits we might hope from it, and render it ineffectual, by setting us in
Flames at home, and embroiling us into Fatal Fewds, and Discontents; that if
possible our Foreign Enemies may be obliged to them for what they were never
able to do themselves, and be forced for once to own, English Wits have been
sharper than French Swords. To this end they shift Sails, and tell us, the
French are weak and Impotent, and unable to attempt any thing against us, that
consequently a Standing Army is unnecessary, and a needless expense; and least
the People should not regard that, they fright them with Dangers, and
Chimerical Bugbears. And seeing these Men's designs have, in both these
changes, evidently endeavored the Interest of our Foreign Enemies; It is not
at all absurd to imagine they have had the handling of a few Lewidores, and
then we need no longer wonder at their Actions; for that Metal carries a great
weight with it; and has a way of persuading, which their corrupted Consciences
is no wise able to resist; Nay least we should believe they could, this Author
has given us two Instances to the contrary; in hopes perhaps of reviving here
the Trade of Bribery, which to their unspeakable Grief has been Dead so long.

This I believe, will afford us the true cause of their complaining of the
splitting and Multiplying of Places, as he calls it; for indeed if any sober
man considers it, he cannot but think it more safe; and that the Trust is
likelier to be managed with more Integrity in the hands of many, than one; for
they are as a Guard or Watch upon one another: If there be but one honest man
in Five, Seven, or Nine, his example will oblige the rest to be so too, least
they are found fault with; whereas there is not that obligation on a single
Person; But if there is not an honest man to be found in Five, Seven, or Nine;
we are in a hopeless state, and our Affairs in a desperate Condition.

If these Gentlemen were scattered among those places, one among the Five,
another among the Seven, another among the Nine, etc. then I suppose, 'twou'd
be full as well, as if the Commissions were entrusted with single Persons;
(themselves expected) and the places would be well managed to be sure, though
there were Ninety Nine joined with them; so that it is plain their Quarrel does
not lie against the splitting of Offices; but they are angry that none of the
splinters fell to their share: They think they have as much capacity, and
therefore as good pretensions to preferment as any one. This is the ground of
their Quarrels, and true reason of all their Complaints, and as we deal with
peevish froward Children, the readiest way to quiet them is to give them
something to Play with.

In the following Pages I have endeavored to show the Necessity of a Standing
Force, not as they do, by what was formerly in Use; but by considering the
Present Circumstances of things, which is the only true way of obtaining the
right; for it is not what our Ancestors did formerly, but what we ought to do
now.

Our Ancestors acted according to the state of their Affairs, and I dare
affirm, if they were living now, they would alter their Measures, to the
present occasions, and make no scruple of varying their Counsels as they saw
necessity required.

Such a Method of acting is a sure sign of Wisdom, and seldom fail of success;
whereas never to alter, though there is Necessity for it, shows Positiveness in
the highest degree; proves incureable folly, and ever ends in unpitied Misery.

These Gentlemen, wise in their own Conceits, are always instructing others;
they have not patience to let the Wisdom of the Nation act as they shall think
fit; but by an impudent boldness they pretend to Model the Government, and
regulate the Affairs of the Nation in a Club Room, over a heap of Sot's Weed,
with as much assurance as if they were all Privy Counselors, and are as
Dogmatical and Positive in what they advance, as if they had choused the Pope
of his Infallibility.

They might have been so Civil as to have stayed, to see what His Majesty's
thoughts were, and what the Parliament will do in the business; since all good
Men are assured, that His Majesty will never intend, nor the Parliament ever
consent, to any thing, but what will be evidently for the Glory, Honor, and
Safety of these Nations.

THE CASE Of a Standing ARMY Freely and Impartially STATED, etc.
IT IS not at all strange to see the best things Evil spoken of. The Wisest
Counsels and most Regular Conduct have often been severely Censured even by
those who have largely shared their good Effects. There have been some in all
Ages, who have had such a predominant and unhappy mixture of Ill Nature in
their Constitutions, that they have taken a pleasure to be always out of
Humor, ever complaining and murmuring, never pleased with either good or bad
Fortune; and since the whole delight of such wretches consists in a constant
exercise of their Spleen, they take care never to want this devilish diversion,
by continually employing themselves in finding faults in others; not putting
themselves to the trouble of distinguishing between Good, and Ill, unless it be
to bestow their bitterest Reproaches where they find the greatest Excellencies,
because most directly opposite to their own Imperfections.

That this is the case of most of our Malcontents I believe we may be pretty
sure; for it can easily be shown, that the very same Persons have been noted
Grumbletonians in the Luxurious and Effeminate Reign of Charles the II. the
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Reign of the late King James, and still keep up their
snarling Humors even in the Mild and Easy one of his present Majesty King
William: So that it is plain the fault lies only in their own corrupted Blood
and vicious Tempers.

That such People should have any regard, or that any one should be drawn in to
mind or value, much less to cry up, their wicked Insinuations and mischeivous
Complaints, which have no other source than the too great abundance of their
Spleen, and their own settled ill dispositions, which no Art can correct or
cure, is a very surprising and sad Accident, and ought to be dreaded by every
good person; for in the end the Consequences may prove very fatal and
prejudicial.

Amongst these sort of Men none have made a greater Noise or seemed to have
more plausible pretenses, than those Persons who have employed their Pens in
terrifying the People with the danger of a Standing Army. Liberty is their Cry,
a Glorious Topic indeed when it is not abused; but it has ever been made the
Stalking-Horse to all Designs, and dressed up in as various shapes as the Wit
and Cunning of Designing Persons found necessary and convenient to their Ends
and Purposes; it is an Argument very specious and plausible, never failing to
dazzle the Eyes of the Unthinking Vulgar, who run away with the word, and
consider no farther than the bare out side of things.

Whether or no there lies any ill Designs, at the bottom of the present clamor
against a Standing Army, I know not; but I am afraid of what might follow if
these Gentlemen's Notions were embraced, and their desires satisfied; I cannot
but think we should be in very ill Circumstances if we were left Unguarded, and
without Forces sufficient to secure us from the Insults of our Enemies; but I
hope their ill counsels will never prevail to reduce us to so lamentable a
condition, as to be more beholden to the Generosity or Imprudence of an Enemy,
than to our own Strength and Wisdom.

Nay I dare engage, that these same Gentlemen, who are now so very hot for the
Disbanding the Army, should the Army be Disbanded, would be so far from being
better satisfied, or cured of the spleenetick Humors they are overrun with,
that they would then make the Want of an Army the Grounds and Occasions of new
Complaints; they would then with open Mouths, and a full Cry, and with
something more reason on their side, roar out, that we were neither safe nor
secure, but left naked and defenseless to a Potent and Inveterate Enemy, who
might, (if he pleased) make an easy Conquest of us, and quickly be Master both
of our Lives and Estates; This would then be the Outcry, and we should be
Imposed on with the continual AIarms of an Invasion from abroad, by the very
same Persons, who now endeavor to frighten us with the Loss of our Freedom and
Liberties by an Army at home; the grumbling Humor would still find something to
feed on, and preserve it self alive in spite of either Cure or Poison.

But to begin with our Author of the History of Standing Armies in England;
Page first he says, If any Man doubts whether a standing Army is Slavery,
Popery, Mahometism, Paganism, Atheism, or any thing which they please. How Sir,
A Standing Army to be so many several things or what you please, this is
strange indeed, and if this is all, we need not fear; for to be every thing, or
what you please, is to be nothing at all, I admire this Gentleman should
stumble on so odd a beginning; but to go on, let him read first, the story of
Matho and Spendius at Carthage; Secondly, the Histories of Strada and
Bentivoglio: where he will find what work Nine Thousand Spaniards made in the
17 Provinces, though the Country was full of fortified Towns, possessed by the
Low Country Lords, and they had assistance from Germany, England and France. I
think this one Paragraph is a direct Confutation of the whole Book; for if Nine
Thousand Spaniards well Disciplined, made such havoc in the 17 Provinces, though
the Country was full of fortified Towns, and in the Possession of the
Low Country Lords, assisted too by Germany, England and France; I think we,
(who cannot boast of many strong fortified Towns, nor cannot reasonably expect
any quick Assistance from Abroad,) should think of keeping up a Force able and
sufficient to protect us in case of Necessity, and not of leaving our selves
Open and Unguarded; this is so very obvious to the meanest degree of Sense,
that I wonder how these Gentlemen or any one else can have a thought to the
contrary.

But he goes on confuting his own Notions; for he confesses that we have always
had an Established Force among us, if so, then I think the dispute may be
brought into a narrow Compass; for the question will not be, if a Standing
Force here is Legal; for that is granted, but the question will be, what Forces
are Necessary to be kept in Pay at this time; which may be immediately
resolved, by considering what an Army is raised and kept in Pay for; and it is
either to Invade and Offend our Enemies, or to be a Security and Defense to our
selves, when we have reason to fear an Annoyance or Invasion from Abroad; and I
suppose all Englishmen will see the occasion of a Standing Force, and a pretty
large one too; for if we have not an Army sufficient for our Security and
Preservation, we had as good have none; so that all the pains this Gentleman
has been at in computing the Forces now in Pay, on purpose to instill Fears and
Jealousies in the hearts of his Majesty's good Subjects, is to no manner of
purpose, unless it be to give us the greater reason to rejoice in our Security,
and to thank God that we are so well provided for our Defense. It Is true indeed
we have just had a Peace; which gives these Gentlemen occasion to say, that we
have nothing to fear, and consequently no Use for an Army, but if we consider
how apt a certain Prince is to disturb and Invade his Neighbors, and how able
he is at this time to do it; how often also he has found pretenses to break the
most Solemn Leagues, we should quickly be convinced of the contrary, and find
very good Grounds to fear an attempt upon us if we are not able to prevent it.
In Page 3 he highly extolls the Merits of Queen Elizabeth, and deservedly too,
he tells us, She assisted the Dutch, whereby She trained up her Subjects in the
Art of War, That She would never permit them nor France to build any great
Ships; kept the Keys of the Maes and Scheld in her own hands; and died with an
uncontrol'd Dominion of the Seas, and Arbitress of Christendom; all this She
did with a Revenue not exceeding 300000 l. per Annum, and had but inconsiderable
Taxes from her People.

To dispute with these Men, we must set things in a right Light. It Is plain,
they built upon false suppositions, which few People observe, being dazzled with
the plausibleness of their Arguments, and blinded with their pretended concern
for their Country; but to argue truly upon the matter, and to state the Case
aright, we must consider the Alterations, and Revolutions, that have happened
in Europe, within these hundred Years. France is now arrived to a vast Height,
it is now no more that France which we could Invade and almost Conquer at our
pleasure. We may indeed forbid them building great Ships, but I fancy they
would hardly mind us. Ships they have to compose a strong and mighty Fleet,
with Seamen able and experienced to Man them, great Armies at Land in constant
Pay; this is a State far differing from what they were formerly; therefore we
go a wrong way to work, when we suppose them in the same condition they were in
a hundred Years ago, and build Maxims for present use on those suppositions;
for it is evident they are increased to an incredible pitch in extent of their
Country, Riches, and multitudes of the Inhabitants; that this is no groundless
supposition, is very clear, by their being able to cope with a Confederacy of
the most Potent Princes of Europe for ten Years together: As the Author of the
account of Denmark says in his Preface, we have lately bought the experience of
this truth too dear not to be now sensible of it. It Is not very long ago since
nothing was-more generally believed (even by Men of the best Sense) than that
the Power of England was so unquestionably established at Sea, that no Force
could possibly shake it; that the English Valor and Manner of Fighting was so
far beyond all others, that nothing was more desirable than a War with France.
Should any one have been so regardless of his reputation at that time to have
represented the French an overmatch for the United Forces of England and
Holland; or have said, that we should live to see our selves insulted on our
own Coasts, and our Trade endangered by them, that we should be in
apprehensions of an Invasion and a French Conquest, such a venturesome Man must
have e expected to have passed for a very Traveller, or at best, for an
illnatur'd and unthinking Person, who little considered what the resistless
Force of an English Arm was; but our late Expertence has reclaimed us from
these Mistakes: Our Fathers and Grand Fathers told us indeed these things, when
they were true, when our Yeomanry and Commonalty were every day Exercised in
drawing the Long Bow, and handling the Brown Bill, with other Weapons then in
use, wherein we excelled all the World.

To set this still in a clearer Light, 'twill not be amiss if we consider the
State of England in respect of what it was formerly; and I believe we may,
without much thought, affirm that our Monarchy was at its highest pitch in the
Reign of our glorious Queen Elizabeth, the remissness and carelessness of some
of the late Reigns have softened our Spirits, and brought a Luxury unknown to
our Forefathers in vogue among us, whereby we are degenerated from that old
hardiness and Fortitude, our Ancestors were so famous for. This being the true
State of the Case without partiality on either side; these Gentlemen's Notions
will naturally fall to pieces; and I hope that true Englishmen will no longer
suffer themselves to be imposed on by a single of Words, that have only an
empty sound to recommend them; it is time I think to look about us, and consider
seriously on the matter, before we part with those Forces that have so bravely
fought for us Abroad, and are still so willing and able to defend us at Home:
But before I part with this Gentleman on this head, I cannot but take notice of
the sly Insinuation he makes of Queen Elizabeth's doing all those great things
with only 300000 l. per Annum, and some inconsiderable Taxes besides; his
design is that People should immediately make reflections on the Taxes that have
been raised to Maintain this War; but if this Gentleman had that Ingenuity he
pretends to, he would hinder such Reflections, by letting us know that such a
Sum was more than 3 times as much in our Days, and that by her Privateers She
took several Millions from the Spaniards, besides the Customs and Interest were
paid her by the Dutch, with these She did all those great things: that She had
but an Army between 1400 and 2000 Men in time of Peace is evidently false; for
there were a greater Number than that requisite to the Garrisoning of the
Cautionary Towns in her hands in Flanders; but I think it is needless to follow
him in his Historical Account or things, for they are very little, to his
purpose, or indeed to any purpose at all.

In Page 19 he tells us, That his present Majesty was invited over, and landed
at Torbay, publishing a Declaration, which set forth all the Oppressions of the
late Reign, (but the keeping up a Standing Army) declared for a free
Parliament, in which things were to be so settled, that there should be no
danger of falling again into Slavery; and promised to send back all his foreign
Forces as soon as this was done.

Sure these Gentlemen imagine they may say any thing; they are great Instances
of the Mildness of the present Government, when they are not brought to an
Account, for taking such Liberties both in their Speeches and Writings, to
Insinuate whatever they think may be prejudicial to those above them; for to
tell us that a Standing Army is certain Slavery, and to Insinuate that his
present Majesty intended from the very first to maintain a Standing Army, is as
plain as they can speak, to asperse His Majesty with what they daily experience
to be false: such Liberties are too bold, and that they are not called to
Account for them, is plain demonstration of the Idleness and Vanity of their
Fears.

Here again he lays t he blame of Ireland's not being timely succored on the
Government, when we all know how earnest His Majesty was for the Relief of
those distressed People; though he tell us, that Ireland was neglected to be
relieved, for a pretense for the raising a greater Army; I would have these
Gentlemen take care how they provoke Mercy.

In Page 21, he tells us, the King acquainted the Parliament the 8th of March,
when speaking of the deplorable Condition of Ireland, that he thought it not
advisable to undertake the reducing of it, with less than 20000 Horse and
Foot. This was a better Pill to the Parliament, who thought they might have
managed their share of the War with France by a Fleet at Sea, but there was no
Remedy, a greater Army must be raised, or Ireland lost. This Gentleman writes
fiast I suppose, and seldom minds his Sense. Did the Parliament think of
Conquering Ireland by a Fleet? He would have had them landed their Seamen, and
left their Ships a prey to the French. We'll forgive him one blunder however,
if he will take care what he writes hereafter: but I admire how this Gentleman
makes the Conquest of Ireland and a War with France the same thing; for I take
them to be distinct: Ireland is our own Country, and when we fought for that,
we fought for what was immediate ely our own, we were not at War with France,
or any Foreign Prince, we were reducing a People, who were in actual Rebellion
to the Crown of England, but we'll not quarrel about Terms; though by the way,
the miseries and hardships our Fellow Subjects of Ireland felt, should make us
terribly afraid of giving any Neighboring Prince the least hopes of succeeding
in any Attempt upon us; for it is an undeniable Maxim, that opportunity makes
the Thief, and by Disbanding our Troops, we may possibly give some grounds for
hopes of Success to a Prince naturally Aspiring and Ambitious, and very apt to
fancy himself capable of doing more than he is able; but to return, I would ask
this Gentleman how he came to be so sure that the Parliament thought to have
managed their share of this War by a Fleet at Sea, which he so possitively
asserts. We are all sure that the Parliaments of England were of another mind
in former Days, or they would never have contributed so largely and liberally
toward an Invasion of France as they often did, Nay, in all our Histories, I
never found they ever parted with their Money more heartily, than when it was
for a War with that Country, and yet they never so much as dreamed of their
carrying on a War, only by a Fleet at Sea, but quite the contrary; for we all
of us know, that our Kings very frequently Transported great Armies over into
Flanders, Normandy, or some part of France, thinking it more advisable to Seat
the War in an Enemies Country rather than their own. To give some Instances,

William the Conqueror entered France with a great Army. William Rufus Invaded
Normandy, so did Henry the V. and Richard the I. Henry the III. twice
Transported great Armies over to France. Edward the I. twice Invaded France.
There were no less than five several Armies Transported over to France in the
Reign of Edward the II. Henry the V. had continually an Army in France. Many
more Instances might, be given of the like nature, but these are enough to let
us see, that in former times our Parliaments thought it no diminution to their
Wisdom to carry on their Wars in Foreign Parts by Landforces; though in those
Days they were confessedly stronger at Sea than any of their Neighbors; and
amongst all our Princes we find none more beloved, and extolled, than those
Martial Monarchs, who Transported and Headed their English Armies in Foreign
Parts. Besides, whoever does but consider how liberally and largely our late
Parliaments have contributed toward the Expense of a ten Years War, and what a
happy Agreement and Union there has been all along betwixt the King and them, I
say, whoever considers this, can by no means believe he speaks truth, when he
tells us, that the Parliament thought they might have managed their share of
the War with France by a Fleet at Sea, and that they thought the raising a Land
Force a bitter Pill.

I think this Gentleman should be required to give a more public account of
this Assertion. To make us believe the King outwitted the Parliament, and that
the Parliament themselves acted disagreeably to their own opinions, this is a
New contrivance, and may in time produce very evil Consequences. But I hope Men
of Sense will take care how they are cajoled by such horrid Insinuations.

Well, now he comes to his dear beloved Militia, and tells us what wonders were
done in Ireland by the Iniskilling-Men, and those of Londonderry; but pray let
us stop a little to consider the matter, and not suffer this Phamphleteer to
run away with Noise and Nonsense. The Iniskilling Men were People made
desperate by the Ruins of their Estates and Fortunes, almost weary of their
Lives by the Cruelties and Hardships they suffered from the Irish Papists,
having the cries of their Wives and Children, (laboring under the greatest
Miseries) ever in their Ears, and the deplorable condition of their Native
Country before their Eyes; beside they were not a Militia, as our Author
falsely boasts, but were for the most part Gentlemen and others that sled from
the Barbarities of the Irish Papists from all parts of Ireland, and gathered in
a Body for their security at Iniskilling, and great Numbers of them Officers
and private Soldiers of the Army, whom Tryconnel had Disbanded because
Protestants, Men that had been in Pay and Discipline a great part of the Reign
of King Chales the II. So that it is a mistake to say they were a Militia;
farther, if it be considered whom they fought with, there is none will wonder at
what they did, they encountered poor senseless wretches that knew not their
Right hands from their Left; and always look behind them when they draw their
Swords. And if these are the Wonders they boast of, they had as good be silent,
and say nothing of the matter.

In the next Page he says, at last by our great Armies and Fleets, and the
constant Expense of maintaining them, we were too hard for the Economy, Skill,
and Policy of France, and notwithstanding all our difficulties, brought them to
terms both Safe and Honorable. Did we so Sir. then I think we have very little
reason to complain, and if our Fleet and Armies procured us this Peace, They
only can preserve it; by parting with either we make it precarious, and to
depend merely on the Generosity of an Enemy, who is not used to be firmer to
his Word than his Interest; several true sensible Englishmen are of the
opinion, that the longer we maintain a Standing Armed Force, we shall be the
longer from having Occasion to make use of them; but that on the contrary, the
sooner we Disband them, the sooner we shall be put to the trouble and charge of
raising New; For it is certainly true, that that Nation which is most able to
wage War, will be the unlikeliest to be put to the trouble of it.

But here he says, I shall omit giving any account of the Conduct of our Fleet
during this War, how few Advantages we reaped by it, and how many occasions was
lost of Destroying the French; only thus much I will Observe, that though a great
part of it may be attributed to the Negligence, Ignorance, or Treachery of
Inferior Officers, yet it could not universally happen (the Gentleman is
positive in what he says) and unpunished too, notwithstanding the Clamours of
the Merchants, and repeated complaints in Parliament, unless the Cause had laid
deeper. Now this Gentleman should take care to be well informed, before he so
possitively Asserts things of this Nature; he may be called on to give an
Account of his knowledge in the Affairs he pretends to be so well acquainted
with, and it may go very hard with him if he cannot prove what he Affirms, and
produce Grounds for his malicious Insinuations; but if he is informed of the
Nature of Affairs, and so well knows the miscarriages that have befell us,
where the Source and Original of them lay, their secret Springs and Movements;
he ought, especially since he pretends to be such a Patriot, to have pointed
out the Persons, discovered the Authors, and openly accused them to the World;
for God be thanked, none need be silent now in a just Cause, none need be
afraid or backward to reveal the Truth; we are unacquainted with Threats and
Closettings so frequent in the late Reigns, and are neither Bribed nor
terrified out of the Truth; if they are only his own private Suggestions, and
Chimera's raised and fomented by his own ill Humors, he ought to have forbore
them, particuly at this time of Day, when they may embroil the King and
Parliament into Heats and Jealousies of each other, which might create greater
hardships to the Nation, than the whole ten Years War, and might prove more
fatal in the end.

However, to satisfy these murmuring Gentlemen in this point, we may give very
good reasons that our Affairs at Sea were not managed to more advantage, and
also that they are not capable of being better managed without our having a
Land Force at home; for the French King found his Account lay in Pyrating on
our Merchants, where something was to be had, rather than in Fighting our
Fleets, where, besides the Uncertainty of Victory, nothing but dry Blows were
to be gained; whereas, by taking our Trading Vessels, he not only impoverished
us, but at the same time enriched himself, which was a double advantage; and to
hinder this Misfortune there was no way but one, that was the dividing our
Fleet, as he did his, into several small Squadrons, and send them Cruising, and
Coasting about in all places where our Merchants had any business; but then the
Remedy would have been worse than the Disease; for we should have left
ourselves Open and Unguarded, at a time when our King was out of the Nation,
and all our Forces in Flanders; and I believe the French would scarce have let
slipped the opportunity of Invading us, and hardly failed of making their
Advantage of such an Oversight. This I think is enough to convince these
Purblind Politicians of the Necessity of a Standing Army; for if a War should
break out again, having a Land Force to secure us, our Fleet may divide
themselves, and either block our Enemies in their own Ports, or attend and
Convoy our Merchants in all places of Danger, so hinder our Enemies from
Enriching themselves by our Losses; Whereas, if we are without a Land Force
sufficient to Protect us, our Naval Forces could take little care of our
Merchants (whereby they would every where, become an easy Prey to the Enemies
Privateers) for they must keep together in a Body at home, to be able to secure
us from Invasions, least our Enemies should come upon us; so while we were
Protecting our Trade, we might lose the Kingdom.

Now he comes to his Computations, which as I said, signify nothing to the
purpose, unless it be to make us rejoice that we are in so good a Condition to
resist our Enemies Abroad, for I know of none we have at home; if he knows of
any, let him speak out, which I suppose is more than he is willing to do: It Is
generally observed of such as make the greatest Noise and Stir, that they are
always the readiest to pull in their Horns, and cry they know nothing of the
matter. Besides when he was computing, 'twou'd have been but a little more
trouble to have informed us the Number of the French Forces, and what Troops
the Dutch and other Nations have in Pay, this would have been very convenient,
we might have known the Strength of our Neighbors as well as our selves, and
then perhaps thought it might be prudent to keep it up in some tolerable degree
of equality with theirs; this I am persuaded would be the natural result of our
reflecting on their great Strength.

If indeed this Gentleman, or any of his Adherents, could actually engage our
Neighbors to Disband their Forces, we should no longer dispute this point with
him, but I suppose this is more than he will promise; therefore since all
around us are in Arms, and entertain vast Numbers of Armed Troops in constant
Pay, 'twou'd be a fatal blot in our Politics to part with ours; for, since the
Practice is grown so general, No King or Prince, though endowed with never so
peaceable a Spirit, and never so desirous of being at ease, dares lead the
Dance and disarm, for fear of his Armed Neighbors, whose Necessities or
Ambition make them wait only for an opportunity to fall upon him that is worst
provided to make resistance. So that while our Neighbors keep up their
Standing Forces, it is evident we must do so, unless we will submit our selves
to be Insulted by them.

Farther, when this Gentleman tells us the greatness of our Standing Forces
now, and that in former Days they were very inconsiderable, he only lets us
know just as much as will serve his own turn and no more, for there is a vast
alteration crept into the very Constitution of our Government within these
hundred and fifty Years; formerly the Nobility and Gentry held their
Possessions and Lands from the Crown by Knight's Service, and so were always
bound to attend on their Kings in his Wars with certain Numbers of Armed Men,
according to the Tenure and Extent of their several Lordships or Lands, and
they had their Villains or Vassals, who, by a like Tenure from them, were
obliged to wait on their respective Lords or Landlords, when required for the
Service of their King and Country, and that they might not be Undisciplined
when they were called for, every Parish was to take care that all Boys should
at set times Exercise the Arms then in Use, as Shooting in Bows, handling the
Battle Ax, and such like; so that by this Method there was no occasion for any
great Standing Force, for the People were Soldiers themselves, and might be
raised on any sudden Occasion, by the Kings giving Notice to the Nobility and
Gentry of his want of their Service, and by their immediate Summoning their
Vassals for the Attendance they were bound to pay. 'Twill be immediately
replied why may it not be so now, by this means we might rid our selves of the
fears of a Standing Army, and yet be able to defend our selves, or Annoy our
Enemy. To this I answer, I should be very glad if some such Method could be
taken now, and a Militia formed capable of managing their share of War, and
supporting our Credit and Reputation Abroad in the World, without our being put
to the Uneasiness and Expense of a Standing Force, for I am not so rash as to
affirm a Standing Army to be at all a Benefit or Advantage to the Nation, if it
might be dispensed with on good Terms, no, rather quite the contrary, I think
the only Reason, that can be giving for the keeping a Standing Force in Pay, is
Necessity: But I hardly think a Mititia can be formed to serve our occasions
now. For,

First, by the cunning and contrivance of Humane reach and Invention, and the
charge of Times and Accidents, War now is become a Trade, it consists not so
much in strength of Body, or a real Courage, as in Slight and Wit; to be able
to fortify Camps and Towns, to draw your Enemy into Ambuscades, or drill him
along into disadvantageous Places, to be able to draw him to Battle, or secure
your self from being forced to one, these are now the best Martial
Qualifications, and these are things must be learnt by Use and Practice, none
can be perfect in them but by Experience, there must be an Apprenticeship
served for the learning them. This I think is sufficient, to make us believe
that a Militia can very hardly be so regulated, as to prove useful at this time
of Day.

2dly, Supposing a Militia might be brought to good Discipline and Order, yet
it would be a very great while before such a thing could be done, and would these
inconsiderate Gentlemen have us leave our selves Naked and Open all the time,
this would be an Imprudence that our Enemies perhaps would be glad to find us
guilty of, since I believe they only would be the gainers by it.

3dly, Though our Militia was serviceable, yet we should find very few of them
forward to go over to any Foreign Parts, where it might be convenient and
necessary for us to employ our Forces, for they would be Men that were settled
and fixed by Wives and Families at home, whereas our Standing Forces (the
Private Soldiers) are most of them Men that have no fixed Habitations are not
tied at home by Wives and Families, but taken either young before they had
settled themselves, or mostly from among those that were Vagabonds, and
Wanderers, that had no business, and were rather a Burden than Benefit to
their Country, but by being put into the Army are now become useful and
beneficial to it; whereas if they are Disbanded, what can be expected from such
people, who are not fixed at home by the tie of Families or Interest, but to go
abroad, atd enter into any Service that will be so kind as to entertain them;
and who can blame them, since they know no other way of Livelihood; the
Consequence of which thing alone might fright us from what these Gentlemen
would have us immediately do, and make us very cautious how we part from that
Force, which have done us so much good even when they were but learning their
Trade, which at our Cost and Expenses they have learnt so well as to be Masters
of; but by Disbanding them, and turning them abroad, we give our Neighbors the
opportunity of reaping the Profit and Advantage.

But this Gentleman tells us we need not send Forces into Foreign Parts, we
need only have a strong Fleet at Sea, and that would be security enough: But I
think the Practice of all our Kings and Parliaments, as I have already
Instanced, may be enough to confute one part of this Assertion; for I take it,
our Fore Fathers were as wise and knowing in what concerned their Interest, as
any of us now can pretend to; and if we loak back into former Stories we shall
find enough to convince us of the folly of trusting too much to the other part;
by seeing what has happened, we shall quickly find that a Fleet will not secure
us from Invasions. To give some Instances to these Positive Gentlemen, How
often did the Danes land great Numbers of Armed Forces, in almost every part of
this Island? continually alarming the poor People, ruining and making horrible
devastations wherever they came; exercising all manner of Barbaraties on the
poor unprovided English, putting whole Towns, Men, Women and Children to the
Sword; till at last they Lorded it over the whole Island; and perhaps there are
a People in the World, would not be much civiller on an occasion, which God
forbid they should ever have; and which while we have a good Army, we need not
fear; but to give some more Instances. William the Conqueror landed with an
Army here, so did his Son Robert, Duke of Normandy, in the Reign of William
Rufus, and in the Reign of Henry the First. The Empress Maud landed an Army in
the Reign of King Stephen, so did Henry II. The French Invaded the Land in the
Reign of Henry III. Queen Isabel landed with an Army at Orwel, in Sussex, in
the Reign of Edward the Second. Henry the Seventh landed with an Army, though
Richard the Third took all possible care to hinder him. And whenever there have
been heats and discontents in this Kingdom, the French have ever assisted one
or another party to keep up the Contention; though our Princes by their Fleets
have always endeavored to hinder it. These are enough to convince every lover
of his Country, of the falsity of these Gentlemen's, saying that a Fleet only
is able to protect us.

Perhaps they will object against what has been said, and say, That in those
days we were weak at Sea, but that now we are grown much stronger. So is our
Neighbors too, as we very well know by experience; I scarce think any of these
angry Gentlemen will venture to affirm, that we are at this time, the most
potent at Sea, or that none of our Neighbors dare to look us in the face on
that Element; whereas in former days, though we were but mean at Sea, in
comparison of what we are now; yet our Neighbors were much meaner, we were
formerly confessedly the most powerful in Shipping, and enjoyed an absolute and
uncontrolled dominion on the Seas; and if in those days, when we bore so great
a sway on the Ocean, and all the Nations around us so little, a Fleet could not
hinder Armies from landing in England; I cannot think how it should do it now,
when our Neighbors are as strong in Shipping, and as Powerful at Sea as our
Selves. This I think is a plain case, an Argument so clear, that I wonder how
any sensible persons can overlook it. And if we may be Invaded, though we have a
good Fleet, as it is plain we may, we should be careful how we parted with a
Land Force; which would then be our only safety, and can be no Injury at all to
us, as long as his Majesty is so clearly in the Interest of his People.

All this great Clamor and Noise against a Standing Army, can have no other
meaning than this, That they dare not trust his Majesty, or rely on his
Integrity; these are hard things, and a very ungrateful way of dealing with a
Prince, who has all his Lifetime hazarded his Person for the relief and
succor of the Distressed; who could never be wrought upon, either by bribes or
menaces, to be unjust to his word, even in the smallest particle; a Prince
whose single Reputation caused a strict band and Union amongst Princes of the
most disagreeing Interests, Humors, and Religions. That this Prince should be
mistrusted by a People of the same Religion, is a thing wonderful and
surprising; and will hardly be credited in after Ages, especially when they
shall know that he rescue'd these same People from the Jaws of Slavery and
Popery; and saved them just sinking into the Pit of Destruction; but this is
more than these Gentlemen dare openly own; therefore they complain against the
Court, and the Government; concealing their base Reflections and ill-manner'd
Insinuations, under double and ambiguous meanings; but the skreen is too thin
and transparent; it is easily seen through, and their throughts as readily
apprehended as if they had writ them at length.

But to go on with this Gentleman, and come to his Crisis, Page 42, where he
says, several Accidents concur to make the Disbanding of an Army practicable
which may not happen again. To be even with him, and give him a Rowland for his
Oliver; several Accidents concur to oblige us to keep up a Standing Army here,
which never did happen, nor never may again: There Is a King beyond Sea, who
maintains pretensions to the Crown, with a Prince whom he owns to be his Lawful
Son and Heir; so young that he may live according to an indifferent Computation
these 40 Years or more, and though they may seem quiet and dormant for a time,
yet it is hardly to be expected they will let slip any opportunity, they may
think favorable to the regaining their pretended Rights; it is to be considered
also, that they are of a Religion which no Oaths can bind or secure, when their
Church will be a gainer by the Breach of them; add to this, that this Nation
has been always the bar and hindrance to all the ambitious designs Projects of
that Communion, and this has created an incurable hatred in them toward us,
which they never fail to let us know upon all occasions; so that we have all
the reason in the World to look about us, especially, considering there are
such Multitudes against us, and so few to assist us; it is true we have just made
a Peace, after a chargeable and Expensive War; but as 'twas the Number and
Valor of our Troops that forced it from an Ambitious and inveterate Enemy; so
nothing but the same can preserve it to us; for we are all pretty confident,
that he whom we have had to deal with, has not been tender in breaking the most
solemn Leagues, when either his Interest or Ambition has thought it convenient.

Besides we see he has not delivered Brisack to the Emperor, which he ought to
have done, but finds pretenses to delay it till Spring, and we know not whether
he will do it then or no, unless he finds he shall be forced to it. Add to these,
the great Number of Jacobites we have at home, who are a People restless and
uneasy; ready to Plot and execute any base and Villainous designs: Add also,
that the King of Spain lies a dying, and the King of France has great Armies
ready to enter into that Country; at so favorable a Juncture, to support the
right he pretends to that Crown; I say, all these things truly considered,
Here Is a concurrence of Circumstances that never happened at once till now, nor
perhaps never may again, that call upon us, and oblige us to keep up our
Standing Forces at this Time.

I think I have said enough to convince any reasonable Persons of the Necessity
of an Army at this time; which is all need be done, to answer this Historian;
for if there is a necessity of an Army, it is certain it should be one that may
be sufficient and able to cope with any force our Enemies may bring against us;
or else we had as good have none at all: In former times when our Neighbors
had but five or ten thousand Men in Arms there was no occasion for our having a
greater Number; but if they increase to a Hundred thousand or more, we must
also be in some tolerable degree equal with them, or be contented to be
Insulted or Invaded by those that are stronger; this is so very plain and
clear, I shall argue it no farther, but show the danger of trusting to a
Militia, when they are attacked by regular and disciplined Troops and so
conclude,

And the Want of a sufficient Number of Standing and Disciplined Troops may be
learnt from the Dutch, who were almost brought to the brink of ruin, in the
Year 1672, when the French, who seldom fail to make their advantages of the
over-sites and Neglects of their Neighbors; Invaded them with mighty Armies,
which like a Torrent overrun Three large Provinces, taking above Forty strong
Towns in almost as many days. Whoever reads Sir William Temple's Observations,
will find that Great Man makes out the want of regular Standing Forces, one of
the chief reasons of their Misfortunes, which had like to have been the utter
Ruin of their Commonwealth; he says, it was their too great parsimony in
disbanding the best of their Foreign Officers and Troops, after the Peace of
Munster; he tells us, those Ministers who had the Directions of Affairs, bent
their Chief application to the Strength and Order of their Fleet, and totally
Neglected their Land Army; so that those few Soldiers they had were without
Discipline. These were the Reasons made the French King suppose their Conquest
Easy, and invited him to invade them, and upon Trial he found he was not
mistaken, for they were not able to resist him; though it is Observable that for
Twenty Years before, they had been regulating their Militia, and endeavoring
to make it serviceable, but 'twas so far from being so, that they suffered the
French to become Masters of their strong Fortified Towns almost as soon as they
approached them, this is so lively and near an Example and so well fitted for
our Instruction, that methinks we should take warning by it, without desiring
to make the Experiment our selves.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula Cautum. How often has Poland, (a Country
these Gentlemen are pleased to produce as an Instance of supporting themselves
by a Militia) been revag'd and Insulted by the Sweeds, Muscovites, and Tartars,
and suffered all the Extremities of Fire and Sword for the want of Standing and
Regular Troops.

Now I think I have sufficiently showed the weakness of these Gentlemen's
Arguments, and the absolute Necessity for our keeping up a Land Force, not by
false Computations of things, but by a true consideration of the present
Circumstances of Affairs, which is the only means to find the right of this
Matter; So that I hope no true Englishman, who desires the good of his Country,
will be for the Disbanding the Forces till either our Neighbors have done the
same, or that our Militia be so well regulated, that they may be able to Cope
with any Disciplined Troops whatsoever.

For supposing, on our Immediate Disbanding our Forces any of our Neighbors
should think it the Critical time to attempt an Invasion of England, before our
Militia was ready to receive them, and this is none of the unlikeliest
Suppositions, would ask these Gentlemen, if we should not have some Reasons for
apprehending of of danger, when we have only the Success of a Fleet to depend
on, several Accidents might happen to render it unserviceable to us, as our
being kept in Port by contrary Winds, or our not being in a readiness enough to
hinder them, these are no very Improbable things, we have had the knowledge of
their Possibility by Experience, and I say, imagining it happened that we were
Invaded, I desire to know what resistance our Militia could make against 20 or
30 Thousand Regular Troops well Disciplined and inured the War; we should then
wish for our Forces when they were not to be had, nay perhaps when a
considerable Number of them were listed in the Enemies Service, having been so
ungratefully used here as to be turned loose to Want and Misery, after having
spent their Youth and Blood in our Service; and what Nation would pity us?
Would not all the World cry out we deservedly fell Martyrs of our Folly? that
we could blame none but our selves, for that our selves only were the Authors
of our Destruction.

After all that can be said on both sides, and to suppose even all the Idle
Chimeras these Grumbletonians would fright us with, the whole matter absolutely
depends on our coosing one of these two things, viz. either to trust King
William or King Lewis.

FINIS.

