Tears of ye Indians or inquisition for Blood Being a Relation of ye Spannish
Massacres in those part. R Gaywood fecit


The Tears of the INDIANS: BEING An Historical and true Account Of the Cruel
Massacres and Slaughters of above Twenty Millions of innocent People; Committed
by the Spaniards In the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba, Iamaica, etc. As also, in
the Continent of Mexico, Peru, and other Places of the West Indies, To the
total destruction of those Countries.

Written in Spanish by Casaus, an Eyewitness of those things; And made English
by I. P.

DEUTERONOMY. 29.15. Therefore thine eye shall have no compassion; but life for life,
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

LONDON, Printed by I. C. for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil. 1656.

TO His Highness, OLIVER, LORD PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland, With the Dominions thereto belonging.
May it please your Highness,
I Have here laid prostate before the Throne of Your Justice, above Twenty
Millions of the Souls of the slaughtered Indians; whose forced departure from
their Bodies, Cruelty it self compassionates. Yet methinks I hear a sudden
stillness among them; the cry of Blood ceasing at the noise of Your great
transactions, while You arm for their Revenge. By which it is apparent, how
well your Highness does observe the will of the most High, using Your vast
Power and Dignity only to the advancement of his Glory among the Nations:
while the Divine Deity bequeathes You back again immediate Recompenses;
crowning You, like his holy Warrior, David, with the highest degree of earthly
Fame. Therefore has he inspired your Highness with a Prowess like that of
Joshua, to lead his Armies forth to Battle; and a Zeal more devoutly fervent
than that of Iehu, to cut off the Idolater from the earth. Which Divine virtues
appear so eminent in You, that there is no man, who opposes not himself against
Heaven, but does extol Your just Anger against the Bloody and Popish Nation of
the Spaniards, whose Superstitions have exceeded those of Canaan, and whose
Abominations have excelled those of Ahab, who spilt the Blood of innocent
Naboth, to obtain his Vineyard.

And now, may it please your Highness, God having given You a full Victory over
Your Enemies in this Land, and a fixed Establishment, by the prosperous and
total quelling of those pertinacious Spirits; certainly there is no true
Englishman who does not lift up his eyes to heaven with Thanks to Almighty
God, that You have made the Land so happy, as to be the Admiration of other
Nations, who have laid themselves at Your feet for Alliances, as knowing Your
wonderful Successes both by Sea and Land.

Pardon me, Great Sir, if next my zeal to Heaven, the loud Cry of so many
bloody Massacres, far surpassing the Popish Cruelties in Ireland, the Honor of
my Country, of which You are as tender as of the Apple of Your own eye, has
induced me, out of a constant Affection to your Highness Service, to publish
this Relation of the Spanish Cruelties; whereby all good men may see and
applaud the Justness of Your Proceedings: Being confident that God, who has
put this Great Design into Your Hands, will also be pleased to give it a
signal Blessing; which is the Prayer of

Your HIGHNESS most faithful, and most obedient Servant, I. Phillips.

To all true Englishmen.
NEver had we so just cause to exclaim in the words of the Prophet Jeremiah; O
that our heads were waters, and our eyes fountains of tears, that we might weep
for the Effusion of so much Innocent Blood which provoked these sad Relations
of devout CASAUS, by reason of the cruel Slaughters and Butcheries of the
Iesuitical Spaniards, perpetrated upon so many Millions of poor innocent
Heathens, who having only the light of Nature, not knowing their Savior Jesus
Christ, were sacrificed to the Politic Interest and Avarice of the wicked
Spaniards.

The blood of Ireland, spilt by the same Faction, in comparison of these
Massacres, was but as a Drop to the Ocean. It was the Saying of Christ himself,
the Son of Mercy, and Redeemer of the World, That we ought not to cast the
Childrens Bread to dogs: But what would he have judged of those, that not only
cast the Bread, but the Blood; and not only the Blood, but the Innocent Blood
of men, women and children, to satisfy the contemptible hunger of their
Hounds? The intention of these men was Murder; and they killed up the poor
Indians, not as if they had been their Fellow-Mortals, but like Death it self;
and invaded their Land, not like Men, but like the Pestilence, whose
destruction is Epidemical.

When our own Case had a small Resemblance of this, how sensible the People
were, and how they mourned at the burning of a poor Village; the usual
Accidents, or rather, things to be expected, in a tedious and necessitated War:
but, had you been Eyewitnesses of the transcending Massacres here related; had
you been one of those that lately saw a pleasant Country, now swarming with
multitudes of People, but immediately all depopulated, and drowned in a Deluge
of Blood: had you been one of those that saw great Cities of Nations and
Countries in this moment flourishing with Inhabitants, but in the next, totally
ruined with such a general Desolation, as left neither Person living, nor House
remaining: had you seen the poor innocent Heathens shaming and upbraiding, with
the ghastliness of their Wounds, the devilish Cruelties of those that called
themselves Christians: had you seen the poor creatures torn from the peace and
quiet of their own Habitations, where God had planted them, to labor in a
Tormenting Captivity, by many degrees worse then that of Algier, or the Turkish
Galleys; your Compassion must of necessity have turned into Astonishment: the
tears of Men can hardly suffice; these are Enormities to make the Angels mourn
and bewail the loss of so many departed souls, as might have been converted and
redeemed to their eternal Mansions.

We read of old, of the Ten Persecutions wherein the Primitive Christians were
destroyed by the Cruelties of the Heathen Emperors: but we now read of
Christians, the Professors of a Religion grounded upon Love and Charity,
massacring, where there was no cause of Antipathy, but their own obstinate
Barbarism; as if because their Wickedness had so far transformed them into
Devils, they were resolved to deface the image of God, so innocently conversing
among them. The Turks and Scythians shall be now no more the Adagies of Cruelty
among us; for here is a Christian Nation which has taken off that Envy from
them, and entayl'd it upon themselves.

And now, O men of England, let me ask you but this Question; Whether you, that
for these many years have had the Honor to be the Patrons of Religion; whose
Charity has still relieved, and whose Power has still defended the Cause of
the Oppressed at home and abroad; whether you can withdraw your Assistance from
this Great Work, and deprive your selves of that Birthright which you seem to
have among the Nations, God still continuing the Management of his Justice in
the hands of our most Fortunate and Lawful Magistrate, whom he has raised up,
as his Great Instrument, to revenge the Blood of that innocent People.

Consider this, moreover, That you are not uow to fight against your
Countrymen, but against your Old and Constant Enemies, the SPANIARDS, a Proud,
Deceitful, Cruel, and Treacherous Nation, whose chiefest Aim has been the
Conquest of this Land, and to enslave the People of this Nation; witness those
Invasions in the days of Queen ELIZABETH; whose Leagues of Amity we had more
reason to repent of, then to rejoice at, as being destructive to the Nation,
and made with those that only sought the Advantages of Peace, that they might
be more safe to do us Mischief: and so little they cared for Peace with us,
that they never sought it, but when mere Vrgencies of State required; and never
kept their Articles, when they had the least hope of Profit to themselves: Of
which we need not look for ancient Examples; they are fresh in Memory, and have
been too sadly and undeservedly sustained, both nearer home, and of late years
in the West Indies also, as appears by that Pious and Prudent DECLARATION set
forth by his Highness the LORD PROTECTOR; as if Providence had so ordained it,
that by the Wrongs of our Countrymen in those Parts, we should be interested in
the Quarrel of those Innocent Nations.

Neither need we to fear the Vaunts of the Spanish Monarch, whose Government
stands not on those strong Foundations that some imagine; Blood and Tyranny
being the chief Pillars of his Greatness, or rather, his Arcana Imperii; and
his Empire being only strong in this, That the Weaknesses thereof have not yet
been well looked into. Should we chase him from his Indian Treasures, he would
soon retire to his Shell, like a Snail tapt upon the horns. And perhaps it
would not a little avail to the General Peace of Europe, whereby we should be
strengthened against the Common Enemy of Christianity. For doubtless it has
been the Satanical Scope of this Tyrant, To set all the European Princes at
Variance, and to keep them busy at home, that they might not have leisure to
bend their Forces against his Golden Regions. But he pretends a Right to them,
though upon very slender Grounds: for that the English may better claim then
himself; it being first discovered, as is well known, and tendered to Henry the
Seventh, by Sebastian Cabot, one of his own Captains. Which brings to mind the
Poor Spirits of our English Kings, who would not regard such an Advantage, so
highly importing the Honor of the Nation, so far as to be almost guilty of the
Blood shed in those parts, through their neglect. But for farther satisfaction
concerning the Right of the English to the West Indies, I shall refer you to a
further Treatise, which I may ere long put forth.

And now, honored Countrymen, seeing that by Divine Providence the Cruelties
and Barbarous Massacres of the Spaniards have been so apparently presented to
you, I cannot but be confident of your Endeavors, as you tender the Good and
Welfare of your Native Country, to acquit your selves in so just a Cause, which
God has put into the Heart and Hands of our Supreme Magistrate, who is so
Vigilant to embrace all Opportunities for the Good of the Nation.

Tears of the Indies, or Inquisition for Blood: being the Relation of the
Spanish Massacre there.
IN the year 1492. the West Indies were discovered, in the following year they
were inhabited by the Spaniards: a great company of the Spaniards going about
49. years ago. The first place they came to, was Hispaniola, being a most
fertile Island, and for the bigness of it very famous, it being no less then
six hundred miles in compass. Round about it lie an innumerable company of
Islands, so thronged with Inhabitants, that there is not to be found a greater
multitude of people in any part of the world. The Continent is distant from
this about Two hundred miles, stretching it self out in length upon the sea
side for above Ten thousand miles in length. This is already found out, and
more is daily discovered. These Countries are inhabited by such a number of
people, as if God had assembled and called together to this place, the greatest
part of Mankind.

This infinite multitude of people was so created by God, as that they were
without fraud, without subtilty or malice, to their natural Governors most
faithful and obedient. Toward the Spaniards whom they serve, patient, meek and
peaceful, and who laying all contentious and tumultuous thoughts aside, live
without any hatred or desire of revenge; the people are most delicate and
tender, enjoying such a feeble constitution of body as does not permit them to
endure labor, so that the Children of Princes and great persons here, are not
more nice and delicate then the Children of the meanest Countryman in that
place. The Nation is very poor and indigent, possessing little, and by reason
that they gape not after temporal goods, neither proud nor ambitious. Their
diet is such that the most holy Hermit cannot feed more sparingly in the
wilderness. They go naked, only hiding the undecencies of nature, and a poor
shag mantle about an ell or two long is their greatest and their warmest
covering. They lie upon mats, only whose who have larger fortunes, lie upon a
kind of net which is tied at the four corners, and so fastened to the roof,
which the Indians in their natural language call Hamecks. They are of a very
apprehensive and docible wit, and capable of all good learning, and very apt to
receive our Religion, which when they have but once tasted, they are carried on
with a very ardent and zealous desire to make a further progress in it; so that
I have heard diverse Spaniards confess that they had nothing else to hinder
them from enjoying heaven, but their ignorance of the true God.

To these quiet Lambs, endued with such blessed qualities, came the Spaniards
like most cuel Tygres, Wolves, and Lions, enraged with a sharp and tedious
hunger; for these forty years past, minding nothing else but the slaughter of
these unfortunate wretches, whom with diverse kinds of torments neither seen nor
heard of before, they have so cruelly and inhumanely butchered, that of three
millions of people which Hispaniola it self did contain, there are left
remaining alive scarce three hundred persons. And for the Island of Cuba, which
contains as much ground in length, as from Valladolid to Rome; it lies wholly
desert, untilled and ruined. The Islands of St. John and Iamaica lie waste and
desolate. The Lucayan Islands neighboring toward the North upon Cuba and
Hispaniola, being above Sixty or thereabouts with those Islands that are
vulgarly called the Islands of the Giants, of which that which is least fertile
is more fruitful then the King of Spains Garden at Sevil, being situated in a
pure and temperate air, are now totally unpeopled and destroyed; the
inhabitants thereof amounting to above 500000. souls, partly killed, and partly
forced away to work in other places: so that there going a ship to visit those
parts and to glean the remainder of those distressed wretches, there could be
found no more then eleven men. Other Islands there were near the Island of St.
John more then thirty in number, which were totally made desert. All which
Islands, though they amount to such a number containing in length of ground the
space of above Two thousand miles, lie now altogether solitary without any
people or Inhabitant.

Now to come to the Continent, we are confident, and dare affirm upon our own
knowledge, that there were ten Kingdoms of as large an extent as the Kingdom
of Spain, joining to it both Arragon, and Portugal, containing above a thousand
miles every one of them in compass, which the unhumane and abominable villainies
of the Spaniards have made a wilderness of, being now as it were stripped of all
their people, and made bare of all their inhabitants, though it were a place
formerly possessed by vast and infinite numbers of men; And we dare confidently
aver, that for those Forty years, wherein the Spaniards exercised their
abominable cruelties, and detestable tyrannies in those parts, that there have
innocently perished above Twelve millions of souls, women and children being
numbered in this sad and fatal list; moreover I do verily believe that I should
speak within compass, should I say that above Fifty millions were consumed in
this Massacre.

As for those that came out of Spain, boasting themselves to be Christians,
they took two several ways to extirpate this Nation from the face of the
Earth, the first whereof was a bloody, unjust, and cruel war which they made
upon them: a second by cutting off all that so much as sought to recover their
liberty, as some of the stouter sort did intend. And as for the Women and
Children that were lest alive, they laid so heavy and grievous a yoke of
servitude upon them that the condition of beasts was much more tolerable.

Unto these two heads all the other several torments and inhumanities which
they used to the ruin of these poor Nations may be reduced.

That which led the Spaniards to these unsanctified impieties was the desire of
Gold, to make themselves suddenly rich, for the obtaining of dignities and
honors which were no way fit for them. In a word, their covetousness, their
ambition, which could not be more in any people under heaven, the riches of the
Country, and the patience of the people gave occasion to this their devilish
barbarism. For the Spaniards so contemned them (I now speak what I have seen
without the least untruth) that they used them not like beasts, for that would
have been tolerable, but looked upon them as if they had been but the dung and
filth of the earth, and so little they regarded the health of their souls, that
they suffered this great multitude to die without the least light of Religion;
neither is this less true then what I have said before, and that which those
tyrants and hangmen themselves dare not deny, without speaking a notorious
falsehood, that the Indians neevr gave them the least cause to offer them
violence, but received them as Angels sent from heaven, till their excessive
cruelties, the torments and slaughters of their Countrymen moved them to take
Arms against the Spaniards.



Of Hispaniola.
IN the Island of Hispaniola, to which the Spaniards came first, these
slaughters and ruins of mankind took their beginning. They took away their
women and children to serve them, though the reward which they gave them was a
sad and fatal one. Their food got with great pain and dropping sweat, the
Spaniards still consumed, not content with what the poor Indians gave them
gratis out of their own want; One Spaniard consuming in one day as much as
would suffice three families, every one containing ten persons. Being thus
broken with so many evils, afflicted with so many torments, and handled so
ignominiously, they began at length to believe that the Spaniards were not sent
from Heaven. And therefore some of them hid their Children, others their Wives,
others their Victuals in obscure and secret places; Others not being able to
endure a Nation that conversed among them with such a boisterous impiety sought
for shelter in the most abrupt and inaccessible mountains. For the Spaniards
while they were among them did not only entertain them with cruel beating them
with their fists, and with their staves, but presumed also to lay violent hands
upon the Rulers and Magistrates of their Cities: and they arrived at that
height of impudence and unheard of boldness, that a certain private Captain
scrupled not to force the Wife of the most potent King among them. From which
time forward they began to think what way they might take to expel the
Spaniards out of their Country. But good God! what sort of Arms had they?
such as were as available to offend or defend as bulrushes might be. Which when
the Spaniards saw, they came with their Horsemen well armed with Sword and
Lance, making most cruel havocks and slaughters among them. Overrunning Cities
and Villages, where they spared no sex nor age; neither would their cruelty
pity Women with child, whose bellies they would rip up, taking out the Infant
to hew it in pieces. They would often lay wagers who should with most dexterity
either cleave or cut a man in the middle, or who could at one blow soonest cut
off his head. The children they would take by the feet and dash their innocent
heads against the rocks, and when they were fallen into the water, with a
strange and cruel derision they would call upon them to swim. Sometimes they
would run both Mother and Infant, being in her belly quite through at one
thrust.

They erected certain Gallowses, that were broad but so low, that the tormented
creatures might touch the ground with their feet, upon every one of which they
would hang thirteen persons, blasphemously affirming that they did it in honor
of our Redeemer and his Apostles, and then putting fire under them, they burnt
the poor wretches alive. Those whom their pity did think fit to spare, they
would send away with their hands half cut off, and so hanging by the skin. Thus
upbraiding their flight, Go carry letters to those who lie hid in the mountains
and are fled from us.

This Death they found out also for the Lords and Nobles of the Land; they
stuck up forked sticks in the ground, and then laid certain perches upon them,
and so laying them upon those perches, they put a gentle fire under, causing
the fire to melt them away by degrees, to their unspeakable torment.

One time above the rest I saw four of the Nobles laid upon these perches, and
two or three other of these kind of hurdles furnished after the same manner;
the clamours and cries of which persons being troublesome to the Captain, he
gave order that they should be hanged, but the Executioner whose name I know,
and whose parents are not obscure, hindered their Calamity from so quick a
conclusion, stopping their mouths, that they should not disturb the Captain,
and still laying on more wood, till being roasted according to his pleasure,
they yielded up the ghost. Of these and other things innumerable I have been an
eyewitness; Now because there were some that shunned like so many rocks the
cruelty of a Nation so inhumane, so void of piety and love to mankind, and
therefore fled from them to the mountains; therefore they hunted them with
their Hounds, whom they bred up and taught to pull down and tear the Indians
like beasts: by these Dogs much humane blood was shed; and because the Indians
did now and then kill a Spaniard, taking him at an advantage, as justly they
might; therefore the Spaniards made a Law among themselves, that for one
Spaniard so slain, they should kill a hundred Indians.

Of the Kingdoms which the Island of Hispaniola did contain.
THE Island of Hispaniola had in it five very great Kingdoms, and five very
potent Kings, to whom the other Lords, of which there was a very great number
were for the most part subject; for there were some few Lords of peculiar
Countries that did not acknowledge the jurisdiction of these Kings; one of
these Kingdoms is called Maqua, which signifies a plain. This Plain if there
be any thing in the world worth taking notice, claims a very nice observation.
For from the South to the North it is stretched forward fourscore miles in
length; in breadth it takes up sometimes eight, sometimes five, and sometimes
ten miles, on all sides it is shut up with very high mountains; it is watered
by thirty thousand Rivers and Rivolets, whereof twelve are not less then
either Duerus, Ebrus, or Guadalgevir: and all the Rivers which run from the
Mountains on the West side, whose number is twenty thousand, do all of them
abound with gold. With which Mountain the Province of Cibao is bounded, where
are the Mines of Cibao, that afford the most exquisite and pure Gold which is
so much valued among us. This Kingdom was governed by Guarionex, who had under
his jurisdiction as his vassals, Lords and Governors so potent, that every one
of them was able to bring into the field for the service of Guarionex, above
Sixteen thousand men apiece. Some of which Lords I very well knew; this King
was not meanly virtuous, by nature peaceful, and much devoted to the King of
Castile. This King commanded his subjects that they should present to the
Spaniards a bell full of Gold, which when they were not able to do by reason
that the people had but little skill how to dig out the Gold, he thereupon
commanded them to present the Spaniards with as much as they could fill.

Here a Cacicus or Governor offered himself to the service of the King of
Castile, upon condition, that he would take care that all the Country from
Isabella to St. Domingo, being five hundred miles in length, might be tilled;
which promises I am very confident he would cheerfully have performed; and then
might the King of Castile have had a revenue of above Three millions of
Castilian Crowns, and there had been still remaining in the Island above fifty
Cities as large all of them as Sevill.

But what was the recompense which they afforded to this mild and bountiful
Prince? they suffered one of the Spanish Captains unworthy of the name of a
Christian to vitiate his Wife. He might have raised an army and endeavored a
revenge* but he rather chose to leave his Kingdom and his dignity, and to live
a banished person in the Province of Coquaios, where a potent vassal and
subject of his inhabited. But the Spaniards hearing of his flght, resolved not
to let him lurk any where; but immediately making war upon him that had
received them so liberally, they never rested till they had wasted all the
Kingdom to find him out, at length he fell into their hands; and no sooner
had they taken him, but they fettered him immediately, putting him into a ship
that was bound for Spain; but the ship was wrackt by the way, many Spaniards
perishing, and a great treasure of Gold being lost; God so taking revenge upon
their enormities.

Another Kingdom was called Marien, where there is a port at one end of the
plain that looks toward the North, being larger and more fertile then the
Kingdom of Portugal, and which very well deserves to be better peopled; for it
abounds with Mountains wherein are great store of Gold Mines. The name of the
King that there ruled was Guacanagari, under whom there were many other potent
Lords, some of whom I knew: To this place came the old sea Captain that first
discovered America, who was received with so much courtesy and friendship by
Guacanagari, who gave him and his associates all the help and assistance that
might be (for his ship was there sunk) that upon his return into Spain he would
often affirm, that his own parents in his own Country were never so friendly
to him. This King flying from the cruelty and enormous murders of the
Spaniards, being deprived of his Kingdom, died poorly in the mountains. The
rest of his Nobles ended their lives in that servitude and slavery which shall
be hereafter related.

The third Kingdom was Maquana, a Country very temperate and fertile, where
the best Sugar in that Island is made. In this Country at that time Canabao
did reign, who for power, dignity, gravity, and the ceremonies which were used
toward him, far exceeded the rest. This King suspecting nothing less, was by
the craft and subtlety of the Spaniards taken in his own house; whom when they
had taken they put a shipboard to send him to Castile; but there being six
ships in the Port ready to set sail, the sea began to swell so high, and to be
so unruly, that all the six ships with the Spaniards in them, together with
King Canabao, who was laden with chains, all perished in the waves. The great
God showing the Judgments of his wrath upon these unjust and wicked wretches
as he had done upon the others. This King had three or four brothers stout and
valiant men, who being offended at the Captivity of their Lord and King,
hearing of the devastations and rapines daily committed by the Spaniards in
these Countries, and understanding that their brother was dead, resolved to
take arms for the relief of their Country; but the Spaniards meeting them
with a certain number of horse, which are a very great terror to the Indians
made such a slaughter among them, that they depopulated the greatest part of
this Country.

The Fourth Kingdom was called Xaraqua, being in the center and middle of the
whole Island, for eloquence of language, as also for good government and
gentile customs, it excels all the rest, there was in it a great company of
Lords and noble men, and for the people themselves they were the most comely in
the whole Island. The King of this Country was called Behechio, who had a
sister who was called Anacaona. Both the Brother and the Sister were very
bountiful to the Spaniards, for they had freed them from the dangers of
imminent death, showing great kindnesses to the Kings of Castile. Behechio
being dead, the Kingdom was solely governed by his Sister. Now it happened one
day, that the Governor of the Island with sixty Horse, and three hundred Foot
(though the Horsemen were sufficient not only to wast the Island, but also the
whole Continent) called to him about three hundred of the Peers and Lords of the
Nation, the greatest part whereof who were the more powerful, having by craft
got them together in a straw Cottage, he cause to be burnt alive together with
the house, the rest with an infinite sight of people he caused to be put to
death by the Soldiers, who murdered the poor people like dogs with their Swords
and Lances. As for Anacaona the Queen, that he might seem to be more courteous
to her, he caused her to hang her self. And if it happened that any who were
either moved with compassion, or covetousness, thinking to make lacqueys or
servants of the Children, had set them behind their horses, another would come
behind them, and either run them through, or cut off their legs if they hung
down upon the horse sides. And when certain of the Indians, who escaped this
furious massacre fled into an Island distant from them about some eight miles,
they were by the Governor condemned to perpetual servitude.

The fifth Kingdom was called Hiquey, where an ancient Queen, by name
Hiquanama, governed, who was afterward crucified by the Spaniards: and there
was an infinite number of those whom I here saw partly burnt alive, partly
torn to pieces, partly put to other tortures, or redeemed from death, to a
worse misery and captivity. Now there is so much to be said concerning the
slaughters and devastations made by the Spaniards, so many stories to be
reckoned up, as would be hardly contained in writing, it being impossible to
set down one thing of a hundred: for a conclusion of what I have said before, I
will only add one thing more, affirming upon my conscience, that for all the
fore rehearsed enormities and villainies committed by the Spaniards, yet the
Indians gave them no more occasion to perpetrate so many detestable cruelties
upon them, then the most religious persons living in the most reformed
Monasteries give to the Nations where they dwell, to extirpate them; and they
had as little reason to condemn to a perpetual slavery that poor remnant that
escaped alive. And this I shall further add, that I do verily believe, that at
that time when the Spaniards began this horrid persecution, they had not
committed the least crime against the Spaniards that could merit any revenge.
And this I also dare affirm, that the Indians had always just reason to raise
war against the Spaniards, and that the Spaniards on the contrary, had never
any legal cause of quarrel against them, but only always an intention to
exercise a fury on them greater then the most consuming and prodigal rage, that
ever made the worst of tyrants in famous.

The wars being now at an end, and the inhabitants all killed up, the women and
children being only reserved, they divided them among themselves, giving to one
thirty, to another forty, to one a hundred, to another two hundred, and those
that had most, received them on this condition, that they should instruct them
in the Catholic Faith, though commonly their Masters were a company of stupid,
ignorant, and covetous fellows, and defiled with all manner of vices. But the
main care was to send the men to work in the Gold Mines, which is an
intolerable labor, and to send the women to manure and till the ground; an
exercise fit only for the stoutest men. These they fed with nothing but roots
and herbs, so that the milk of women with child being dried up, by that
reason the poor little infants died. And the men being separated from the
women, there was no more issue to be expected from them. The men perished in
the Gold Mines with hunger and labor, the women perished in the fields, being
tired out with the same calamities: and thus was a vast number of the
inhabitants of this Island wholly extirpated. Besides all this they caused them
to carry great burdens of a hundred and fourscore pound, and to travel with it
a hundred or two hundred miles. They were also forced to carry the Spaniards up
and down in their Hamechs, using them in manner of beasts to carry their
burdens and the necessaries of their journeys. And as for the blows which they
gave them with whips, cudgels and their fists, wherewith they continually
tormented them in their labor, I could be hardly able to find either time or
paper to make a narration large enough of those things.

Now it is here to be noted that the desolation of these Islands and Provinces
happened after the death of Queen Isabel, who deceased in the year 1504, for
before that time few of the Provinces were entrenched upon by any unjust war,
or over-flowed with this deluge of devastation; or if any thing was before that
time done, it was concealed from the knowledge of the Queen, for she was
always zealous and solicitous for the safety and prosperity of this poor
people.

And this may be also a general rule, that the Spaniards to what ever part of
the Indies they did come to, after that time ceased not to exercise their
abominable slaughters, tyrannies, and execrable oppressions upon the poor
people, and being delighted with new kinds of torments, daily increased their
cruelty and rage.

Of the Islands St. John and Jamaica.
IN the year 1509. the Islands of St. John and Iamaica that looked like
fruitful gardens, were possessed by the Spaniards, with the same bloody
intentions, as the other were; for there they also exercised their accustomed
cruelties, killing, burning, roasting men, and throwing them to the dogs, as
also by oppressing them with sundry and various torments in the Gold Mines, as
if they had come to rid the earth of these innocent and harmless creatures,
of whom above six hundred thousand were murdered in these two Islands, so
lavish were the Spanish swords of the blood of these poor souls, scarce two
hundred more remaining; the rest perished without the least knowledge of God.

Of the Island of Cuba.
IN the year, 1511. they went over into the Island of Cuba, which extends as
far in length as it is from Valladolid to Rome, in which there were many fair
Provinces, inhabited with an infinite number of people, where the humanity and
clemency of the Spaniards was not only as little as it had been in other
places, but their cruelty and rage much greater. In this Island many things
were done worthy observation. A certain Lord of great power among them by name
Hathvey, who had fled over to Cuba, that he might avoid either death or
perpetual captivity, hearing by some of the Indians that the Spaniards were
also come into this Island, having assembled the Indians together, he began as
follows:

Countrymen and Friends, you are not ignorant of the rumor by which we
understand that the Spaniards are come among us, neither am I now to tell you
how they have used the inhabitants of Hapti (so the call Hispaniola, in the
Indian language) you know it by a sad experience: nor can we hope to find them
more merciful then they did. Then quoth he, Countrymen do you know the Errand
which brings them hither? To whom they replied, that was unknown to them, yet
they further replied, that that they were well assured of the cruel nature of
the Spaniard. Then quoth he, I Will tell ye the cause of their coming. They do
worship some covetous and unsatisfied Deity, and to content the greedy worship
of that Celestial Power, they require many things from us, using all their
endeavor to murder and enslave us. Which having said, taking up a little Chest
filled with Gold, he proceeded in these words: Behold here the God of the
Spaniards, and therefore if you think fitting, let us dance and sing before
this their God, Perhaps we may thereby appease his rage, and he well then
command the Spaniards to let us alone: Who with an unanimous shout cried out
all, Well said, well said; and so they went to dancing round this box, not
ceasing till they had sufficiently wearied themselves. Then the Lord Hathvey
going on with his speech, quoth he, If we do keep this God till he be taken
from us, we shall be surely slain, and therefore I think it expedient for us to
cast it into the River; so his counsel being followed, the Chest was cast into
the River.

When the Spaniards had landed in this Island, this noble man that had
sufficient trial of their manner, avoided them as much as he could, still
flying from them and defending himself by force of arms upon all occasions.
But at length being taken, for no other reason, but because he fled from those
that sought his life, and defended himself that he might not be tormented to
death, he was by the Spaniards burnt alive. While he was tied to the stake,
there came to him a Monk of the Order of St. Francis, who began to talk to him
of God and of the Articles of our Faith, telling him, that the small respite
which the Executioner gave him was sufficient for him to make sure his
salvation if he believed. Upon which words after Hathvey had a little while
paused, he asked the Monk if the door of heaven was open to the Spaniards, who
answering, Yes, to the good Spaniards. Then replied the other, Let me go to
Hell that I may not come where they are.

It happened once that the Citizens of a very fair City distant about twelve
miles from the place where we were, came forth of the City to do us honor, and
to submit themselves to the King of Castile, but they being returned home, the
Governor of the Spaniards about the middle of the night as they were sleeping
in their bed, and least suspecting any such thing, sent a company who came
suddenly upon them, and set fire upon their houses, burning up both men, women
and children, here some they murdered, others whom they spared, they tormented
to make them tell where they had hid their Gold, after which they made them
their slaves, having first marked them in the body: and immediately as soon as
the fire was spent, they ran to find out the Gold. At that time the Spaniards
got above ten hundred thousand Crowns of Gold, out of which the King scarce had
three hundred thousand sent him; there were slain in this place eight hundred
thousand people; and those other Tyrants that came afterward, emptied the
Island of those that remained.

Among all the notorious enormities committed by the foresaid Governor, there
is one not to be omitted: a certain noble Indian presenting him, perhaps more
for fear then love, a present of above nine thousand Crowns, the Spaniards not
content with this, tied him to a stake, and stretching out his Legs, put fire
to them, requiring a greater sum of Gold, who not able to endure the torment
sent home for three thousand more; notwithstanding the Spaniards with a fresh
rage began to torment him again, but seeing that he was able to give them no
more, they kept him so long over the fire till his marrow dropped from the soles
of his feet, whereof he died. These were the torments wherewith they murdered
not only the common People, but the Peers and Lords of those Nations.

Sometimes it would happen, that a Band of Spaniards ranging abroad would light
upon a mountain where the Indians were fled for protection from their cruelty,
where they immediately fell upon the Indians, killing the Men, and taking the
Women and Virgins captive; and when a great company of the Indians pursued them
with weapons for the recovery of their Wives and Children, they resolving not
to let go their prey, when the Indians came near them, immediately with the
points of their swords ran the poor Women and Children through the bodies. Upon
which the wretched Indians beating their breasts for grief would now and then
burst forth in these words, O perverse men, O cruel Spaniards, What will ye
kill helpless women?

There was the house of a Noble man distant from Panama above 15. miles; he was
by name called Paris, and he was very wealthy in Gold; to him the Spaniards
came, and by him they were entertained like Brothers, he giving to the Captain,
as a Present, fifteen thousand Crowns; who by that perceiving that he must of
necessity have a very great treasure, feigned a departure, but about the middle
of the night returning again entered the City, set it on fire, sacrificing the
poor people to the flames. Hence they took away about fifty or sixty thousand
Crowns* The Noble man escaping, gathered together what force he could and made
after the Spaniards, who were gone away with no less then a hundred and forty
thousand Crowns of his own Treasure; when he had overtaken them, he fell upon
them, and having slain above fifty of the Spaniards, he recovered his Gold
again. The rest saved themselves by flight. But not long after the Spaniards
returned with greater force upon the Noble man and having routed him, made
slaves of all his people.

Of the Province of Nicaraqua.
IN the year 1522. the foresaid Governor went to subdue the Province of
Nicaraqua. There is no man that can sufficiently express the fertility of this
Island, the temperateness of the air, or the multitude of the people that did
inhabit it. There was a vast number of people in this Province, for it
contained diverse cities above four mile in length: and for plenty of fruits
(which was the cause that it was so extremely well habited) without compare.
This people because their Country was all plain and level, had not the shelter
of the Mountains, neither could they be easily persuaded to leave it, so
pleasant was their habitation. And therefore they endured far the greater
misery, and persecution, and underwent a more unsufferable slavery, being the
less able to bear it, by how much they were of a mild and gentle nature. This
Tyrant vexed and tormented these poor creatures with so many continual
injuries, slaughters, captivities and cruelties, that no tongue is able to
express them. Into this territory he sent above fifty horse, who totally
extirpated the people of this Province by the Sword, sparing no age nor sex,
not for any wrong they did them, but sometimes it came not so speedily when
they called as they expected, or if they brought not such quantities of corn as
they imposed, or if they did not bring a sufficient quantity of Indians to
their service: for the Country being in a plain there was no avoiding the fury
of the Horsemen.

He commanded these Spaniards to go pillage and depopulate other Countries,
permitting to these Robbers, and Hangmen, to bring away and enslave what number
of these poor people they pleased: whom they laded with chains that weighed
above sixty or fifty pound, that they might not have the opportunity of
escaping, so that it seldom happened that above four in four thousand returned
home; and if either through the weight of their chains, or for hunger or thirst
they did chance to faint by the way, because they would not hinder their
journey, they cut off their heads immediately, throwing the head in one place
and the body in another. And the poor captive Indians when they saw the
Spaniards preparing for such journeys, at their departure would weep and fall
into these kind of sad expressions, These are the journeys that we have often
gone, to serve the Christians, and then we could return home again to visit our
Wives and Children, but now all hope is cut off from us, and we must never see
them more.

It happened also, by reason that it came into the Governors mind to change
the Indians from one Master to another, pretending to take away force from some
that he saw began to envy him, that there was no seed time nor harvest for a
whole year; now rather then the Spaniards would want, they took it from the
Indians, by which means there perished no less then thirty thousand people;
which caused one woman for hunger to eat her own child.

And because these Cities and other places were such pleasant abodes, therefore
the Spaniards took up their habitations in these places, dividing the
possessions among themselves; and as for the Indians, both old and young they
lived in the houses of the Spaniards, drudging day and night in a perpetual
captivity, who spared not the smallest children, but imposed on them burdens as
much as they were able to bear, and sometimes more; and by this means allowing
them neither houses nor any thing else proper to themselves, they destroyed
them daily, and do daily destroy them: so that they exceeded the cruelties
which they had committed in Hispaniola.

They hastened also the death of many of these poor people, by forcing them to
carry timber and planks for shipping to the port that was distant about thirty
miles from this place; compelling them also to fetch honey and wax from the
Mountains, where they were many times devoured by the Tygres. Neither were they
ashamed to lade and burden Women with child, as if they had been only beasts
for carriage.

But there was no greater plague that depopulated this Country, then a liberty
granted by the Governor to the Spaniards, for the requiring of slaves and
captives from the Nobles and potent men of the Kingdom; who as often as the
Spaniards obtained leave to demand them, which was every four or five months,
and sometimes oftener, gave them constantly fifty servants, whom the Spaniards
still threatened, that if they would not be obedient, they would either burn
them alive, or throw them to the dogs. Now because the Indians have but few
servants, for it is a very great matter to see above three servants in that
place waiting upon a Noble man; therefore the Nobility were fain to come to
their subjects, from whom first they took all the Orphans, then coming to those
that had many children, from them that had two they took one, and from those
who had three they demanded two; and thus they were fain to make up the Number
which the threatening Tyrant required, while the poor people wept and deplored
the sad misfortune of their Children, over whom they are very tender. Which
being done for a daily continuance, in ten or twelve years they made a clean
riddance of the inhabitants out of this place. For every foot there came five
or six ships which returned full of Indians into the Regions of Panama and
Peru, where they were sold, and ended their days in captivity. For experience
has taught us this, that when ever the Indians are removed from their
accustomed habitations into other climates, they quickly die; the Spaniards
neither affording them sufficient food, nor in times of sickness diminishing
their labor, for which end they were only bought. And thus the number of
people hurried from the enjoyment of their freedom into a sad and laborious
captivity, amounted to five hundred thousand souls, of which above fifty or
sixty thousand are already perished, and more daily perish. All these Massacres
were committed within the space of fourteen years. There may be now remaining
in the Province of Nicaraqua perhaps some four or five thousand men, though
they daily diminish through the immoderate oppressions of the Spaniards.
Notwithstanding in former time for number of people, it was the most
flourishing place in the whole world.

Of New Spain.
IN the year 1517. New Spain was discovered; after the discovery of which they
did nothing first or second, but immediately sell to their old practices of
cruelty and slaughter: for in the following year the Spaniards (who call
themselves Christians) went thither to rob and kill; though they gave out that
they went to people the Country. From that year unto this present year 1542.
the violence, injustice and tyrannies of the Spaniards came to their full
height; and now quite forgetting their humane natures, they laid aside all fear
of God or of their King. For the slaughters, massacres, cruelties, devastations
of Countries, destructions of Cities, violences, tyrannies, and rapines of the
Spaniards, which they did commit in these so many several and so large
Kingdoms, are so numberless, and strike the mind with such a horror, that
those which we have before related, are nothing in respect of these which we
are to relate, being all perpetrated in the year 1518. and continued to this
very month in a most sad and dreadful manner; so that what we said before
holds very true, that the Spaniards still went on from bad to worse, themselves
striving to exceed themselves in wickedness.

And thus from the first entry of the Spaniards into New Spain, which happened
upon the tenth day of the month of April, continuing from the eighteenth year
until the thirtieth, in which space of time are contained twelve years
complete, there has been no end of the bloody massacres and cruel slaughters
of the Spaniards, perpetrated in the continent of Mexico and the parts
adjoining, which contained four or five large Kingdoms, that neither for
compass nor fertility gave place to Spain. All this region was more populous
then either Toledo, Sevill, Valadolid, Augusta Caesarea, or Faventia; nay I may
affirm that there is not at this present, neither was there when those places
were at the highest of their flourishing estate, so many people as in those
parts, which take up the space of above a thousand and eight hundred miles. In
these ten or twelve years, what with Men, Women, Youths, and Children, above
four millions were by the Spaniards consumed part by fire, part by the sword in
these destructive wars; wars more unjust and more condemned both by the Law of
God and men, then any invasion of the Turk against the Catholic Religion.
Neither do we now reckon those that died under the intolerable yoke and burdens
of their captivity.

There is no language, no art or humane science, that can avail to recite the
abominable crimes and bloody actions committed by these enemies not only of
Commonwealths, but of all humane societies; neither can any diligence, or time
of writing sufficiently aggravate the circumstances of these detestable deeds.
Notwithstanding something I shall say of every one of them; though I do
seriously protest, that I connot rehearse one thing of a thousand in respect of
all that were done.

Of New Spain in particular.
AMong other grand murders of theirs, they committed one more notorious in the
City Cholula, which did contain above thirty thousand families. All the potent
men of that Region, with the Priests who brought along with them their chief
Priest also, came to meet the Spaniards; and that their reception and
entertainment might be the more honorable, they agreed to entertain the
Spaniards in the houses of the greatest Noble men; but here the Spaniards
consulted how to begin their massacres, or as they called them, chastisements
of the people, that they might keep in awe every corner of the Country with
the terror of their cruelties. For this was their common custom, that they no
sooner had set sooting in any place, but they committed immediately some
notorious violence upon the people, that the rest might stand in the greater
fear of them. They sent therefore to the supreme Lord of the City, as also to
all the other Lords and Governors, that they should give them a meeting, but
they were no sooner come to parley, but they were all immediately laid hold on,
leaving none to carry back these bad tidings to the rest; first they demanded
of them six thousand Indians, to carry the Luggage which they had with them,
which when they were brought together they shut up in their houses. It was a
sad spectacle to behold this poor people preparing themselves to carry those
burdens. They came naked, covering only their secret parts, and at their
shoulders hung a little Net wherein they kept their food; and thus while they
stooped under their burdens, they lay open to all the cuts and blows of the
Spanish weapons. Now being in this manner gathered together in a great and wide
place, part of the Spaniards all in arms, stood at the door to keep the rest
out, while others with Swords and Lances killed the innocent Lambs, so that
not one escaped. After three or four days were expired, some that had hid
themselves among the dead bodies all over besmeered with blood, came with all
submission imploring mercy and compassion from them; but they not at all
regarding their tears, nor moved with their lamentations, immediately hewed
them to pieces. All the Lords and Noble men, were kept a while in chains, and
afterward at the Commandment of the Spanish Captain, tied to stakes and burnt
to death. But the King of the whole Country escaped, with about thirty or
forty men, betaking himself to a Temple which was like a Castle, and in their
language called Quu; there defending himself a good part of the day; but the
Spaniards out of whose hand few of them, especially the soldiery escaped,
setting the Temple on fire, burnt them all that were within alive, who as they
were dying, brake forth into these lamentations: O wicked men, how have we
injured you, that you should thus torment us? Away, away to Mexico, where our
chief Lord Montenchuma will revenge our quarrel. This is also reported that
while the Spaniards were busily acting this bloody Tragedy, killing and
destroying above six thousand innocent creatures, their chief Captain in sport
sung these verses: One flame the Roman 'City now destroys,
And shrieks of people made a dismal noise,
While Nero sung, and moved with delight,
From Tarpey Hill beheld the woeful sight.


Another butchery was by them committed in the City of Tepeaca, which was a
much larger City then the former. Here they put to the sword an infinite number
of people, with many additions of cruelty.

Departing from Cholula they came to Mexico, the King whereof Montenchuma sent
the Peers and Nobles of this Realm with innumerable presents to meet them, who
all the way testified by several sports and solemnities, the joy which they had
for their arrival; When they approached near the wall of the City, the Kings
Brother came forth with many Noble men to meet him, who brought many gifts of
Gold and Silver, to present them with. Coming to the entry of the City, there
stood the King himself with all his attendants, who being carried in a golden
Litter accompanied them to the Palace which was prepared for them. But that
very day, as was told me by some that were there, they seized upon the King,
little suspecting any such matter, setting a guard upon his person of above
eighty Soldiers: after that they put him in chains. But here passing by many
things which might be said; I will relate one thing worthy observation. The
Governor being called away to quell one of his Captains that had taken arms
against him, and having left Montenchuma with a guard of above a hundred, it
came into the minds of the Spaniards to do something which might render them
dreadful and terrible to the Indians; which was a policy, as I said before,
they did often use. In the mean while all the Nobility and commonalty of the
City minded nothing else but to exhilarate the mind of their captive King with
several varieties of sports and recreations. Among which there was none that
they used more then dancings and revellings, which they performed all night
long in the streets. These exercises they in their language called Mirotes, but
the Islanders Areytos. To these recreations they bring together all their
wealth and richest garments, and what ever they do esteem precious; using them
as the greatest testimonies of gladness. The Nobles also and Princes of the
Royal blood every one according to their degree, were busy in these sports in
those places which were nearest the houses where the King was detained captive.
Not far from the Palace there were above two thousand youths, being all the
children of the Nobility, and indeed the flower of the Nobility which were in
Mantenchuma's Kingdom. To these came the Captain of the Spaniards with a small
party of Soldiers, sending other Troops to other parts of the City, as if they
only came to be spectators. But the Captain had given command that at a certain
hour they should fall upon them; and he himself being about to lead the way,
cried out, St. Iago, let us rush in upon them. The word being thus given, the
Souldiees all fell on, and with their swords began to hack and hew those
delicate bodies, spilling that generous and noble blood with such an unheard of
malice, that they left not one alive. And doing thus to others in other places,
there fell a dismal fear and amazement upon the whole Country. Nor will these
poor creatures doubtless ever forget as long as the world stands, to lament
and bewail in their solemnities the sad calamity and ruin of the whole
seminary of their Nobility, of which they were wont so much to boast.

The Indians beholding this unheard of cruelty and injustice committed upon
such a number of innocent souls, having with long patience endured the
captivity of their King, who had charged them to be quiet, now ran all to their
arms, and falling upon the Spaniards, wounded many, the rest narrowly escaping:
at length the Spaniards putting a Dagger to the breast of the King Montencuma
threatened to kill him unless he would look through the window and command his
subjects to lay down their arms. But the Indians at that time contemning the
commands of their King, chose them a Captain whom they made chief Commander of
all their Forces. By this time the forementioned Governor was returned from
subduing his enemy, bringing with him a greater number of Spaniards then he
carried away with him. Whereupon the Indians desisted from doing any thing more
until he was entered into the City. But then gathering together very great
Forces, they fought so vigorously, that the Spaniards despairing of victory
resolved to retreat in a tempestuous night and to leave the City. Which being
known to the Indians, they cut off abundance of them upon the bridges of the
Lakes: neitheir can any man deny but that they did it justly, for the reasons
above rehearsed. Afterward the Spaniards having recollected more forces, there
followed that great contention in the City, wherein they committed so many
several butcheries upon the Indians, by killing and burning both the Commonalty
and the Nobility in a most barbarous manner.

Having committed so many detestable slaughters upon the Indians in Mexico, and
other places distant ten, fifteen and twenty miles from thence, this tyrannical
plague proceeded to infest and depopulate the City of Panuco. There was a
wonderful frequency of people in that Country, neither were the slaughters,
that were there committed, less remarkable. In the like manner they laid waste
the Provinces of Tatepeca, Ipilcingonium, and Columa, every one of which is of
as large a compass as the Kingdoms of Legiona and Castile. It is a very hard
thing, if not altogether impossible, to recite all the murders and cruelties
there committed; besides that, it would cloy the reader.

Here we must observe, that they entered into these Kingdoms and territories,
(which for the abundance of people ought to have been the joy of all true
Christians) upon no pretense, but as they said to reduce them to slavery. For
at their first entrance they commanded them to swear fealty and obedience to
the King of Spain, and those that would not come in and submit themselves to
the will of such unjust and cruel men, they proclaimed rebels, and and accused
them of that crime to the King. The blindness of the chief Governors of the
Indies not permitting them to discern, that no man can be called a Rebel who
is not before a Subject.

This cruel Tyrant leaning upon this pretense, sent two other Captains
excelling himself in fury, and impiety to Guatimala the most fertile and most
flourishing Kingdom both for men and fruit of any that were situated
southward. They had also received commands to visit the Kingdoms of Naco,
Honduras, and Guaimara looking toward the north, and being distant from Mexico
above three hundred miles; the one was sent by land, the other by sea, being
both of them well furnished with men and ammunition for Horse and Foot.

And this I dare affirm, that the enormities committed by these two Captains,
and by him especially that was sent to Guatimala (for the other dyed an evil
death in good time) are enough to fill a particular volume, so many were the
slaughters, violences, injuries, butcheries, and beastly desolations which they
perpetrated, as do not only amaze the present, but must of necessity strike a
horror into future ages: for in this place their abominations and devastations
were more fatal then in any place before.

As for him that went by sea, he vexed all the shore with his incursions and
cruelties, to whom there came certain out of the Kingdom of Yucatan, which
lies in the way to the Kingdoms of Naco, and Naymura, whither he was then
marching, and brought him many presents, yet he was no sooner come into the
Country, but he sent the soldiers to depopulate and waste the same, who
ceased not to commit many abominable outrages. Among the rest, a certain
seditious rebel entering into a region bordering upon Guatemala, burnt up their
City, killing the Inhabitants, and laying waste all the Country, which he did
on purpose, that if he should be pursued by his enemies, they might be liable
to the revenge of the Indians as they passed along; which happened accordingly,
for there the chief Commander from whose power the foresaid Captain had
rebelled, was slain; but he was succeeded by many other fell tyrants, who with
their wonted cruelties and captivity destroyed the people, selling them to
those that brought garments and other provision, and by that kind of
servitude, which they practiced from the year 1524. to the year 1535. they
depopulated and made desert the provinces of Naco and Honduras, which seemed to
be the Elysium and Paradise of the world in every respect. And I have lately
seen them so destroyed, that it would move the most stony heart to compassion.
In these eleven years there prrished in this Country above two millions,
scarce two thousand now remaining, who daily diminish through the hardness of
their servitude.

But as for that abominable tyrant that exceeded all that were before in
tyranny, and is equal to all that remains behind, let us now find him out in
Guatimala.

He going through the Provinces adjoining to Mexico toward Guatimala, which are
above four hundred miles in length, minded nothing else all the way he went,
but slaughters, rapines, burnings, depopulations, compelling all upon the
foresaid pretense to submit themselves to their cruelties, in the name of the
King of Spain, whom they had never seen nor heard of, and whom they could not
but think more unjust and cruel then his Ministers and Officers, yet giving
them no time to deliberate, they wasted all before them with fire and sword.

Of the Kingdom and Province of Guatimala.
AT their first entrance into this Kingdom they committed a very great
outrage. But for all that their chief Lord and Governor carried in a Litter
came forth to meet him with Drums and Trumpets, and great joy; attended by many
of the Nobles of the City of Vtlacan the greatest Mart Town of that Kingdom,
where they gave him provisions in abundance, with all that he could desire.
That night the Spaniards lodged without the City, not thinking themselves safe
in a Town so well fortified as that was. The next day he called to him the
chief Lord with a great number of the Nobles, demanding of them a very great
quantity of Gold. They returning him answer, that they could not satisfy his
request by reason that their Country afforded not Gold, were immediately by
his command, without any cause or form of proceeding, all burnt alive. The rest
of the Nobles of these Provinces, seeing that all the chiefest of them, who had
the power and government of the Kingdom in their hands, were for no cause put
to death, but because they were not able to give them gold, fled to the
mountains for safety, charging their subjects to submit themselves to the
Spaniards, but not to tell them where their sculking places were, nor to give
them notice of their flight. Whereupon an infinite number of the Indians came
to the Spaniards requesting that they might be their subjects, and that they
might serve them. The Captain made answer, that he would not receive them, and
that moreover he would kill them all unless they would declare whither their
Lords were fled: the Indians replied, That they knew nothing of it, but their
Wives and Children they said were ready to serve them, adding, that they were
at home in their houses, whither they might go, and either kill them or use
them as they pleased; which offers they made to them again and again. But
strange to tell, the Spaniards demanded their Cities and Towns, killing these
poor creatures, who as they thought were secure at their work. They came to a
very large Town, which being confident of their own innocence, thought
themselves safer then the rest; but in two hours space they brought such a
desolation upon it, killing all ages and sexes, that there was not a person
left alive, but what saved themselves by flight. The Indians perceiving that
with all their humility, their patience, and their presents, that they were not
able to assuage the fury of these inhumane creatures, and that they were daily
killed up like dogs, began to think of taking arms; for they thought it
better, since an evil death could not be avoided, rather to die fighting and
taking revenge upon their enemies, then to be killed like beasts by them. But
when they saw their want of arms, their feebleness, their nakedness, and
that they were utterly unskilful in the management of horses, that they might
have some way of prevailing upon their enemies, it came in their minds to dig
certain ditches in the ways, that so the horses as they went along might fall
into them: at the bottom of these pits they had driven in stakes sharpened at
the top, and they had covered them over with clods of earth that they might not
be discovered; twice or thrice the Spaniards fell into these ditches, but
afterward by their care they easily avoided them. And therefore they made a
Law among themselves, that all the Indians which they took, of what ever sex or
degree, should be thrown into those pits which they had made: Into these pits
they threw women big with child, and all the aged persons that they could
light upon, till the pit was full. It was a sad sight to behold women with
child goar'd through the body with these stakes; while others that lay
uppermost were killed with swords and lances; those that would not in were
cast to their dogs. They burnt a very potent Peer of the Nation in a great
fire, saying that he was much honored with that kind of death.

Among other abominations committed by this Captain and his followers, who were
not at all more gentle then their leader, this was one more memorable then the
rest. Into the Province of Cuzcatan, where the City of our Savior is situated,
being a Country, which together with the neighboring sea coast is extended
about forty or fifty miles in length; and also into the City of Cuzcatan it
self, which is the Metropolis of the whole Country, he was received with very
great joy, the Indians expecting his coming, laden with a present of above
thirty thousand Turkies and other things necessary for their refreshment. But
he having received their gift, commanded the Spaniards every one of them to
take as many Indians as they pleased, and to keep them for service as long as
they should stay there. Whereupon every one took a hundred less or more,
according as his occasions required. And as for the poor Captives they served
them with so much zeal and affection, that they could require nothing more then
adoration it self. After this the Captain required of the people a great
quantity of Gold, who returned him answer, that they would give him all the
Gold they had. Whereupon the Indians brought together a great company of spears
which were guilt with Orichalcum, so that they seemed to be gold; but the
Captain causing them to be touched, and not finding them to be gold, spoke thus
to the people, All curses light upon such a Region as this, wherein there is no
Gold; and then commanded all those that had taken servants, to keep them in
chains, and to mark them with the mark of servitude, which was immediately
done, the Kings mark being burnt into their flesh; which I saw also done to the
son of the chiefest man in all the City. Those Indians that escaped with the
rest of the inhabitants of the Country, gathered themselves together,
resolving to hazard a war with the Spaniards, but alas with small prosperity,
there being an infinite number of them slain. After this they returned to
Guatimala, where they built a City, which God in his justice destroyed,
overwhelming it, first with earth, then with stones of a vast bigness, and
lastly, letting in upon it a great deluge of waters. Now after that they had
slain all that were able to make resistance against them, they carried away the
rest into captivity, or forced them to give away their children as tribute due
to the Spaniards, for they use the service of no other creatures. And thus part
being sold into the Countries of Peru, and part destroyed by the sword, they
made a wilderness of one of the most happy and populous Countries of those
parts, stretching out in length and breadth above a hundred miles. This the
tyrant himself confessed, writing that this County was more populous then the
County of Mexico, as indeed it was. This man in the space of fifteen years,
which was from the year 525. to 540. together with his associates, massacred no
less then five millions of men, and do daily destroy those that are yet
remaining. It was the custom of this Tyrant, when he made war upon any Town or
Country, to carry along with him as many as he could of the subdued Indians,
compelling them to make war upon their Countrymen, and when he had ten or
twenty thousand men in his service, because he could not give them provision,
he permitted them to eat the flesh of those Indians that they had taken in war:
for which cause he had a kind of shambles in his Army for the ordering and
dressing of man's flesh, suffering Children to be killed and broyled in his
presence. The men they killed only for their hands and feet, for those they
accounted dainties. Which being understood by the neighbors, they were all
struck with astonishment.

Moreover, he destroyed not a few by compelling them to carry ships from one
shore to another, causing them to bear great vessels, together with their
Anchors of an extraordinary weight from the North sea to the South, being
distant one from the other a hundred and thirty miles. And thus, also they
carried their Artillery from one place to another, putting them upon their
naked shoulders, whereby being oppressed with the monstrous weight of those
burdens, they sunk down often of them in the way, of which I was many times an
eyewitness. He divided and separated families, taking women from their
husbands, daughters from their parents, which he gave to the Seamen and
Soldiers. All his ships he filled with Indians, where they died for hunger and
for thirst. And truly if I should relate all his particular cruelties, I should
make a book only to scare and affright men. He had two great Navies, wherein
like lightning from heaven he consumed these poor wretches. Oh how many
children did he deprive of their parents, how many men of their wives, how many
wives did he make widows, how many widows did they vitiate, how many married
women adulterate, how many virgins did they ravish, how many did they enslave,
how many did he cause to languish in calamity, how many tears, how many sighs
did he provoke, upon how many did he bring desolation in his worldly
pilgrimage, and endanger their damnation in the world to come? and this not
only to the Indians that suffered, but to the Spaniards whom he encouraged in
wickedness, and who assisted him in the committing so many heinous and
abominable murders. I do beseech God that he would be merciful to him, and let
his wrath be satisfied with that judgment which he has already inflicted on
him.

Of New Spain. As also of Panucon, and Xalisco.
THese horrid murders and massacres being committed, besides others that I have
omitted, in the Provinces of New Spain, there came another cruel and furious
Tyrant into the Provinces of Panucon, who having perpetrated many heinous
iniquities, and sent great numbers of the Natives to be sold in the Countries
of Spain, laid waste all this Kingdom: and once it happened that they used eight
hundred of the Indians in stead of a team to draw their carriages, as if they
had been mere beasts and irrational creatures. He was afterward made President
of the City of Mexico, and with him many other his fellow tyrants advanced to
the office of Auditors; which Offices they contaminated with so many impieties
and abominations, that it is hardly to be imagined. And as for this Country it
self, they so far destroyed it, that if some of the Franciscan Friars had not
strenuously opposed him, and that the Kings Council had not provided a sudden
remedy for it, in two years space they had wholly depopulated New Spain, as
they had done in Hispaniola. One of the Associates of the President that he
might enclose his Garden with a wall, used the service of eight thousand
Indians, and because he afforded them neither food, nor wages, they all
perished after a most sad and lamentable manner.

After the first Captain, of whom we spoke before, had put an end to the
destruction of Panucon; and that there came news to him that the Kings
Council was coming into these parts, he went further into the Country, that
he might exercise his cruelties with more liberty, and caused fifteen or twenty
thousand of the Indians to follow and carry the burdens of the Spaniards, of
whom scarce two hundred returned alive, the rest being all destroyed; at length
they came to the Province of Machuaca which is distant above forty miles from
Mexico, and is nothing at all inferior to the other either for plenty of
provision, or number of people; the king coming to meet him with all shows of
respect and honor, they put in prison because he was reported to be very rich:
which that they might get from him, they thus tormented him; having put his
feet in a kind of stocks, and stretching out his body, they tied his hands to
a stake, and then putting fire to his feet, while a boy was set to baste them
with oil, that they might roast the better; there stood another also with dogs
behind him, threatening to set them upon him; which if he had done, they would
have soon put an end to his life: and with these torments they vexed him, to
make him bring his treasures to light. At length there came a Franciscan Friar
who freed him from his torments, but not from death, which immediately ensued.
With this kind of torture they put to death many other of the Princes and
Noble men of the Country.

About this time a certain man who came to visit their purses rather then their
souls, knowing the Indians to be adorers of Idols, for the Spaniards had not
taught them better, kept them captive till they had delivered all their Images,
for they thought that they had been all of Gold, but when they found themselves
deceived, he inflicted upon them punishments as if they had committed some
great offense, and because he would not utterly lose their hopes, caused them
to redeem their Idols with Gold, to adore them; and thus did the Spaniards
procure the worship of God among the Indians.

This Tyrant out of the Province of Panucon, went to Methuaca and Xalisco,
which were Countries fruitful both in men and money, and no small glory of the
Indian Nation, having Cities that were in length above seven miles. When he
came into these Countries, the Indians, as they were wont, met him with
accustomed signs of joy and gladness; but he immediately brake forth into his
wonted cruelties, to attain his usual scope, which was the heaping up of Gold,
the only God which they adore. The Cities they burnt to the ground; Their
Princes, having first tormented them, they carried away captive, binding them
in chains. Women with child, without any consideration of their weakness,
they oppressed with tedious labors and hunger, that they died by the way. And
as for their Children, because they could not carry them, they were forced to
throw them away, by which a number of Infants were destroyed.

There being a certain Christian who went about to defile a virgin, her mother
interposed her self, and would have taken the daughter from him; the Spaniard
drawing forth his dagger, cut off her hand, and afterward slew the virgin,
because she would not give consent to his lustful desire.

Among other things also this was most unjust, that they caused to be marked
with the mark of slavery above four thousand five hundred of the Indians that
were all as free born as themselves; among which they also caused to be thus
marked children of two, three or four years old, though they were all such as
came forth to meet him with great acclamations of joy; other things without
number I pass by in silence.

All these above mentioned abominations being done, they reduced the rest to a
tyrannical subjection, for which cause they thought that they were only sent
thither. In which regions the said Governor gave liberty to all the Spaniards,
especially to his Stewards and Officers, to exercise what tortures they pleased
upon the Indians to draw out of them the knowledge where their treasure lay.
His Steward in times of peace killed many Indians, burning some, and casting
other to his dogs, cutting off others hands, legs, and heads, that thereby
their minds being totally subjected they should never deny where their Gold or
treasure lay hid. All these things were done, the Tyrant himself beholding and
consenting; and not only so, but they oppressed them and continually abused
them with stripes and blows of their canes and fists, leaving no cruelty
unexercised toward them. In this Kingdom of Xalisco they consumed by fire six
thousand villages, upon which the Indians growing desperate, seeing the
remainder of those that escaped daily destroyed; they made an insurrection
against the Spaniards, and killing some of them, as they well deserved, they
betook themselves again to the Mountains. But the cruelties and injuries of the
Tyrants that went from these parts to depopulate (which they called discover)
other Regions overtaking them; many Indians were by them slain, while they
sought to defend themselves in the rocks: and to this present there are a
thousand Butcheries committed upon them; whereby there are hardly left any
people in the whole Country. And thus the Spaniards being blinded and forsaken
by God, and given over to a reprobate sense, considered not how unagreeable
both to the Law of God and nature were their proceedings against the Indians,
how unjustly they went about to destroy them by force of arms, and not only to
cast them out of their Country, but to torture them and cut them in pieces:
nor do they see how impious their violences and tyrannies are over these poor
people; they do believe and do affirm both in deed and word, that those
victories which they have obtained and used to the destruction of the Indians,
as if their unjust wars were of right, and are so impudent as to give God
thanks for them: like those thieves of whom Zachary speaks in the eleventh
Chapter, the third and fourth Verses. Feed the flock of the slaughter, whose
possessors slay them and hold themselves not guilty, and they that sell them
say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich.

Of the Kingdom of Yucatan.
IN the year 1526. a vile and impious man through his sawning and lying, was
made Governor of the Kingdom of Yucatan; which was the manner that other
tyrants used for the obtaining of their preferments and offices; for by their
authority they had greater opportunities to do mischief. This Kingdom did
abound with people both because of the temper of the air, and for the plenty of
provision, in which it excelled the Country of Mexico. But those things for
which it is chiefly famous are Honey and Wax, which it afforded to all the
Countries of India, which have been hitherto discovered. It is three hundred
miles in compass. This Nation either as to policy and good government, or as
to their way of living and conversation, excelled all the rest; and well
deserved to have had more knowledge of the true God. There there might have
been erected by the Spaniards many brave and large Cities where they might have
lived as in a Paradise, had they not rendered themselves totally unworthy of any
such benefits through their own enormities and impieties. This Tyrant with
three hundred men made war upon these innocent Indians living peaceably in
their houses, and offering injury to none, destroying many people. And because
the Country has no Gold, for if it had they had soon ended the lives of the
inhabitants, by digging in the Mines, making a gain of those bodies and souls
for which Christ died, therefore those that they left alive, they made slaves
of, sending whole ships away fraighted with people, bartering them for Wine,
Oil, Vinegar, Pork, Horses, and other things which they stood in need of. Out
of fifty or a hundred Virgins which he had chosen out, he exchanged the best of
them for the smallest vessel of Wine, Oil, Vinegar or Pork: and once it
chanced that a youth who was the Son of a Prince, was exchanged for a Cheese,
and a hundred persons for a horse. This was his employment, from the year 26.
to 33. till news was brought of the Regions of Peru, whither the Spaniards
going put an end to their villainies here for a small time. But after some days
were past over, they returned again to their former rapines and dishonouring of
God by their wicked courses; neither have they yet made an end, so that now
three hundred miles of Land lie untilled and void of inhabitants. The
particulars of their cruelty are not to be remembered, only two or three that
come into my mind I will relate.

While the Spaniards were hunting after the Indians with their dogs, they met
with an Indian Women, who being sick and seeing that she was not able to escape
them, taking a rope hanged her self, hanging also her child of a year old
about her waste by the feet; but the dogs immediately fell upon the child,
only he was baptized by a religious person before he died.

When the Spaniards departed out of the Kingdom invited the son of a certain
Noble man, Governor either of a City or great Province, that he would go along
with him, who answering that he was unwilling to leave his native Country,
they threatened to cut off his ears unless he would go along with him;
notwithstanding all which, he persevered in his resolution; whereupon they cut
off his nose and the upper part of his lip, with as little remorse as if they
had been paring their nails.

This Furcisur carried himself obscenly toward a deserving religious person,
boasting to him, that he had got as many Indians as he could with child, that
they might yield the more profit in the sale of them. In this Kingdom, or else
in some province of new Spain, it happened that a Spaniard being a hunting, his
dogs seemed to him to be a hungry, whereupon he took a little Infant out of the
mothers arms, and cutting off the thighs and arms of the Child, cast it to
his dogs, and when they had devoured those, he cast the whole body to them.
Thus we see how they were delivered over to a reprobate sense; and what a value
they put upon these creatures formed after the Image of God. But now worse
things follow.

Many cruelties, and indeed innumerable which were never before heard of, I do
omit, only I shall add this one. These ambitious, blind and execrable tyrants
going out of this Region to seek more riches, there went with them four Monks
of the Order of St. Francis together with Father James, to keep the Country in
peace, and to bring the remainder of those that were left by their preaching to
the knowledge of Christ. I do believe that these were they that in the year
thirty four were solicited by the Indians to come into their Country, and to
preach to them the knowledge of the true God. To which purpose they gathered
assemblies and congregations together, that they might know what sort of people
these were that called themselves Fathers, and Friars, who differed so much
from the rest of the Spaniards, that vexed them with so much affliction and
torment. At length they received them, but on condition that they would come
alone and not let any other of the Spaniards enter in among them, which those
religious persons promised, for they had not only a liberty, but a command from
the Governor of New Spain, that they should so promise them, and that the
Spaniards should do them no harm or injury. Upon which they began to preach the
Gospel among them, and to declare to them the holy intention of the King of
Spain, of which things they had not yet received any knowledge, nor that they
had any other King then him who oppressed them with so much tyranny. The
religious persons had not been there above forty days, when they began to
bring in all their Idols, and to commit them to the fire; and afterward they
brought their children, whom they loved as dearly as the apples of their eyes,
to the religious persons to be instructed. And thus being persuaded by these
religious persons they did more then ever had been done in the Indies before
(for what ever the Tyrants that had oppressed them were wont to tell them they
only spoke in contempt and derision on the Indians) for above twelve or fifteen
Kings of large Provinces, together with their subjects by their Council and
consent, all of them acknowledged the King of Castile to be their superior
Lord of their own accord, and received him for their Emperor, as he was King
of Spain. In test^mony whereof I have a writing in my own custody signed by
those persons.

Thus not without the great joy of those devout persons, an entry was made, for
the bringing of those inhabitants that were remaining in these Countries to the
knowledge of Christ; but in the mean while by another way there entered in among
them about eighteen Spanish Horsemen and twelve footmen, bringing with them
great loads of Idols, which they had brought out of other Countries. The
Captain of the foresaid Spaniards called to him one of the Noble men of this
Country, and commanded him to take these Idols and to distribute them among
his people, and bring in exchange an Indian man or woman for every Idol,
otherwise threatening to make war upon him; the foresaid Lord out of fear took
those Idols, giving every one of them to his subjects, commanding them to
worship them, and also to send back in recompense to the Spaniards some of
their people to serve them. The Indians terrified delivered their children
after a certain proportion, those that had two giving one, and those that had
three delivering two; and thus they ended this sacrilegious merchandise, and so
the Cacique gave satisfaction to the Spaniards; I dare not call them
Christians. One of these sacrilegious Robbers, John Garcia by name, being very
sick and like to die had under his bed two burdens of these Idols, who when
the Indian woman that looked to him was with him, commanded her that she should
not deliver those Idols at a small rate, because they were of the best sort,
and therefore that she should not sell them, but for an Indian man or woman in
exchange, and as he was making this kind of will he expired. And who can now
question but that his soul is now tormented in the flames of Hell* Consider by
this what was the progress of Religion; and what examples of Christianity the
Spaniards did show, when they came into America, how they honored God
themselves, or how much they cared that the Indians should know the right
worship of him; Judge which is the greater crime, that of Jeroboam who made
Israel to sin, causing two golden Calves to be set up, and to be worshipped by
the people, or of the Spaniards, who caused the Indians to buy their Idols, and
made merchandise of them. These are the deeds of the Spaniards, who most often,
out of a desire of heaping up gold, did sell and do yet sell, did deny and do
yet deny Christ their Redeemer.

The Indians seeing that the Promises of the religious persons, that the
Spaniards should not enter into their Country, were not performed, and that
the Spaniards brought Idols out of other places to sell them into their
Country, whereas the religious persons had made them to burn all theirs, that
there might be but one worship of one God, came and spoke to them in this
manner. Why have you told us so many untruths, promising so faithfully to us
that the Spaniards should not come into our Country? Why have you burnt our
gods, when as they do bring and sell others among us? are the gods of other
Countries better then our own? The Friars, although they had little to say, yet
they made a shift to pacify their minds, and immediately went to the
Spaniards declaring to them the evil which they had done, humbly beseeching
them to depart. Which the Spaniards not only utterly denied, but also, which
was more wicked and abominable: they persuaded the Indians that they were
called by the Friars: which being believed, they took council to kill the
religious persons, who being admonished by certain other Indians, avoided that
danger and fled. But after their departure, knowing the falsehood and treachery
of the Spaniards, they sent messengers fifty miles after them, craving pardon
in the name of the Indians, and entreating them to return.

The religious persons, as upright servants of God and zealous for the souls of
those poor people, gave credit to the messengers and returned, and were
entertained as if they had been Angels sent from heaven, and remained with the
Indians for five months, receiving a thousand courtesies from them. But when
the Spaniards would not depart from thence, although the Viceroy used all his
endeavors to recall them; he declared them Traitors and guilty of high Treason;
and moreover, when the persevered in their tyranny and oppression, the
religious persons seeing, that though revenge came late, that yet they would
not go unpunished, and fearing lest that revenge might fall upon their own
heads, and besides not being able to preach the Gospel in quiet, by reason of
the incursions of the Spaniards, resolved to leave the Kingdom, which now
remains destitute of all knowledge, the souls of these poor Indians remaining
in their past miseries of ignorance and Heathenisme, all the streams of divine
knowledge being taken from them, by these cursed Spaniards, as when water is
taken from the young plants; for at the time when they went away, the Indians
were very covetous after the knowledge of our Religion.

Of the Province of Sancta Martha.
THE Province of St. Martha by reason of the Golden Mines and the fertility of
the place wa^ a brave Island; wherefore from the year 1528. to 1542. many
tyrants went thither by sea, with their incursions wasting and spoiling all the
Island, after a strange manner destroying the inhabitants, and robbing them of
all their Gold. And so the whole Country was wasted by them, especially all
the coast and the places adjoining, until the year 1523. And because it was a
fruitful Country, there went thither at several times several Captains,
succediug one another in cruelty, so that every one strived to outvie his
predecessor in the inventions of exquisite torments to afflict the poor people.
And thus also in this place they confirmed our foresaid Axiom. In the year
1529. there went thither a very great tyrant accompanied with many Troops, with
an intention to exceed all the rest of his predecessors in cruelty, who took
away abundance of treasure from the people in the space of seven years; in
which exile he dying without repentance, into his place other tyrants
succeeded, where with their bloody hands and impious points of their swords
they destroyed all the rest that their predecessors had spared. And such a
desolation they brought upon many provinces by their accustomed ways of
cruelty, and inflicted so many torments upon the Princes and people to force
them to declare where their treasure lay, that from the year 1529. to this day
they depopulated above four hundred mile of land, the number of people in these
parts slain being not inferior to those who had been slain in other places.

If I had decreed to reckon up the impieties, slaughters, cruelties, violences,
rapines, murders, and iniquities, and other crimes committed by the Spaniards
against God, the King, and these innocent Nations, I should make two large a
volume: yet I shall do my endeavor, if God grant me life. For the present I
will rehearse a part of those things which the Bishops of these Provinces wrote
to the King our Sovereign Lord. These were letters dated the 25. of May, in the
year, 1541. In which these words are written. I tell your sacred Majesty, that
there is no remedy to ease this afflicted Nation, but to deliver it out of the
power of these step-fathers, and to give it into the power of a loving husband,
which may use it with more gentleness as befits it, and that as soon as may
be; for if there be any delay, it must of necessity perish. And a little after
he proceeds thus. By which it shall be apparent to your Majesty, how deservedly
the Governors of these Provinces ought to be deprived of their dignity, that
the Provinces may be eased; which if it be not suddenly done, these provinces
will never be eased. This also your Majesty may further take notice of, that
they are not men that live here but Devils, that there are no servants of God
or the King to be found, but traitors both to the Law and King. Now certainly
there is nothing more destructive to the peace of the Nation, and that hinders
more the conversion of those that live there in peace, then the cruel and hard
usage which the Spaniards afflict those innocent people withal, which bred in
them such a loathing of the Spanish name, that nothing is more odious and
detestable. For the Indians call them Yaes, which in their language signifies
Devils. And truly not without reason, for the actions of these people have been
more like the actions of Devils, whereby it happens that the Indians seeing such
crimes committed by the Spaniards both of high and inferior conditions, so
void of pity and compassion, cannot choose but think amiss both of God, the
King, and (...) of the Christians; and to labor to (...) them to the contrary,
is a vain and fruitless labor, and whereby a greater advantage is given them
to laugh at Christ and his Law. And as for the Indians that take arms to
defend themselves they think it better to die once, then to fall into the hands
of their enemies, and to be afflicted with many deaths. These things, most
invincible Caesar, I have learnt by experience. He adds further, Your Majesty
has in these Countries more friends and servants then you are aware of; for
there is no soldier of all those that serve in these parts, who does not
publicly and openly profess, whether he rob, steal, kill or burn the subjects
of your Majesty, for the obtaining of gold, but that he does it to do your
Majesty service. Wherefore most invincible Caesar it would be requisite, that
you should signify by the severe correction of some, how displeased you were
with such services, whereby they show themselves so disobedient and refractory
to God himself. Which words are taken from the writings of the said Bishop of
St. Martha, out of which it is manifest, what strange things have been
committed, and are daily committed by them. They call the Indians Warlike, that
continually fly to the Mountains to avoid the cruelty of the Spaniards, and
they call those the Indians and Inhabitants of the Country, whom they have
subjected to the hardship of a perpetual slavery by the terror of their
massacres: by which they have been depopulated and wasted, as appears out of
the letters of the foresaid Bishop, who recites but a very few of those things
that were committed. The Indians of these Regions used to break forth into
these expressions, when they are forced naked through the craggie passages of
the mountains, if at any time they chanced to faint with weariness (for then
they are constantly beaten with canes, sometimes their teeth knocked out with
the hilts of their swords, to make them rise and proceed on in their journeys
without any rest) then were they wont I say to break forth into these
expressions, Oh how envious art thou* I faint, kill me, and put an end to my
days: this they sigh forth, scarcly able to draw out their words, the certain
signs of an inward anguish and deep distress; but who can comprehend in words
the hundredth part of these calamities and afflictions wherewith the Spaniards
do torment the poor Indians; God of his mercy bring them to the knowledge of
those who are able to remedy and prevent them for the future.

Of the Province of Carthagena.
THis Province is distant from the Island of St. Martha toward the West 50.
miles, and is situated upon the confines of the Kingdom of Cerusia, being
stretched upon the sea coast to the Bay of Vraba a hundred miles in length,
South ward it is also stretched to a very great length. These Provinces from
the year 1498. to this present year were handled after a most cruel manner, and
depopulated with several kinds of slaughters, as it happened in the Islands of
St. Martha: but that I may come to a quick conclusion I shall cease to speak of
every particular, that I may make have to the rehearsal of those detestable
crimes which they committed in other Countries.

Of the shore of Pearls, of Paria, and of the Island of the Trinity.
FRom the shore of Paria, to the Bay of V^necuela, which takes up above two
hundred miles in length, the Spaniards committed most wonderful depopulations;
for they gave themselves wholly to their wonted Robberies, enslaving also
infinite numbers of men, on purpose to sell them for money, against all the
faith and pledges which they had given them for their security (for those were
things which they never observed) though they were entertained by these
innocent creatures with all civility, and softered in their houses like their
parents, or children, serving them in all things to the utmost of their power,
and making them masters of all that was in their possession. It can hardly be
said or expressed, with how many injuries and unjust actions they used to
afflict the poor Indians in these Countries from 1510. until this present
year. Two or three of their most heinous crimes I will rehearse, whereby the
reader may judge of the wickedness of those which remain untold.

Into the Island of the Trinity being larger and more fertile then Sicily, and
stored with Inhabitants, according to their quality, more ingenuous and
virtuous then any other Nation of the Indians, a certain Robber went in the
year 1510. accompanied with fifty or sixty other fellow thieves, who presently
proclaimed an edict that all the Indians should come into the Island to live
with him. The Indians received them as their natural Countrymen, both Princes
and subjects yielding obedience to them with much cheerfulness, bringing
provision to them every day as much as would have sufficed to have served a far
greater number; for this is the custom of the Inhabitants of this new world,
to afford all necessaries to the Spaniards in great abundance. A little while
after the Spaniards built a great house for the Indians to dwell in, for they
would not that all of them should have more then one house, where they might
all dwell together, that they might with more convenience execute that which
they had in their resolutions; which they did accordingly: for when they had
thatched it over, and raised it to the height of two men, they shut up
abundance of them in the said house upon pretense to hasten the work; but in
truth, that those within might not be seen by those without; then a part of
them compassed the house with their weapons that none might enter in or go
forth; after that others of them went in, and unsheathing their swords, they
threatened death to the naked Indians if they stirred, and then bound them. And
if any of them went about to fly, they were in the place immediately cut in
pieces; some few that escaped, part wounded, and part whole, joining themselves
with those who stood without, being about two hundred in number, with bows and
arrows retreated to another house, who being all at one end stoutly defending
the entry of the house, the Spaniards set fire to the other end, and so they
all there perished by fire. Hence they departed with their prisoners, all they
could lay hold on, being about a hundred and eighty, to the Island of St. John
where the sold half, and from thence also to the Island of Hispaniola, where
they fold the rest. Now when I taxed the Captain for his wickedness, after he
came to the Island of St. John? He gave me this answer, Pray sir be patient,
for I was commanded by those that sent me, that those that I could not take by
fair means, I should seize by force: yet the said Captain had related to me for
certain, that in the Island of the Trinity he found them both fathers and
mothers to him, which he spoke to his greater confusion and the aggravation of
his crime. Infinite of other things they did, taking captive these poor people
against all faith given. Let these actions be well considered, and whether the
Indians so taken may be justly enslaved or no. Once the Friars of the Order of
St. Dominick consulted about sending some of their Order to this Island, to
spread the light of the Gospel among the Indians, for the salvation of their
souls; Whereupon they sent a Licentiate, famous for his sanctity with a lay
man, to accompany him, to visit the Country, converse with the Inhabitants,
and to seek out fit places for the the building of Monasteries. The religious
persons being arrived were received as Angels from heaven, ear being given to
their words with all attention, alacrity and affection, that they were able at
that time, for they were ignorant of our language; it happened afterward when
the religious persons were gone, that there came a band of Soldiers, who
according to their wonted customs of fraud and impiety, carried away captive
the Prince of the Province, who (either because that name was given him by the
Religious persons, or by the other Spaniards) was called Alfonsus; for they
delight to be called by the names of the Christians, and therefore before they
are informed of any thing else they desire to be baptized. By these soldiers
was Alfonsus craftily seduced a shipboard under pretense that they would give
him a Banquet; with their Prince there went seventeen other persons, for they
had a confidence that the Friars would keep the Spaniards from doing them any
injury, For otherwise the said King would not have trusted them so far; but
they were no sooner on shipboard, but the Spaniards hoysed up their sails for
Hispaniola, where they sold all the Indians for slaves; Now all the Region
being troubled for the loss of their King and Queen, flockt to the Religious
persons, and had like to have slain them; who perceiving the injustice of the
Spaniards were very much troubled; and I do believe, that they had rather have
lost their lives, then that the Indians should have suffered such an injury to
the hinderance of their salvation; but the Indians were satisfied with the
promises of the religious persons, who told them, that as soon as any ships
came to the Island, they would take the first opportunity to go to Hispaniola
and endeavor to get their King and Queen set at liberty. Providence sent a ship
thither to confirm the condemnation of those that governed, by which these
religious persons sent to the religious persons of Hispaniola, but got no
redress, for the Spaniards there were receivers of the prey. When the religious
persons, who had promised to the Indians that their King should return within
four months, saw that he did not come in eight months, they prepared
themselves for death, and to give up their lives to Christ to whom they had
offered them before their departure out of Hispaniola; and so the innocent
Indians revenged themselves upon the innocent Friars. For the Indians, believed
that the religious persons were guilty of the said treachery, partly because
that their promises concerning the return of their King in four months had
proved so vain, partly because the Indians make no distinction between the
religious persons and the theeving Spaniards. It happened also that at another
time, through the great tyranny and oppression of the evil Christians, that the
Indians slew two religious persons of the order of St. Dominic, of which I was
a very real witness, as being one of those who escaped the same fate by a
great miracle, which I had resolved not to have mentioned, lest the horror of
the fact should deter others. Wherefore to avoid prolixity, I shall say no more
concerning these things, leaving them to be revealed at the day of judgment,
when God shall pour his vengeance down upon these robbers and destroyers of
mankind. In these Provinces in the Bay of Coderat, there was a City, the Lord
of which was called Higueroto, a name common either to the persons, or to the
officers of the place. He was a person so mild and gentle, and all his
subjects endued with such virtue using the Spaniards that arrived there with
that civility, that they thought nothing too much for them, bestowing all
things needful either for sustenance or delight that their Country afforded.
This Lord had saved many from death, who had escaped out of other Provinces,
from the murders and slaughters of the Spaniards, being a kind of a sanctuary
for the sick and half famished persons that came into his Country, and when
they were recovered sent them back again to the Island of pearls where the
Spaniards lived, though he had an opportunity to have slain them, there being
none to regard or miss them; in brief, the Spaniards had all the houses of the
inhabitants in common, and all the subjects of Higueroto they called their own
subjects; but a perfidious Spaniard took council how he might destroy this
Region which seemed it self so safe and secure; presently therefore he sailed
thither, and invited a great number of men to come a shipboard, who giving
credit to the Spaniards, came willingly to them; but they were no sooner entered
the ship, but the Spaniards hoysed sail for the Island of St. John where they
sold them all. At the same time I arrived at this Island, where I saw this
tyrant, and was told the relation of what he had done. He wholly destroyed the
City it self, which the other Spaniards who were wont to harrace all the sea
coast, were notwithstanding much troubled at, abominating actions so heinous
committed against them who had been so courteous and liberal to them, and where
they had been entertained as in their own houses.

I will not recite the infinite wickednesses which have been committed by them,
and are daily committed among them.

These Spaniards departed from the sea coast to the Islands of Hispaniola and
St. John, carrying with them above two millions of men to the said Islands,
which they afterward destroyed through hard labor and continual bad usage;
those that before lived in this Island, being not reckned into their number,
who were an infinite and unspeakable number, and it is a most sad thing to
consider, and that which would move the most cruel hearts, to see all this
fertile shore lie desert and depopulated. This is also a known thing, that they
never do transport Indians from these places, but in their voyage they do pay
the third ^art of them as a tribute to the waves, besides those that are
murdered in their own houses. The cause of all these things are their own
wicked purposes; that is to say, by the sale of the Indians to heap up
treasure, yet furnishing the ships not with half provisions for the sustenance
of those that they transport, because they would not be at too much charges;
and sometimes there are hardly provisions enough to suffice the Spaniards
themselves, so that the Indians ready to die for hunger and thirst, are
immediately thrown into the sea. And it was related to me for certain, that a
ship going from Hispaniola to the Island of Lucayos, sailed thither without any
compass, only by the Carcasses that floated up and down the sea. Afterward
when they are landed, where they are carried to be sold, there is no man that
would not be moved with compassion, to see both old and young, men and women,
naked and hungry, drop and faint as they go along. Afterward they divide them
like sheep, separating sons from fathers, wives from their husbands; and then
making up a company of ten or twenty, those that set out the ships, and fitted
them with necessaries, presently cast lots for their shares. And when the lot
fell upon a company that had an old or a sick man, he to whom the lot fell, was
wont to break forth into these expressions, Cursed be this old fellow, why do
you give him me? to bury him? why do you give me this sick man? to be his
keeper? And thus let us consider, in what estimation the Indians are among the
Spaniards, and how the precept of Charity on which the Law and the Prophets
depends is observed among them.

There is nothing more detestable or more cruel, then the tyranny which the
Spaniards use toward the Indians for the getting of pearl. Surely the infernal
torments cannot much exceed the anguish that they endure, by reason of that way
of cruelty; for they put them under water some four or five else deep, where
they are forced without any liberty of respiration, to gather up the shells
wherein the Pearls are; sometimes they come up again with nets full of shells to
take breath, but if they stay any while to rest themselves, immediately comes a
hangman rowed in a little boat, who as soon as he has well beaten them, drags
them again to their labor. Their food is nothing but fish, and the very same
that contains the Pearl, with a small portion of that bread which that Country
affords; in the first whereof there is little nourishment; and as for the
latter, it is made with great difficulty, besides that they have not enough of
that neither for sustenance; they lie upon the ground in fetters, lest they
should run away; and many times they are drowned in this labor, and are never
seen again till they swim upon the top of the waves: oftentimes they also are
devoured by certain sea monsters, that are frequent in those seas. Consider
whether this hard usage of the poor creatures be consistent with the precepts
which God commands concerning charity to our neighbor, by those that cast them
so undeservedly into the dangers of a cruel death, causing them to perish
without any remorse or pity, or allowing them the benefit of the Sacraments, or
the knowledge of Religion; it being impossible for them to live any time under
the water; and this death is so much the more painful, by reason that by the
coarctation of the breast, while the lungs strive to do their office, the vital
parts are so afflicted that they dye vomiting the blood out of their mouths.
Their hair also, which is by nature black, is hereby changed and made of the
same color with that of the sea Wolves; their bodies are also so besprinkled
with the froth of the sea, that they appear rather like monsters then men. By
this intolerable labor, or rather diabolical exercise, they have consumed all
the Lucayans, for their particular gain; out of every Indians labor gaining
above fifty or a hundred Crowns. They sold them also against all justice; only
because Lucayans were most skillful swimmers. There perished also many of the
Inhabitants of other Provinces in this place.

Of the River of Yuya Pari.
THrough this Province runs the River of Yuya Pari which rises in other
Countries about two huudred miles distant. Into this River entered a perfidious
Tyrant, wasting many miles of Land, committing many slaughters, consuming many
by fire, and putting an infinite number of these poor Indians to the sword,
that lived peaceably in their own houses without any suspicion of making
disturbance. At length he died an evil death, and all his forces came to
ruin, though he were succeeded by many others, not inferior to him in
impiety, who daily destroy the souls of the poor Indians, for whom the blood of
Christ was spilt.

Of the Kingdom of Venecuela.
IN the year 1526. our Sovereign Lord the King through the false persuasions
of some evil Counselors made over to certain Dutch Merchants the Kingdom of
Venecuela, being more large and long then Spain, giving to the Governor a full
and plenary jurisdiction over the said People upon certain conditions. They
entered this Region with about 30. men, where they found the people affable and
courteous as they were in other Countries of India before they were killed up
by the Spaniards. They by many degrees crueller then the rest of whom we have
spoken showed themselves more fierce and greedy then Tigers, Wolves or Lions;
for having a jurisdiction over the Land, and therefore possessing it more
freely, they bestirred themselves with greater fury and covetousness in the
heaping up of Gold and Silver, then any of their Predecessors had done before
them; laying aside all fear of God, or of the King, and forgetting all
humanity.

These incarnate devils laid waste and spoiled above 400. miles of most fertile
land, containing very great Provinces, fruitful Valleys forty miles in length;
and an infinite number of Villages abounding with Gold and Silver. So many, and
so many several regions they so utterly depopulated, that they hardly left a
Messenger of these sad tidings, but those which hiding themselves in the
Caverns and Bowels of the Earth escaped the thirst of their enraged swords.
With new and unusual sorts of torments they destroyed above four or five
millions of people; Neither do they yet put an end to their abominable crimes
and enormities: Three or four of their mad actions I will rehearse, whereby the
reader may judge of the rest.

The chief Lord of the Province they took captive, putting him to several
torments to squeeze his Gold from him; but he escaping fled to the Mountains,
and thereupon his Subjects that lay hid among the Woods and Bushes began to
raise a tumult; The Spainards followed destroying abundance of the people; and
as for those who were taken alive, they were publicly sold for slaves. In many
Provinces, and indeed in most Provinces where they came before the captivity of
the chief Lord, they were still welcomed by the Indians with Songs and Dances
and great Presents of Gold; though the thanks which they gave them was always
with the points of their swords, still recompensing them with Massacres. One
day when they came forth to meet the Spaniards, the German Tyrant and Captain
caused an infinite number of them to be shut up in a house made up with straw,
where he commanded that they should be all cut in pieces. Now by reason that
there were beams in the house whither the Indians got up to avoid the fury of
the German swords; therefore (O cruel beasts) the Governor sent certain men
to set fire upon the house, and so burnt them alive: So that now the whole
Region lay waste and desolate, the inhabitants being all fled to the Mountains
for safety.

They came afterward to another large Province near to that of St. Martha,
where they found the Indians in their houses and Cities very peaceably employed
about their occasions, where they lived a good while at the charges of the
inhabitants, the Indians serving them like men in whose power their lives and
safeties were, enduring beyond imagination their continual importunities and
daily oppressions, which were almost intolerable. This being added, which I
said before, that one Spainard consumes in one day as much as would suffice to
serve an Indian family consisting commonly of ten persons for a whole month. At
that time the Indians presented them with several great sums of Gold, doing
many other kindnesses for them. At length when they were about to go away, as a
recompense for all their courteous entertainment, they resolved to leave them
after this manner. The German Tyrant gave command that all the Indians with
their wives and children if possible, should be gathered together and shut up
in one large place; which done, they were also commanded to signify to them,
that whoever desired to be at liberty, must redeem themselves with their wives
and children at a certain Ransom, imposed upon them at the discretion of the
Governor; and to hasten them the more and bring them to a greater necessity,
he commanded that no sustenance should be given them, till they had paid the
sum required. Hereupon many sent home for the price of their Redemption, that
they might be at liberty to seek for Victuals: But they had not been long at
home ere they were brought back again by the Robbers, and shut up in the same
place, that being oppressed with hunger and thirst they might be forced to
redeem themselves once more; and thus were many of them three or four times
feign to ransom themselves. And in this manner a Country abounding with Gold
and people was totally destroyed; in which there was a Valley forty miles long,
where they burnt a Village that contained above a thousand houses. This
Governor went further, having a great desire to see the lower parts of Perue;
for which journey he provided an infinite number of Indians, lading them with
chains and heavy burdens; and if any of them fainted by the way, because they
would not stand to loosen the chains, they cut off their hands and heads,
casting the head one way, and the body another, and their burdens were divided
and imposed upon others. And now should I reckon the Provinces which he laid
desert, the Cities which he burnt, for all their houses are of straw, besides
the particular slaughters which they made, though I am confident of the truth
thereof, yet should I scarcely be believed, by reason that so much cruelty
could not be supposed in man.

This course took other Tyrants that departed from Venequela and the Province
of St. Martha, with a resolution to make a further discovery of the Divine Gold
of Perue: But they found that glorious Country so desert, so depopulated, so
wasted and destroyed, that they themselves though a crew of blood thirsty
Tyrants, were amazed and wondered to behold such ruins and depopulations.

These and many other things were proved before the fiscal of the Indian
Council, and the several proofs are kept by the said Council; though it is most
certain that they never put to death any of those cursed Tyrants, as if all the
devastations and murders by them committed had not been at all to be regarded.
For hitherto the Ministers of Justice in India through their extraordinary and
damned blindness, have never been very solicitous to inquire after the crimes
and slaughters which those Tyrants have committed, or daily do commit. Only
they tell you slightly, that because such and such a one did ill and handled
the Indians so cruelly, that therefore the Treasury of the King was much
diminished; and this is all they do toward the suppression of so many heinous
actions. Neither are those, which are proved, verified to any purpose, neither
is there that credit given to them as indeed there should be; for if they would
but do their duty both to God and the King, they would soon find the King to
have been cheated by the German Tyrants of above three millions of Gold; for
the Region of Venecuela being about 400. miles in length, for the happiness of
the soil and the abundance of Gold is not inferior to any of the rest: and
thus in the space of seventeen years wherein these enemies of God and the King,
have done nothing else but destroyed and wasted these Countries, they have, as
I said before, defrauded the King not of less then three millions of Gold.
Neither is it to be hoped that these losses can be repaired as long as the
World stands, unless God by some miracle should raise from the dead so many
people as have been slain; besides the blasphemies and curses wherewith they
have been bold to provoke even God himself. But what recompense can be made
for the destroying of so many souls, which through the cruelty and tyranny of
so many blood-sucking Tyrants are now tormented in hell? This also may be added
by way of conclusion to the rest of their Crimes, that from the time that they
first enterd this Region, which is now seventeen years ago, they never ceased
to send whole Ships laden with Indian Captives to the Islands of St. Martha,
Hispaniola, Iamaica, and St. John, having sold at the least a million of men;
neither do they yet forebeare in this year 1542. that abominable practice; the
Royal Council of the King taking no notice thereof: and that, which they cannot
choose but see, they not only dissemble, but suffer and uphold them that do
it. And as for the rest of their Crimes and infinite devastations, which they
spread all along this part of the Continent, for a matter of 400. miles in
length, together with Venecuela which is under their jurisdiction, they shut
their eyes, when they might have remedi'd them. The reason why they did
captivate the Indians was only this; out of a perverse, obstinate and blind
desire of heaping up Gold and riches, which is common to all that have gone
into America. For these quiet lambs, they drew them by violence out of their
houses, carrying them, together with their wives and children into Captivity,
afflicting them in those horrid manners as abovesaid, and burning them with the
mark of Slaves.

Of the Provinces of the Country of Florida.
INto these Countries there went two several Tyrants at several times, from the
year 1510. or eleven, that they might perpetrate the same abominable actions as
the rest had done; that by the blood and destruction of the people, they might
obtain Offices and dignities which they were no way worthy of. But at length
they were taken away by an evil death, the houses also which they had built
them (this I witness of all the three) at the cost of humane blood perished
with them, the memory of them vanishing from the face of the Earth, as if they
had never been. They left these Countries very much troubled and confused,
having incurred no small infamy by reason of the Crimes which they committed,
though they were not many: for God cut them off at the beginning, leaving the
revenge of those evils, which I know, and have seen done in the Indies, to be
poured forth upon this place. Of the fourth Tyrant that came well instructed
lately in the year 1538. we have had no news these three years. This we are
sure of, that at the beginning he carried himself very cruelly; and if he be
alive, most assuredly he has destroyed an infinite number of people; for he
among all those who have done most mischeife in ruining both Provinces and
Kingdoms, is famous for his Savage fury; wherefore I am apt to believe that God
has put the same end to his life, as to the others.

Three or four years after these things happened which I have related, the
other Tyrant that went along with him who there ended his days, departed out
of that Country; whose cruelties and rapines while the chief Captain lived,
and after his death were so many, as we since understood, that what we said
before, may still stand for an Axiom, that the further they went, the more
exorbitant was their fury and iniquity. But because it is so irksome to me to
rehearse these Execrable and bloody acts not of men but of beasts, I will no
longer dwell upon them, but go to those things which followed after.

They found a numerous people, wise and well moralliz'd, over whom they
exercised their wonted tyrannies, seeking to strike an awe and dread into them,
with the anguish and the burdens wherewith they oppressed them. And if they
fainted by the way, they would not take the pains to open the fetters, but came
to the fainting person, and cut off his head or his hands, and so left them.
Once entering into a certain Village, they were with great joy and exultation
received by the Spaniards, who gave them provision till they were satisfied,
allowing them also six hundred Indians to carry their burdens, and to look to
their horses. But the Spaniards being departed, a certain Captain, of Kin to
the chief Tyrant, returned to spoil them that mistrusted nothing; who there
slew the King of the Province with his Lance, and committed many other
cruelties. In another Village, whose Inhabitants seemed to be more vigilant, by
reason of the horrid iniquities which, as they heard, the Spaniards were wont
to commit, they put all to the sword, young and old, little and great, Lord and
subject, sparing none that came in their way.

The chief Tyrant, with a nose and lips down to his beard, having called
together a great number of Indians, reported to have been about two hundred,
caused them all to have their members lopt off, leaving them in this sad and
painful condition, the blood streaming forth, to be witness^s of the mercy of
these persons baptized in the Catholic Faith.

Now let us judge of the love which such kind of men bear toward
Christianity, or after what manner they believe in God, whom they boast to be
good and just, and whose Law is without blemish. Most pernicious have been the
evils committed by these wicked men, the sons of perdition. At length this
wretched Captain dyed without any repentance* neither can we doubt but that he
now lies fettered in the shades of Hell, unless God of his infinite mercy and
goodness, not according to his deserts, have taken compassion on him.

Of the River of Plate, or the Silver River.
ABout the years one thousand five hundred and two or three, some four or five
Captains undertook a journey to the River of Plate, which contains many
Provinces and Countries, which flourish with people very rational, and of
handsome dispositions. In general we can say that they did there commit many
horrid mischiefs and execrable murders. But being at a very great distance
from those Indians, of whom we have talked more at large, we can relate nothing
singular or particular; only we do not question, but they do employ
themselves in the same works of darkness as has been hitherto practiced in
diverse other places; for they are Spaniards still, and many of them the very
same who were present at the other Massacres, and having the same intention to
become rich and potent, which they cannot obtain but by the same courses as
they formerly took, following the bloody footsteps of those who have already
destroyed and slain so many Indians.

After I had written what I have above mentioned, it has been related to me
for certain, that they have depopulated and laid waste many Provinces and
Kingdoms in those Regions, rendering themselves so much the more exquisite and
devilish in their oppressions, slaughters, and massacres of those people, by
how much they are at a farther and more convenient distance from Spain; and
laying aside all thoughts of Justice, which indeed was never practiced in those
Regions of America, as does sufficiently appear by what we have above writtrn.
Among all the Enormities which shall follow after, this one was read in the
Council. A certain Governor had given in charge to his soldiers, that into
whatever Village they came that should deny them provision, that they should
there put all the Inhabitants to the sword. Upon which Warrant the soldiers
went, and because the Indians would not submit to them as to enemies, fearing
rather to come into their sight, then that their Liberality or Store would be
defective, they immediately put to the sword above 5000. of them. A certain
number of men also living in peace, offered their service to them; they
afterward were by chance summoned by the Governor, and because they came not
so suddenly as his fury expected, he thereupon commanded that they should be
delivered to those Indians that were their enemies. With tears and outcries
they beseeched him that he would rather permit them to die by their hands, then
deliver them up to the mercy of their foes; and when they would not come out of
the houses where they were, they were all torn lim-meale, crying out, and
saying, We come in peace to serve you, and you now kill us, may our blood
sprinkled upon these walls be a testimony of our unjust death, and of your
cruelty. Certainly this was a deed not only to be bemoaned, but also to be
bewaild and pitied.

Of the great Kingdoms, and large Provinces of Peru.
IN the year 1531. a great Helluo and devourer of men went into the Kingdoms
of Peru, upon the same pretenses, and with the same intention as the rest; and
being one of those who had been present at the murders and slaughters committed
in other places, in the year 1510. therefore he proceeded with a greater
hardness of heart in his outrages and robberies; and being a man of no faith
or truth, he laid waste Cities and Villages, slaying all the Inhabitants; and
was the cause of all those mischiefs that followed afterward in those
Kingdoms; to undertake the Narration of which, and to represent them all to
the Reader, is a thing impossible, until they shall perfectly and clearly
appear at the day of judgment before all men. And for my self, I do
confess, should I go about to describe the deformity, the quality and
circumstances of their actions, it would be a task too difficult for me.

At his first entrance he wasted certain Villages, and plundered the Country of
a great quantity of Gold: And one time coming into an Island adjoining to these
Regions, which was known by the name of Pagna, being a fertile Island and full
of people: he was received by the Prince and the inhabitants thereof as if he
had been an Angel sent from heaven. But after that six months were past, in
which time the Spaniards had consumed all their provision, they then brought
forth the corn which they had reserved against times of barrenness for
themselves their wives and children, in places under the ground, offering it to
them with tears in their eyes, desiring them to do what pleased them with it.
But they ill rewarded them in the end, killing a very great number of them with
their swords and lances, and those whom they took alive they carried away into
Captivity, emptying and destroying the Country, with many other cruelties.

From thence they went to the Island of Tumbala, which is situated in the
Continent, where he killed all that fell into his power; and because the people
being astonished at their barbarism fled away from them, they accused them of
Rebellion against the King of Spain. This Tyrant used also this kind of
subtilty toward the Indians. He commanded those whom he took, and others which
brought him presents, still to bring him more, till he saw that they were quite
destitute; telling them that he recev'd them now as Vassals and Subjects of the
king of Spain; flattering them also and telling them that he would neither take
them, nor do them any other injury. As though it had been a thing lawful for
him to rob and spoil them, and to terrify them with such kind of strange
news before he had received them into the protection of the King of Spain; or
as if after he had so received them to protection, he had never done any injury
or laid any oppression upon them. After this the King and Supreme Emperor of
all these Regions, Acaliba by name, brought against the Spainards a great power
of pitiful naked Creatures, and armed with most ridiculous weapons, not
knowing the sharpness of the Spanish Swords and Lances, nor the strength of
their Horses; to the place where they lay approached the Spaniards, who
certainly would rob the devils of Gold if they had it; This King resolved to
call the Spaniards to an account, for the slaughters of his people, the
destruction of his Country, and the robberies which they committed upon his
Treasures. But the Spaniards met him, killed an infinite number of his people,
and seized upon his person, which was carried in a kind of Litter. Now they
come to Capitulations about his redemption; He promises ten millions of Crowns,
and numbers down fifteen; they promised to release him, but never stood to
their words, falsifying all the protestations which they made to the King;
telling him how that his Subjects were gathered together again by his command.
To whom the King made answer, that there could not be a leaf of a tree moved
without his will and authority; but if they were now assembled any where
together, it was not by his power; who was now their captive, for they might
take away his life if they pleased. Notwithstanding all which they consulted
whether they should burn him alive or no, which sentence they afterward
passed; but by the entreaty of some, that sentence was mitigated and he was
commanded to be strangled. The King understanding that he was to dye, spoke to
them in these words; Why do you kill me? Did you not promise to set me at
liberty, so I would give you Gold? I gave it you, and more then you required;
yet if it be your will that I must dye, send to your King of Spain: But ere he
could utter more, the flames prevented him. Consider here the equity of this
war, the Captivity of this Prince, the sentence of his condemnation, and the
execution of that sentence, the conscience of the Spaniards, which nothing
deterred them from consuming and taking away by violence the great Treasures of
this great King and of his Nobles, how they all concur to aggravate their
devilish iniquity. Concerning the foul and enormous cruelties wherewith they
wholly extirpated the people of these Regions, I will here relate a few, seen
by a Friar of the Order of St. Francis, and confirmed and committed to writing
under his own hand and seal, and disperc'd not only in these Provinces, but
in the Kingdom of Castile. A copy of which I can produce signed with his own
hand, wherein these things following are contained.

I Brother Mark of Cilicia, of the Order of St. Francis, chief Governor of all
the Brotherhood of that Order, in the Provinces of Peru, being one of the first
religious persons that went into those parts, speak this for a certain truth,
testifying those things which I have seen, and which properly concern the
inhabitants of these Countries. First I am an eyewitness, and do affirm upon
my knowledge that the inhabitants of Perue were a Nation very courteous,
affable, and loving to the Spaniards; and I have seen Presents of Gold, Silver,
and precious Stones, given by those people to the Spaniards in great abundance,
besides many other offices of service which they daily did for them. Neither
did the Indians ever move war till they were forced to it by the contumelies
and injuries of the Spaniards: But on the contrary, the Spaniards being
received by them with all the shows of respect and freindship, were continually
furnished both with men and women for their service.

I am also a witness, that upon no occasion given them by the Indians the
Spaniards did enter their Country, and burnt to death their great Emperor
called Ataliba, after they had received from him as a ransom from his
captivity above two millions of Gold; His whole Kingdom having submitted
themselves to him without any resistance: With the same cruelty was
Cochilimacha his Captain General put to death, who came with other Noble men of
the Country to the Spaniards in peace. The same Fate also followed another
potent Lord of the Province of Quitonia, whom they also burnt without any
occasion given, or injury done them: As unjustly did they burn also Schapera,
Prince of the Canaries: They also burnt the feet for Aloides the most potent
Lord in all the Provinces of Quitonia, afflicting him with many other torments
to make him confess where the Gold of Ataliba lay, though as afterward it
appeared, he knew nothing of it. They also killed Quitonius Cocopagauga,
Governor of all the Provinces of Quitonia, who at the importunities of
Sebastian Barnaclacanus Captain of the Governor came in peace to the
Spaniards, because he could not give them the sum which they demanded; thus
they put to death diverse other of the Noblemen of the Country; and as I
understand, it is the intention of the Spaniards not to leave one of the Lords
and Noblemen of that place alive.

I do also affirm that I have seen the Spaniards for no other cause, but to
satisfy their own wills, dismember the Indians both men and women, cutting off
their ears, noses, and hands, and that in so many places and regions, that it
would be a tedious thing to relate them. I have also seen the Spaniards set
their dogs upon the Indians to devour them; and such a number of houses and
villages burnt by them, that it would be over long to rehearse them: This is
also a truth, that they would snatch young Infants out of their mothers
bellies, and cast them as far as they could throw them; besides many other
cruelties which they committed, which did not a little amaze me, though they
are too many to be numbered.

I do also affirm that the Spaniards got together as many of the Indians as
possibly they could crowd into three houses, and there, upon no occasion given,
burnt them to death. At that time it chanced that a certain Presbyter, by name
Ocaena snatched an Infant out of the fire, which one of the Spaniards
beholding, immediately took the child out of his hands, and threw it into the
fire; which Spaniard, the same day that he did this vile act, as he returned to
his Quarters, fell down dead by the way, whom I persuaded the rest to leave
unburied.

I have also seen them send to the Noblemen and chief Rulers of the Indians to
come to them, engaging to secure them, and to let them return in peace; but
when they came, they caused them to be immediately burnt. Two they burnt while
I was present, one being the Lord of Andonia, the other of Tumbala; neither
could I by any persuasions prevail with them to take them out of the fire; and
this I speak in the presence of God, and according to my own conscience, that I
never knew of any commotion or rebellion raised by the Indians of Peru against
them, though it was apparent to all how they did torment and massacre them.
Which had they done, considering how the Spaniards broke their faith and
promises to them, how against all Law and Right they practiced nothing else but
their desolation and destruction, certainly they had done well, choosing rather
noble a death, then to endure such tedious miseries.

I do also affirm out of the mouths of the Indians themselves, that greater
quantities of Gold lie hid then are yet discovered, which because of the
cruelties and injustice of the Spaniards, they are loath to reveal, nor will
reveal, till the tyrannical hand of the Spaniards shall be taken off them,
rather choosing to dye, as others have done. Whereby God is offended, and the
Affairs of the King many times impeded: For he has been defrauded of more
then would serve to maintain Castile, the recovery of which cannot be performed
without much difficulty and large expenses.

And thus far I have related the very words of this religious person, confirmed
by the Bishop of Mexico, before whom he justified all that is here written.

Here we must consider these things to be such as this Religious person was an
eyewitness of, having traveld long in those parts for the space of above nine
or ten years, and had compassed above fifty or a hundred miles of that
Country, when there were but few Spaniards that lived in those parts; though
afterward to the noise of the Gold there flockt thither above five thousand,
who scattered themselves through those large Provinces, that contained in
length above five or 600 miles, which they totally laid waste, committing
rather more and greater cruelties then they had done in any other Countries;
and to say truth, from that time until this present year, they destroyed a
thousand times more persons then he makes mention of, and with less fear,
either of God, or of the King, and with less pity they massacred the greatest
part of mankind of those that inhabited those Regions, killing above four
millions of people.

A few days after, with darts made of reeds, they shot at the most potent
Queen, who was the Wife of Elinguus, in whose hands the whole Administration of
the Government of these Kingdoms remained, which occasioned him to rebel
against them, and to this day he holds out against them: At length they took
his Queen, and contrary to all right and equity, they put her to death, though
it was reported that she was great with child, for no other cause but that they
might afflict her husband. But if I should go to particularize the murders and
slaughters committed in that Region, the Reader would find them so horrid and
so numerous, that in both respects they would far exceed what has been said
touching the other parts of India.

Of the New Kingdom of GRANATA.
IN the year 1539. many of these Tyrants departing from Venecuela, Santa
Martha and Carthagena, met together to make a Conquest of Peru. And many others
coming out of the same Regions, having a desire to make a further Progress,
they found many pleasant Countries, about some 300. miles from Carthagena, and
diverse gallant Provinces, well stored with courteous and affable Inhabitants
like to other places in India, abounding also in Gold and Precious Stones,
which are called Emraulds; which Provinces by a new name they called New
Granata, because that the Tyrant that first came into these parts was borne in
the Kingdom of Granata. And because those that robbed and spoiled these
Countries, were cruel men, and perverse Stewards, famous butchers and spillers
of humane blood, therefore are their diabolical actions so great and so many,
that they far surpassed those which were done before them in other Countries,
of which, some of the most select ones I will rehearse.

A certain Governor, because he that destroyed those parts would not admit him
to share with him in his gettings, made certain Inquisitions and proofs, which
he got proved by many witnesses, by which are apparent the murders and
homicides which the other committed; in the committing whereof he perseveres
unto this day; There were read in the Council, and stand these recorded.

In the said Examinations the witnesses depose, that when all these Kingdoms
were peaceful, the Indians served the Spaniards, getting their living by
painful labors in the tillage of the Earth, bringing them what quantity of
Gold or Gems they had or could get, having also divided their houses and their
habitations among them, of which they are not a little covetous, as being a
means for them to obtain their Gold the more easily.

But when all the Indians were laboring under their accustomed tyranny, the
Chief Captain and Tyrant of the Spaniards took the King and Lord of the
Country, and kept him a prisoner for the space of six or seven months, for no
other reason then to squeez from him what Gold and precious Stones he could.
The said King, whose name was Bogata, through fear promised him that he would
give him a golden house, hoping by that means to be set at liberty; and so he
sent his Indians, who brought back great sums of Gold and Precious Stones. But
because the King gave them not a golden house, therefore they told him that he
must be put to death, because he did not stand to his word. Whereupon the
Tyrant commanded that he should be brought before him; and thus they presumed
to call to judgment one of the greatest Kings of the Land. Whereupon sentence
was given that he should be tormented, because he had not given the gold'n
house. Whereupon they tortured him, dropping hot soap upon his belly; then they
fetterd his two feet to two posts or stakes, and bound his neck to another;
then two men holding his hands, they set fire to his feet, the Tyrant coming
now and then to him, and threatening death to him, unless that he would tell
them where his treasure lay; But that could not be done, for with torments they
soon ended his life. Which things, while they were doing, the displeasure of
Heaven fell upon the City for their sakes, whereby it was immediately consumed
with fire. The other Captains of the Spaniards, resolving to walk in their
Leaders footsteps, because they knew no Art but that of dismembring the poor
people, were not less guilty of the same crimes, with diverse and most horrible
torments afflicting both the Nobles and the Commonaly which submitted
themselves unto them, though they would feign have bought their peace with
great presents both of Gold and Precious Stones. They tormented them only that
they might obtain from them the greater Sums of Gold and Silver; and thus all
the Noble Blood of that Country was spilt in a most barbarous and shameful
manner.

One time it happend that a certain number of the Indians, full of innocence
and simplicity, came to proffer their service to the Spanish Captain; But while
they thought themselves safe under the protection of their own humility, a
Captain at that instant came to the City where they served their Masters, who,
after he had supped, commanded all the Indians, who were sleeping and resting
from the hardness of their labors, to be all put to the sword. Which
slaughter he made with intention to make himself the more dreadful to all the
Country. Once the Captain commanded all the Spaniards that they should bring
forth as many of the Indian Lords or common people, as they had in their
houses, into a public place, and there kill them; and thus they slew above
four or five hundred men. This the witnesses affirm of a certain particular
Tyrant, that he exercised very great cruelties, by cutting off the hands,
noses, and feet both of men and women.

Another time it happend that the chief Captain sent an Officer into the
Province of Bogata, to enquire who had succeeded the Prince that was so cruelly
murdered; who riding many miles into the Country, took the Indians captive,
cutting off the hands and ears of many of them, only because they would not
tell who was their Kings Successor; others they threw to their dogs to be torn
to pieces; and thus they killed and destroyed great numbers of the Indians in
these parts.

Upon a certain day, about the fourth watch of the night, they fell upon many
Princes, Peers, and other men who thought themselves in safety; for the
Spaniards had made promise to them that they should not receive any injury;
upon which promise they came out of their lurking holes in the mountains,
returning without any fear or suspicion to their houses; all these this Tyrant
took, and causing them to lay their hands upon the ground, with his own sword
cut them off, telling them that he would chastise them for not declaring where
their King was.

Another time, because the Indians did not bring a chest of Gold to the Captain
which he required, he therefore sent forces to make war upon them, in which war
so many were slain, so many dismembered, that the number was hardly to be
reckond; besides others that they cast to their dogs, bred up and fed with
humane flesh, who were immediately devoured by them.

Another time the Inhabitants of another Province, seeing that they had murderd
about four or five of their chief Princes and Rulers, fled in fear to a certain
mountain for shelter against their inhumane enemies, where there were got
together above four or five thousand Indians, as has been proved by
witnesses: But the Captain, or Governor of the Spaniards, sent a notorious
Tyrant with a company of Soldiers to reduce, as he said, those rebellious
Indians, that had fled from their slaughters and cruelties; and to chastise
them for it, as if they had done an unlawful action; or as if punishment had
been due to the Indians, and not rather more deserved by themselves, to have
bin used without all pity, who had showed themselves so merciless to others.
The Spaniards scale this Mountain by force, for the Indians were weak and
unarmed, telling them that they desired peace if they would lay down their
Arms; whereupon they all immediately threw away their weapons, which when the
chief Tyrant beheld, he sent to certain of the Spaniards to possess themselves
of the chief places of strength in the Mountain; and then commanded them to
fall upon the Indians. Whereupon they fall upon them as Wolves or Lions fall
upon a flock of sheep, till they were wearied with murdering; but they had no
sooner taken breath, but he commanded them again to renew their fury, and
caused them to precipitate the rest which were remaining from the top of the
Rock which was very high and steep. And the witnesses affirm that they have
seen a cloud of Indians falling down from the Mountain, which were all bruised
to pieces.

And to finish his cruel enterprise, he caused the Indians that had hid
themselves among the thickets to be searched out and put to the sword, and then
thrown down from the tops of the high mountains. And not satiated with these
cruelties, that their horrible abominations might be the more notorious, he
gave command that all the Indians that were reserved alive should be kept by
his particular soldiers as their slaves, a custom which they constantly
observed; as for the women, those excepted whom they thought most fit for their
service, they were all thrust together into a house made of straw and there
burnt to death, to the number of above four or five hundred.

The same Tyrant came to the City of Cota where he took an infinite sight of
people, and cast fifteen or sixteen of the Nobles and Lords of the Kingdom to
his dogs, cutting of the hands of many of the Indians both men and women, which
he hung upon a perch for the Indians to behold; in this manner were seen hung
together above seventy pair of hands. This is also to be added that they cut
off the noses both of Infants and their Mothers.

No man can rehearse the cruelties committed by this man, the enemy of God;
They are innumerable, neither heard of nor seen before, especially those
committed in Guatimala, which were their chief masterpeices in this art of
destruction which they have been so long practicing.

The witnesses do moreover add this, that the cruelties and slaughters
committed in the said new Kingdom of Granata by the said Captain and his
accomplices the destroyers and Abaddons of mankind, who are with him, and to
whom he gives the power to exercise these strange abominations, are so many and
so great, that if his Majesty do not stop the deluge of evils which they bring
along with them (for the slaughters of the Indians are made only through the
desire of their Gold, though it be all in their own hands already) in a very
short time the Kingdom will be ruined and laid desolate, and the land when all
the Inhabitants are destroyed must of necessity lie untilled.

In this place we must noe pass by a most pernicious cruelty of these Tyrants
which was so violent, that in the space of two or three years (for no longer
time there was between the desolation and the discovery of this Kingdom which
was the most populous Country in the whole World) they totally ruined and
depopulated the whole Country, showing themselves so void of compassion, so
empty of grace, so regardlesse of the Kings honor, that they had not left a
person living, had not his Majesty a little stopped the current of their cruelty:
which I the more easily believe, because I have seen my self in a few days
several great Kingdoms and Countries destroyed and desolate. There are some
large Provinces adjoining to the Kingdom of new Granata which are called
Popagan and Cali, and three or four others which stretch themselves in length
above 500. miles, which they destroyed in the same manner as they did the
other, and by their foresaid Massacres brought down to the lowest degree of
desolation, and this some who returned out of these Countries and came to us
relate; But if there were ever any thing to be bewailed by man, they were the
stories which they told of large Cities ruined and buried in their own ashes;
scarce fifty houses remaining where before there were above a thousand, or two
thousand; and the sad narrations which they brought, of large Countries and
Regions that lay desolate and spoiled of their inhabitants.

At length there went out of the Kingdoms of Perne through the Country of
Quitonia into the Regions of Granata and Popaganum, many very cruel Tyrants,
who marched through the Carthagenians, and Vrabia, to reach Calisium, while
others stayed to assail Quitonium it self. But these at length joined
together, depopulating above six hundred miles in length, with an infinite
waste of men, to the remainder whereof they are at present no less cruel.

And thus what I set down as a rule, still holds good, that the violence and
cruelty of the Spaniards, by continuance still waxed more and more furious and
bloody. But among all these Crimes, which are only worthy of fire and sword,
that have been perpetrated in these Countries, this which follows is worthy
the taking notice of.

When the heat of Massacring and killing is over, they carry captive away
sometimes two hundred, sometimes three hundred men apeice; and when their
master pleases, he commands a hundred at a time to be brought before him, to
whom when they come like meek and patient lambs, he commands thirty or forty of
them to be put to death; telling the rest that thus they shall all be used
unless they prove diligent in his service.

Consider I beseech you, all that read, or shall read these few papers, whether
an act so horrible, so detestable, so inhumane, do not exceed all the
iniquities and cruelties that the imagination of man can comprehend; and
whether such Spaniards may not be deservedly called Devils; or whether it be
not a thing almost indifferent whether the Indians should be in the hands of
Spaniards, or of the Infernal spirits. Neither will I forget to relate one
barbarou's action, which as I think does exceed the cruelty of beasts.

The Spaniards which are among the Indians do breed up a sort of fierce dogs,
which they teach and instruct to fall upon the Indians and devour them. Now let
all men, judge whether Christians or Turks, in this it much imports not,
whether so much cruelty ever pierced their ears before. These dogs they take
along with them in all their expeditions, carrying also diverse Indians in
chains for the sustenance of those dogs. And it was a common thing for them to
say one to another; Give me a quarter of your Indian for my dogs, and too
morrow when I bill one I will pay it you again; As if they were no more to be
accounted of then the offals of a hog or sheep. Others were wont to go a
hunting in the morning, and being asked how they had sped: Oh very well replied
the other, my dogs have killed fifteen or sixteen Indians this morning; These
have been all proved in the impeachments made by one Tyrant against another.
Could there be any thing more horrible or more cruel?

But I will here stay, until there shall come news of greater impieties (if
greater there can be) or till we shall return to behold these things which for
the space of above forty years we have already seen. And now I do protest
according to my conscience and in the sight of God, that the losses of the
Indians were so great, and so many their subverted Cities, the cruelties and
massacres so horrible, the violences and iniquities so in human, that though I
have done my utmost to relate what I could, and to paint them in their own
lively colors, yet have I not been able to rehearse one thing done among a
thousand, either as to the quantity or the quality of the Crimes.

And now that all true Christians may be moved with the greater compassion
toward the poor creatures, that their losses may appear the more deplorable,
that they may with a greater indignation detest the ambition, cruelty, and
covetousness, of the Spaniards, to those which I have abovesaid, I will also
add this for a truth, that, from the time America was first discovered unto
this present, the Indians never were the men that ever showed the least
disaffection, or offered the least injury to the Spaniards, but rather adored
them as Angels of immortality come to visit them from Heaven, till their own
actions betrayed them to a far worse censure.

This I will also add, that from the beginning to this day, the Spaniards were
never any more mindful to spread the Gospel among them, then as if they had
been dogs; but on the contrary forbid religious persons to exercise their
duty, deterring them by many afflictions and persecutions from preaching and
teaching among them, for that they thought would have hindered them in getting
their Gold, and kept the people from their labors. Neither had they any more
knowledge of the God of Heaven, as to say whether he were of wood, brass, or
iron, then they had above a hundred years before. New Spain being only
excepted, whither the Religious persons had most liberty to go: So that they
all died without Faith or Sacraments, to the willing destruction of their souls.

I Friar Bartholmew Casaus, of the Order of St. Dominic, who went to these
parts through the mercy of God, desiring the salvation of the Indians, that so
many precious souls redeemd with the blood of Christ might not perish, but
wishing with my whole heart, that they might through the knowledge of their
Creator live eternally: Because of the care also and compassion which I bear
to my Country, which is Castile, fearing lest God should destroy it in his
anger for the sins which it has committed against his divine Majesty, the
faith and the honor of diverse great persons in the Court of Spain, zealously
religious, and who abominate these bloody and detestable actions, after many
hindrances of business, did at length put an end to this brief Tractate at
Valentia the eighth day of December 154^. when the Spaniards (though they were
in some places more cruel, in some places less, after the end of all their
torments, violences, tyrannies, desolations and oppressions, were at length
come to Mexico, which enjoyes a gentler usage then other parts; for there is an
outside of Justice, which does something restrain their cruelty, though not at
all the immoderate tributes which they lay upon them. And now I have a real
hope, that Charles the Fifth our Sovereign Lord and Prince, Emperor and King of
Spain, (to whose ears the wickednesses and impieties of these tyrants do
daily come, which are committed against the will of God in these Countries, for
they have hitherto concealed these things from him) not less subtly then
maliciously, will extirpate the causes of so many evils, and apply fitting
remedies to the calamities of this New World delivered by God to him as to a
Lover of Justice and Mercy. Which God we do beseech to grant him happiness in
his life and in his Imperial dignity, and to bless his Royal soul with eternal
happiness. Amen.

FINIS.
The Historical Relation of the Spanish Massacres in the West Indies.

