THE Impartial Critic:

OR, SOME OBSERVATIONS Upon a Late BOOK, Entitled, A Short View of TRAGEDY,
Written by Mr. RYMER, AND Dedicated to the Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of
DORSET, etc.

By Mr. DENNIS.

Hanc etiam Mecoenas aspice partem.
Virgil. LONDON: Printed for R. Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1693.

A Letter to a friend: Sent with the Following DIALOGUES.
SIR,
UPon reading Mr. Rymer's late Book, I soon found that its Design was to make
several Alterations in the Art of the Stage, which instead of reforming, would
ruin the English Drama. For to set up the Grecian Method amongst us with
success, it is absolutely necessary to restore not only their Religion and
their Polity, but to transport us to the same Climate in which Sophocles and
Euripides writ; or else by reason of those different Circumstances, several
things which were graceful and decent with them, must seem ridiculous and
absurd to us, as several things which would have appeared highly extravagant to
them, must look proper and becoming with us.

For an Example of the first: The Chorus had a good effect with the Athenians,
because it was adapted to the Religion and Temper of that People, as I have
observed more at large in the Fourth Dialogue. But we having nothing in our
Religion or Manners, by which we may be able to defend it, it ought certainly
to be banished from our Stage. For Poetry in general, being an imitation of
Nature, Tragedy must be so too. Now it is neither probable, nor natural, that
the Chorus, who represent the Interested Spectators of a Tragioal Action,
should Sing and Dance upon such terrible or moving Events, as necessarily
arrive in every Tragedy. And I wonder that Mr. Rymer should cry up a Chorus, in
the very same Book in which he cries down the Opera: for no Man can give any
Reason, why an Opera is an extravagant thing; but I will, by retorting the same
Reason, prove a Chorus extravagant too. But to make the absurdity of it the
more apparent, let me desire you, Sir, a little to look back to the Spanish
Invasion, which Mr. R -- fancies a proper Subject for a Tragedy: Suppose then,
that an Express gives Notice to Queen Elizabeth, of the Landing of the
Spaniards upon our Coast, and of great Number of Subjects revolting and running
in to them. The Queen upon the reception of this News, falls a lamenting her
Condition, with an Air becoming of a Sovereign Princess, in whom Sorrow and
Majesty must be united: so far there is no offense to Nature or Decency; for
this may be called Tragedy upon the Stage of the World. But then, Sir, suppose
that as soon as the Queen has left off lamenting, the Ladies about her, in
their Ruffs and Farthingals, fell a dancing a Saraband to a doleful Ditty: Do
you think, Sir, that if this had really happened at White Hall, it would have
been possible to have beheld it without laughing, though one had been never so
much concerned for his Country? Now can any thing that is incongruous and
absurd in the World, be proper and decent on the Tragic Stage.

I now beg leave, Sir, to give a particular instance of something that must
needs have been very moving with the Athenians, which yet would have been but
ill received amongst us: And that is a passage in the Antigone of Sophocles.
That Story, as it is managed by that admirable Poet is one of the most moving
that ever was: And there is no part of it that touohes me more, than the
Complaints of Antigone, upon her Condemnation by Creon. But there is one thing
peculiar in it, which must needs have exerted Compassion in the Athenians in an
extraordinary manner; for other wise Sophocles, who perfectly understood his
Audience, would never have made her repeat it, at least, four times in the same
Act: For when she was condemned to the severest Punishment, which was to be
buried alive, the thing that lay most heavy upon her Heart was, that she was to
go to Hell with her Maidenhead. I think, Sir, I need not take pains to
demonstrate, that this passage would have been laughed at with us. Now what
reason can be given, why that should appear so contemptible to us, which moved
the Athenians so much? The only Reason that can be assigned, is the difference
of Climate and Customs. The Athenians by using their Women, as the Modern
Italians do theirs, plainly declared their Opinion of them; which was, that
Passion was predominant over Reason in them; and that they were perpetually
thinking, how they might make some Improvement of the Talent which NATURE had
given their Sex. The Athenians therefore having these thoughts of their Women,
the Complaint that Antigone made, could not appear peculiar and surprising to
them. Now it is evident, that every thing which is ridiculous must be both
particular and surprising; for nothing which is general and expected can excite
a sensible Man to Laughter. But we having quite contrary thoughts of our Women;
which is plain, by the Confidence which we so generously repose in them, a Maid
who had said, what Antigone did, upon our Stage, would have said something that
would have appeared a frailty particular and surprising and would have been
ridiculous.

Thus, Sir, have I given you two instances of things which succeeded very well
with the Ancients, and would yet be very ill received amongst us, upon the
account of the difference of our Religion, Climate, and Customs. I shall now
give you some account of a thing, which is very well received upon our Stage,
but would have succeeded but ill with the Ancient Grecians, by reason of the
same difference of Climate and Customs.

The thing that I mean, is Love; which could but rarely be brought upon the
Grecian Stage, without the violation of probability, considering that their
Scene lay generally in their own, or a warmer Country: For two People in a
Tragedy cannot make Love without being together, and being alone. Now when
Lovers came together in Greece, they found something else to do, than to talk.
Their Women under so warmer Sun, melted much sooner than ours. Nor were they so
fantastic as long to refuse what they eternally desire; or to pretend a mortal
displeasure, for being offered to be obliged in the most sensible part of them.
Therefore most of the Love that appeared upon the Athenian Stage, was between
such People as their own Customs obliged to cohabit, as Admetus and Alcestis,
who were Man and Wife; Hippolitus and Phedra, who were Son and Mother-in-Law,
and with which last, the only Obstacle to Enjoyment, was the Horror which so
Criminal a Passion inspired. Had the Athenian Poets introduced upon their Stage
two passionate Lovers, who had not been related, and engaged them in a
Conversation both tender and delicate, an Audience would have been apt to ask,
with the Spanish Lady, mentioned by Monsieur Sr. Euremont: Que d' esprit mal
employe! A quoy bon tous ces beaux discourse quand ils sont ensemble? You know,
Sir, that this Lady made this Reflection, which St. Euremont commends so much,
upon the Reading a Conversation in Cleopatra, between two passionate Lovers.
Upon which that ingenious Gentleman, with his usual good Sense, takes occasion
to condemn Calprenede, for making no distinction betwixt the Love of a Southern
Climate, and that of England or France.

By what I have said, Sir, it may be easily guessed that it is in vain to think
of setting up a Chorus upon the English Stage, because it succeeded at Athens;
or to think of expelling Love from our Theaters, because it was rarely in
Grecian Tragedies.

But since I shall treat of this last hereafter, and I have already trespassed
upon your Patience, I shall only beg leave of you to make one Apology for my
self, and so for the present take leave of you.

Let then the Admirers of Mr. Waller know, (that is, all the ingenious Men in
the Kingdom) that if I have in the following Dialogue rigorously examined some
Verses which were writ by that Great Man, I have been far from doing it out of
a motive of Malice or Vanity, or so much with a design to attack Mr. Waller, as
to vindicate Shakespeare.

For Mr. Rymer, who pretends that this last is without Excellency, affirming,
that the forementioned Verses of the first are without Fault, it appears to me
to be very plain, that the Man who overlookt Mr. Waller's Faults, might
overlook Shakespeare's Excellencies For it is much more easy to find Faults,
than it is to discern Beauties To do the first requires but common Sense, but
to do the last a Man must have Genius.

There is no Man who has a greater Veneration for Mr. Wallen than I have: We
have all of us reason to Honor the Man, who has been an Honor to England: And
it is with an inexpressible pleasure, that I find his Death lamented by two
great French Wits, viz. La Fontaine, and Monsieur St. Euremont. A Man may in
many places of Mr. Waller's Works, see not only Wit, Spirit, good Sense, but a
happy and delicate turn of Thought, with clearness, boldness, justness,
sublimeness, and gallantry. For the last of these Qualities, I know not whither
he has been surpassed by any Writer in any Language.

Voiture, indeed, is a very gallant Writer too; but his Gallantry is of such a
different Character from our English Poets, that they will not admit of
Comparison. Mr. Waller's is more sprightly, more shining, more bold, and more
admirable. The French-man's, by the Character of his Country, more supple, more
soft, more insinuating, and more bewitching: But besides those rare Qualities
which are to be found in that Admirable Man, there are Two for which we were in
a peculiar manner obliged to him. For he not only improved the Language of our
Verse considerably, but was the first who used our Ears to the Music of a just
Cadence. Yet if any one is of Opinion, that either his Language or Numbers are
always perfect, he errs: For as there are sometimes Improprieties in his
Expressions, so there is a great deal of Prose in his Verse. Mr. Dryden, who
had the good luck to come after him, has the Honor to have finished what the
other so happily begun. For as we have nothing to show, even in Prose, which
has a greater purity than some of his blank Verse, and particularly that of the
Spanish Friar, (tho at the same time that it has the purity and easiness of
Prose, it has the dignity and strength of Poetry) so I cannot imagine any thing
more perfect than his Equal Numbers in Heroic Verse, wherever he designed
them perfect; and in this he will never be exceeded by any Man, unless length
of Time makes some strange Alteration in the Tongue. I do not believe that any
sensible Man can believe I say this to flatter him: For what can be got by
flattering a Poet; especially a Poet in Mr. Dryden's Circumstances? But this we
may be assured of, that as long as we are foolishly partial to the Dead, and
unreasonably unjust to the Living, we must resolve to continue at a stand in
Politer Learning, and must not think of making that Progress which the French
have made. I know very well, that we have greater Geniuses than they, and that
we can show better Writers; but that they can show more good Writers than we,
no Man who knows them can doubt. Since our Poets want the solid Encouragement
that theirs have; that is, the plentiful Pensions: It would be folly to deny
them that fantastic Possession which they are contented and pleased with;
since Fame is a sort of an Airy Revenue, which they who unjustly detain from
the Owners, cannot themselves enjoy; it is a base Envy to put the Legal Owners
off to a vain Reversion.

Thus, Sir, have I sent you my Thoughts, with a great deal more have than ever
I thought to have writ any thing which was designed to be published I desire
you therefore to pardon the negligence of the expression, if you find never so
little good Sense to make some amends for it. I am,

SIR, Yours, etc.

The First DIALOGUE.
BEAUMONT, FREEMAN.
Beaum. JACK Freeman! This is an unexpected, and a surprising Visit: with what
Impatience have I longed for this happy Hour, and how have I regretted this
tedious Absence! Prithee, how long have thou been in Town?


Freem. But just time enough to shift me; yet time enough to receive two
Assignations, the one from a Lawyer, and the other from a Wench, who, as the
Devil would have it, saw me as I passed in the Stage-Coach through the Hay
Market. But I resolved to visit neither, till I had seen thee.


Beaum. Surprizingly kind! especially in this infamous Town, where it is almost
scandalous to be so much a Friend; where Friendship is seen to give place, not
only to Business and Pleasure, but sometimes too even to Vanity; where I have
known an old grave Rogue, who has had nothing to do, disappoint three or four
honest Fellows, purely that he might be thought a Raskal of Business: and where
I have known a young Fop baulk a Drinking Appointment, out of a longing desire
to be thought more lewd, and diverted by some wicked Adventure. But, prithee,
how do all our Friends in Hamp-shire?


Freem. Why, Faith, here of late, they have done something odly; but by the
help of the Bottle, they have still made a hard shift: they have been as
constantly wet, as the Weather in this obstinate Season, and being forbid by
the perpetual Rains to follow the daily Labor of their Country Sports, they
have handed about their Brimmers within doors, as fast as if they had done it
for Exercise. But I long to hear some News from thee. What say our Politic
Grumblers now?


Beaum. Do not thou know, Jack, that I hate both Politics and Politicians;
every Politician who is not in a Public Station is an Ass, and the feverest
Satyr on so fantastic an Animal as Man; god's death! that a Creature so very
impotent, should yet be so very busy; he has seldom either Wisdom to foresee,
or Power to prevent the least Accidents that befall him, in his own little
private Capacity, yet must be insolently enquiring into Secrets of State, and
meddling with mighty Kingdoms. For my part, I very often seek lewd Company a
Nights, though I hate it, on purpose to escape the News-mongers, and Dyer is not
at more expense and trouble to obtain his Intelligence, than I am to avoid the
Clamor of it.


Freem. Well! said moral Ned Beaumont, Philoscphy and Whimsie, I see, are not
inconsistent, however the Schools would impose upon us. This puts me in mind of
a very odd Answer, from one whom I asked once, What a Clock it was by his
Watch? he replied, That he had never been such a Sott, as to throw away his
Money on Watches; that he, indeed, was as profuse as another; but that the very
design of his Profusion, was to be ignorant how the time past away; that the
very Sound of a Clock, or an Alarm, occasioned melancholy Reflections in him,
and disturbed the Tranquillity of his Mind. So that this Fellow had as firmly
resolved not to perplex his Noddle with the Apprehensions of Hell and Futurity,
as thou have determined not to trouble thy Head with the Fear of a French
Invasion. But, prithee, what News from the Commonwealth of Learning? You use to
be more inquisitive after what passes there, and able to inform a Friend of it:
What New Books have you now abroad.


Beaum. I sent you down Two by the Carrier, the Juvenal, and the Account of
Tragedy; and we have had none since in the Politer Studies, that deserve any
consideration.


Freem. I read them over with a great deal of pleasure, and some application;
Dear Ned! How have I longed to talk with thee of the latter.


Beaum. Aye, Jack, the latter: tell me truly, Had not thou discovered, though
there had been no Name to it, that it was written by the same Gentleman, the
same Judicious and Learned Gentleman, who writ the Observations upon the
Tragedy of the Last Age? Does not the same Spirit of Learning, and exquisite
Sense, seem to be diffused throughout it?


Freem. There is good Sense and Learning in both those Books; but if I may have
liberty to speak my Mind, Ned, before you, who are the Author's Friend, there
seems to be more Learning in the latter Book, and more good Sense in the former.


Beaum. Pray, Sir, what Exceptions have you to the Sense of the latter?


Freem. Why, to use plain dealing with one who is so much my Friend, I am
neither satisfied with the Design of that Book, nor with the Method of carrying
on that Design, nor with the Style in which it was written.


Beaum. But sure you cannot find fault with the Style, Jack; Can thou have a
Quarrel to Pleasantry?


Freem. Pleasantry! you may call it what you please, Sir; but that pleasant
way, is by no means fit for a Critic: a Critic, whose business it is to
instruct, should keep to the Didactick Style, as Aristotle, Longinus, and the
French Critics have done: for if a Man is eternally Laughing, how can I
possibly fall into his Opinion, who know not if he speaks in good earnest?


Beaum. Why surely, Jack, one of your Apprehension may easily discern when
another rallies, and when he speaks what he means.


Freem. Your Servant, good Mr. Beaumont: But supposing that may be done, when a
laughing Critic condemns an Author, how can I know whether he has convicted
him by the advantage of his Wit, or the force of his Argumentation? The best
thing in the World is as liable to be ridiculed as the silliest. Has not
Scarron impudently diverted all Europe at the Expense of Virgil, the best of
Poets, and the justest of Writers? upon which an ingenious Frenchman has made
this Observation, That as all Human Grandeur is but Folly, so Sublimeness and
the Ridiculum are very nearly related.


Beaum. But what is it that you call the Didactick Style, Jack? for I have read
so little of Criticism, or of Rhetoric, since I have enjoyed the leisure of a
Country Life, that I have great need to be informed.


Freem. The Didactick Style, is a Style that is fit for Instruction, and must
be necessarily upon that account, pure, perspicuous, succinct, unaffected and
grave.


Beaum. Every Style ought to have three of these qualities; for barbarity,
obscurity, and affectation, must certainly be faults in all: But why,
particularly, does the Didactick Style demand succinctness and gravity.


Freem. It requires Succinctness, that its Precepts may be more readily
comprehended, and more easily retained; and it requires Gravity to give it an
Air of Authority, and cause it to make the deeper impression.


Beaum. For my part, I thought Gravity had been long since laughed out of the
World.


Freem The false and affected Gravity has been justly and deservedly laughed at,
but the true both is, and will always be venerable, being the genuine result of
Wisdom and Virtue; that Gravity will be always laughed at, that strives to
impose a Fool upon the World for a Man of Sense, or a Raskal for a Man of
Honor; for all Cheats, when they are found out, are despicable.


Beaum. But have not I seen thee laughing at a Fellow, only for looking
gravely, though you never had heard him speak?


Freem. Yes; but by that very Gravity I soon discovered the Blockhead in him;
for to a Man who understands the World never so little, a Fool never looks so
sillily, as when he attempts to look wisely; which Butler had certainly in his
Head, when he writ the following Couplet.


For Fools are known by looking wise,
As Men find Woodcocks by their Eyes.
It Is, as it were, a Revenge which Nature takes of them, for forcing her by
Affectation: for Gravity must be always affected, when it accompanies Vice or
Folly; but it is natural to Wisdom and Virtue. Now Nature will always be held
reverend, and Affectation contemptible.

Beaum. Pray, what do you take Gravity to be? for I have never considered it
yet with attention.


Freem. I think I may venture to describe it thus: Gravity is a composed and
majestic assurance, which appears in a Man's looks, or his air or manner of
expression, and proceeds from the tranquillity and greatness of a Mind, that is
guided by the Dictates of right Reason.


Beaum. Very well: But are not we then as obnoxious to be imposed on by that
Assurance, and that Air of Authority, which always go along with Gravity, as
much as we are on the other side, by the Sophistication of Pleasantry, which
stums, as it were, an Argument, if I may use that expression, to render it
agreeable to the taste of those who are ignorant.


Freem. Not one jot obnoxious on that score: for Gravity can no more make a
silly Notion pass upon a Man of Sense, than it can set off a Blockhead.
Pleafantry, indeed, may make Sophistry pass upon us, because it puts the Mind
into agitation, and makes it unfit for enquiry; but Gravity never fails to make
it serene, and dispose it for the strictest Scrutiny.


Beaum. Well, you have here said enough to make me wish, that Mr. R. -- had
made choice of another Style. But you told me, that you disliked the Design of
his Book.


Freem. Yes; but I have neither eat nor drunk since I came to Town, and --


Beaum. I have Wine in my Chamber.


Freem. But I have not been in a Tavern this Month: Therefore prithee let us to
the Old Devil, and talk the rest over a Bottle.


Beaum. Since it is your inclination, it shall be so.


The End of the First Dialogue.
DIALOGUE II.
Beaumont, Freeman, Drawer.
Beaum. SO Sirrah! What need we have come so near Heaven to be wicked?


Draw. I Will make you amends in your Wine, Master.


Beaum. Look you do, Sir. Let me see, it must be your best Red, I think. Well,
we have at least got this advantage by mounting, that we are not like to be
interrupted; which is as great a Plague to Critics, as it is to Poets; not so
much as a Drawer will come near us, without half an hour's ringing for him: so
that I am in no danger of getting drunk to Night, though I am in wicked Jack
Freeman's Company.


Freem. Sir, you do me too much Honor, though I dare swear, no body will take me
for a Saint, who knows I have been thy Friend these ten Years. But prithee,
what sort of Men were those two, whom you spoke to in coming up Stairs?


Beaum. Why one of them was a Bookseller: Now pray guess what the other was.


Freem. Why, Faith, an Author.


Beaum. If ever thou art indicted for a Magician, I Will turn Evidence 'egad, it
was an Author, Sir.


Freem. I have been osten in terrible apprehension of Authors, but I never was
afraid of my Carcass before, from one of them; but this indeed had like to have
fallen foul upon me; they were both in a sweet pickle.


Beaum. I suppose that Morecraft has been treating his Author with the
Generosity of a true Bookseller; that is, with intention to make him drunk, and
so to cheat him of his Copy.


Freem. If that was his design, the Author has turned the Dice upon him, I gad;
for Morecraft is by much in the worse Condition of the two; and perhaps the Dog
drank till he grew generous in earnest.


Beaum. If it should prove so, to morrow he will hang for his Virtue; for such a
true bred Raskal can never forgive himself a good Action, especially if it has
been costly to him.


Freem. You seem to know him well, Sir: But see, here comes the Wine: Sirrah,
fill to this Gentleman.


Beaum. Come, Jack, remembering our Hamp shire Friends: Faith, it is good Wine;
but a Pox of this Port, it is not so well tasted as Claret, and it intoxicates
sooner.


Freem. Why Faith, the intention was good; but I think in my Conscience, the
Prohibition of Claret has mainly promoted Drunkenness. Come, here is the
soresaid Health to you.


Beaum. I thank you; and now to our business: but before we proceed to this
Book again, I desire you to give me some satisfaction, in relation to a passage
in the Dedication. For Mr. Rymer mentioning the Greek Oedipus, says afterward
of the French, and the English, Quantum mutatus. Now I have always taken our
English Oedipus to be an admirable Play.


Freem. You have had a great deal of reason to do so; and it would certainly
have been much better, if Mr. Dryden had had the sole management of it. If Mr.
Rymer, by his Quantum mutatus, designs to fix any mark of disesteem upon Mr.
Dryden's Tragedy, he is doubtless to blame; but if he only means, that Mr.
Dryden has altered the Character of Oedipus, and made it less suitable to the
design of Tragedy, according to Aristotle's Rules, then Mr. Rymer is in the
right of it.


Beaum. Pray show me that.


Freem. I shall do it as succinctly as I can: The Design of Tragedy, according
to Aristotle, is to excite compassion and terror: from whence it necessarily
follows, that we are not to make choice of a very virtuous Man, to involve him
in misery; nor yet on the other side, of one who is very vicious.


Beaum. I desire to know how you draw that Consequence.


Freem. The Consequence is just: For the making a very good Man miserable, can
neither move compassion nor terror; no, that must rather occasion horror, and
be detested by all the World. On the other side, by representing a very bad Man
miserable, a Poet may please an Audience, but can neither move terror nor pity
in them: for terror is caused in us by a view of the Calamities of our Equals;
that is, of those who resembling us in their faults, make us, by seeing their
Susferings, apprehensive of the like Misfortune. Now if at any time an Audience
sees a very wicked Man punished, each Man who knows himself less guilty, is out
of all fear of danger, and so there can be no terror: nor can the calamity of
a very wicked Man raise compassion, because he has his desert.


Beaum. What sort of Person must be made choice of then?


Freem. Why one who is neither virtuous in a sovereign degree, nor excessively
vicious; but who keeping the middle between these extremes, is afflicted with
some terrible calamity, for some involuntary fault.


Beaum. Well, and just such a Man is Mr. Dryden's Oedipus, who cannot be said
to be perfectly virtuous, when he is both Parricide and Incestuous; nor yet on
the other side excessively vicious, when neither his Parricide nor Incest are
voluntary, but caused by a fatal ignorance.


Freem. Aye, but says Dacier, to punish a Man for Crimes, that are caused by
invincible ignorance, is in some measure unjust, especially if that Man has
other ways extraordinary Virtues. Now Mr. Dryden makes his Oedipus just,
generous, sincere, and brave; and indeed a Hero, without any Vices, but the
forementioned two, which were unavoidable both. Now Sophocles represents
Oedipus after another manner, the distinguishing Qualities which he gives him,
are only Courage, Wit, and Success, Qualities which make a Man neither good nor
vicious. The extraordinary things that he pretends to have done in Sophocles,
are only to have killed four Men in his Rage, and to have have explained the
Riddle of Sphiux, which the worst Man in the World that had Wit, might have
done as well as Oedipus.


Beaum. Well, but does not Sophocles punish Oedipus for the very same Crimes
that Mr. Dryden does, vid. for his Incest and Parricide? If not, for what
involuntary faults, does the Sophoclean Oedipus suffer.


Freem. Aristotle by those Osfences, which his Interpreter Dacier calls
involuntary, does not mean only such faults as are caused by invincible
ignorance, but such to which we are strongly inclined, either by the bent of
our Constitutions, or by the sorce of prevailing Passions. The faults for which
Oedipus suffers in Sophocles, are his vain Curiosity, in consulting the Oracle
about his Birth, his Pride in refusing to yield the way, in his return srom
that Oracle, and his Fury and Violence in attacking four Men on the Road, the
very day after he had been fore-warned by the Oracle, that he should kill his
Father.


Beaum. But, pray, how were those involuntary Faults?


Freem. Dacier means here by involuntary faults, faults that have more of human
frailty in them, than any thing of design, or of black malice. The Curiosity of
Oedipus proceeded from a Vanity, from which no Man is wholly exempt; and his
Pride, and the Slaughter that it caused him to commit on the Road, were partly
caused by his Constitution, and an unhappy and violent Temper. These are faults
that both Aristotle and Dacier suppose, that he might have prevented, if he
would have used all his diligence; but being guilty of them through his neglect,
they asterwards plunged him in those horrible Crimes, which were followed by
his sinal Ruin. Thus you see the Character of the Athenean Oedipus, is
according to these Rules of Aristotle, the fittest that can be imagined to give
Compassion and Terror to an Audience: For how can an Audience choose but
tremble, when it sees a Man involved in the most deplorable Miseries, only for
indulging those Passions and Frailties, which they are but too conscious that
they neglect in themselves? And how can they choose but melt with compassion,
when they see a Man afslicted by the avenging Gods with utmost severity, for
Faults that were without malice, and which being in some measure to be found in
themselves, may make them apprehensive of like Catastrophes? For all our
Passions, as Dacier observes, are grounded upon the Love of ourselves, and that
Pity which seems to espouse our Neighbor's Interest, is founded still on our
own.


Beaum. Why, will you persuade me, that because an Audience finds in itself the
same vain Curiosity, and the same ungoverned Passions, that drew Oedipus to
Murder and Incest, that therefore each Spectator should be afraid of killing
his Father, and committing Incest with his Mother?


Freem. No, you cannot mistake me so far; but they may very well be afraid of
being drawn in by the like neglected Passions to deplorable Crimes and horrid
Mischiefs, which they never designed.


Beaum. Well then, now I begin to see the reason, why, according to the Sense
of Aristotle, the Character of Mr. Dryden's Oedipus is altered for the worse:
For he, you will say, being represented by Mr. Dryden Soveraignly Virtuous, and
guilty of Parricide only by a fatal invincible Ignorance, must by the severity
of his Sufferings, instead of compassion create horror in us, and a murmuring,
as it were, at Providence. Nor can those Sufferings raise terror in us, for
his Crimes of fatal invincible Ignorance, not being prepared, as they are in
Sophocles, by some less faults, which led him to those Crimes, as it were, by
so many degrees. I do not conceive how we can be concerned at this; for
Terror, you say, arises from the Sufferings of others, upon the account of
Faults which are common to us with them. Now what Man can be afraid, because he
sees Oedipus come down at two Leaps from the height of Virtue to Parricide, and
to Incest, that therefore this may happen to him? For a Man who is himself in
Security, cannot be terrified with the Sufferings of others, if he is not
conscious to himself of the Faults that caused them: but every Man who is
disturbed by unruly Passions, when he sees, how the giving way to the same
Passions, drew Sophocles's Oedipus into Tragical Crimes, which were never
designed, must by reflection necessarily be struck with Terror, and the
apprehension of dire Calamities. This, I suppose, is your Sense.


Freem. Exactly.


Beaum. Well, but the Authority of Aristotle avails little with me, against
irresutable Experience. I have seen our English Oedipus several times, and have
constantly sound, that it has caused both Terror and Pity in me.


Freem. I will not tell you, that possibly you may have mistaken Horror for
Terror and Pity: for perhaps it is not absolutely true, that the Sufferings of
those, who are Sovereignly Virtuous, cannot excite Compassion. But this is
indubitable, that they cannot so effectually do it, as the Misfortunes of
those, who having some Faults, do the more resemble ourselves: And I think,
that I may venture to affirm two things: First, That if any one but so great a
Master as Mr. Dryden, had had the management of that Character, and had made
the same mistake with it, his Play would have been hissed off the Stage. And
Secondly --


Beaum. I must beg leave to interrupt you: Why should you believe that another
Man's Play upon the same Subject, would have miscarried upon that mistake, when
I never heard it yet taken Norice of?


Freem. It would have miscarried, though the mistake had never been found out:
For a common Author proceeding upon such wrong Principles, could never have
touched the Passions truly. But Mr. Dryden having done it by his extraordinary
Address, the Minds of his Audience have been still troubled, and so the less
able to find his Error.


Beaum. But what was that second thing, which you were going to observe?


Freem. It was this: That if Mr. Dryden had not altered the Character of
Sophocles, the Terror and Compassion had been yet much stronger.


Beaum. But how could so great a Man as Mr. Dryden, make such a mistake in his
own Art?


Freem. How did Corneille do it before him, who was certainly a great Man too?
And if you will believe Dacier, C'etoit le plus grand genie pour le Theater qu'on
avoit Jamais ven: Great Men have their Errors, or else they would not be Men.
Nay, they are mistaken in several things, in which Men of a lower Order may be
in the right. This has been wisely ordered by Providence, that they may not be
exalted too much; for if it were not for this, they would look down upon the
rest of Mankind, as upon Creatures of a lower Species.


Beaum. Do you believe then, that Aristotle, if he could rise again, would
condemn our English Oedipus?


Freem. He would condemn it, or he would be forced to recede from his own
Principles; but at the same time that he passed Sentence on it, he would find
it so beautiful, that he could not choose but love the Criminal; and he would
certainly crown the Poet, before he would damn the Play.


Beaum. But it is high time to return to Mr. Rymer's Book; you were saying, you
disliked the Design of it.


Freem. Yes; but if you will come to morrow Morning to my Lodgings, there I
shall give you my Reasons for it. We have criticiz'd sufficiently for one time;
besides, at my Chamber I have two or three Books, which I may have an occasion
to cite.


Beaum. Well then, let us drink a Glass and be merry. Come, Jack, here is your
Mistress to you.


Freem. Nay, Faith, Ned, I am resolved to be sober to Night.


Beaum. Prithee, can thou be otherwise in my Company? How many grave Lectures
have I been forced to read to thee over a Bottle, in order to keep thee sober?


Freem. But, as the Devil would have it, thou art seldom Philosophically given
in Company, but at the same time thou art inclined to be damnable Drunk too.
Have you forgot since you grew drunk in Hamp-shire, in extolling the Dogma's of
Seneca? When the Company laughed to see the Speculative Stoic, a Practical
Epicurean.


Beaum. However, it is something to speak for Sobriety: I never heard you do
that, unless when we were in Italy together, once at Florence, for want of
leuder Employment, you declaimed in praise of the Italian Temperance; but it
was only in order to get a sober Seignior to sit out another Flask with you.


Freem. Faith, Rallery apart, I always esteemed Drunkenness the most odious of
Vices. There is something to be said for Whoring, Whoring is according to
Nature, but Drunkenness is a Vice against Nature; we go always with the Stream
to Letchery, but we often tug against it to arrive at Drunkenness. He who
drinks five Brimmers in a hand, might certainly have performed a very good
Action without half so much violence offered to his inclination. And he who out
of his Love to Conversation, is often persuaded to drink hard, might, if he has
but never so little delicacy, be virtuous with less reluctance.


Beaum. But since Drinking is so unnatural a Vice, how comes it so much in
fashion amongst us?


Freem. Why some witty Men, they say, introduced it upon the Restoration, and
the Fools finding the imitation easy, immediately fell into the Dance.


Beaum. The Wits were horribly o'reseen in beginning it, but the Fools were in
the right in carrying it on.


Freem. How can that be?


Beaum. Because a Fool has as much reason to declare for Drunkenness, as a poor
Dog has to declare for Levelling: for Death does not level Conditions more than
Drunkenness equals Capacities. A Blockhead when he is drunk, may talk as well as
a Man of Sense, if in the same Condition; nay, better perhaps: for that
quantity of Wine will make a witty Man mad, which will but just be sufficient
to animate the cold and phlegmatic Mass of a Sot. They who have cause to be
ashamed of themselves, have reason to be fond of Disguises; now Drunkenness is
a very convenient Mask to make a Blockhead pass Incognito.


Freem. Thou art in the right of it, and upon this Remonstrance I would have
left it off, if I had been never so fond of it before. But it is now some time
that I have had a mortal Quarrel to it.


Beaum. I shrewdly suspect, that Drunkenness began the Quarrel: for if that had
not mauled you with your Rheumatism, I suppose these Invectives might have been
spared.


Freem. Well, come, will you go? We'll pay at the Bar.


Beaum. Thou art Seven Years older, and shall be my Governor. But my Lodgings
are nearest, will you go lie with me?


Freem. No, Faith, Sir, I hope for a better Bedfellow; but to Morrow at Eleven
I expect you. Till then, Adieu.


Beaum. Your Servant.


The End of the Second Dialogue.
DIALOGUE III.
Freeman in his Chamber, repeating,
Should Nature's Self invade the World again,
And over the Center spread the Liquid Main,
Thy Power were safe --.
(Enter to him Beaumont.
Beaum. WHY how now Jack? At the scandalous Exercise of repeating this Morning?
Art thou in Debt?


Freem. What makes you ask that?


Beaum. Because if thou art, thou recitest to scare away Duns perhaps. But
whose are those Verses? If they are thine, I scamper immediately.


Freem. You are very merry, Sir.


Beaum. 'Sdeath! I had rather be lampoon'd this Morning, than stay to hear a
Critick's Verfes.


Freem. Well, they are Waller's, Sir.


Beaum. Aye, now thou say something, Jack.

Waller by Nature for the Bays designed,
Witb Spirit, Force, and Fancy unconfined
In Panegyricks is above Mankind.
At least Jack, thou can not be so impudent as to dissent from Mr. Rymer, in
his Judgment of those incomperable Verses upon the Eleet.


Freem I am that impudent Dog, I gad.


Beaum. Why, are not the Thoughts new there?


Freem. Yes.


Beaum. And Noble?


Freem. Yes, very Noble; but a Pox they are not all of them true though.


Beaum. You had best say too, that the Language is not clean and majestic.


Freem. I need not say so, it says enough of itself.


Beaum. This is downright Spirit of Contradiction; I desire you to show me
three saults in those Verses, without being hypercritical.


Freem. Here, take the Book and repeat them then.

Beaumont reads. Where e're thy Navy spreads her Canvas Wings,
Homage to thee, and Peace to all she brings.
Have you any thing to say to that Couplet?


Freem. Yes; if Mr. Waller had been to say that in Prose, he would have
expressed himself otherwise: he would have said thus: Where e're thy Fleet
goes, she carries Peace to all, and causes all to pay or do Homage to thee: For
where e're she goes she brings Homage; would not be good English in Prose.


Beaum. Why, will you allow nothing to be said in Verse, that may not be said
in Prose too.


Freem. Yes, an Expression may be too florid, or too bold for Prose, and yet be
very becoming of Verse. But every Expression that is false English in Prose, is
barbarous and absurd in Vorse too. But pray proceed.

Beaumont reads. The French and Spaniard, when thy Flags appear,
Forget their Hatred, and consent to Fear.

Freem. I have nothing to say to that Couplet: Go on.

Beaumont reads. So Jove from Ida, did both Hosts survey,
And when he pleased to Thunder, part the Fray.
Is not that a Noble Similitude?


Freem. Yes; but the word Fray is altogether unworthy of the Greatness of the
Thought, and the Dignity of Heroic Verse. Fray is fitter to express a Quarrel
betwixt drunken Bullies, than between the Grecian and Trojan Heroes, and fitter
to be parted by Stokes, than by thundering Jove. But go on.

Beaumont reads. Ships heretofore on Seas, like Fishes sped,
The mightier still upon the smaller fed.

Freem. That is to say, as a great Fish Breakfasts or Dines upon a small one,
so a great Ship chops up a little one. I have known several, who, to their
sorrows, have seen a Ship drink hard, but I never met with any who have seen
one eat yet.


Beaum. P'shaw, Pox, this is downright Banter. This is to fall into the very
same fault which you have condemned in others.


Freem. I stand corrected, Sir, without rallery then, this Metaphor Feed, is
too gross for a Ship, though I perfectly know what Mr. Waller means by it. But
what think you of the word Sped? Is that an Heroical word?


Beaum. No, I must confess, that Sped is something too mean.


Freem. Too mean! why it is fit for nothing but Burlesque, Man. Besides, the
word heretofore seems too obsolete, nor is Fishes very Heroical.


Beaum. Come, Jack, you had better let them two pass, it will be an Error on
the Right Hand: for Good Nature makes some amends for Error; but Error and Ill
Nature is the Devil and all.


Freem. Let them pass then. In the second Verse of this Couplet, we have
mightier opposed to smaller; whereas the word that is truly and naturally
opposed to smaller is greater.


Beaum. Methinks too, that should sooner have occurred to Mr. Waller.


Freem. Doubtless it did so: But Mr. Waller could not make use of that; for if
he had, he must directly and apparently have affirmed a thing which is not
true. For we know very well, that a small Privatier will take a Merchant man
biggerthan itself. Though all that Mr Waller has got by avoiding that Rock, has
been only to run himself on another: for by opposing mightier to smaller, he
infers, that the mightier are still greater, which is to imply a false thought,
if not to express one. But pray go on.

Beaumont reads. Thou on the Deep imposest nobler Laws,
And by that Justice have removed the Cause.
Of those rude Tempests, which for Rapine sent,
Too often, alas, involved the Innocent.

Freem. I see you have taken Notice yourself, of the want of a Pause at the end
of the first Couplet, by proceeding to the second. But, pray what is that
Comparative Nobler referred to?, For Laws are neither mentioned before nor
after. Now every Comparative, according to Grammar and good Sense, ought to be
referred to a Positive: Nobler Laws than what? Or then there were when?


Beaum. Why then there were, when one Ship destroyed another.


Freem. That is as much as to say, Nobler Laws than there were when there were
no Laws at all. But what do you understand by removing the Cause of those rude
Tempests? for that seems to me to be something obscure.


Beaum. Thou art a pleasant Fellow, faith; What accuse Mr. Waller of obscurity?


Freem. I have always admired Mr. Waller, for a great Genius, and a gallant
Man. Nor am I more pleased with any of his Excellencies, than with the
clearness of his happy turns. But from his being generally clear, can you
infer, that he was not once in his Life obscure? Pray what do you understand by
removing the Cause of those Tempests?


Beaum. Why, I understand the Pirates; for Mr. Waller could not think, that our
Fleet could remove the Winds sure.


Freem. No? we shall see that immediately. But what do you understand by
involving the Innocent?


Beaum. Why, involving them in Ruin, in Destruction.


Freem. To involve a Man in Ruin is intelligible enough, but barely to involve
a Man cannot be good English, methinks, because it presents no clear Notion of
any thing to my Mind. But tell me truly, Ned, If any one should talk to thee of
a rude Tempest, which sent upon the Ocean for Rapine, sometimes involves a very
honest Fellow, would not thou swear, that that Man banter'd thee? Are not
these thoughts and words ill suited? -- But I see you have nothing to reply,
and therefore proceed.

Beaumont reads. Now shall the Ocean, as thy Thames be free
From both those Fates of Storms and Pyracy.

Freem. That is as much as to say, Now your Majesty's Fleet's at Sea, Boreas
has blown his last. Henceforward the poor Dog will not dare to peep out of his
hole, for fear of being served as the Persian served his Brethren.

In Coramatque Eurum solitus sevire flagellis.
And as there never was a Storm yet upon the Thames, so there shall never be
one hence forward upon the Ocean.


Beaum. 'Slife! thou banter'st me now indeed.


Freem. Yet this is the downright meaning of the Couplet, or there can be no
meaning at all in it. But pray go on.

Beaumont reads. But we most happy who need fear no Force,
But winged Troops, or Pegasean Horse.

Freem. That winged should have been winged; but that was the fault of the Age,
and not of Mr. Waller; who, to do him Justice, was the first who began to
contract our Participles which end in ed; which being not contracted,
exceedihgly weaken a Verse.


Beaum. But are all our Participles that end in ed, to be contracted?


Freem. No, you must except wounded, confounded, boasted, wasted, and the like,
because we cannot express two d's, or td, without a Vowel between them; and
consequently we should not be able to distinguish the forementioned
Participles from their Verbs, if they should be contracted.


Beaum. But is not cursed to be excepted too?


Freem. That may be sometimes excepted too: because when that Participle is not
contracted, it is not only liable to be mistaken for the Preterperfect Tense of
its Verb, but for an Adjective of a different signification, vid. cursed, which
signifies the same with fierce.

No Tygress on Hyrcanian Mountains nursed.
No Lybian Lioness is half so cursed.
Says Sir Richard Fanshaw in his Translation of Pastor Fido. But pray go on.

Beaumont reads. It Is not so hard for greedy Foes to spoil
Another Nation, as to touch our Soil.

Freem. There is nothing to say to that: Go on.

Beaumont reads. Should, Nature's Self invade the World again,
And over the Center spread the Liquid Man,
Thy Power were safe, and her destructive hand,
Would but enlarge the Bounds of thy Command.
Thy --

Freem. Hold, you go on to fast, Mr. Beaumont.


Beaum. Why, can any thing be more Noble than this?


Freem. This is truly sublime indeed; but I have an exception to make to the
second Verse. For what does Mr. Waller mean, by spreading the Liquid Main over
the Center? The Center is either taken for an imaginary Point, which is
Mathematically in the midst of the Globe, and so to spread any thing over the
Center cannot be good Sense; or the Center is taken for the whole Globe,
consisting of Land and Sea, and then to spread the Main over the Center, is to
spread the Center over itself.


Beaum. This Criticism seems to be just enough.


Freem. Nor am I satisfied with the Epithet Liquid; for every Epithet is to be
looked upon as a Botch, which does not add to the thought. Now it is impossible
to think of the Sea, without thinking that it is Liquid at the same time. But
go on.

Beaumont reads. Thy Power were safe, and her destractive hand
Would but enlarge the Bounds of thy Command.

Freem. Well, go on.

Beaumont reads. Thy dreadful Fleet would style thee Lord of All,
And ride in Triumph over the drowned Ball:
Those Towers of Oak over fertile Plains might go,
And visit Mountains where they once did grow.

Freem. This is a most noble passage indeed; but the word drowned is not
sonorous, besides it should be contracted. Proceed.

Beaumont reads. The World's Preserver never could endure,
That finished Babel should those Men secure,
Whose Pride designed that Fabric to have stood
Above the reach of any Second Flood.

Freem. Come make an end.

Beaumont reads. To thee his Chosen more indulgent, He
Dares trust such Power, with so much Piety.

Freem. That He seems to be a Botch. But methinks Mr. Rymer has a very odd
Observation at the latter end of these Verses; for here, says he, is both Homer
and Virgil; here is the pious AEneas, and the Fortis Achilles: whereas Mr.
Waller does not design to praise the King for his Valor here. There is a great
deal of difference betwixt Power and Valor; the last is Personal, the other in
the reach of Fortune.


Beaum. Well, but you declare then, that you are of too refined a taste to
relish Waller?


Freem. I thought I had declared the quite contrary. My design in making these
Remarks on his Verses upon the Fleet, was only to show you, that Mr. Rymer has
mistaken the most incorrect Copy of Verses that perhaps Mr. Waller has writ,
for one of his rarest Masterpieces. Yet all incorrect as those Verses are, I
have told you, that I perfectly admired some places in them; from whence any
Man may reasonably conclude, that I have an Opinion of Mr. Waller in the main,
which is answerable to the Merit of that extraordinary Man.


Beaum. But methinks the very faults of a Great Man ought to be respected upon
the account of his Excellencies.


Freem. The very contrary of which is true: Upon that account they ought to be
the rather exposed. His Faults are the more dangerous on the account of his
Excellencies. For young Writers, before they have Judgment to distinguish, are
sometimes so far mistaken, as to copy the very Faults of famous Poets for
Beauties. One thing I will easily grant you, that to expose a Great Man's
Faults, without owning his Excellencies, is altogether unjust and unworthy of
an honest Man.


Beaum. Well: But since you will not allow these Verses to be what Mr. Rymer
assirms them to be, pray let me hear you name a Copy of Verses, whose Thoughts
or Language you have no exception to. But a Pox, a Caviller can never esteem
any thing perfect.


Freem Then will I show you, that I am no Caviller.


Beaum. Nay, I am certain, I can name one Author, whose Verses you can have no
exception to.


Freem. Pray, who may they be, Sir?


Beaum. Who may it be? why who the Devil should it be, but thy Self, Man? To
whose Verses can a Critic have no exception, but his own? Come, prithee, Jack,
let us hear one of thy finished Pieces now. Come, do not I know, that thou
would not have taken all this pains to pull down the Reputation of another,
if it were not to set up thy own.


Freem. Curse of this unseasonable Rallery: Can any thing be more insipid than
an untimely Jest?


Beaum. Why are you so barbarous, as to rake into the Ashes of the Dead then?
If Selfish and Haughty were but here, what do you think they would say?


Freem. Those are two special Sparks indeed. Who will allow the Dead to have
had no Faults, and the Living to have no good Qualities. When Mr. Oldham was
alive, those two Gentlemen would allow him to have neither Wit nor Genius,
which none but Sots could deny him; and they have the impudence to be angry
now, if a Man will not allow him to have had both Delicacy, and a good Ear,
which none but Blockheads can grant him. In Horace's time, there were a sort of
Gentlemen, who were just the Reverse of these two: they would allow none to be
past Censure, but those who had been dead a hundred Years. Horace to expose
them, made use of a pecaliar address. I may venture to show the folly of our
Spa^ks, by the very same address, with a contrary application: Ours will allow
none to be liable to Criticism, but those who have been rotten long enough to
have secured an Author in Horace's time. You take it then for granted, that an
Author who has been dead this hundred Years, is obnoxious to Censure?


Beaum. Yes; or else it would be barbarity to attack Shakespeare, who has not
been dead so long.


Freem. Well then, suppose our Author has been dead a hundred Years, wanting
one?


Beaum. One Year can signify nothing, and he is still obnoxious to Censure.


Freem. Very good, Sir.

Vtor permisso, caudque pilos ut equine
Paulatim vello: and demo un^m, demo etiam unum
Dum cadat elusus ratione ruentis acervi
Qui redit ad fastos, etc.
That is to say, Sir, I will do as if I were to pull off a Horses Tail, I will
one by one substract the Years, till you consess your Errors; for I will oblige
you to one of these two things, either to consess that the Dead are not to be
attacked at all (and so there can be scarce any Criticisin); or else to fix
upon the particular Year when they begin to be liable. And I think you will own,
that to fix upon that would be ridiculous enough in all Conscience.


Beaum. But pray, what should be the reason, that all Men exclaim so against
arraigning those who have been lately dead, if they have any Opinion of them?


Freem. One reason may be, that the showing them Faults which they could not
find out themselves, upbraids them with want of discernment, and disturbs their
good Opinion of themselves: And another which is stronger is this; that they
have a secret fear of being thus arraigned in their turns.


Beaum. But People can with some Patience hear of the Faults of those who have
been long since dead. What should be the meaning of that?


Freem. The meaning is plain: For how few are those who think of being
remembered a hundred Years after they are dead?


Beaum. Yet all this while you have for got to name a Copy of Verses, which may
be allowed to be more perfect than those which you have just condemned. Come
name them, Sir.


Freem. You must excuse me, Sir.


Beaum. Nay, prithee let us hear.


Freem. Then hear, O hear, in what exalted Strains
Sicilian Muses, through these happy Plains,
Proclaim Saturnian Times, our own Apollo Reigns.

Beaum. So, Mr. Dryden, I perceive, is obliged to you.


Freem. Not a jot obliged: For art thou such an Ass to think, that I commend
another Man's Verses for the Author's sake?


Beaum. For whose then pray?


Freem. For my own most certainly, that I may pass for a Man of Judgment.


Beaum. Well, though thou art a vain Dog, yet every vain Dog would not have made
this honest Consession. But when shall we come to the Main Point? This has been
a long Prelude: Faith, let us 'en Print this Conference, and give it the Title
of The Preamble, as a worthy Author in King Charles the Second's time,
entitled his Book, The Preface.


Freem. However, Chance has not so unhappily thrown us upon this Method: for
you being prepossessed with the reasonableness of Mr. Rymer's Design, the
showing you his Errors in two or three things that are of less importance, may
go some way toward the removing your prejudices, and the prepating you to hear
Truth when we come to the principal matter.

Enter Freeman 's Boy.
Boy. Sir, a Gentleman below would speak with you.


Freem. I beg your Pardon for a moment. There lies Dacier upon the Table, you
may divert yourself with him, till I return.


The End of the Third Dialogue.
DIALOGUE IV.
BEAUMONT, FREEMAN.
Freem. SO, I have now got loose, and have secured us against more interruption.


Beaum. Now then, let me hear your Objections to Mr. Rymer's Design; for
nothing can seem more commendable to me, than his intention, which is to
restore Tragedy to its primitive purity, by re-establishing the Ancient Method,
and reviving the Rules of Aristotle.


Freem. I am for observing the Rules of Aristotle, as much as any Man living,
as far as it can be done without re-establishing the Ancient Method. But
because the Ancients Tragedies had little Love in them, that therefore ours
must have little too; because the Ancient Tragedies had a Chorus, that
therefore we must ridiculously ape them; this is what I cannot endure to hear
of.


Beaum. But why ridiculously ape them? Mr. Rymer pretends that the Chorus is
necessary; nay, that it is always the most necessary part of a Tragedy; that
the French have lately seen the necessity of it, and that the success of their
last Plays has sufficiently justified the Wisdom of their late Reformation.


Freem. It Is very inexcusable in a Man of Sense, to make any conclusion from
success. The French before now have damned a very good Play, and consequently
may like an ill one. J'ay veu (says St. Euremont) Corneille perdre sa
Reputation (s'il est possible qu'il la perdit) a la representation d'une de ses
meilleurs pieces. I have seen, says he, Corneille lose his Reputation (if it
had been possible for him to lose it) at the acting of own of his best Plays.
Which he speaks to condemn the changable Relish of the Parisians. Nor is it
true, that the French saw any necessity for the restoring the Chorus. Monsieur
Recine, in his Presace to Esther, which was the first Tragedy that has been
lately writ with a Chorus, says, That he was put upon the handling that Subject
in that Method, by those who had the Superintendency of the House of St. Cyr;
that is, by Madam de Maintenon. So thatwhat Mr. R -- calls a necessity, was but
at the best a convenience.


Beaum. A convenience!


Freem. Aye; for upon the Writing this Religious Play with a Chorus, the
cloistered Beauties of that blooming Society, had a favorable occasion of
showing their Parts in a Religious way, to the French Court.


Beaum. Let me die, it thou have not been reading the scandalous Chronicle.


Freem. Many an honest well-meaning Text has met with a wicked Comment.


Beaum. But what does it signify, whether the French found the Chorus
necessary, or only found it convenient. Mr. Rymer, whom all the World allows to
be a competent Judge of these matters, not only affirms it to be necessary, but
the most necessary part of a Tragedy.


Freem. That it is not the most necessary part of a Tragedy, I shall prove by
an Argument, which, if Mr. Rymer admits of Aristotle's Rules, will amount to a
demonstration. For Tragedy, according to Aristotle, is the imitation of an
Important Action. Now an Action may be imitated without the Chorus, but not
without the Episode.


Beaum. What is it that you call Episode?


Freem. All that was between the singing of the Chorus, which is all our Modern
Tragedy. But further, Fable is the very Soul of Tragedy, according to Mr. Rymer
himself. Now nothing is more plain than this, that the Fable in Tragedy may
subsist without the Chorus, but not without the Episode: From whence it
necessarily follows, that the Episode is always the most necessary part of a
Tragedy; for without it, Tragedy can have no Soul, and consequently can have no
Being.


Beaum. This, I must confess, is something.


Freem. Something? Well, to complete your Conviction, I shall add the Authority
of Dacier, who has these words in his Comment upon Aristotle's Treatise of
Poetry, Chap. 12. Sect. 6.

Le Tragedy n'etoit dans son origin q'un choeur sans acteurs Ensuite on
ajouta les acteurs, pour delasser le choeur, and tout ce que ces acteurs
disoient enter deux chants du choeur, s'appelloit Episode, comme qui diroit
part ajoutee; parce que ces recits etoient pieces etrangeres and surajoutees a
une ceremony don't else ne faisorent point party; mais quand' la Tragedy eut
commence a se former, and que les recits qui n'etoient que les party
accessoine furent devenues les principal alors, etc.

So that it is plain, according to the Sense of Dacier, that though the Chorus
was at first the Foundation of Trady, it is now the least necessary part of it.


Beaum. Well, you seem to have proved, that the Chorus is not the most
necessary part of a Tragedy, however it may be necessary, and therefore ought
to be restored. Mr. Rymer affirms particularly, that it is necessary to confine
a Poet to unity of place.


Freem. There he is so far mistaken, that Monsieur Racine, who in several of
his former Tragedies, has with Religion, observed that unity, has not tied
himself to it so scrupulously in the very first Tragedy which he writ with a
Chorus, which he owns himself in his Preface to Esther, and is plain to any one
who reads that Tragedy. And whereas Mr. R -- affirms, that the Chorus is not to
be lost out of sight, let him but consult the First Scene of the Second Act of
Esther, and the Seventh Scene of the Third Act of Athaliah (which is the Second
Play that Racine writ with a Chorus) and he will find, that in those Scenes the
Stage is without a Chorus.


Beaum. But has not Racine in that deviated from the ways of the Ancients?


Freem. I must confess, I believe he has; for having lately read over the
Oedipus and Antigone of Sophocles, I find, that in those two Plays, the Chorus
is always in sight. However, this may serve as an Argument to prove two things:
First, That if a Poet will be irregular, he may as well break the unity of
place with a Chorus, as without it. Secondly, It may prove, that Racine
undertook to write his Esther, purely out of compliance with Madam de
Maint^nen. For if he had done it with a design of conforming to the Ancients,
he would doubtless have conformed in every thing: but he has been so far from
doing that, that his Esther, you know, has but Three Acts; which is directly
contrary to the Precept of Horace,

Neve minor quinto neu fit productior actu
Fabula --
And to the Practice of the Ancients.


Beaum. Why, as far as I can remember, Sophocles and Euripides never
distinguished their Phys by Acts.


Freem. They did not make use of the word Act, to denote their Distinctions, as
the Romans afterward did; but however, the Chorus sung four times in the
intervals of the Episode, as the Music plays four times in the Intervals of
the Acts with us.


Beaum. You affirm then, that the Chorus is necessary upon no account.


Freem. I cannot conceive how the Chorus can be necessary, if Tragedy can
attain its end without it. Now the end of Tragedy, according to Aristotle, is
to excite Compassion and Terror, in order to the purging of those, and the
like Passions. And Terror and Compassion may be excited without a Chorus,
perhaps better than with it.


Beaum. Pray, why so?


Freem. Because the Chorus in some measure must calm an Audience which the
Episode disturbed by its Sublimity, and by its Pathetick; and therefore he who
makes use of a Chorus in Tragedy, seems to me, to do like a Physician, who
prescribing a Dose for the evacuation of Peccant Humors, should afterward
order Restringents to be taken in the midst of its kind Operation. The Song of
the Chorus must be foreign from the matter, or pertinent: If foreign from the
matter, it must not only calm the Mind in some measure, but take it off from
the subject. But if it is never so pertinent, it must very much cool a Reader,
if not a Spectator; though I make no question, but it must have the same effect
upon both.


Beaum. But you ought to prove, that it must have the same effect upon both.


Freem. If it has not, it must be wholly unprofitable: for the design of the
Chorus is to give good Advice, to preach up Morality, to extol Virtue, to
praise or pray to the Gods.

Ille bonis faveatque and confilietur amici
Et regat eratos, and amet peccare timentes;
Ille dapes laudet mensoe brevis: ille salubrem
Justitiam legesque and apertis otia portis.
Ille tegat commissa, deosque precetur and oret
Vt redeat miseris abeat fortuna superbis.
Horat. Art. Poet.

Now I would fain know, how an Audience that is extremely disturbed with
Terror, or with Compassion, can be capable of harkning to good Advice, of
apprehending the reasonableness of good Instruction, or of performing Religious
Duties.


Beaum. But pray, if Terror and Compassion must be raised to such a height
without receiving any check, how can they be said to be purged?


Freem. Dacier has given us a very sensible account of that. For as the Humors
in some distempered Body are raised, in order to the evacuating that which is
redundant or peccant in them; so Tragedy excites Compassion and Terror to the
same end: For the Play being over, an Audience becomes serene again, and is
less apt to be moved at the common Accidents of Life, after it has seen the
deplorable Calamities of Hero's and Sovereign Princes.


Beaum. Now here have I an Objection to make, which must be confessed to be of
some importance. Aristotle has given Rules for the Chorus, which he would not
have done, unless he had believed it necessary. Horace has followed his steps.
Dacier, who is Aristotle's best Interpreter, has endeavored its restoration:
He has declared the necessity of it, for teaching Morality to the People; he
has told us, that Racine was convinced that there was a necessity for it; and
he has commended him for reviving it in his last Tragedies.


Freem. But pray, Sir, how came you to know what Dacier says? I thought you had
told me, you had not conversed with the Critics lately.


Beaum. I read this in Dacier's Preface, but now, when you left me alone.


Freem. Indeed, it must be confessed, that Aristotle has mentioned the Chorus,
and discoursed of the different parts of it. But then, consider how large a
space the Chorus took up in the ancient Tragedy, and how little Aristotle has
said of it, and you will be obliged to own that he slighted it, and would have
made no mention of it, if he could have avoided it; but he could not do that,
being engaged to treat of the whole Art of the Stage. Nor could he in prudence
condemn the use of it, if you consider that it was Religious in its Office and
Institution. The same Answer will serve for Horace, because his Religion and
Design were the same with Aristotle's Dacier shall answer himself: For if he
declares a Chorus to be necessary in his Preface, he tells you in his Comment
upon the Sixth Chapter of Aristotle, that he scarce believes it to be natural,
and that having several times wondered, how so delicate and so ingenious a
People as the Athenians must be allow d to be, could think if agreeable to
Nature, or Probability, that a Chorus who represented the Spectators of a
Tragical Action, should sing and dance upon such extraordinary and moving
Events; he was obliged to attribute it to the Inclinations and Superstition of
the Greeks; who, as they were the People of the World the most inclined to
Singing and Dancing, (which natural bent of theirs was fortified by Education)
so were they the most bigoted of all Nations; and Singing and Dancing, which
helped to constitute the Ceremonials of their Religion. were held as Sacred by
them, and of Divine Institution: So that when Dacier, who tells us in his
Comment upon the Sixth Chapter, that he could not have believed the Chorus
natural, if it had not been so adapted to the Superstition and Musical Temper
of the Greeks; declares it to be necessary in his Preface; he must do it out of
belief, that his own Countrymen were as airy Bigots as the Greeks.


Beaum. And, Faith, he was very much in the right of it. How many Frenchmen
have we seen, who between the First and Second Courses have risen from Table,
and danced to their own damned Voices? I must confess, they do not dance at
Church, but they have several apish Gesticulations there, which one may easily
mistake for Dancing, and which are as entertaining to the full. But sor
Singing, it is both their Diversion and Duty.


Freem. Well then; all this considered, it is no wonder that Dacier should tell
us, That Racine being to write upon a Religious Subject, saw a necessity for a
Chorus; that is, for a great deal of Singing and Dancing: for without it there
had been two inconveniences: First, The Religion of the Stage had been more
free from Superstition, than that of the Altar. And, Secondly, a Play had been
more insipid than High Mass.


Beaum. Yet Dacier has given us two Reasons for the necessity of a Chorus, that
have nothing to do with Racine: For a Chorus, says he, is necessary, First, To
deliver Moral Sentiments to the People. And, Secondly, To reflect upon what is
vicious and commendable in the Characters of the primary Actors; in which he is
certainly in the right. Now the Chorus being retrenched from our Modern
Tragedy, Morality must be retrenched at the same time. For the principal Actors
being shaken by violent Passions, cannot be made sentencious; for Sentences
require Reflection, and that requires Serenity; at least some degree of
Serenity. How then can our Theater, the Chorus being retrenched, be said to be
the School of Virtue? Or how can any one be the better for Modern Tragedy?


Freem. Our Theater may be said to be the School of Virtue, upon two accounts.
First, because it removes the greatest Obstructions to Virtue, by reducing the
Passions to a just mediocrity, from their violence and irregularity. And
Secondly, because it teaches some Moral Doctrine by the Fable, which must
always be allegorical and universal.


Beaum. This Answer is something satisfactory. But what can you answer to the
Second pretended necessity for restoring the Chorus? which is, that the Stage
may be furnished with Persons, who may commend or blame any thing that may be
vicious or excellent in the Characters of the primary Actors? For there may be
a necessity sometimes for their speaking profanely and impiously; which may be
of dangerous consequence, without the Reflections of the Chorus.


Freem. Nothing that is said, can be of pernicious consequence in a Tragedy, if
it is writ as it ought to be. That is, if it is what Horace calls, Fabula recte
morata.


Beaum. Pray what may that be?


Freem. A Tragedy is Fabula recte morata, in which the Manners are well
painted: So that every Actor discovers immediately by what he says, his
Inclinations, his Designs, and the very Bottom of his Character; then if any
thing is said impiously, an Audience not only knows that it is spoken by an
implous Man, but by one that is upon the Point of being punished for his
Impiety.


Beaum. This seems to be sensible enough: But now good Sense requires that we
should think of our Dinner: for a hungry Sophister, who disputes at the time he
may eat, does but defraud his own Genius, to put a cheat upon another Man's
Reason: Therefore, let us to the Cock, and I Will send for Jack Wild to make a
third Man; who shall very dogmatically tell you, that there can be no Tragedy
without a Chorus.


Freem. But can he prove it?


Beaum. That you shall judge when you have heard him.


Freem. Well: I Will follow you.


The End of the Fourth Dialogue.
DIALOGUE V.
BEAUMONT, FREEMAN. Scene, Freeman 's Chamber, after Dinner.
Beaum. WAS ever any Man mawl'd as thou have been! Jack Wild has handled you as
you deserved, l'faith: Thou were quite bafled, quite run down, Man!


Freem. Bafled and run down, Good! Are we in Bow-street, or on the Bank-side?
Your Mr. Wild has an admirable Talent for running People down, I confess. But
do not thou know, that the silliest thing that a Man can do, is to speak
Sense in some Company? Is it not a greater sign of Judgment to hold one's
Tongue, than to talk Reason to People who cannot hear it?


Beaum. Then you do not believe he was in the right, it seems?


Freem. I am not quite so credulous. I must confess Mr. Wild had got Dacier
without Book perfectly; nay, and that very place in Dacier which pleads most
strongly for a Chorus. But then he would admit of no Answer. I would advise Mr.
Wild to take Orders; a Pulpit sure is the only place where Impertinence has
privilege to be tedious, without interruption. But thou were as attentive as
any Fanatical Bigot at a Conventicle: therefore, if you can recollect his
Reasons, I dare undertake, to convince you of their insufficiency.


Beaum. Faith, I Will try; but then you shall engage, that if I happen to show
such a plaguey Memory, I shall not lose my Reputation of a Wit with you.


Freem. That I do readily engage for, I'saith.


Beaum. So then; his first Argument was this: Tragedy is the imitation of a
Public and Visible Action; therefore there ought to be a Chorus.


Freem I must confess, Dacier affirms, That Tragedy must be the Representation
of a Public and Visible Action; but Aristotle says no such thing, that I know
of.


Beaum. But common Sense though says so: For if an Action is not publicly
visible, how can it be seen by such a numerous multitude?


Freem. How can an Action, the Scene of which is in Greece, be seen by us here
in England?


Beaum. Nay, I will grant you, that there is an occasion for us to give way to
a wholesome delusion, if we design to receive either delight or profit from the
Drama. But however, a Poet is still to endeavor, that his Representation be
attended with as much probability as it is capable of; And it is much easier
for a thousand Spectators to imagine themselves in some open place, either at
Mycenoe or Thebes, than to imagine themselves in a King's Oabinet, in either of
those two places.


Freem. I must confess what you say appears to be reasonable, but how do you
infer from hence, that there ought to be a Chorus?


Beaum. The Action of a Tragedy being publicly visible, and acted by Persons
of the most exasted Ranks, it is impossible but that there must be People
besides the Actors, interested in the principal Action, upon which Action the
Fortune of those People must in some measure depend.


Freem. And these People you will tell me, are to constitute the Chorus.


Beaum. Right.


Freem. This, I must confess, is according to Dacier; but his Doctrine is
neither warranted by Aristotle, nor always by the Practice of the Ancients; for
it does not appear to me, for example, what dependence, as to their Fortunes,
the Chorus in the Electra of Sophocles, has upon the principal Actors. But
suppose we had Charity to grant, that it is impossible for a grave and
important Action to be acted in public by great Men, but others must
intermeddle in it: Can Dacier infer from hence, that these People thus
concerned, ought to sing and dance at their Princes Sufferings? I will grant it
probable, that at the Sufferings of Kings several should be concerned; at the
same time you must grant it absurd, that they should sing and dance at their
Sufferings. Now would you have a Poet show a thing that is absurd, to show
something else that is probable, when the probability may be supposed as well
as shown, or shown without an absurdity.


Beaum. How can that be?


Freem. In our modern Tragedies, as well as the ancient, there are several
concerned besides the Actors; I mean, besides the primary Actors (for the
Chorus was an Actor in the old Tragedy, and spoke like a Jury by its Foreman)
but they have some better reason for their being concerned, than purely their
itch of meddling; nor do they express their concern in a way which is contrary
to all Decorum: But I could give you an example of a Chorus, where the singing
is not only absurd and unnatural, but destructive of the Poet's design.


Beaum. That example I should be glad to hear.


Freem. It Is the Chorus at the end of the First Act in the Electra of Sophocles.


Beaum. How does that which is sung by the Chorus there, run counter to the
design of the Poet?


Freem. I will, in as few words as I can, give you the Fable of that Tragedy:
Clytemnestra, with her Adulterer AEgystus, assassinates her Husband Agamemnon;
but her Son Orestes, by means of his Sister Electra, escapes: after a long
absence from Mycenoe, he arrives secretly with Pylades and his Governor,
surprises Clytemnestra and her Adulterer, and revenges the Death of his Father.
The Scene opens with the Arrival of Orestes before the Royal Palace of Mycenoe,
at Break of Day, where they find Electra lamenting her sad Condition. The
Chorus advise her not to be so loud, least she should be heard by AEgystus: yet
as soon as ever she is gone, they grow infinitely louder, and in a Consort of
Fifteen Voices, threaten Ruin to Clytemnestra and her Adulterer. It Is true,
they were told that AEgystus was not in the Palace; but they knew very well,
that Clytemnestra was there, and that AEgystus would be with her that very day.
Now this coming after an unlucky Dream, which Clytemnestra looked on as
ominous; which Dream is mentioned by this very Chorus: This Song must in all
reason alarm Clytemnestra, and prevent the surprise which is design d by the
Poet. Besides, how did this Chorus dare thus loudly and publicly to contemn
Clytemnestra before her own Palace, at the very time that she had the Sovereign
Power in her hands?


Beaum. I must confess, I am not able to give any Answer to this.


Freem. I could show you another gross absurdity in that very Tragedy, which is
purely occasioned by the Chorus. But pray go on to the next Argument.


Beaum. I would fain know first, what that other absurdity is: a digression
sometimes is as much worth the while as the main matter; and I have always been
pleased to hear of the Errors of any extraordinary Man, because it has still
been the best support to me, under the mortifying Sense, which I have of my own
Infirmities.


Freem. The absurdity which I speak of, is, the discovery that Orestes makes of
himself and his design, to Electra, in the Fourth Act of that Tragedy (which he
does in the presence of the Chorus); so that he enrrusts a Secret upon which
his Empire and Life depends, in the hands of Sixteen Women: For Orestes had no
Friends on whose assistance he might rely, unless it were his Friend and his
Governor, and consequently he had nothing to depend upon, but Secrecy and
Surprise, and a swilt Execution.


Beaum. Has Dacier in his late Comment upon Electra, taken no notice of those
two mistakes?


Freem. He has taken no notice at all of the first; which I was extremely
surpised at: For that Error seems to me apparently to shock common Sense, I
must confess, he has taken notice of the last, because he thought he could make
a defense for it. But he has done it after such a manner, that I am sorry that
a Man of Monsieur Dacier's Merit should talk at so poor a rate.


Beaum. At how poor a rate?


Freem. I have considered that passage enough to give you the English of it
Verbatim. There are several Persons, says he, of extraordinary Merit, who
cannot endure to see Plots and Contrivances against the Lives of Princes, in
the presence of a Chorus, pretending that this cannot be probable; nay, that it
cannot be natural. But these People, says he, ought to reflect upon the
Conditions that are necessary to qualify a Chorus rightly. The Chorus ought to
be interested in the Action, as much as the principal Persons, they ought to be
animated by the same Spirit, and all their Happiness ought to depend upon their
Secrecy and their Fidelity. And when a Chorus is thus qualified, there is
nothing which may not be said before it, without any violation to probability.
And then it is as natural to see a Conspiracy concerted before it, as it is to
behold a number of Conspirators closely consulting in some secure Retirement.
The Chorus of Electra is of this nature, says he.


Beaum. And is it?


Freem. Monsieur Dacier may imagine what he pleases, but there is nothing that
the Chorus or Electra says, that may induce a Man to believe, that the fortune
of the first depends upon the success of the last. But supposing it did, can
any Man who has common Sense believe, that a Prince, as dlscreet as Orestes is
represented by Sophocles, should entrust a Secret, upon which his Empire and
Life depended, with fifteen Women, only upon the recommendation of his Sister,
whose discretion he had no reason to have any mighty Opinion of? But this has
been a long digression, therefore pray proceed to the next Argument, which Mr.
Wild brought for a Chorus.


Beaum. A Tragedy, said he, is the imitation of an Action, which must be one
and entire; and therefore there must be a Chorus: For without it the Acts can
never be joined, there will be a solution of continuity, and Tragedy can never
be one entire Body. Pray, what can you answer to this?


Freem. This, I must confess, is the Bugbear Argument; but we shall do well
enough with it. Then Mr. Wild and you fancy, that the Action breaks off every
time that the Music plays between the Acts?


Beaum. That is Mr. Wild's Opinion.


Freem. But then I could tell you, that the Action is supposed to be continued
behind the Scenes.


Beaum. How can an Audience be sure of that? Or when the Stage is left empty
upon the end of the First Act, what grounds has a Company to believe the Actors
will return? What grounds, I say, can they have, but Custom, which is but a
ridiculous Security at the best, and can be none at all, to one who sees a
Tragedy acted the first time. Whereas a Chorus naturally keeps the Company
together, till the return of the principal Actors.


Freem. But sure, I should think, that an Audience between the Acts should have
a much better Security for the return of the Actors than Custom, and that is
from the nature of Tragedy, which is the imitation of an entire action; that
is, of an Action which has a beginning, a middle, and an end. Now this
beginning and middle, are, according to Aristotle, Things that necessarily
suppose something to follow.


Beaum. When you talk at this rate, you suppose that every one who sees a
Tragedy, understands the Rules of Aristotle.


Freem. The Rules of Aristotle are nothing but Nature and Good Sense reduced to
a Method: I may very well suppose, that every one who goes to see a Tragedy
acted, goes with a hope, that he shall not see something absurd, and that he
has common Sense to know, that a Tragedy would be very absurd, which should
conclude abruptly, before the just end of the Action; that is to say, before
that part of it, which necessarily supposes nothing to follow it.


Beaum. You say the Song of the Chorus is very absurd and unnatural; but are
not the Fiddles between the Acts a great deal more absurd and unnatural. A Poet
in a Tragic Imitation, is always to have an eye to probability. But is it
probable, that Oedipus, or any other Prince, should four times in the height
and fury of his Passion, leave the Scene of Action, purely to give leave to a
Company of Musicians to divert the Spectators four times, least they should be
too much shaken by the progress of the terrible Action? Would not such a one be
a merry Monarch, a very complaisant Wretch?


Freem. Has not Dacier reason to be ashamed of this empty Sophistry, which may
so easily be retorted upon himself? For would it not be as ridiculous to make a
King leave the Scene of the Action four times, only to give way to the People
who compose the Chorus? Any Man knows, that in Plays which have a Chorus, and
in Plays which have none, it is the necessity of the Action, which makes the
Actors leave the Stage. For an Actor never leaves the Stage in a Tragedy which
is writ as it should be, but when he has business in another place. But suppose
I should grant you, that the Fiddles are more absurd than a Chorus, we do not
pretend that our Music makes a part of Tragedy, as you pretend that the Chorus
does, and if there must be an absurdity, it had better been in Ornament than in
Essentials.


Beaum. But if your Music does not make a part of the Modern Tragedy, how can
it be said to be one body, when the parts of it are not united?


Freem. It Is not the tagging of the Acts with a Chorus, that properly makes a
Tragedy one Body, but the Unity of the Action; and for my part, I cannot
conceive, but that the Parts are sufficiently united, when the Action has a
Beginning, a Middle, and an End, which have a mutual necessary and immediate
dependence. But if it should be granted to Dacier, that the Fiddles between the
Acts are absolutely destructive of the Unity of the Poem, he could never infer
from it, that there ought to be a Chorus, when the mischief may be prevented
another way.


Beaum. What way is that?


Freem. Why, by not dividing Tragedy into Acts at all.


Beaum. But several Inconveniences would follow from thence.


Freem. I will easily grant it; but any inconvenience ought to be admitted,
rather than that grand absurdity a Chorus. For Poetry being an imitation of
Nature, any thing which is unnatural strikes at the very Root and Being of it,
and ought to be avoided like Ruin.


Beaum. Well, thou have here taken a great deal of pains to prove, that we
ought not to re-establish the Chorus; but you promised to show me, that we
ought not to banish Love neither.


Freem. I have now an appointment which I am obliged to keep touch with. But
when we next meet, I will not only engage to demonstrate that to you, but to
show you, that contrary to Mr. Rymer's assertion, Shakespeare was a great Genius.


Beaum. I shall be very glad, if you perform what you say. But prithee tell me
before we part, your Opinion of Mr. Rymer's Judgment of our English Comedies.


Freem. Never was there a more righteous Decree. We have particularly a Comedy
which was writ by a Gentleman now living, that has more Wit and Spirit than
Plautus, without any of his little contemptible Affectations; and which, with
the Urbanity of Terence, has the Comic force which the Great Caesar required
in him.


Beaum. What Comedy can that be?


Freem. What indeed can it be, but the Plain Dealer?


Beaum. I find then, that you do not dissent from Mr. R -- in every thing.


Freem. No, I should be very sorry if I should do that; for his Censures of
Shakespeare in most of the particulars, are very sensible and very just. But it
does not follow, because Shakespeare has Faults, that therefore he has no
Beauties, as the next time we meet I shall show you.


Beaum. Well, till then, your Servant.


Freem. Honest Ned, Adieu.


THE END.
ERRATA.
In the LETTER to a Friend.
FOR exerted Compassion. read excited Compassion. for warmer Sun r. warm a Sun,
for desire r. desired. for following Dialogue r. following Dialegues. for is a
base Envy r. it shows a base Envy. for greater Geniuses than they r. greater
Geniuses in England, than they have in France.

Dialogue the Third.
PAge. 18. for Punegyricks r. Panegyric. p. 19. for I desire you r. I defy
you. p. 22 for gallant Man r. gallant Writer. for Sevire r. Saevire. p. 29. for
caudque etc. r. caudaeque pilos ut equinae. Dialogue IV. p. 32. for Recine r.
Racine. p. 34. for parties accessoine r. les parties accessoires furent
devenues les principales. p. 36. for amici. r. amicis, for eratos r. iratos.

ADVERTISEMENT.
MIscellany Poems, etc. By Mr. Dennis, will be Published this next Week.
Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.


