THE GREAT Necessity and Advantage of PRESERVING OUR OWN Manufacturies; BEING
An ANSWER TO A PAMPHLET, INTITUL'D, The Honor and Advantage of the East India
Trade, etc.

By N. C. a Weaver of London.

LONDON, Printed for T. Newborough at the Golden-Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1697.

To the HONORABLE The Commons of England in Parliament, Assembled.
May it please Your Honors,
THE reason that has emboldened me to address the following Discourse to this
Honorable House, is because of a Bill now depending, to restrain the wearing
of East-Indian and Persian wrought Silks, Bengalls, etc. I having met with a
Book, (newly come forth) that seems purposely designed to elude the necessity
of.

It is not because I think it answered here with that Accuracy that it might
have been, nor do I pretend to be able so to do; but because I conceive that
Truth ought to be Vindicated, and Error Detected, rather meanly, than not at
all; but what is wanting in my Ability, is abundantly supplied in the Justness
of the Cause, and the Plainness of the Truth, here pretended to be Vindicated.

That Manufacture is one of the chief procuring Causes of Riches, and of
improving the Land where it is, is so plain a Truth, that I think can scarce be
denied, and therefore ought to be promoted by us rather in England than in
India.

That there are many Towns in England and Wales that may be improved, by having
Manufactories set up in them, besides what have already, I do not question; and
the Advance that it gives to Land that lies near them, is visible.

The extreme and pressing Necessities of the poorer sort of People that uses to
be employed in those Manufactories, cannot but afflict them that hear their
daily Complaints, and has been a great Motive to induce me to this Undertaking.

That it has pleased God Almighty to preserve our Laws, Liberties, and
Parliamentary Constitutions to this day, is a mercy that every Englishman ought
to acknowledge with Thankfulness, and that the frequent rise of Grievances of
one kind or another, make a Necessity of frequent Parliaments is evident to
Experience, and that we do not only need, but enjoy them is our Comfort.

That the God of infinite Wisdom and Goodness may continually direct and bless
your Councels and Endeavors to his Glory; to the Honor and Safety of the
King's Majesty, and to the Welfare and Prosperity of the Nation, is, and shall
be the Prayer of

Your Honors most Humble, And truly Devoted Servant, N. C.

THE GREAT Necessity and Advantage Of Preserving Our own Manufactories.
THAT there is a Controversy between the Manufacturers of England and the
East India Traders, I conceive to be generally well known, but the true State
of the Case, I suppose, is not so well understood: the Author of a Pamphlet
very lately come forth, entitled, The great Honor and Advantage of the
East India Trade, etc. applies the cause of this difference wholly to the
mistaken Prejudices of those, who being, as he says, no Philosophers, don't
know where to fix the reason of their misery by the Decrease of their Trade,
but have blindly stumbled upon this as the next in their way; I shall therefore
endeavor to set this case in its true light, thereby to discover whether it be
a mere chymerical Fancy, or a real Evil, that they complain of; and to that
end, that it may appear more clear, I shall lay down both negatively and
positively;

First, What it is that they do not complain of?

Secondly, What it is that they conceive they have just reason to complain of
and desire Relief?

As to the first, they do not desire to hinder the Trade and Commerce of the
Nation, but are so far from it, that they desire the Increase of all our own
Manufactures, as one of the best means of Increase in it; nor do they desire
the hinderance of any Merchandise that tends to the good of the Nation (as he
seems to suggest) but if that men will say, That their trading Genius is
discouraged, because they are hindered from freely exporting the Native Product
of the Land to be manufactured beyond Sea, as in the case of the Owlers, or
because they are hindered from bringing in all sorts of Provision to serve
instead of the Product of our own Land, or because they are hindered from
sending out the Treasure of the Nation to bring n Lieu thereof such
manufactured Goods, as shall serve instead of our own greatest Manufactures,
which used to employ the largest numbers of our Poor: in all these cases, and
and other such like, it is evident, that whatever cry such men make of the
great loss and damage it is to the Nation to hinder their Trade and Commerce;
yet there is nothing more at the bottom of their design, than their own private
Gain, to enrich themselves in particular, though it be to the extremest Damage
and Prejudice of the Nation in general; for as it is possible for the Nation to
get by that Trade the Merchant loses by, as the afore-mentioned Author relates
and exemplifies; so it was not for want of Wit (he is so much a Philosopher)
that he did not tell us, that it is as possible for a Merchant to get much, and
grow very rich by that Trade which the Nation loses and is impoverished by. As
for example, Suppose a Merchant send 10000 l. to India, and bring over for it,
as much wrought Silks and painted Callicoes, as yield him here 70000 l. if they
be all worn here in the room of our own Silk and Woollen Manufactures, the
Nation loses and is the poorer 10000 l. notwithstanding the Merchant has made a
very profitable Adventure, and so proportionably the more and oftener he sends,
the faster he grows rich, and the more the Nation is impoverished.

Secondly, It is not any suppression of the East India Trade in general that
they desire, it is possible that a very considerable Trade may be carried on,
in such Commodities, as may make that Trade very profitable, not only to
private Men but to the Nation. There are many very useful Commodities brought
from thence, as Pepper, Salt Petre, raw Silk, several Drugs, and many other
things that do not interfere with or hinder the Growth or Manufacture of
England, and such was the Indian Trade, generally speaking, till within thirty
Years last past, since which time they have labored to increase their Trade to
their utmost power in those Manufactures, and finding the Advantage they had of
having their Goods cheap wrought by the wretched Poverty of that numerous
People, have used sinister Practices to betray the Arts used in their Native
Country, such as sending over Artificers and Patterns to instruct them in the
way of making Goods, and Mercers to direct them in the Humor and Fancy of
them, to make them fit our Markets, a Practice so inconsistent with the Love,
and contrary to the interest of their Native Country, that it is reckoned in
some Countries a capital Crime, and this brings me to the second general, that
is,

Secondly, What it is that they conceive they have just reason to complain of,
and desire relief against.

And that is, that great Import of Foreign Manufactures that are spent here in
the room and stead of our own, and that in such vast quantities, as seems very
likely to extinguish the English Manufactury, which is as it were quite born
down by that mighty Torrent and Inundation of Foreign Manufacturies; and this
sending out of our Treasure to bring in this abundance of wrought Goods, is
like drawing out the pure and spirituous Blood of a Man's Veins, and filling
them with Hydropick Humors.

But the Author of that Pamphlet says, That this Foreign Commerce is the only
way to procure us Treasure: If he means so much of it as is spent here (and
that is all we contest about) it must needs be a great mistake, for that is so
far from supplying us with Gold and Silver, that it is more like a Quick-sand
to devour that we have already.

As for his Comparison, That the Worsted Weavers of Norwich may as well
complain against the Silk Weavers of London, it is altogether false and
illusive; for London and Norwich are Members of the same Body, and therefore
what is laid out with One or Other is still within the Nation, and will
circulate like Blood in the Veins; but all the Treasure laid out with the
Indians for their Manufactures to wear here, is as entirely lost for ever to
this Kingdom, as the Blood, that by cutting the Veins, being shed upon the
Ground, is to the Body: But since he says we have no Mines of Gold or Silver,
we can tell him of something else to supply that; our vast quantity of Sheeps
Wool, which is improved from 6 or 7 Pence per pound by the Labor of our own
People to 6 or 7 Shillings per pound; this thus improved by Manufacture, if
worn at home, is Money saved to the Nation from Foreign Expense, because it
costs the Nation nothing; but if sent abroad, the Product is all clear gain to
the Nation (provided it be by English Shipping) and if the Produce be
manufacturable Commodities, as in the Turkey Trade Raw Silk, Hair, etc. then
they are improved again by the labor of our own People to double or treble the
value; and if this may justly be compared to Mines for the increase of our
Treasure, then the sending out of our Silver or Gold to India to bring over
wrought Silks, Bengalls, etc. to be worn here, may as justly be called
Quicksands to decrease our Treasure by devouring or swallowing it up. What he
starts and pretends to answer, That the made goods seem particularly to injure
the Broad Silk Weavers, by putting them by or beside their trade and way of
living, is illusive, false and foolish; for he cannot but know (if he know any
thing of this matter) That the Norwich and other Worsted Weavers were as much
and as early in their Sense of and Complaints against the great damage they
received by these made Goods; and I cannot well tell, whether the Folly or
Dishonesty be greater of comparing against both these numerous People, and the
vast Multitudes that are Dependents on both, a few People employed about the
Indian made Goods; and to say that the latter is much more to the benefit of
the Nation in general.

But the boldest stroke lies behind, That it is not true in fact (i. e.) (that
the made Goods injure the Weavers) and this is indeed the true Paradox. Now
matter of fact we conceive must be made good by Evidence, we are willing to
hear it; then it is his Experience, testifies, that the scarcity of Indian Goods
does them no kindness, but that rather the plentiful Importation of these made
Goods sets them at work: now in opposition to his Experience, we can bring in
the Testimony of many thousands that have experienced quite contrary, and the
sense of it is too fresh upon them, to be easily persuaded, that it is but a
Dream, and therefore such lame proof of fact is of no value; he might as well
have said, That when a Man has eat his Belly full of Westphaliaham, it fits
him presently with a better Stomach for English Bacon; or when a Gentlewoman
has just bought French Alamode or Flanders Lace, it makes her the more earnest
presently to furnish her self with English Lace and Alamode; and it is an easy
matter to say, That it is Prejudice hinders, when People will not assent to such
Contradictions: But he says, The bringing in of these made Goods will make Silk
cheap, and that sets them to work; if he had said, they will bring in more raw
Silk, and by that means make Silk cheap, and set them to work, it had been to
the purpose; but the bringing in of the made Goods, takes off the great
occasion of their working, viz. (the supplying the Market) and so sets them to
play; and this is plain and visible.

But that I may not suspected of Partiality, or be said to abound in mine own
Sense, I shall bring in the Testimony of the Judicious Sir Josiah Child, who
lays down these solid Principles of Truth and Reason in the 43d Page of his
Discourse of Trade, That

Whatever does 1 Advance the Value of Land in Purchase, 2 Improve the Rent of
Farms, 3 Increase the Bulk of Foreign Trade, 4 Multiply Domestic Artificers,
5 Incline the Nation to Thriftiness, 6 Employ the Poor, 7 Increase the Stock of
People,
must be a procuring Cause of Riches.

I conceive that it is self-evident, that there is no one thing more adapted to
all these ends, than the Use and Encouragement of our own Manufactories; nor
any thing more contrary, than the Use and Expense of foreign Manufactures, as
that judicious Author observes, That the Expense of foreign Commodities,
especially foreign Manufactures, is the worst Expense a Nation can be
inclinable to, and ought to be prevented as much as possible.

And though the pernicious Effects of the use and wear of foreign Manufactures,
does first reach those concerned in Manufactory here, yet its ill Influences
will as sure reach the Gentry and Proprietors of Land, (if not timely
prevented) for as the said judicious Author says, Land and Trade are Twins, and
have always, and ever will wax and wain together; it cannot be ill with Trade,
but Land will fall; nor ill with Lands, but Trade will feel it.

And therefore it must needs be, that the promoting the use and wear of Indian
Manufactures here, tend to the sinking of the Value of Land in England, after
the Pattern of India, for there must be always a Symmetry and Proportion
between the price of Labor and the value of Land, for he that works for 2
Pence a day, cannot give 50 Shillings per ann. Rent, nor can he give 3 or 4
Pence per l. for Meat, nor for any other Provision suitable: and it is as sure,
that if the Husbandman must sell his Provision for a quarter part of what he
now sells it, he cannot pay his Landlord much more than a quarter part of what
he now pays, but these are so plain Truths, that it seems, as needless to spend
many words about it, as it is to bring Arguments to prove that two is more than
one, or that the whole is more than a part, or any other most certain Maxim.

But ere I conclude, it will be necessary once more to look back to the
forementioned Pamphlet, styled, The Great Honor and Advantage, etc. where
that Author brings in the profit the Dutch make, and the Scotch promise
themselves by the East India Trade, as a sure token of its Goodness, because no
man courts a Mischief. I answer, it is not true nor pertinent: it is not true in
the sense we are treating of, for too many men court that which is a public
Mischief, for their own private Gain, as I suppose will be generally owned in
the case of those that bring in Alamodes and other French Commodities against
Law, now we are engaged in a Waragainst them, and many other cases were easy
to name, wherein men do court that which is a Mischief to the Public for their
own private

2. Nor is it pertinent; for it is not the East India Trade in general that is
complained of, nor that we seek Relief against; but only such of the made Goods
as interfere with our own Manufactures; and yet but so much of them neither, as
only are worn here: and as to this, it is well known, That though the Dutch
Trade to the E. Indies be so much superior to ours, yet as to these Goods, that
are the mischievous part of that Trade, two of our last Ships, brought over
much more than their twelve Ships brought; and yet that Trade would not be so
pernicious to the Dutch, as to us, because they have not so large a tract of
Land, no such Fund as our Sheeps-wooll, nor such vast numbers of People
employed in Manufactories; but as they have a smaller spot of Ground, so their
People are mostly employed about Merchandise and Shipping.

He might have told us, what reception the French, that have a large tract of
Land, and many Manufactorers, do give to Foreign wrought Goods, especially
Indian (if he had thought it his interest:) Some are of Opinion, and not
without reason, That if the French King had suffered his People to export the
Treasure of his Country, to bring in foreign made Goods, as freely as our
Indian Traders now do, his own Merchants would have helped so effectually to
humble him, that he had been brought to Reason before now.

But that Author has a special knack of confounding one thing with another, to
the end, that he might make one thing pass for another, (a trick very necessary
for those that do not intend to clear up Truth, but stifle it.) Thus he would
make Trade and Commerce in general, and the whole E. India Trade, to be
understood for this part of it, which we only oppose, (and some of themselves
have counted a small part formerly.) Thus he would have the particular gain of
that Company, in advancing their Actions treble, pass for a sign of the Profit
it was to the Nation, and the greatest part of his Book, upon strict
examination, will fall under this Head.

As for our Scotch Friends, whatever they promise themselves from this Trade,
that we contest about, (and if that Bill now depending before the Honorable
House of Commons, for restraining the wear of Indian Silks, etc.) do pass into
a Law, they will be little the better for it, if they come to bring in their
Callico's in any considerable quantities to be worn in Scotland, in lieu of
their own Linen Manufacture; a few years will teach them (whatever some private
persons may get by it) that they have made but an ill bargain of it for their
Country; but if it should not pass into a Law, no doubt but they will be
peddling them all over England, and then they may well promise themselves to be
great gainers, but poor England must pay for all, and suffer the fate of
Issachar, to couch under two Burdens.

I have now done for the present with the aforesaid Author and the Trade he
pleads for; if any desire to inform themselves, both in our East Indian and
other Foreign Trades, what benefit each is to the Nation, they may please to
read a Book, called, An Essay on the State of England in relation to its Trade,
etc. written about a Year since, by the Ingenious Mr. John Carry, Merchant of
Bristol.

I shall now state briefly, Whether the People, and their Employ, (for whose
sake I have made these faint Essays) be a real benefit to the Kingdom in
general, or only to some few persons in particular, under the severe
Administration of the Duke of Alva, in the Netherlands: Many Families came over
into England, and brought over with them this Trade of weaving broad Silks and
Stuffs made of Wool and Silk and Wool mixed: These were graciously received,
by that great and wise Princess Queen Elizabeth, of blessed Memory; and were so
encouraged, that through the succeeding Reigns, they came to more thousands
than they were Families: that this has been one of those means, that has
advanced Land both in Rent and Purchase so considerably since that time, were
easy to demonstrate, not only from Experience, but from the nature of the
thing, as a Cause that must naturally produce such an Effect; and when all is
said that can be, we shall never be enriched by an Ignis fatuus, but by such
Trades as have a natural tendency thereunto. To conclude, Solomon faith, The
honor of a King is the multitude of his Subjects, but in the want of People is
the destruction of the Prince. Now this Trade has not only brought a
Livelihood to such great Multitudes of our own People, but entertained also
many thousands of French Protestants fled hither for Refuge, which will be much
to the Honor and Advantage of this Kingdom, if our Manufactures be so
encouraged, that there may be a sufficient employ flor them all, and our Poor
(whom God and Nature requires us to take care of) be so employed, as to be an
useful part of the Nation. Much more might be said; but I shall only add, That
no one thing under the Divine Providence, and the Care of our Governors,
contributes more to the Riches and Safety of the Nation, than encouraging our
own Manufactures.

FINIS.

