THE CASE OF JAMES PERCY, Claymant To The Earldom of Northumberland.

WITH An Impartial Account of the Proceedings he has made in the several
Courts of Justice in order to the Proving and obtaining his Right and Title to
the said Earldom.

Humbly Addressed to the KINGS Most Excellent Majesty, and the Right Honorable
the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal in PARLIAMNET Assembled.

Prove 8. 15. By me Kings Reign, and Princes Decree Justice. LONDON, Printed in
the Year, 1685.

HENRY PERCY, Fifth Earl of Northumberland, Married; and had Issue Three Sons,
viz.

I. Henry Percy, 6th. Earl of Northumberland, Married, and dyed without Issue.

II. Thomas Percy, Married and had Issue; But when Josceline Percy the 11th.
Earl dyed; the Heirs Males of this Line were Extinct also.

III. Sir Ingelram Percy, Married and had Issue 2 Sons, (viz.) Henry, and
Robert.

Henry Percy, Eldest Son, Married, and had Issue 3 Sons (viz.) James, William,
and Henry; But the 2 elder Brothers died without Issue-Male.

Henry Percy, (Third Son,) Married, and had Issue 3 Sons (viz.) Henry, James,
and Henry: But the two Henryes dyed young.

James Percy, (the now Claymant) Married, and has 3 Sons, (viz.) Anthony,
Henry and John.

Anthony Percy, is Married, and has Issue, Henry Percy, Grandson of James
Percy the now Claymant.



The following Account makes out this Pedigree fully, from Henry Percy 5th.
Earl of Northumberland, to the Claymant James Percy.

A True Pedigree to prove the Claymant, James Percy, to be the second Son of
Henry Percy of Horton in the County of Northampton, who was third Son of Henry
Percy of Pavenham in the County of Bedford, who was the Eldest Son of Sir
Ingelram Percy, Knt. who was the third Son of Henry Lord Percy, 5th. Earl of
Northumberland, By which Descent the Claymant is Cousin and next Heir-Male to
Joscelin Percy the late and 11th. Earl of Northumberland Deceased.
HENRY Lord PERCY, Fifth Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of
Cockermouth and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne and Bryan, and
Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter,

Who Married ^^^herine, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Sir Robert Spencer
Knight; by whom he had Issue,

1st. Henry Lord Percy. 6th. Earl of Northumberland; who Dyed without Issue.

2. Thomas Percy Knight, who was Executed; had to Wife, Eleanor, one of the
Daughters and Coheirs of Sir Gwichard Harbottle Knight; by whom he had Issue,
Thomas the 7th. Earl of Northumberland, who was beheaded at York, and dyed
without Issue-Male; And Henry the 8th. Earl of Northumberland, whose Issue is
incerted hereafter.

3d. Sir Ingelram Percy Knight, who was Married, as by the Oath of Mr. Henry
Champion, who kept the Books and Records of the Percies.

Henry Lord Percy 6th. Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of
Cockermouth and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne and Bryan,
Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, who Dyed at Hackney near London
the day before the Calends of July, 1537. leaving no Children behind him, The
Dignity of the Earl of Northumberland was vacant till the time of Edward the
VI. John Dudly Earl of Warwick, Viscount Lisle, Lord Basset and Ties was
Entitled Duke of Northumberland the 5th. year of King Edward the VI. But when
he was Dead, Thomas Percy Nephew to this Henry by Thomas his Brother, who was
Executed; In the Reign of Queen Mary, was restored to all the Honors of that
Family.

Thomas Percy, Nephew to Henry the 6th. Earl of Northumberland by his Brother
Thomas, when the stock of the Percies were fading; to their Relief was invested
in the Earldom of Northumberland, which the Earl of Warwick held before; and
thereby was ^he 7th. Earl of Northumberland of that Family, Lord of the Honors
of Cockermouth, Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne and Bryan;
Queen Mary bestowing those Honors upon him, and his Heirs Male; (and for want
of such Issue, Then to Henry his Brother, and his Heirs Male,) by her Letters
Patents, dated the first day of May, 1557. and whatsoever else of the Ancient
Patrimonies of the Earls remained, Seized, or Forfeited: But if He should die
without Issue Male, Then it should go to his Brother Henry, and his Issue Male.
And although (to Honor him the more,) Queen Elizabeth made him Knight of the
most Noble Order of the Garter; Yet He, (unmindful of all these Benefits,)
Conspired with Charles Earl of Westmerland, to Depose, by Force, Queen
Elizabeth; So by Authority of Paliament he was Condemned for High Treason, and
as Chief in the Conspiracy, was beheaded at York, 14th. Year of Queen Elizabeth.

That he Married Anne the Daughter of Henry Somerset Earl of Worcester, and had
Issue Male, Thomas, who dyed young, and four Daughters; Heirs Males Extinct.

And Henry Percy 8th. Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of
Cockermouth, Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne and Bryan; all
enjoyed those Honors by virtue of the Letters Patents given by Queen Mary to
his Brother Thomas, and was Created Earl of Northumberland, Anno 1574. and
after accused of Treason; and being in the Tower of London, slew himself with a
Dag charged with Two Bullets, (before his Cause was heard, or that he was
Arraigned,) in the Month of July, 1585.

ARMS Quartered as before.

Who Married Katherine one of the Daughters and Coheirs of John Nevel Lord
Latimer, by whom he had Issue, 1. Henry the 9th. Earl. 2. Thomas, who dyed
young. 3. William. 4. Sir Charles Percy Knight. 5. Sir Richard Percy Knight. 6.
Sir Alan Percy Knight. 7. Sir Josceline Percy Knight. 8. George Percy Esquire


Henry Lord Percy 9th. Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of
Cockermouth and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, (...), Bryan, and (in his
Mothers right) Lord Latimer; He was Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, by Queen Elizabeth, in the Year of our Lord, 1593.

Who Married Dorothy, Daughter of Walter (...), Earl of (...); by whom he had
Issue, 1. Algernoon, the 10th. Earl. 2. Lord (...),
who dyed without Issue.

Algernoon, the 10th. Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of
Cockermouth and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne, Bryan and
Latimer, Kinght of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Lord Admiral of England,
and General over His Majesty's Forces for his Expedition in Anno 1640. and one
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council: He Married Two Wives: by the
former he had four Daughters; and by the latter Wife, 1 Son, (viz.) Josceline.

Josceline, the 11th. Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of
Cockermouth and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poyning, Fitz-payne, Bryan and
Latimer, Deceased;

Who Married Elizabeth, Daughter to the Earl of Southampton, by whom he had
Issue, 1. Henry, who dyed young; before his Father. 2. Elizabeth, who Married
the Lord Ogle.
(Heirs Males Extinct.)

The Collateral Line.

Sir Ingelram Percy the 3d. and youngest Son of Henry Percy the 5th. Earl of
Northumberland; was married, and had Sons and Daughters, (as by the Oath of Mr.
Henry Champion, who kept the Percies Books and Records; where he found what h^
testified upon Oath, at the Trial between Vtting Plaintiff, and Coppleston
Defendant) He had Issue, viz. 1. Henry Percy, 2. Robert Percy,
and two Daughters.

About 1559. these four Children were (in the time of Troubles in Queen
Elizabeth's Days) sent out of the North in Hampers, to old Dame Vaux at Haraden
in Northamptonshire, and there were brought up, preserved, and provided for.
Therefore it is concluded by all, that Sir Ingelram's Lady (the Mother of those
Children,) must be related to Dame Vaux's Family.

Henry, the eldest Son of Sir Ingelram, Married the Daughter of one Tibbott, by
whom he had Issue, 1. James Percy, who dyed about the year 1654. in Ireland,
without Issue-male. 2. William, who died young. 3. Henry.
And three Daughters.

Henry Percy Married Lydea the Daughter of Mr. Robert Cope of Horton in
Northamptonshire, by whom he had Issue. 1. Henry, who dyed young. 2. James. 3.
Henry, who dyed young.
One Daughter, named Elizabeth.

James, the now Claymant, born 1619. of Henry and Lydea his Wife, who was 3d.
Son of Henry, who was first Son of Sir Ingelram, who was 3d. Son of Henry, 5th.
Earl of Northumberland, who was great great Grandfather of the Claymant James
Percy, who married Sarah the Daughter of John Sawyer of Norwich, Gent. by whom
he has Issue,

1. Anthony Percy, Married and has a Son (viz.) Henry. 2. Henry. 3. John.
In May 1670. Joscelin Percy, late Earl of Northumberland departed this Life in
parts beyond the Seas; after whose death, the Honors descended to the now
Claymant ut per the Pedigree asoresaid.

October the 11th. 1670. The Claymant Arrived in England to prosecute his
Claim to the Earldom of Northumberland; at which time it being given out, that
the Countess Dowager of the said (...) with Child; the Claymant desisted until
the contrary was evident.

February the 3d. 1670. The Claymant entered in His Late Majesty's Signet-Office
at White Hall hi^ Claim to the said Earldom, as Cousin and next Heir-Male to
Josceline, and to the Title, Stil^, Honor and Dignity of Baron Percy, and Earl
of Northumberland Cum pertinent^^, and to the Annual Rent or Fee of 20ll. with
which the said Honor and Dignity is endowed payable by the Sheriff of
Northumberland out of the same County; And at the same time entered there also
his Cav^at, that no Grant might be made thereof to any Person.

In the same Year 1670. The Claymant, in Order to the Recovery of his Right,
applied himself to Sir Heneage Finch then Attorney General to His Late Majesty,
and desired him to sign the Claymants Quo Warranto.

In the same Year 1670. the Claymant humbly addressed himself by Petition to
His (...) Majesty for redress in that matter, who was graciously pleased to
send Sir John Birkenhead to the said Attorney General, to demand of him from
his Majesty why he did not sign the Claymants Quo Warranto; who returned for
answer, That he could not do it, as he was of Council with the Defendant, ^he
Countess Dowager of Northumberland.

This Answer of the Attorney Generals being signified to His Majesty, he was
pleased expressly to refer the Clymant to Sir Edward Walker and Sir John
Birkenhead, to inquire and search into the Claymants Pedigree; for which
purpose the Claymant attended them with his Council Mr. Sergeant Brampston,
where the matter was debated; and there then appearing some difficulty to find
with certainty, who was the Claymants Great Grandfather: It was the joint
advise of Sir Edward Walker, Sir John Birkenhead, and Sergeant Brampston, That
the Claymant should at adventure Claim under some one of the Family of the
Percies, and not delay his prosecution any longer; they all then declaring to
the Claymant, that in case he pitched upon a wrong Person to Claim from, yet it
could not prejudice the Claymant; for that on the contrary would be a means
(...) out the Right Person.

Pursuant to this Advice, the Claymant took his descent from Sir Richard Percy
as his Great Grandfather; and the matter thereon coming to be heard before the
Lords in Parliament, Sir Richard Percy appeared to be too young to be the
Claymants Great Grandfather; Sergeant Pemberton then of Counsel with the
Claymant, Informed their Lordships of the Reason and Advice aforesaid of the
Claymants fixing upon Sir Richard Percy as his Great Grandfather; and that
notwithstanding the mistake, yet the same could not, nor ought really to
prejudice the Claymant, as to any definitive Sentence to be passed thereon by
their Lordships, against the Claymant; For that the matter of the Claymants
Right and Claim ought first to be Tried in the Inferior Courts; and in case
the Truth of the matter could not be found out and determined at Law, then (and
not before) it was proper for their Lordships Judgment and Determination; with
which their Lordships were satisfied.

Upon this the Claymants Adversaries procured to be Published in the Gazets,
That the Claymant was an Impostor; and at their Courts, declared to the
Tennants, That his Name was not Percy, but that he was a Bastard, and that they
could prove, that Henry Percy, who he declared was his Father, was never
married: the Consequence of which evil, and unheard of practices, Was

1st. Rendering the Claymant Odious to the World. And

2ly. Through the foul practice of the Claymants Solicitor, there was a
misinformation given unto His Late Gracious Majesty of ever Blessed Memory, who
thereupon gave the Title and Land away, which multiplied not only Enemies, but
Power against the Claymants Just demands: In Order to the removing these
Obstacles, convincing the World of the Malice of his Adversaries, and clear
himself of these vile Imputations, to assert his undoubted Right to the Honors
and Earldom of Northumberland, the Claymant brought his Action of Scandal
against Mr. John Clerk one of the Adversaries principal Agents.

In 1674. The Cause came to Trial (Clerk having for a long time before sheltred
himself under Privileges of Parliament) where notwithstanding the Claymant
proved himself Legitimate by Father, Mother, Grandfather and Grandmother; yet
the Claymants Attorney, with colusion, and without the Claymants consent,
suffered a Non-Suite; upon which the Lord Chief Justice Hale, stood up and
declared his dissatisfaction thereat; saying in open Court, That the Claymant
had fully proved himself a true Percy, by Father, Mother, Grandfather and
Grandmother, and of the Blood and Family of the Percyes of Northumberland, and
that he did verily believe the Claymant was Cousin, and next Heir Male to
Josceline Percy late Earl of Northumberland? only he was afraid, he had taken
his Descent a little too low. Nay, the Jury (then Impanneld, and sworn upon the
Trial; after the Trial, had a Treat given them by the Adversaries) declared
thus to Clark the Defendant in the Suit: Sir, You are beholding to the Claymant
James Percy, for suffering a Nonsuit; for truly, otherwise we must have given
a Verdict against you for him* his Pedigree was proved so clear.

Note, The Damages in this Action was laid at 10000ll.

Note, Immediately after this Trial was over, the Court of King's Bench risen,
and the Judge going to his Coach, the late Earl of Shaftsbury meeting him at
his Coach, said thus to the Judge, My Lord, I hear Mr. Percyes Trial was to
day; I pray, What do you think of him? To which the Lord Chief Justice Hales,
(with much earnestness) replied, I verily believe he has as much right to the
Earldom of Northumberland, as I have to this Coach and Horses which I have
bought and paid for;

Note, The Earl of Shaftsbury when he was Lord Chancellor of England was by
Agreement with some of the Adversaries to have had Lands of the Percies to the
value of 30000ll. for what purpose let the prudent and unprejudiced judge.

After this, the Claymant (pursuant to Judge Hale's Intimation) endeavored to
search higher for his Pedigree, and for that purpose repaired to the Right
Honorable, and truly Noble and Virtuous the then Countess of Dorset, Pembroke
and Montgomery at Appleby-Castle, at such time as Judge Wild and Judge Ellis
(in their Circuit) Dined there; when and where (after a long discourse had
between the said Countess and the Claymant touching his Claym to the Earldom of
Northumberland, and inquiry after his great Grandfather) the Countess in the
presence of Sir Thomas Stringer, and Sir John Otway, said thus to the Claymant:
If you be of Kin to me, you must be Descended from those Children that were
sent into the South in Hampers, in the Troublesome times, in Queen Flizabeth's
Days; which proved a happy intimation to the Claymant, for thereby he at last
arrived to the knowledge of his Great Grand Father, as in the Pedigree.

Some short time after this, the Claymant brought an Action in Ejectment, in
the Court of King's Bench, for Cannington, and Rodway in Somersetsh^re, against
Sir John Coppleston, Trustee for the Lady Clifford; against which Sir John
sheltred himself, under Privilege, for a considerable time; but at length, to
wit, In the Term (as the Records will make appear) this Trial came on, where
the Claymant fully proved his Pedigree; and that he was Cousin, and next
Heir-Male to Jocelin Percy, late Earl of Northumberland; and it is especially
to be Noted, That, whereas at the first Hearing in Parliament, the Adversaryes
produced one Sir John Hanmer, who deposed, That Sir Richard Percy dyed in
France, Anno 1648. and was never Married, but was Buried with Ribands and
Gloves, as a Batchellor. Now (at this Trial with Sir John Coppleston) the
Claymant proved by Mr. Henry Champion (who kept the Books and Records for
Algernoon Tenth, and Jocelin Eleventh Earls of Northumberland) that he found in
those Books and Records, that Sir Ingelram Percy was Married, and had Sons and
Daughters: And the Court then Declared, That the Claymant had fully proved his
Pedigree, and Right of Claim, and willed him to proceed to the Title of the
Lands in question; unto which, the Claymants Council replied, They had proved
his Pedigree and Right; and conceived the Lands must attend that, and that they
relying therein, were not prepared nor Instructed to proceed further, than to
prove the Claymants Legal Lineal Descent. Whereupon, for want of certain
Evidences and Records touching the same Lands, then in the Defendants Custody;
a Nonsuit was had against the Claymant, and Seventy Pound Costs Awarded.

Note, Upon payment of these Costs, Sir John Coppleston Offered to the
Claymant, That if he would relinquish his Right to those Lands in
Sommersetshire, he should have some consideration for the same; and further,
That he the said Sir John Coppleston, would furnish the Claymant with such
Writings as should enable him to recover above 5000. Per Annum, good Lands.

The Claymant brought another Action of Scandal against one Mr. Wright, another
of the Adversaries Agents, for the like Scandalous words with those spoken by
Clark. This Cause was tried before the Lord Chief Justice Rainsford, where the
Claymant proved his Legitimacy and Pedigree by several Witnessess; so fully and
clearly; and to that fullness and Satisfaction, that before he had Examined
half his Witnesses, the Lord Chief Justice Rainsford stood up, and said, You
Gentlemen of the Jury, We need not trouble the Court further in Examining any
more of the Plaintiffs Witnesses, by reason his Pedigr^^ has been fully pooved
before, at a former Trial, at the Bar of this Court So a ^erdict passed for the
Claymant: But when the Jury brought in but Three Hundred Pounds Damages, the
Lord Chief Justice was angry with them, for not giing the Plaintiff greater
Damages.

Note, This Verdict, and the Judgment there upon, is Exemplified.

In June 1676. The Claymant brought another Action of Scandal in the Guild Hall
London, against John Blackstone Esquire, Agent for the Lady Elizabeth Percy;
who kept her Courts, and had spoke the like scandalous words against the
Claymant, in delivering his Charge to the Juryes and Tennants, That Blackston
Removed the Cause into the Court of Kings Bench.

May 7. 1677. Appointed by the Court for Trial, and the Master of the Office
attended by both sides, and a Jury struck, and the Claymant prepared for Trial,
and brought up Sixty-Five Witnesses; several of which came from the most remote
parts of the Kingdom; the Travel in Sommoning, and bringing them to London,
above Four Thousand Miles: The Charges thereof, and in retaining, and feeing
fourteen Councels for the Trial, amounting to above Four Hundred Pounds.

At the day appointed, the Claymant attended with his Counsel and Witnesses,
prepared for Trial; when the Defendants Counsel Insisted, the Defendant was
privileged, as Agent of the Countess-Dowager of Northumberland, that he was
Steward of her Courts, and Receiver of her Rents; and therefore if the
Claymants Council proceeded to the Trial, it should be at their Perils; which
so awed them, that they refused to Plead; declaring, they had no mind to go to
the Tower: Some of them having been there upon the like occasion before. And so
the Trial was put off; at which the Court seemed much disatisfied; and
particularly, Mr. Justice Wild stood up in open Court, declaring his resentment
of the Adversaryes practices in these words, viz. Fie, fie, Gentlemen; Is this
a time to insist upon Privileges; when you forced the Plaintiff to this Trial,
and have put him to so great Expense, Travel, and Labor? You do but cast cold
Water upon your Cause. It is not the first time this Cause has been before
this Court.

After this, Blackeston sheltring himself under the late Earl of Essex's
privilege, (the Countess Dowagers being taken off by Order of the House of
Lords upon another occasion) the Clayment Petitioned the House of Lords to
discharge Blakestons privilege, under the Earl; whereupon an Agreement was
made between the Earl, and the Clayments Council; that the Clayment paying
Ninety Pound Costs into Court (then unpaid upon the Nonsuit against Clarke)
Blakeston should not stand upon Privilege, but go forthwith to Trial;
whereupon the Claymant paid the Ninety Pound Costs into Court, there to remain,
until a fair Trial had; and the 11th. of November, 1678. the Trial came on, and
after opening of the Cause, the Defendants Council took Exceptions to some
Point in the Declaration, which, after a debate, was waved; the Action judged
to be well laid, and the scandalous Words proved.

Then the Claymants Council proceeded to call Witnesses, to pove his Pedigree
upwards, as being the better way to satisfy the Court, and inform the Jury; and
that the Claymant could not possibly Arrive at, any present better way to prove
his Pedigree, than by his Action of Slander; For that the Claymant had before
that delivered Declarations in Ejectment in several Counties, but the Lands
being all in the hands of great Personages, stopped his Proceedings, on such
Ejectments by Privilege, which Candidness of the Claymants Council was
unreasonably made use of to the Claymants great Damage. For hereupon Draughts
of the Claymants Pedigree being delivered to the Judges, the Lord Chief Justice
Scroggs said, What need you trouble the Court to Examine all these Witnesses,
if there be no Lands, therefore let us see first, what Lands there are.

Then the Claymant produced diverse Records out of the Tower, and elsewhere;
which evidenced, that the Lands (late the Lady Lucy's in Cumberland, and other
Counties, in the Records especially named) were Settled upon the Heirs-Males of
the Percyes for ever, tendering three Hundred Pounds to the King, etc. and
quartering the said Lucyes Coat of Arms next their own, and before the Percyes.

Here the Defendants Council started up an Attainder of Sir Thomas Percy in
King Henry the Eighth's time, also his Son in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
which being new to the Claymant, and therefore his Council not prepared
presently to answer, time was given to the Clayment, to Inform and prepare
himself to answer that matter; and a further day appointed for Trial, and the
Jury then Sworn, withdrawn; and after that, two several days appointed for
Trial, and also a third day, to wit, the 27th. of January, 1678. But

The first day of Hillary Term, 1678. the Defendants Council moved the Court,
for a new Jury, and also for a further day for Trial; both which the Court
granted. Yet after all this, the Defendant moved again for a longer day, which
was granted, until Thursday the 6th. of February. Notwithstanding all which,
and that the Claymant had (at a vast Expense) kept his Witnesses in Town, all
this time, yet would not the Court Award him any Costs.

Note, In the Lord Chief Justice Hayles time, it was otherwise; for, in the
Suit brought as aforesaid against Clarke, the Defendant moving to put off that
Trial for seven days, on pretense he was not prepared; the Court Awarded the
Defendant to pay the Clayman^ Thirty Five Pound Costs, in respect of the Charge
of keeping his Witnesses in Town, before any further time given for Trial; and
which was paid accordingly.

Sixth of February, 1678. The New ^ury appeared, and the Trial came on again;
the Cause opened, and one of the Witnesses called to prove the Words; who
appearing, the Court declared he had sufficiently proved them before. So no
Exception being made thereunto, or to any matter in the Declaration, by the
Defendants Council: It was Agreed to proceed, and take up the Case, where they
left at the former Trial, the 11th. of November.

Hereupon Copys of the Records of the Patents in Queen Maryes time (viz.) One
for the Barony, and the other for the Earldom, were produced. Upon this, the
Defendants Council Objected the Attainder of Thomas Percy. Against which, the
Claymants Council insisted, and Evidenced, That the Claymants Descent and Claim
was Paramount the Attainder, and that the same could not, in any sort, affect
the Claymant, and which was admitted by the Court.

This Point being thus Cleared, the Claymant descended to Examine his Witnesses
to prove his Pedigree, but the Defendants Council declared, They admitted and
owned the Claymants Pedigree and Title, but that could not Affect the Lands,
for that by an Act of Parliament touching Exchange of Lands between King Henry
the Eighth, and Henry Percy the Sixth Earl of Northumberland, and others, the
Limitations in the Settlement, under whom the Claymant Claymed, were destroyed.
But this Point being also answered, as well by several Savings in that Act, as
otherwise; and the Claymant Pressing, That he might be permitted to Examine his
Witnesses, to prove his Pedigree, and proceed in the Cause: The Defendant then
resorted to their first piece of Craft, and Insisted upon a pretended
Insufficiency in the Declaration, and which had been debated, and waved as
aforesaid; but the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs now falling in with them, would
not suffer the Claymants Witnesses to be Examined, as to his Pedigree; but on
the contrary, Cried out The Declaration is naught, the Declaration is naught;
whereupon, the Claymant was driven to suffer a Nonsuit.

After this, the Claymant brought an Ejectment, for recovery of that part of
the Estate belonging to the Earldom, called the Lady Lucyes Lands* and in 1681.
brought the same to Trial at the Kings-Bench-Bar, where the Claymant fully
proved his Pedigree; and so was Declared by the Court; But by the evil
Practices of the Adversaries, with the Person that managed the Cause for the
Claymant; and his not producing, at the Trial, the Copy of the Grants, made by
Richard the Second, to the Earls of Northumberland; for want thereof, and some
other Records the said Agent was entrusted with, by the Claymant, the said
Trial passed against the Claymant. The then Lord Chief Justice Pemberton
standing up in Court, and saying to the Claymant, Mr. Percy, Your Cause is ill
managed, suffer a Nonsuit.

Note, Through the like Practices, and evil Dealings of another of the
Claymants Agents, one Mr. James Hooton, the Claymant lost the benefit of two
Writs of Error brought in the House of Lords.

By these Methods the Claymant proceeded in the Courts of Law singly.

Now for Equity and Law together:

The Earldom of Northumberland, being heretofore endowed by his Majesty's
Ancestors, with an Annual Rent or Fee of Twenty Pounds per Annum, payable by
the Sheriff of Northumberland, out of the County.

In order to the Recovery thereof, and Affirmance of the Claymants Title, he
exbibited his Bill in his Majesty's Court of Exchecquer, against Edmond
Craister Esquire the then Sheriff of Northumberland, for Recovery of the said
Twenty Pounds per Annum; not in the least doubting, but to bring the Merits of
that Cause to a speedy Issue; but on the contrary, notwithstanding, the Sheriff
was otherwise an uninterressed Party then, only as the hand to pay the Twenty
pounds per Annum to the Claymant, and have it again allowed in his Accounts.
Yet the Spirit and Practices that had hitherto opposed the Claymant, in his
Prosecuting his just Right in the Courts of Law, appears in this also* and that
the World may see it plainly, take this following Account of those Proceedings,
viz.

In Trinity-Term, 1682. The Bill was fyled against Mr. Craister, who appears,
but sits in Contempt for not answering; whereupon four several Attachments
issued against him, directed to the Coroner of the County of Northumberland;
but before any Obedience would be given thereunto, or Execution procured
thereon, the Claymant (Plaintiff in the Cause) was necessitated to be at the
extraordinary Expense of sending Persons on purpose, from London into
Northumberland, to procure the same to be Executed.

Note, These Delays spent all Trinity, Michaelmas, and Hillary-Terms, 1682.
and Easter-Term, 1683.

Trinity-Term, 1683. The Coroner returns Cepi Corpus, but neither brings in the
Body, nor Assigns the Bail-Bond, and is therefore amerced Five pounds.

Michaelmas-Term, 13 November 1683. The Plaintiff moves, and obtains an Order
for a further Americiament of Ten pounds against the Coroner, and liberty for
the Plaintiff to Examine his Witness, de been esse.

November the 20. 1683. Upon another Motion a further Amerciament of Twenty
pounds.

November the 27. 1683. Upon another Motion, a further Amerciament of Forty
pounds.

Hillary-Term, 1683. January 25. Upon another Motion, a further Amerciament of
One Hundred pounds; and then Ordered, that the former Amerciaments should be
forthwith Estreated and Levied.

February 12. 1683. Upon another Motion, a further Amerciamen^ of Fifty pounds,
and to be forthwith Estreated.

Easter-Term, 1684. April 16. Upon another Motion, and Information o^ these
Matters; and that no Obedience was given by the Coroner: It was Ordered, That
the Comptrollor of the Pipe, should forthwith Issue special process to the
Sheriff of Northumberland, for Levying those Amerciaments; and that the Process
should be returnable the first day of the next Term, and that Mr. Craister
should not have his quietus, until he had answered the Plaintiffs Bill, and
cleared his Contempts; yet no Obedience yielded.

10 of May 1684. Upon another Motion, a further Amerciament of One Hundred and
Fifty pounds.

30 of May 1684. Mr. Craister put in his Answer, and upon the Plaintiffs
Motion, it was referred to the Remembrancer, to Tax the Plaintiff his Costs for
these Abuses and Delays, which amounted to One Hundred Sixty Four pounds,
Twelve shillings, Six pence; and yet Taxed but at Twenty one pounds, Sixteen
shillings, and Six pence.

Now any reasonable Man would have Imagined, That after all (...) and Contempt,
this small Pittance of 21 ll. 16 s. 6 d. Costs, should have been readily paid:
But observe the contrary.

20 June 1684. Upon the Plaintiffs Motion, Ordered, That unless Mr. (...) (by
Monday then next) pay to the Plaintiff the Costs (...), the Amer^^aments should
forthwith be levied.

27. June 1684. The Plaintiff Moves further, and inform^ the (...) were not
paid; whereupon ordered, the Costs be paid that day, (...) Motion; but not a
Penny paid.

Michaelmas-Term 1684. Nov. 4. The Plaintiff Moves the (...) forms, That no
Costs is paid, nor any Obedien^^ given to the (...) whereupon an Attachment was
^warded against (...), unless he (...) 21 ll. 16 s. 6 d. and 1^ s. and 4 s.
more for (...) of Costs (...) but no Obedience given.

Hereupon the Plaintiff (b^ Petition to the B^ron^ of the (...) the whole
progress the Cause had had; and that to put the Plaintiff to (...) Craister, de
nov^, with the ordinary Process, was to run the old (...), in Infinitum; and
that the Plaintiff having taken all the Method^ that (...) could advise, and to
no purpose; prayed the Consideration (...) by the (...), and such course to be
taken (...) the Defendant, as might enforce Obedience (...) these or the like
Reasons, incert^^ in his Petition.

First, The notorious and out-daring Practices of the (...), and (...) flying
in the Face of the Court, by their unpresidented D^^obed^^nce to Authority, and
rendering the same Contemptuous to all, and ineffectual in it^ Justice to the
prosecutor.

Secondly, The Ruin hereby following the Suitor, not only by the (...) Charge,
but Delay.

Thirdly, For that it is dishonorable, and reflects upon the Justice, as well
as (...) of the Court, That any person should be suffered to dare and tri^^e
with (...), and Ruin the Prosecutor immediately under the protection thereof;
if after ^uch Delay, he must yet further suffer in his real Expense, ^^casioned
(...) by this unparalled Contempt of Justice; The loss of near ^^ s. 6 d. in
the pound, the Costs taxed being little more than 2 s. 6 d. in the pound: And

Lastly, For that nothing deters any Person from Contemning Justice, but making
the Delinquent Exemplar.

Upon this Petition, the Court ordered, That if Craister did not pay the Costs
by a day certain in Michaelmas-Term, 1684. then all the former Amerciaments to
be forthwith Levied, and a further Amerciament set.

Notwithstanding all which, the Plaintiff was put to the Charge of several
other Motions for the Costs; and they not paid until the beginning of
Hillary-Term last.

9 January 1684. The Claymant, by Petition, humbly Addressed himself to his
late Sacred Majesty, and the Lords of his Privy Council, briefly setting forth
the said Matters in the Suit against Craister; and that the proceedings of
Craister (and the Coroner) were in notorious Contempt of His Majesty's Dignity
and Authority; and tended not only to the bringing His Majesty's Courts of
Justice into Contempt, but to the Obstruction of Justice in general, and utter
Ruin of the Claymant in particular.

Upon this Petition the Claymant received a Gracious verbal Answer, That the
whole Matter of the Petitioners Cause should be heard and determined in the
next ensuing Parliament.

That it being necessary to make his said late Majesty, by his Attorney
General, a Desendant to the Claymant's said Bill, in the Court of Exchequer, he
made humble Application to the said Attorney General, to put in an Answer
thereunto; but has not hitherto been so happy, as to obtain the same; whereby
the Claymants further proceedings in that Cause, are at a full stop.

Now it remains, that the Claymant answer some Objections much insisted on by
his Adversary: As,

Object. I. That the Claymant, at first, derived his Pedigree from Sir Richard
Percy, as his Great Grandfather, and afterward from Sir Ingleram Percy.

Answ. This is admitted to be true in Fact; but the occasion of deriving from
Richard Percy, was:

1. The Matches of the Percies were rent out of the Heralds Book, and Sir
Ingleram Percy's was quite lest out of the First Pedigree.

2. The Misfortunes of the Family of the Percies in Queen Elizabeth's Time; and
thereby, those of them under whom the Claymant is immediately Descended, driven
out of their Native Country, and from their Father's House, in a most obscure
manner, merely for Preservation of their Lives in their tender Years.

3. The taking away the Court of Wards and Inquisitions, post mortem.

4. The Interruption in the Executing the Office of Heralds, in ^he Times of
the late Rebellion.

5. The Adversaries having the Advantage o^ possessing themselves of all the
Memorandums and Records of the late Earls of Northumberland, Algernoon and
Ioscelin, and the Pedigrees and Descents of that Family.

6. The Advice abovesaid, given to the Claymant by Sir Edward Walker, Sir John
Berkenhead, and the Claymant's Council, to fix upon a Wrong Party, as the only
way to find out the Right; and which, in truth, had the hoped-for Effect. Nor
is this an Objection with any knowing, intelligent, unbiased Person; it being
a thing frequently in practice in the Courts of Law.

Object. II. The Obscureness of the Claymant, and Meanness of his Profession,
having been a Trunk-maker.

Answ. The Obscureness was, as before is said, from the Misfortunes and
Difficulties of the Family of the Percies, in the troublesome Times of Queen
Elizabeth.

Nor is it any real Disreputation upon any Noble Family; the supporting
Families by Lawful Callings, though never so mean, being esteemed a Virtue by
all virtuous Persons: And it is most frequent in the Noblest Families in
Germany* To Train up their Sons in the learning Handicraft-Trades. Nor can any
thing but Vice, disparage True Nobility. Besides, the Matter in Controversy,
is not, Whether the Claymant was of this, or that Trade? but, Whether he be
Cousin, and next Heir Male to Joscelin Percy, late Earl of Northumberland;
which he has at several Trials, and in several Courts, proved to full
Satisfaction of the said Courts, by all the Methods and Ways imaginable?

As by Proof of his Lineal Descent, and the Ownings and Declarations of the
late Earls of Northumberland, Algernoon and Ioscelin; That the Claymant (by the
Appellation of James Percy, the Trunk-maker at Dublin) was of the Blood and
Family of the Percies, and next Heir Male, after the said Ioscelin, to the
Earldom; and by diverse other unanswerable Proofs.

This being the True State of the Claymant's Right and Title to the said
Earldom, and of the Means by which he has endeavored to Recover his said
Right; wherein he has been obstructed by the Powerfulness of his Adversaries,
and the Corruption of his Agents: He humbly submits to the Great Wisdom,
Honor, and Justice of the King's most Sacred Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, in Parliament Assembled, (and where it is not possible, there can
be any Failer of Justice) for Relief and Redress in the Premises.

To the KING's Most Excellent Charles R.
MAJESTY, The Humble Petition of Charles Longeville Esquire Cousin and next Heir of
Henry late Earl of Kent, Lord Hastings, Longeville and Ruthin, deceased.
Humbly Showing,

THat Reginald Gray Your Petitioners Successor, whose Heir he is, was Seized to
him and his Heirs, as of Fee and Right of the Dignities of Lord Hastings and
Ruthin; That is to say, of the Title of Lord Ruthin, by descent from Roger Lord
Gray of Ruthin his Father; and being so seized, was diverse ^imes, in the Reign
of Your Majesty's Royal Predecessors, King Edward the III. Summoned into the
Court of Parliament, by the Name of Reginald Gray of Ruthin, and accordingly
sat therein; and of the said Titles and Dignities dyed Seized, and by diverse
mean descents, the same Dignity descended unto Edmond Gray, Knight, who, by
reason thereof, was seized of the Dignities thereof, as of Fee to him and his
Heirs; and being so seized, the said Edmond, by the Name of Edmond Lord
Hastings and Ruthin, was by the Letters Patents of Your Majesty's Predecessors,
King Edward the IV. Created Earl of Kent to him, and to the Heirs Males of his
body begotten; and shortly after, of the Dignities aforesaid, dyed seized;
after whose decease, the said Title of Earl of Kent, and of Lord Hastings and
Ruthin, by diverse Mesne Descents, did descend and come to Sir Henry Gray
Knight, Cousin and Heir of the said Edmond: By reason whereof, he became of the
said Dignities seized; That is to say, of the said Title of the Earl of Kent to
him, and to the Heirs Males of the Body of the said Edmond: And of the said
Title of Lord Hasting and Ruthin to him and his Heirs, and thereof dyed seized;
by means whereof, as the said Title and Earl of Kent, is descended, and come to
the Right Honorable Anthony now Earl of Kent, as Heir-Male of the Body to the
said Edmond; so that the said Dignities of the Lord Hastings and Ruthin, are of
right ^^^cended to Your Petitioner, as Rightful Cousin and Heir of the said
Reginald and Nephew, and next Heir of the said Henry Earl of Kent; That is to
say, Son and Heir of Susan, late Wife of Sir Michael Longeville Knight, Sister
and Heir of the said Henry.

May it therefore please Your Excellent Majesty, Graciously to give Command for
Your Petitioners Summons to this present Parliament, there to sit and enjoy the
Place and Preheminences to the said Dignities to him descended, and of Right
belonging; And Your Petitioner shall daily pray, etc.

His Majesty's Reference.
At Our Court at Whitehall, the 25th. of November 1640.
WE are Graciously pleased to refer the Petition, and the Consideration
thereof, and of the Petitioners Claim and Title to the Peers o^ Our Parliament;
and Our Will and Pleasure, That Justice and Right be done hereupon.

Order hereupon, it was referred to the Commitee of Privileges, and the Lord
Ruthin to have notice of it, and a Copy of the Petition.

House of Lords. The Opinion of the JUDGES of England in the Case of Charles
Longeville Es
Lunae 1st. February, 1640.
THE Judges this day delivered their Opinion in the Case of the Lord Gray, and
Charles Longeville, Esquire concerning the Titles of the Baronies of Hastings and
Ruthin.

1. Whether a Possessio Fratris can be upon a Baronage by Writ.

And it was the Unanimous Opinions of the Judges, That there can be no
Possessio Fratris in Point of Honor; And upon somewhat, which was spoken of in
the Argument concerning Power, in Conveying away of Honor,

It was Resolved upon the question Nemene Contradicente.

That no Person that has any Honor in him, and a Peer, may Alien or Transfer
the Honor to any other person.

Resolved upon the Question.

That no Peer of this Realm can drown and extinguish his Honor (but that it
descends to his Descendants) Neither by Surrender, Grant, Fine, nor any other
Conveyance to the King.

Upon which the said House, Confirmed the said Opinion, and did accordingly
Order the Dignities to Charles Longeville Esquire Veneris 5. die Febr. Sequentis.

Vera Copia Examinat' per Original' J. P.

Die Martis 18. Junij, 1678.
FOrasmuch as upon the Debate of the Petitioners Case, who Claims the Title of
Viscount Purbeck: A Question at Law did Arise, Whether a Fine Levied to the
King by a Peer of the Realm of his Title and Honor, can bar and extinguish the
Title.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, upon a very long
Debate: And having heard His Majesty's Attorney General, are unanimously of
Opinion, and do Resolve and Adjudge, That no Fine Levied, or a^ any time
hereafter to be Levied to the King, can bar such Title of Honor, or the Right
of any Person, Clayming such Title under him that Levied or shall Levy such
Fine.

Vera Copia Johannis Brown. Clerk Parl'

On the 9th. day of January last 1685. KING Charles the Second of Ever Blessed
Memory, did then in Council direct, That the Petitioners Cause should be fully
determined in PARLIAMENT.

Therefore the Petitioner presented to His Most Excellent Majesty KING JAMES
the Second, the Claymants Petition, with Precedents annexed; wherein the
Descent, Property and Right, by the Assent of His now Majesty; He is become the
next Heir-Male, and Earl of Northumberland: which Petition was presented into
His Sacred Majesty's hands the 26th. of May, 1685.

By James Percy.

Who further Prays, That Your Lordships will be pleased to Intercede with the
KING, for a speedy Determination of this matter, which has been in Contest
about Fifteen Years.


