THE Levellers Design DISCOVERED:

Or the ANATOMY of the late unhappie MUTINY:

Presented unto the Soldiery of the ARMY Under the Command of his Excellency
the Lord Fairfax; For prevention of the like in others.

Written by HENRY DEN, an Actor in this Tragaedy.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, near the inner Temple. 1649.

The Levellers Design discovered, etc.
HOw great and dangerous a Mutiny happened lately in part of the Army, is not
unknown to the Nation. How great, and manifold miseries were thereby threatened
unto the languishing Commonwealth is beyond expression: This mutinous and
turbulent spirit that was amongst us, not being included within the quarters of
one Regiment, but diffused (like evil blood through the veins) into many
Regiments of the Army: wherein this discontented humor has infected diverse. I
having had too much experience, by bearing too great a part in this
discontented Rebellion) shall do what I can to discover unto the world both the
Causes and effects thereof; that by the manifestation of the weakness of the
groundwork, and by the declaration of the hideous consequences: men being
undeceived, They who are any way entangled, may be recovered, out of that
dangerous and destructive Faction; They who are yet free may have their
thoughts prevented, That dangers of like nature may be anticipated, and a right
understanding settled. That Peace and Union, Love and Concord, may knit and
unite the joints of this present Army so together, that neither open enemy, or
pretended friend, may be able by force or flattery to devide it.

The first, and great occasion of this unexpected Mutiny, was this: Our
Regiments, with some others, were by Lot designed for the service of Ireland.
The Service we granted both very honorable, and also necessary, for the
prevention of War, and settling of Peace in this Nation: Yet did we believe that
there stood between us and Ireland, an engagement made by the Army, at that
famous Rendevouz at Triploe Heath, June 5. 1647. binding us neither to suffer
dividing nor disbanding of this Army: until such satisfaction were given, as
in that engagement required: It was thought essentially conducing to the
satisfaction of the Army, to the reconciliation of differences, to the
procuring of National freedom, and to the relief of Ireland: To require such
a Council, to be set up again in the Army, consisting of Two Commission
Officers, and Two Agitators, chosen by every Regiment of Horse or Foot;
together with the concurring general Officers, In this we were very bold, (I
do not say wise) propounding to his Excellency this condition, to be performed
before we could submit unto his Excellencies order: This performed, we were
contented to refer our selves to the censure of this Council. That which gave
us boldness herein, and that which beguiled us, was this: That we did not
conceive how the engagement, could possibly admit of a dispensation.

Such a Council being by that engagement appointed, as a representative of the
Army, ought (as we did then believe to be still continued, unless we would
prove perfidious Covenant-breakers. I could not, (I confess) unty this knot:
but here I was entangled, and ensnared, and therefore, for that present,
thought my self bound in duty to God and men, to prosecute this engagement:
Hence it was (many being of the same mind) That 12. Troops of Horse were
drawn together and looking upon superior Commanders, as Tyrannical
Covenant-breakers. We marched contrary to his Excellencies expresses; being
heightened with the zeal of the performance of our engagement.

And touching this thing we were further persuaded, that it did hold forth such
strength of reason, That the greatest part of the Army would suddenly have
joined with us: And this was the cause why I joined with that Party, deviding
from the Army, notwithstanding there appeared less safety, and greater hazard:
And I believe this Cord drew on many honest hearted men, who did
conscientiously seek to make good that engagement. But herein I confess a
double error: First, had this engagement been to be prosecuted: yet ought not
we to have moved beyond our Sphere; and to break one engagement by the
prosecution of another; to disobey his Excelencies order under any pretense. It
is a good thing to yield obedience unto that authority under which we are
placed. Our second Error was, in not peracquainting his Excellency and his
Council of War, with our grievances, In whom we have found so great meekness
and moderation, that we could not have missed expected satisfaction.

But that further answer may be given, and thereby the snare may be broken, and
no more be entangled, I shall declare what satisfaction I have received: That
so I may give the same satisfaction unto others. Such a Council indeed, the
engagement required, And such a Council was constituted in the Army, acting,
and transacting of matters pertaining to the discipline of the Army. And so
long was this Council continued; until the inconvenience thereof was so far
manifest; That most of the Regiments of Horse and Foot did Petition his
Exelency to send back the several Agitators, unto their respective Regiments,
until he should be pleased to resummon them: Professing a willingness in
themselves, to submit unto his Excellency with his Council of War, according to
the pristine discipline of the Army. His Excelency having received these
Petitions, did not immediately send back the Agitators (as requested) But having
first summoned a Council, and communicated the Petitions unto them; it was by
them concluded, that according to the Petitions of the several Regiments, the
Council of Agitators should be dissolved, until his Excel. should fee cause
to resummon them. Now this being so: his Excel. cannot be charged with
violation of that engagement: neither does th^re remain any obligation on his
Excel. to have continued or revived any such Council. Much less is it
warrantable in the Soldiery of the Army to assume that power to themselves
Seeing they suffered a dissolution by the same power, by which they had their
first constitution.

And if this had been formerly known unto some of us, I am persuaded many had
been prevented in this precipitate action.

This that has been spoken (though now it seems weak) was the first and chief
ground of our discontent, which brake forth into irregularity and high
disobedience. Some other grounds there are which did add fuel to this fire, and
blow up the sparkles which did here begin to be kindled. A second ground was,
The many aspersions which are cast upon some general Officers of the Army, to
the blasting of their fame and reputation, have proved as a whet-stone, to set
a rough edg upon the resolutions of many and to stir them up unto further
discontent. I need not repeat what is spoken and written by some men. As to my
self, I do profess, I did never believe them; and I bless God I see less cause
to believe them then ever: I have thought strange that men should seek to
dishonor them whom the Lord has honored. But truly I do observe great
credulity (the character of Lightness) in very many, whom I could wish
otherwise minded. I desire that diligent search may be made, Whether this
proceed not either from jealousy, which always suspecteth the worst, and
betrayeth all hope of good, or from envy, repining at the felicity of other
men: Yet least some should say, That there is no smoke but some fire; all these
accusations cannot be false. I shall plainly show that much such smoke has
been where no fire was to be found, and that the best men (especially in
authority) have been partakers of this portion. And tacitly to answer another
Objection, I shall show, That good men have sometimes been infected with the
forenamed Contagion. Moses was the meekest man in his time upon the earth, yet
did the Conspirators charge him as fiercely and hainously as any Officer of the
present Army is charged this day, in taking too much upon him, lifting up
himself, making himself a Prince over the people; and this is not only spoken
by sons of Belial, but by those that were men of renown, and famous among the
people, yea countenanced, because believed by the whole Congregation of Israel.
Now unless we will say, That all the Congregation were evil, we must be forced
to confess, That good men are sometimes overtaken with this fault, of accusing
and condemning others when there is no cause. Experience will teach us, not to
be too credulous to give ear to reports, lest we be induced to believe that
which we have no ground for: if flying reports might be taken for evidence, we
should in all ages find very few good men, but we should be ready to condemn
the generation of the just.

Another complaint exaspering the minds of some, is, That one Tyrant is pulled
down, and a second set up in his room. I confess this complaint were of great
weight if it were true: But truly I suppose this arises from the want of
discerning of true Government from Tyranny: As Flattery was wont of late years
to extol Tyranny, as if it had been the perfection of Government; so Ignorance
and Envy is ready to brand true and lawful Government with the name of Tyranny.
I see the difference between the one and the other, and I desire other men may
discern it. A Tyrant makes his Will the Law, the other makes the Law his Will.
And truly if we exclaim against Tyranny when our Rulers govern not according to
lust, but according to Law and Rule, we shall incur a just suspicion, that it
is not Tyranny but Magistracy that we complain of.

Another thing that has much disturbed the minds of men, and filled them with
discontent is, The slow motion of the Parliament, as to the taking away of
oppressions, and easing the grievances of the people. In answer to this, We are
to consider the Parliament before, and after, the Armies entrance into London.
As to the former consideration, before the Armies entrance into London, I am so
far from admiring their slow motion, that it is a wonder to me that they moved
at all any other way then backward: And I do admire the great providence of
God, who withheld them from turning all things upside down, while the House was
filled with so many men of corrupt interests. As to the Parliament in the
second Consideration, since the Armies approach to London, we have cause to
bless God, that they have done so many things for us, which our eyes have seen;
and what is not yet done, is in promise already performed unto us, with
assurance of such celerity as matters of so great weight will possibly admit.
And for answer unto this Complaint, there needs not any to a patient spirit,
and the impatient are not capable of an answer. In conclusion of this I shall
declare my thoughts. That although some men do not cease to cast dust in the
faces both of Parliament and Council of the Army, yet has not that Cloud been
thick enough to hinder the appearance of those beams of Justice, Mercy, Pity,
Clemency, Moderation, which shine forth in them, which have drawn me to so
reverend an esteem of both, as I cannot conveniently now set forth, lest I
should incur suspicion of falling from one extreme into another.

I shall only say this, That I bless God for them; and it were no small degree
of ingratitude, if we should deny it a great mercy to the Nation, that God has
raised up such men amongst us. These are the ordinary Causes of our
Discontents, which being weighed in the balance it will appear, that the
greatest of all is the unthankfulness of our hearts and impatiency of our
spirits, our want of love to cover offenses, and our too much envy, aggravating
what may be amiss. I shall now proceed to show the effects of this Distraction,
if it be lawful to judge of the Effects in the Cause; The fruits of this Mutiny
would have proved so bitter, that had I many tongues, and great strength of
invention, I could not sufficiently declare them: But when I shall have done
that which I am able, it will appear clearly to the world (though we with faces
of brass should deny it,) That the Sentence passed on us all, and the Execution
upon some, was very just and righteous; and that his Excellencies Clemency in
sparing of us was very great. Let me speak truly of the consequences likely to
have attended this Insurrection, as they were represented unto me upon serious
Meditations, after I had received the Sentence of Death, at such time as I
judged my self, not only unworthy, but also incapable of Mercy (from men) in
respect of my deep crime. And I shall make it appear, that if we had not been
prevented, this Mutiny would have proved more dangerous and destructive then
the first War raised by the King, with his Cavalry, or the second revived by
the Welsh, the Kentish, the invading Scots, and others.

The first and second War did unite the hearts of the Army together, and caused
the well-affected in the Nation, with heart and hand, to join in one: But this
would have procured a division between the well-affected, and made a breach in
this victorious Army, by forcing one part to engage against the other, and one
in fury to destroy the other; and thereby Ham-string the sinews of this Nation,
rendering all former Victories null; bringing upon us a more desperate
condition their ever, re-delivering us up into the hands of our conquered, yet
insulting, Enemies. Surely hereby great joy had sprung up to the Malignant
party: But exceeding sorrow and woe to the well-affected.

I cannot but with shame acknowledge blindness of heart, and a spirit
insatuated, when we undertook this desperate and dangerous enterprise. We have
therefore cause to say; Blessed be the Lord who gave us into his Excellencies
hand. And blessed be his Excellency of the Lord, who has been so happy an
instrument to withhold our hands from the blood and ruin of our Nation.

The first and second War had some Basis and foundation to build upon, some
appearance of visible Authority to countenance it: from which appearance of
Authority it derived a Beginning, in which also it did terminate it self;
(viz.) in the will and pleasure of a King. But this Mutiny was without any
foundation at all: The name of a King we disclaimed: From the Parliament we had
neither received nor required Commission: The People knew not our desires, and
they were more against us then for us, for ought we knew. Now what Success
could be expected from such Confusion? Justly did the Lord dis-own us, to teach
all men that he is a God of Order, and not of Confusion, to teach us that he
needs not our disobedience to Superiors, or any evil action, to consummate
this determination.

The first and second War was managed by men of one interest, as touching the
King, they all aimed at his restitution, at the advancing of his Prerogative:
But we were an Heterogenial Body, consisting of parts very diverse one from
another, settled upon principles inconsistent one with another. So that although
the intentions of some men were good and plausible; yet the major part must
needs be far different, unless we think it possible, that light and darkness,
good and evil, can be concentrick together, insomuch that had we proved the
stronger party, and prevailed, where should we have terminated? Who can imagine
otherwise, but that parties amongst us of several dispositions would have every
one sought to fulfill his own will? and so should we have run into division, and
subdivisions, until we had ended in Confusions. These things I have declared
for this end, that I may manifest unto my Fellow Soldiers, that I am ashamed of
the late proceedings, and do conceive great indignation against my self, for
being accessory unto such rash attempts; That I may give warning unto others,
that they may beware and fear to do any such thing. Oh, how necessary is it at
all times to draw near unto God for wisdom and understanding to guide us and
direct us in all our ways. And lastly, I desire all may consider and acknowledge
how great the preventing mercy of God has been toward us at this time, that
so we may be incited to offer praise, and honor, and glory to him that lives
for ever and ever.

FINIS.

