THE CASE OF ANTHONY EARL OF SHAFTSBURY; As it was Argued before His Majesty's
Justices of the Kings Bench, Trin. Term. 29. Car. 2. Being upon his CONFINEMENT
in the TOWER etc. With a SPEECH of this Worthy EARL, pleading his own Case, and
the Liberty of the Subject.

LONDON, Printed by K. P. for C. R. 1679.

To the READER.
THIS being the CASE of a PEER of this Realm, wherein the Liberty of the
Subject is concerned; and being Argued before His Majesty's Justices of the K.
B. It is Published for thy Satisfaction.

Trin. 29. Car. 2. B. R. Jun. 27. and 29. 1677. THE EARL of SHAFTSBVRY'S CASE.
THIS day the Earl of Shaftsbury was brought to the Bar upon the return of an
alias Hab. Corp. directed to the Constable of the Tower of London; the effect
of the return was, that Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, in the Writ mentioned, was
Committed to the Tower of London. 16. Febr. Anno Dom. 1676, By virtue of an
Order from the Lords Spiritual and Temporal then in Parliament assembled: the
Tenor of which Order follows in haec verba:

Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Constable of His Majesty's Tower of London, his Deputy, or Deputies, shall
receive the Bodies of James Earl of Salisbury, Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, and
Philip Lord Wharton; Members of this House, and keep them in safe Custody,
within the said Tower, during His Majesty's Pleasure, and the Pleasure of this
House; for their High Contempts committed against this House, and this shall be
a sufficient Warrant on that Behalf.

To the Constable of the Tower, etc. J. Brown Cler. Par.

The Earl of Shaftsbury's Council prayed that the return might be Filed, and it
was so, and Friday following appointed for debating the sufficiency of the
return, and in the mean time directions were given to his Council to attend the
Judges and Attorney General, with their exceptions to the return, and my Lord
was remanded till that day, and it was said that though the return was filed,
the Court could remand or Commit him to the Marshalsea at their Election.

On Friday the Earl was brought into Court again, and his Council argued the
insufficiency of the return.

Williams said, That the Cause was of great consequence, in regard that the
King was touched in his Prerogative; the Subject was touched in his Liberty,
and this Court in its Jurisdiction.

1st. The Cause of Commitment which is returned, is not sufficient for the
general Allegations of high Contempts is too uncertain, for the Court cannot
judge of the Contempt, if it does not appear in what act it consists.

2dly. It is not known where the Contempts were committed, and in favor of
liberty, it shall be intended they were committed out of the House of Peers.

3dly. The time is uncertain, so that, peradventure, it was before the last Act
of General Pardon.

4thly, It does not appear whether the Commitment were on a conviction or
accusation only.

It cannot be denied, but that the return of such a Commitment, by any other
Court, would be too general and uncertain, More. 893, Astwish was Bailed on a
return, quod commissus fuit per mandatum. N. Milit. Dni. Custod. Magn. Sigil
Angliae virtute cujusdem contemptus in curia facti, and in that Book, that
diverse other persons were bailed on such general returns, and the Cases have
been lately affirmed in Bushels Case, reported by the late Lord Chief Justice
Vaughan, where it is expressly said that such Commitment and return being too
general and uncertain, the Court cannot believe in an implicit manner, that in
truth the Commitment, was for causes particular and sufficient.

Vaughan's Reports, 140. Accord. 2. Inst. 52, 53. and 55. and the 1. Rolls.
218. and though the Commitment of the Jurors was for acquitting Pen and Mead,
contra plenam and manifestam evidentiam: it was resolved to be too general, for
the evidence ought to appear as certainly to the Judge of the return, as it
appears before the Judge authorized to Commit. Rush. Case. 137.

Now this Commitment being by the House of Peers will make no difference; for
in all Cases where a matter comes in Judgment before this Court, let the
question be of what nature it will, the Court is obliged to declare the Law,
and that without distinction, whether the question began in Parliament or no.
In the Case of Geo. Binion in C. B. there was a long Debate, Whether an
Original Writ might be Filed against a Member of Parliament, during the time of
Privilege; and it was urged, that it being during the Session of Parliament,
the termination of the Question did belong to the Parliament, but it was
resolved that an Original might be filed, and Bridgman then Chief Justice, said
that the Court was obliged to declare the Law in all Cases that came in
Judgment before them. H. 4. Ed. 4. Rut. 4. 7. 10. in Scacc. In Debt by River
Versus Cousin, the Defendent Pleads that he was sent of a Member of Parliament,
and Ideo Capi seu arestant non debet, and the Plantiff prays Judgment, and
afterward by Advice of all the Judges the Judgment was entered. Videtur
Baronibus quod tale habetur Privilegium quod Magnates, etc. Et eorum familiares
capi seu arestare non debent sed nullum habetur privilegium quod non debent
Implantare ideo respondet Noster. So in Triviniards Case, a question of
Privileges was determined in this Court. Dyer. 60. in 14. Ed. 3. in the Case
of Sr. John, and Sir Jeoffry Stanton which was cited in the Case of the Earl of
Clarendon, and is entered in the Lords Journal.

An Accord of wast, depended between them in the Common-Please, and the Court
was divided and the Record was Certified into the House of Lords, and they gave
direction that the Judgment should be Entered, for the Plantiff afterward on a
Writ of Error, brought in this Court that Judgment was Reversed:
Notwithstanding the Objection, that it was given by order of the House of
Lords; for the Court was Obliged to proceed according to the Law in a matter
that was before them in point of Judgment. Not long since the Earl of Bristol
Exhibited an Accusation against the Earl of Clarendon to the House of Lords,
and it contained diverse matters whereof some did arise out of Parliament, and
it was referred to the Judges to consider whether that procedure was
Parliamentary, and the 4th. July 1663. it was resolved by the Judges that the
Lords ought not to proceed only upon an Impeachment by the Commons, when the
matters arise out of the House.

The Construction of all Acts of Parliament, are given to the Courts of
Westminster, and accordingly they have Judges of Validity of Acts of
Parliament, they have searched the Rolls of Parliament, Hub. 109. Lord Hunsdons
Case, they have determined whether the Journal be a Record: Hub. 110: When a
point comes before them in Judgment, they are not fore closed by any Act of the
Lords, but ought to Judge according to the Law, by which the Realm is Governed
and not by the Lords: if it appears that an Act of Parliament be made by the
King and the Lords without the Commons, that Act is Felo-de-se, and the Courts
of Westminster ought to judge it void, 4. H. 7. 18. Hub. 111. and accordingly
they ought to do, if this return contain in it that which is fatal to it self,
it has been a question often resolved in this Court when a Writ of Error in
Parliament, shall be a supersedias, and this Court has determined that shall
be said to be a Session of Parliament, 1. Rolls. 29. and if the Law were
otherwise there would be a failure of Justice if the Parliament were Desolved,
there would be no question but the Prisoner should be discharged on a Habeas
Corpus, and yet then the Court must examine the cause of Commitment, and by
Consequence a matter Parliamentary, and the Court may now have Cognissance of
the matter, as clearly as when the Parliament is Desolved, the Party would be
without remedy for his Liberty, if he could not find it here, for it is not
sufficient for him to procure the Lords to determine their pleasure for his
Imprisonment, for before his Enlargement he must have the Pleasures of the King
to be determined, and that ought to be in this Court, and therefore the
Prisoner ought first to resort hither.

Let us suppose (for it does not appear in the return, and the Court ought not
to Enquire of any matter out of it,) that the supposed Contempt was a thing
done out of the House; it would be hard for this Court to remand him: Suppose
he were removed to a Foreign Prison, during the Pleasure of the Lords: No
doubt, but that would have been an Illegal Commitment against Magna Charta and
the Petition; there the Commitment would have been Expressly Illegal, and it may
be this Commitment may be no less; for if it had been Expressly shown, and if he
be remanded, he is Committed by this Court who are to answer for his
Imprisonment.

But 2, the limitation of the Imprisonment during the Pleasures of the King and
the House is Illegal and uncertain; for since it ought to determine in two
Courts, it can have no certain Period, a Commitment until he shall be
Discharged by Kings Bench and Common Pleas is Illegal; for the Prisoner cannot
apply himself in such a manner as to obtain his Discharge. If a Man be
Committed to further order Cook says, he is Baylable presently, for that
Imports till he shall be delivered in good course of Law, and if this
Commitment have not that Sense, it is Illegal, for the pleasure of the King is
that which shall be determined according to Law in his Courts, as where the
Stat. of Westminster, 1 Chap. 15. declares that he is not reprovable, who is
taken by Command of the King, who ought not to extend to an Extra judicial
Command but in his Courts of Justice, to which all matters of Judicature are
deligated and distributed. 2 Inst. 186. and 187.

Wollop, To the same purpose, cited Bushels case, Vaughan, 137. that the (...)
return for high Contempts was not sufficient, and the Court that made the
Commitment in this Case makes no difference, in the Case for otherwise one may
be Imprisoned by the House of Peers Unjustly, for a matter relevable here and
yet shall be without any manner of relief, by such a return, for on Supposition
that this Court ought not to meddle where the person is Committed by the Peers,
any person at any time and for any Cause may be subject to a perpetual
Imprisonment at the Pleasure of the Lords.

And the Law is otherwise for the House of Lords is the Supreme Court yet their
Jurisdiction is limited by the Common and Statute Law, and their Excises are
examinable in this Court, for there is a great difference between the Errors
and Excise in and of a Court between an Erroneous proceeding without
Jurisdidiction, which is void and a mere Nullity 4. H. 7. 18. 6. in the
Parliament the King would have one attain it of Treason, and lose his Lands,
and the Lords assented but nothing was said of the Commons, wherefore all the
Justices held clearly that it was no Act, and he was restored to his Land, and
without doubt in the same case if the Party had been Imprisoned, the Justices
might have made the like resolution that he ought to have been discharged.

It is a solaecisme that a Man shall be Imprisoned by a limited Jurisdiction,
and it shall not be examinable, whether the cause were within their
Jurisdiction or not, if the Lords without the Commons should grant a Tax, and
one that refused to pay it should be Imprisoned, the Tax is void, but by a
general Commitment the Party shall be remedyless if so be the Lords should
award a Capias for Treason or Felony.

By these Instances it appears that their Jurisdiction was restrained by the
Common Law, and it is also restrained by diverse Acts of Parliament, 1 Hen. 4.
Chap. 14. no Appeals shall be made, or any ways pursued or where a Statute is
made a Power is Implicitly given to this Court by the Fundamental Institution,
which makes the Judges Expositors of Acts of Parliament; and peradventure if
all this case appeared upon the return this might be a Case in which they were
restrained by the Stat. 4. Hen. 8. Chap. 8. That all the Suits, Usements, and
Condemnations, etc. Many time from henceforth, at any time to be put or had
upon any Members for any Bill speaking or reasoning of any matters concerning
the Parliament to be Communed or Treated of, shall be utterly void and of no
Effect, now it does not appear, but this is a Correction and Punishment Imposed
upon the Earl, contrary to the Statute, there is no question now made of the
Power of the Lords, but it is only urged that it is necessary for them to
declare by Virtue what Power they proceed otherwise the Liberty of every
English Man shall be subject to the Lords, whereof they may deprive any of them
against an Act of Parliament, but no usage can justify such a proceeding.
Elsmores Case of the Post, Nati. 19. The Duke of Suffolk was Impeached by the
Commons of High Treason, and Misdemeanors, the Lords were in doubt whether they
should proceed upon such a general Impeachment to Imprison the Duke, and the advice of the Judges being demanded, and their Resolution given in the Negative
the Lords were satisfied. This Case is mentioned with design to show the
respect given to the Judges, and that the Judges have determined the highest
matters in Parliament. At a Conference held between the Lords and the Commons,
3d. April. 4. Car. concerning the right and Privilege of the Subject, it was
declared and agreed, that no Freeman ought to be Committed or restrained by
Commitment of the King or Privy Council, or any other (in which the House of
Peers is included,) unless some cause of Commitment, Restraint, or Detainor, be
set forth for which by Law he ought to be Committed, etc.

Now if the King who is the head of the Parliament, nor the Privy Council who
is a Court of State, to which secrecy is so necessary may not Imprison without
showing cause a fortiori: The Lords in Parliament cannot, which are a Court of
Law as well as a Court of State, and therefore ought not to proceed in an
Illegal manner, it is true in 1. Rolls. 192. Rushworths Case, Cook is of Opinion
that the Privy Council may Commit without showing cause, but in his more Mature
Age, he was of another Opinion and accordingly the Law is declared in the
Petition of Right.

Smith argued to the same purpose, and said a Judge cannot make a Judgment
unless the Fact appears to him and on an Habeas Corpus, the Judge can only take
notice of the Fact returned, it is lawful for any Subjects that finds himself
agrieved by any Sentence or Judgment to Petition the King in an humble manner
for redress and where the Subject is restrained of his liberty the proper place
for him to apply himself unto is this Court which has the Supreme Power as to
this purpose, over all Courts and on an Habeas Corpus Ishuing hence, the King
ought to have an Account of his Subject Rolls. Hab. Corp. 64. Witherlies Case,
and though the Commitment be by the Lords, yet if it be Illegal, this Court is
Obliged to discharge the Prisoner, as well as if he had been Illegally
Imprisoned by any other Court; the House of Peers is a high Court but the Kings
Bench has ever been Instructed with the Liberty of the Subject, and if it were
otherwise in case of Imprisonment by the Peers, the Power of the King was less
absolute than the Power of the Lords.

It does not appear but that this Commitment was for Breach of the Privilege,
but nevertheless if it were, this Court might give relief as appears in Sr.
George Bigmores Case before cited and Much. 12. Ed. 4. Rut. 20. for the Court
which has Power to judge what is Privilege has also Power to judge what is
Contempt of Privilege if the Judges may judge of an Act of Parliament, A
fortiori, they may judge of an order of the Lords, 20. Ed. Butchers case, where
he in Revertion brought an Action of Wast, and dyed before Judgment, and his
Heir brought an Action for the same Wast, and the King and the Lords determined
that it did lie, and commanded the Judges to give Judgment accordingly for the
time to come, but by Ryley. 39. it appears that it is only an Order of the King
and the Lords, and that was the cause the Judges conceived that they were not
bound by it, but 39. 3. 13. and ever since have Judged the contrary if it be
admitted. for that for Breach of Privilege may Commit, yet it ought to appear
on the Commitment that that was the Cause, for otherwise that may be called a
Breach, which is only a refusal to answer to a matter whereof the House of
Lords is restrained to hold Plea by the Stat. of the 1st. of Hen. 4. and for a
Contempt Committed out of the House they cannot Commit, for the Word Appeal in
the Statute extends to all Misdemeanors, as it was resolved by the Judges in
the Earl of Clarendon's Case, July. 1663. If the Imprisonment be not lawful the
Court cannot remand him to his wrongful Imprisonment, for that would be an Act
of Injustice, to Imprison him, De nono Vaughan. 156. It does not appear whether
the Contempt was a Voluntary Act, or an Opinion, or an Inadvertency, and he has
now suffered five Months Imprisonment already, false Imprisonment is not only
where the Commitment is unjust, but where the Petition is too long. 2 Inst. 53.
In this Case if this Court cannot give Remedy, peradventure the Imprisonment
shall be perpetual for the King as the Law is now taken may Adjourn the
Parliament for 10 or 20 Years.

But all this is said on Supposition that this Session has Continuance, I
conceive that the Kings giving his Royal Assent to several Laws which has been
Enacted, the Session is determined, and then their order for the Imprisonment
is also determined Brook Parliament. 86. Every Session in which the King Signs
Bills is a day of it self, a Session of it self, 1. Cor. 1. 7. A Special Act is
made, the giving the Royal Assent to several Bills, shall not determine the
Session. ('It Is true, it is there said to be made for the avoiding all Doubts.) In
the Stat. 16. Car. 1. There is a Promise to the same purpose, and also 12. Car.
2. 1. and 22. and 23. Car. 2. 2. 1. 11. To. 2. No. 12.

By the Opinion of Cook. 4. Inst. 27. the Royal Assent does not determine, but
the Authorities on which he relies, don't Warrant his Opinion, for first in the
Parliament, Roll. 1. H. 7. It appears that the Royal Assent was given to the
Act, for the reversal of the Attainder of the Members of Parliament; the same
day it was given to the other Bills, and the same Year the same Parliament
Assembled again, and then it is Probable, that the Members which had been
attained were present and not before, 8 R. 2. No. 13. is only a Judgment in
Case of Treason, by Virtue of a Power reserved to them on the Statute 25. Ed.
3. Rot. Parliament. 7. H. 4. No. 29. is not an Act of Parliament, 14. Ed. 3. N.
789. The Act is first entered on the Roll, but on Condition the King will grant
their other Petitions, the Inference my Lord Cook makes, that the Act for the
Attainder of Queen Katherine, 33. H. 8. was passed before the determination of
the Session, yet it was on a Judgment given against by the Commissions of Oyer
and Terminer, and the Subsequent Act is only an Act of Confirmation; but Cook
ought to be Excused for all his Notes and Papers were taken from him, so that
this Book did not recieve his last hand, but ^is observable he was one of the
Members of the Parliament, 1 Car. 1. When the special Act before mentioned, and
was made, and no Instance can be given where an Act was passed; and afterward
the Parliament did proceed in that Session only where there was a Precedent
Agreement between the King and the Houses, so I conclude that the order is
Determined with the Session, and the Earl of Shaftsbury ought to be Discharged*

Airs to the same effect argued, That the Warrant is not sufficient; for it
does not appear that it was made by the Jurisdiction is desired in the House of
Peers; for that is corain Rege in Parliamento, so that the King and the Commons
are present in supposition of Law, and the Writ of Error in Parliament is
Inspecto Recordo nos consilio and advisamento Spiritualium and Temporalium, and
Communitatum in Parliamento praedict' existent', etc. it would not be difficult
to prove that anciently the Commons did assist there, and now it shall be
intended that they were present; for there can be no Averment against the
Record. The Lords do several Acts as a distinct House, as the Debating Bills,
the Enquiring of Breaches of Privileges, and the Warrant in this Case being by
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, cannot be intended otherwise, but that it was
done by them in their distinct capacity, and then the commitment being during
the Pleasure of the King and the House of Peers, it is manifest that the King
is Principal, and His Pleasure ought to be determined in this Court.

If the Lords should commit a great Minister of State, whose Advice is
necessary for the King and the Realm, it cannot be imagined that the King shall
be without remedy for his Subject, but that he may have him Discharged by his
Writ out of this Court.

This present Recess is not ordinary Adjournment; for it is entered in the
Journal that the Parliament shall not be Assembled at the Day of Adjournment,
but Adjourned or Prorogued to another Day, if the King do not signify his
Pleasure by Proclamation.

Some other Exceptions were made to the Return.

1. That no Commitment is returned, but only a Warrant to the Constable to
receive him.

2. The Return does not answer the Mandate of the Writ; for that it is to have
the Body of A. E. of S. and the return of Warrant for the Imprisonment of A.
Ashley E. of S.

Sergeant Maynard argued to maintain the Return; The House of Lords is the
Supreme Court of the Realm; it is true this Court is superior to all Courts of
ordinary Jurisdiction, If this Commitment had been by any Inferior Court, it
could not have been maintained; But the Commitment is by a Court that is not
under the Control of this Court; and that Court is in Law sitting at this
time, and therefore the expressing the Contempt particularly is a Matter that
coutinues in the Deliberation of that Court: It Is true, this Court ought to
determine what the Law is in every Case that comes before them, and in this
Case the Question is only whether this Court can judge of a Contempt committed
in Parliament during the same Session of Parliament, and discharge one
committed for such Contempt, when Question of Privilege arises in an Accord
depending in this Court, the Cour^ may determine it; but now the Question is,
Whether the Lords have capacity to determine their own Privileges, and whether
this Court can control their Determination, and Discharge during their Session
a Peer committed for contempt. The Judges have often demanded what the Law is,
and how a Statute should be expounded of the Lords in Parliament as on the
Statute of Amendments, 40 Ed. 3. 34. 6, 8. Co. 157 and 158. a fortiori. The
Court ought to demand their Opinion when a Doubt arises on an Order made by
the House of Lords now sitting.

As to the Determination of the Imprisonment, doubtless the Pleasure of the
King is to be determined in the same Court where the Judgment was given.

As to the Determination of the Session the Opinion of Cook is good Law, and
the Addition of Promises of many Acts is only in Majorem cautelam.

Attorney Genesis To the same Effect, as to the uncertainty of the Commitment, it
is to be considered that this Case differs from all other Cases in two
circumstances: 1. The Person which is committed is a Member of the House by
which he is committed (I do not take upon me to say that the Case would be
different if the person committed were not a Peer. 2. The Court that does commit
is Superior to this Court, and therefore if the contempt had been particularly
shown of what Judgment soever this Court should have been as to the contempt,
yet they would not have discharged the Earl, and thereby take upon them a
Jurisdiction over the House of Peers.

The Judges in no Age have taken upon them the Judgment of what is Lex and
consuetudo Parliamenti; but here the Attempt is to engage the Judges to give
their Opinion in a matter whereof they might have refused to have given it. If
it had been demanded in Parliament, it is true, if a Writ be brought where
Privilege is pleaded, the Court ought to judge of it as an Incident to the
Suit whereof the Court was possessed; but this will be no warrant for this
Court to assume a Judgment of an original Matter arising in Parliament, and
that which is said of the Judges power to expound Statutes, cannot be denied.

But it is not applicable to this Case by the same reason that this commitment
is questioned, every commitment of the House of Commons may be likewise
questioned in this Court. It is objected, that there would be a failure of
Justice if the Earl should not be discharged; but the contrary is true; for if
he be discharged, there would be a failure of Justice for Offenses in
Parliament, and therefore the Earl would be discharged from all manner of
punishment for his Offense, if he be discharged (for he must be discharged or
remanded; for the Court cannot Bail but where they have a Jurisdiction of the
Matter) and so delivered out of the Hands of the Lords, who only have power to
punish him.

It is objected that the contempt is not said to be committed in the House of
Peers, but it may well be intended to be committed there; for it appears he is
a Member of that House, and that the contempt was against the House; and
besides there are contempts whereof they have Cognizance though they are
Committed out of the House, it is Objected that it is possible this Contempt was
Committed before the General Pardon but surely such Injustice shall not be
supposed in the Supreme Court, and it may well be supposed to be Committed,
during the Session in which the Commitment of Prison was.

It would be great difficulty for the Lords to make their Commitments so exact
and particular when they are Employed in the Arduous Affairs of the Realm, and
it has been adjudged on a return out of Chantery, of a Commitment for a
Contempt against a Decree that it was good, and yet the Decree was not shown.

The Linnitation of the Imprisonment is well, for if the King or the House
determine their Pleasure, he shall be discharged, for then it is not the pleasure
of both, that he should be detained, and the Addition of those words during the
pleasure, is no more then was before Implied by the Law, for if those words had
been Omitted, yet the King might have pardoned the Contempt if he had but
Expressed his pleasure under the Broad Seal. If a Judgment be given in this
Court, that one shall be Imprisoned during the Kings pleasure; his pleasure
ought to be Determined by Pardon, and not by any Act of this Court, so that the
King would have no prejudice by the Imprisonment of a great Minister, because
he could discharge* him by a Pardon the double Limitation is for the Benefit of
the Prisoner who ought not to complain of the duration of his Imprisonment,
since he has neglected to make Application for his Discharge in an orderly way.

I Confess by the Determination of the Session, the orders made the same
Session are Discharged, but I shall not affirm whether this present Order will
be Discharged or no, because it is a Judgment. But this is not the present
Case, for the Session continues notwithstanding the Royal Assent given to
several Bills, according to the Opinion of Cook and all the Judges. Hutton. 61.
and 62. Every Proviso in an Act of Parliament is not a Determination of what
was the Law before; for they are often added for the Satisfaction of those that
are Ignorant of the Law.

Solicitor Genesis To the same effect, in the great Case of Mr. Seldom, 5 Car. 1:
the warrant was for notable Contempts committed against us and our Government,
and stirring up Sedition; and although that be almost as general as that in our
Case, yet no Objection was made to it for that cause in any of the Arguments,
Rushworth's Collections 18 and 19. in the Appendix. But I agree that this
Return could not have been maintained if it were out of an inferior Court, but
during the Session this Court can take no Cognizance of the Matter, and the
Inconvenience would be great if the Law were taken otherwise; for this Court
might Judge one way, and the House of Peers another: which doubtless would not
be for the Advantage and Benefit of the Subject. For the avoiding of this
Mischief, It was agreed by the whole Court in the Case of Barnardiston and
Somes, that the Accord for the double Return could not be brought in this Court
until the Parliament had determined the Right of Election, lest there should be
a difference between the Judgments of the Courts.

When a Judgment of the Lords comes to this Court, though it be of a Reversal
of a Judgment of this Court, the Court is obliged to execute it, but their
Judgment was never examined or corrected here. In the Case of the Lord Hollis,
it was Resolved that this Court had no Jurisdiction of a Misdemeanor committed
in Parliament, when the Parliament is determined, the Judges are the Expositors
of the Acts, and are entrusted with the Lives, Liberties and Fortunes of the
Subject, and if the Session were Determined, the Earl might apply himself to
this Court for the Subject shall not be without a place where he may resort for
the Recovery of his Liberty, but this Session is not Determined for the most
part the Royal Assent is given the last day, as says Plouden, Partridges Case,
yet the giving the Royal Assent, does not make it the last day of Parliament
without a Subsequent Resolution or Prerogative, and the Court Judicially takes
notice of Prorogation and Adjournments of Parliament. Cro. Jac. 111. Ford.
Versus Hunten, and by Consequence no order is discontinued but remains as if
the Parliament were actually Assembled. Cro. Jac. 342. Sr. Chr. Haudens Case,
so that the Earl ought (...) apply himself to the Lords who are his proper
Judges.

It ought to be observed, That this attempt is Primae Impressionis, and though
Imprisonment upon Contempt has been frequent by the one and the other House,
till now no person ever sought* Enlargement here: The Court was obliged in
Justice to grant the Habeas Corpus, but upon the whole matter being disclosed,
it appears upon the Return, that the Cause belongs ad aliud examen; they ought
to remand the Party.

As to the Limitation of the Imprisonment, the King may determine his Pleasure
by a Pardon under the Great Seal of England, as in the Case of Reinger and
Flagossa, Plowden 20.

As to the Exception that no Commitment is returned, the Constable can only
show what concerns himself, which is the Warrant to him directed; and the Writ
does not require him to return any thing else.

As to your Exception, that he is otherwise named in the Commitment then in the
Writ: The Writ requires to have the Body of A. Earl of S. Quocunque nomine
Censeatur in the Commitment.

After this, my Lord Shaftsbury made a Speech; the Substance thereof follows.

My Lords,
I Did not intend to have spoke one word in this business, but something has
been Objected and laid to my Charge by the King's Council, Mr. Attorney and Mr.
Solicitor, that enforces me to say something for your better satisfaction.
They have told you that my Counsel in their Arguments said, That this Court was
greater then the House of Peers, which I dare to appeal to your Lordships and
the whole Court, that it was never spoken by them, I am sure was not by any
directions of mine. What is done by my Counsel and by me, is, That this is the
most proper Court to resort unto where the Liberty of the Subject is concerned.
The Lords House is the Supreme House of Judicature in the Kingdom; but yet
there is a Jurisdiction that the Lords House does not meddle with. The King's
Counsel has mentioned, as a wonder, That a Member of the Lords House should
come hither to diminish the Jurisdiction of the Lords. I acknowledge them to be
Superior to this, or any other Court, to whom all Appeals and Writs of Error
are brought; and yet there are Jurisdictions that they do not challenge, and
which are not natural to them, or proper for them. They claim not to meddle in
Original Causes, and so I might mention in other things; and I do not think it
a kindness to any Power or Body of men, to give them some power that are not
natural or proper to their Constitution. I do not think it a kindness to the
Lords to make them absolute and above the Law, for so I humbly conceive this
must do, if it be adjudged that they by a general Warrant, or without any
particular Cause assigned, do commit me, or any other man, to a perpetual and
indefinite Imprisonment: And, my Lords, I am not so Inconsiderable a person,
but what you do in my Case, must be Law for every man in England.

Mr. Attorney is pleased to say I am a Member of the Lords House, and to lay
weight on the word Member. It is very true, I am one of them, and no man has a
greater Reverence or Esteem for the Lords then my self; but, my Lords, I hope
my being a Peer, or a Member of either House, shall not loose my being an
English man, or make me to have less title to Magna Charta and the other Laws
of English Liberty*

My Opinion is not with one of my Counsel, who argued very learnedly, That the
passing an Act by the King's Royal Assent can make a Sessions, because the
usual Promise was not in it. It was without any Instruction of mine to mention
that point.

The King's Counsel tells your Lordships of the Laws and Customs of Parliament;
and if this was so, I should submit; but this Case of mine is Primae
Impressionis, and is a new way, such as neither Mr. Attorney nor Mr. Solicitor
can show any President of, and I have no other remedy nor place to apply to
then the way I take.

Mr. Attorney confesses that the King's pleasure may please me without the
Lords. If so, this Court is Coram Rege. This Court is the proper place to
determine the King's pleasure. This Court will and ought to judge of an Act of
Parliament void, if it be against Magna Charta, much more may judge an Order of
the House, that is put in Execution to deprive any Subject of his Liberty. And
if this Order of Commitment be a Judgment, as the King's Counsel affirms, then
it is out of the Lords hands, and properly before your Lordships, as much as
the Acts which were lately passed, which I presume you will not refuse to judge
of, notwithstanding that the King's Attorney General says that this Parliament
is still in being: I take it something ill that Mr. Attorney tells me I might
have applied elsewhere.

My Lord, I have not omitted what became my Duty toward the King; for besides
the Oath of Allegiance I took as a Peer, or an English man, there is something
in my Breast that will never suffer me to depart from the Duty and Respect that
I owe him; but I am here before him, he is always supposed to be here present,
and he allows his Subjects the Law.

My Lord, they speak much of the Custom of Parliament; but I do affirm to you,
there is no Custom of Parliament that ever their Members were put out of their
own Power; and the Inconveniences of it will be endless.

Mr. Attorney was pleased easily to answer the Objection of one of my Counsel;
If a great Minister should be so Committed, he has the Cure of a Pardon, the
Prorogation, or a Dissolution: but if the Case should be put, why forty
Members, or a greater number, may not as well be taken away without remedy in
any of the King's Courts, he will not so easily answer; and if in this Case
there can be no relief, no man can foresee what will be hereafter.

I desire your Lordship well to consider what rule you make in my Case, for it
will be a President that in future Ages may concern every man in England.

My Lord, Mr. Attorney says you can either release or remand me; I differ from
him in that Opinion. I do not insist upon a Release: I have been a Prisoner
above five Months already, and come hither of Necessity, having no other way to
get my Liberty, and therefore am very willing to tender your Lordship Bayl,
which are in or near the Court, good as any are in England, either for their
Quality or Estate, and I am ready to give any Sum or Number.

My Lord, this Court being possessed of this business, I am now your Prisoner.

The Court delivered their Opinion Seriatim.

Justice Jones. Such a Return made by an Ordinary Court of Justice, would have
been ill and uncertain; but the Cause is different when it comes before this
High Court, to which so much respect has been paid by our Predecessors, that
they have deferred the Determination of Doubts conceived on an Act of
Parliament, until they have received the Advice of the Lords: and now, instead
thereof, it is demanded of us to control the Judgment of all the Peers, and
given on a Member of their own House, and during the continuance of the same
Session. The Cases where the Courts of Westminster have taken Cognizance of
Privilege, differ from this Case: for in those it was only an Incident to the
Case before them, which was of their Cognizance; but the direct point of the
Matter is now the Judgment of the Lords.

The course of all Courts ought to be considered, for that is the Law of the
Court, Lane's Case 2. Rest. and it has not been affirmed, That the Usage of the
House of Lords has used to express the matter more particularly on Commitments
for Contempts, and therefore I shall take it to be according to the course of
Parliament. 4. Inst. 50. It is said that the Judges are Assistants to the
Lords, to Inform them of Common Law; but they ought not to Judge of any Law,
Custom, or Usage of Parliament.

The Objection as to the continuance of the Imprisonment, has received a plain
Answer, for it shall be determined by the Pleasure of the King, or of the
Lords: and if it were otherwise, yet the King could pardon the Contempt under
the Great Seal, or discharge the Imprisonment under the Privy Seal.

I shall not say what would be the consequence (as to this Imprisonment) if the
Session were determined, for that is not the present Case; but as the case is,
the Court can neither Bayl nor Discharge the Earl.

Wild Justice. The Return no doubt is illegal; but the question is of a Point
of Jurisdiction, Whether it may be examined here? This Court cannot meddle with
the Transactions of the most High Court of Peers in Parliament, during the
Session, which is not determined; and therefore the certainty or uncertainty of
the Return is not material, for it is not examinable here: but if the Session
had been determined, my Opinion would be, that he ought to be discharged.

Rainsford Chief Justice. This Court has no Jurisdiction of the Cause, and
therefore the Form of the Return is not considerable. We ought not to extend
our Jurisdiction beyond its due limits, and the actions of our Ancestors will
not warrant us in such an Attempt.

The Consequence would be very mischievous if this Court should deliver a
Member of the House of Peers and Commons who are committed, for thereby the
business of Parliament may be retarded: for it may be the Commitment was for
evil behavior, or undecent reflections on other Members, to the disturbance of
the Affairs of Parliament.

The Commitment in this case is not for safe Custody, but he is in execution of
the Judgment given by the Lords for the Contempt; and therefore if he should be
bayled, he would be delivered out of execution; for a Contempt in facie Curiae
there is no other Judgment or Execution.

This Court has no Jurisdiction, and therefore he ought to be remanded. I
deliver no Opinion whether it would be otherwise in case of a Prorogation.

Twisden Justice was absent, but he desired Justice Jones to declare that his
Opinion was, That the Party ought to be Remanded*

And so he was remanded by the Court.

FINIS.
October 23. 1679.

I Do Appoint Robert Pawlet to Print this my Speech: And that no other Person
presume to Re-Print the same.

WILLIAM SCROGGS.


