The CASE of several Thousands of His MAJESTY's Subjects, Entitled under the
Letters Patents of King Charles the Second, to Annual Sums out of the
Hereditary Revenue of EXCISE: Humbly Offered to the Consideration of the
Honorable House of Commons.
THE Parliament having Passed, in 19 Caroli 2di, an Act for Assigning Orders in
the Exchequer without Revocation, and therein expressed it to be made for the
Advantage of the Trade of this Kingdom; and for Seven Years to give Credit to
His Majesty's Exchequer; Also for Payment of Moneys that should be Charged on
any Branch of His Majesty's Revenue: Several Goldsmiths and Others were thereby
encouraged to Advance great Sums to serve Public Occasions.

But notwithstanding the said Act, His said Majesty in Council, on the 2d of
January 1671/2, declared, That His Necessities forced Him to Postpone Payments
in the Exchequer for One Year; And that the Lords of the Treasury should Employ
and Dispose of all the said Moneys so stopped, for Setting forth and Payment of
the Fleet, and other Public Services, in order to the Preservation and Safety
of His Majesty's Government, and Defense of His People: By which Stop in the
Exchequer, the said Goldsmiths were not able to pay their Debts to Thousands of
Persons, who had then Moneys in their hands.

Therefore to Remove the great Difficulties which many Subjects lay under by
the said Stop of Payments; And for want of a more Effectual Relief, His said
Majesty caused the Accounts of those to whom he was so indebted, to be stated
by the Proper Officers; And for the Moneys which appeared due by those Accounts
to each Respective person, His said Majesty by his Letters Patents, about April
1677, Gave and Granted to Each of his said Creditors, their Heirs and Assigns,
in lieu and satisfaction of their Respective Debts, Annual Sums or Payments out
of the Hereditary Revenue of Excise, answerable in Value to the Interest of
their Respective Debts, at the Rate of Six Pounds per Cent. per Annum, to be
paid Quarterly, and to be preferred before any other Payment out of the same,
by Virtue or Color of any Warrant, Order, or Directions whatsoever, of any
After-Date, excepting only Necessary Sums for the Management of the said
Revenue, and about 36209 l. 15 s. 4 d. a Year, to the then Queen-Consort, and
Duke of York, with a Power of Redemption, upon Payment of the Principal Sum,
and Arrears to that time; And pursuant thereto, the said Patentees and their
Assigns were paid in the Reigns of King Charles the Second and King James the
Second, to Lady Day 1683, but not any part since that time, notwithstanding all
due Applications to that purpose.

Which Occasioned those Proprietors to have many Thoughts which way to be
Relieved; And upon Application to the Members of the Honorable House of
Commons, to know if it was not proper to offer their said Case to their
Committee of Aggrievances, they were advised, First, to prosecute the Legal
Remedy, which through great Difficulties has been done, and by Ten Years
Labor and great Charge the Title under the said Patents has been solemnly
settled and determined to be well Granted; And that the Patentees and their
Assigns ought to be duly paid their several Yearly Sums, and the Arrears
thereof; And accordingly a Judgment is given for Mr. Williamson (an Assignee of
Sir Robert Vyner) for the Arrears of the Yearly Sum of Sixty Pounds, payable to
him; And for the future Payment of the same, out of the Hereditary Revenue of
Sixty Pounds, said Revenue has been also adjudged and determined to be legally
Charged therewith, and with the Rest of the Yearly Sums, payable to the
Respective Patentees and their Assigns.

And now after the great and many Difficulties and unexpressible Miseries that
several of these Proprietors have undergone for want of Payment, and the great
Charges they have been at to Recover their Legal Estates, a Vote has Passed on
the 12th of March present, in the Honorable House of Commons, to Appropriate,
amongst other Revenues, the Hereditary Revenue of Excise toward the Supply
Granted for the Year Seventeen Hundred.

So that by the said Vote, the Estates of the said Patentees and their Assigns
would be Invaded, should it Pass into an Act of Parliament; for such an
Application, although but for One Year, it would be manifest Damage to the
Proprietors concerned therein, and may tend to a defeating of the said
Williamson from the Benefit of the Execution of the Judgment in his Favor,
obtained in the most Solemn manner: Which it is humbly hoped and prayed, the
Honorable House of Commons, will not be pleased to do, for the Considerations
following: I. That the Overplus mentioned in the Act for Provision for His
Majesty's Household, etc. to be at the Parliament's Disposal, is only of His
Majesty's Estate therein; but not of what was before Legally Charged on the
Hereditary Excise, and become His Subjects Property. II. That it is very
unusual, that what is particular Persons Estates, should by a Law be taken from
them to answer Public Services. III. That Dispensing with Property, has not
hitherto been allowed; And may be of Example to Power at another time, to be
the sole Judge of a Necessity when to do it, which in time may hazard our
present Constitution. IV. That the Sufferings of the said Patentees, and their
Assigns, for Seventeen Years last past, without any just Color, deserves
Compassion and Relief: But a Continuance of such Hardships must Affect both the
Justice and Credit of the Nation. V. That the House of Commons are the Great
Preservers of the Legal Property of the People of England.


Therefore it is humbly Hoped and Prayed, That the Honorable House of Commons
will not proceed upon any such Vote to Enact the same; but that in Justice to
the Concerned, they will leave the Hereditary Revenue of Excise free and open
to pay and discharge the said Annual Sums, and Arrears legally Charged thereon.


