BERWICKS BEAUTY, OR A CHURCH Erecting there.

Haggai 1. 7, 8. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your own ways in your
hearts.

Go up to the mountain, and bring wood and build this house, and I will be
favorable in it, and I will be glorified, says the Lord.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1650.

To the Honorable, Colonel George Fenwick, Governor of the Town of Berwick upon
Tweed; And to the Right Worshipful Thomas Watson Esquire, Major of the same.
Gentlemen,
THat zeal to the building the Lords House, which discovers it self in your
care and charge in beginning, and diligent progress in expediting the same, is
the ground of this presumption, and encourages me to this boldness. Though with
the VVidow it be but a mite, yet I shall with her heart also cast it into your
Treasury, hoping it may further the work, and confident it will be accepted by
you both, as a good intention, though no large portion from

Your faithful and devoted Servant, Robert Denton.

A MITE Cast into the TREASURY.
THe glory of God ought to be the first and chiefest end of every intention and
action.

His glory is not more illustrated in any thing, than in erecting Churches (or
places, or what you please to term them) for his public worship and service;
if therein we pray unto and praise his great and glorious Name: for, My h^use
shall be called the house of Prayer to all Nations, says God by the mouth of
the Prophet, Isa. 56. 7. and, He that there offers praise, shall glorify me,
says the Lord by the prophetic King, Psalm. 50. 23.

This Church, I presume is begun to be erected with the same intentions, nor
want I a firm foundation for that presumption; Therefore, I also (being born
in, and sworn to that Corporation, to act all things that may conduce to its
good) conclude my self engaged in conscience to my power to assist in so
religious and pious an action: The way by which I conceive I may best discharge
this engagement, is,

First, by humbly representing such encouragements as may confirm those noble
Resolutions, which so piously have begun, cheerfully to proceed in so religious
a work.

Secondly, by discovering such things (as known) may further and advance it.

And lastly, by humbly requesting a lawful favor of the Major, Bailiffs and
Burgesses of that Corporation, that thereby I may be enabled to be a
contributor also thereunto.

I shall not need to insist much upon encouragement of those, whose zeal to
perfect the work declares them such, as willingly offered themselves, Judges 5.
2. yet I am confident this motive may fan up that zeal to a brighter flame, if
they will be pleased to eye the good fruit which this work will produce, and
the reward they shall gain thereby.

Our Savior was much moved, and as a prevalent Motive also it was urged by the
Elders of the Jews to persuade and induce Christ to grant the Centurions
Petition, and to prevail with him to heal his Servant, because he loves, said
they, our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue, Luke 7. 5.

The building an House for the assemblies of the Servants of God, is an
undeniable Testimony of a man's zeal toward the true worship and service of
God; and when the piety of Superiors shall discover it self, by attempting and
furthering the erecting Houses for the exercise of the public Worship of God,
weak and simple people are invited by their example to respect Religion, and
reverence the service of God; yea Godless Barbarity, is converted to Christian
Civility, and Heathenish Liberty to comely Policy; and the present age shall be
encouraged by their example, to go and do likewise, Luke 10. 37. at least,
seeing This their good work may glorify their Father which is in heaven,
Matthew. 5. 16.

And as for their reward; both the present and future ages shall speak their
praise, and bless God for this good Monument of their religious Intentions,
when children shall be instructed by their godly Parents, to say, This House of
God was begun, furthered and finished in the time, by the care and diligence
and (in part) at the cost of Colonel Ge^rge Fenwick Governor, and Thomas Watson
Esquire; Major of the Town of Berwick upon Tweed.

Neither does this their zeal want encouragement from the blessed Spirit of God
it self, for they have for their president, the examples of the best men in
Gods holy Word, recorded as powerful Motives to persuade them to an unwearied
prosecution of such pious Resolutions.

David in his greatness did advise to build Gods House, 2 Samuel 7. 2. the result
whereof, was that holy and heavenly ejaculation: The zeal of thy house has
eaten me up, Psalm. 69. 9. I will not say, that the expression is now inverted,
and the zeal of some has eaten up Gods House.

Solomon thought it the chiefest part of his Royalty, to act what his Father
projected, 1 Kings 5. 5.

Cyrus an Heathen proclaims it as his charge from the God of Heaven, to build
the House of the Lord for his Worship and Service, Ezra 1. 2. and both Ezra and
Nehemiah made it their principal work to put in execution that religious
Proclamation Ezra 8. and Nehem. 4.

These examples I hope are not needlessly inserted for their encouragement, I
come now to my promised discovery.

King Joash minding to renew the house of the Lord, gathered together the
Priests and the Levites, and said unto them, Go out unto the cities of Judah,
and gather of all Israel money to repair the house of God from year to year, or
for a year, and see that you haste the matter, 2 Chronicles. 24. 5.

Jehoiada the Priest took a chest, and slit an hole in the lid of it, and set
it beside the altar, on the right side, as one comes into the house of the
Lord; and the Priests that kept the door, put therein all the money that was
brought into the house of the Lord, 2 Kings 12. 9.

This money (when much, or a sum) was taken out and delivered to the overseers
of the work, to be laid out to the workmen, but were not called to an account;
for THEY dealt faithfully, 2 Kings 12. 15.

Faithful dealing in matters belonging to the public good, procures a quietus
est, at an easy rate; whereas those who waste their Masters goods, ought at a
dear rate to receive that summons, Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou
may be no longer steward, Luke 16. 2.

Would not those men deserve a sharp check, whose private avarice should
swallow up a Kings public bounty, and Policy divert that to their own ends,
which a Princes Piety granted and designed for a common good? They then who
should make use of that for the repairing of their own, which such a King
intended for the restoring the house of God, must justly merit Haggaie's
reprehension: Is it time for your selves to dwell in sieled houses, and this
house lie waste, Haggai 1. 4.

For, (be the pretense what it will) yet the abuse of such sums as are
collected for pious and religious purposes, evidently demonstrates that such
men prefer self-policy and private profit to Religion; nay, it clearly shows
that such men seek their private necessities, yea very pleasures before Gods
Honor; and such unfaithful Collectors, merit the unprofitable servants
judgment, Matthew. 25. 28.

The late King granted his Letters Patents in 1641. to the Major, Bailiffs and
Burgesses of the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, to gather and collect through all
England money to build a new Church in the said Town, in lieu of Trinity Church
demolished in Queen Mary's days; the virtue of those Letters Patents was to
endure for one year only.

Thomas Davison Tailor, having all the Briefs delivered to him, in number 9000,
and some hundreds, gives his Bill to be accomptable to the whole Town for the
same, and that Bill was attested by J^hn Sleigh, Robert Sleigh his Son, Patrick
Ramsey, and Robert Denton of Black Friars in L^nd^n: This Bill is in the
custody of Mr. Sleigh senior, and as for Thomas Davison, he being deceased, his
Executrix is able to make satisfaction, and lives in the said B^ack-Fryars.

But here the af^resaid Robert Denton must in conscience give this Testimony to
the said Thomas Davison deceased, that he has often professed to him, that he
had paid in all the moneys that he had received for this business to Mr.
Sleigh, either by Bills of Exchange, or according to his special Orders, and
therefore he humbly conceives that this should be charged home to Mr. Sleigh to
clear himself; and also that every person concerned in this business, be
compelled to give in their account upon Oath, and where any are found tardy,
that interest be exacted (as in justice and equity it may) f^r the sums they
shall be f^und to be in arrears; but this he submits to the wisdom of those in
authority whom it chiefly concerns.

Thomas Davison, in September 1641. did send some of these Briefs to the
abovenamed Robert Den^ons house (because as then he had not anhouse of his own)
and being the same September. sent by the Parliament into Scotland, returned not
almost in three months after; and the year consuming, the said Robert Denton
by virtue of a Commission from the Town, under the common Seal and Hands
subscribed (which he can make appear) having also great Seals and Letters of
Deputation, delivered some Briefs to such Brief-gatherers as repaired to him,
and took Bonds of them to be accomptable, as follows;

Pollo Logous a Grecian, received Briefs to collect in Essex, Hertfordshire and
Buckinghamshire, his security Mr. Brown in Black-Fryars, the sum 300 l.

Mr. Gravener, to collect in Suffolk and N^rfolk; his security Mr. L^w in
Butt^lph-Lane, the sum 300 l.

Mr. Anthony Que, to collect W^lts, Berks, and Hampshire, with other places, as
by his Bond appears; his security Mr. Newberry in Watlingstreet, the sum 300 l.

These Bonds were by a special Order from Mr. Sleigh then Major, commanded from
Denton and delivered to Davison.

Davison took Bonds of many in the West part of England on this side Trent, for
which his Executrix is to be accomptable according to his aforesaid security.

Mr. John Burges and Eward Allison, paid in unto Mr. Sleigh aforesaid, the sum
of 300 l. or thereabouts.

The Castle of Berwick was by Dentons care and diligence, purchased of the Earl
of Suffolk for 330 l. for which Sir Thomas Witherington (a worthy Instrument of
this work) was bound, and the materials to be employed merely to this end
(toward the building of the Church) though Mr. Nicholas Foster offered unto
the said Denton 450 l. to have purchased it for his own particular use, as he
himself will justify; but how some of the materials so purchased were disposed
of, the abovenamed Mr. Sleigh may give account: but Denton can give no other
account for this his careful service, but that for his pains he was hardly
dealt with by the Guild, September. 1649.

Mr. Thomas Carew a Bedchamber-man, gave by Will toward the building of the
Church 200 l. which sum by Mr. Fisher was paid to Davison, for which his
Executrix is to be accomptable.

Robert Dento^, coming to account for his collections for Kent, and some part
of Warwickshire, as by the Briefs Endorsed appears, was found Debtor to the
Town for the foresaid use in the sum of 50 l. as will appear by Record in the
Guild Book, September, 1649. and this necessitates Robert Dentons humble
Request of a lawful favor of the Major, Bailiffs and Burgesses of the
Corporation of Berwick aforesaid, as follows;

Sir Pelham Carew (deceased) in his life time became debtor in a Bond of 150 l.
real debt to Robert Denton, but taken in the name of the Major, Bailiffs and
Burgesses of Berwick aforesaid, because some part thereof by the said Robert
Denton, was designed toward the building of the aforesaid Church.

His Relict the Lady Mary Carew, now wife to Mr. George Palour living in the
Tower of London, is liable to this debt, and able to pay it, having an estate
of her late husbands worth 90 l. per annum, in Horsham in the County of Sussex.

This Bond is for the present in the hands of the Widow Davison, delivered by
Robert Denton as a pledge or Engagement for his faithful performance of his
promises and obligations as aforesaid.

Mistress Davison denies to deliver the Bond without a special Proxy from the
Guild, because made in their name.

Therefore the said Robert Denton humbly desires that the Guild would by a
Proxy command the Bond out of the said Mistress Davisons Custody, and that the
Honorable the Governor, the Worshipful the Major, Bailiffs and Burgesses, would
be pleased to write effectually and prevalently to the Lady Mary Carew, without
further delay or trouble to pay the foresaid 150 l. having been now due about
Ten years, by which payment he shall be enabled, not only to pay the 50 l.
which he owes to the Town, but also to perform the free Design of his heart as
a contribution toward this so religious a work; besides, it will help toward
the payment of Mr. Young (the Mason in this work) to whom the said Robert Denton
is indebted in 100 l.

And as for the Lady Mary Carew, report (and her own conversation justifying
that report) speaks her to the world as the most religious, most pious, and
withal exactly just in her dealings: Therefore, it is not to be doubted that
she will so derogate from her native worth and nobleness, as to deny the
payment of that debt, which her conscience cannot but dictate unto her is most
justly due and payable by her, in relation to the Noble Knight her Husband
deceased; but especially, seeing it will advance so religious a work, and that
in her Native Town, when she shall hear the work is begun.

To all, I take not upon me to advise, much less to prescribe to such Honorable
and Worthy persons, in so great and high employments: These are only humble
Representations of that service which is due to them, and desires, which are
with humility requested of them, by Their faithful Servant, Robert Denton.

FINIS.

