THE EXALTATION OF CHRISTMAS PIE As it was Delivered IN A PREACHMENT At ELY
House.

By P. C. Dr. of Divinity and Midwifery.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

Brewerton, Chap. CXIX. Ver. XXXI.
And they did eat their Plum-pies, and rejoiced exceedingly.
Beloved,
THis Text which I have named unto you, is such a Text, that if it be well
squeezed, it will afford abundance of matter. Truly beloved, it makes my teeth
water to think on it; You shall hear it over again, And they did eat their
Plum-pies, and rejoiced exceedingly. Now you must consider, that these words
have a coherence with something that went before: For they do plainly imply
that the persons of whom the Text speaks were invited by some or other of their
brethren to dinner. And now being invited to dinner, and being set down at the
table and having also teugh'd the Roast Beef, then I say, they did eat their
Plum-pies and rejoiced exceedingly. Thus you see how that And is in this place
a Conjunction Copulative, Lyming words and sentences together. And now we talk
of a Conjunction Copulative, give me leave my beloved to step a little aside
from my text, for these words have more Marrow in them then you are aware of.
To tell you the truth there are several sorts of Conjunctions Copulative, there
be your Astrological Conjunctions Copulative, as when the English Merlin lay
with Mistress F --. For a Conjunction Copulative, is a carnal closing together
of Male and Female, to the satisfaction of their wanton desires; Now this is a
thing much us d among Professors; who are exceedingly offended that increase
and multiply, was not made one of the ten Commandments. Then there is your
praeter natural Conjunction Copulative, as when an Elders maid lies with a
Mastiff or as when a Quaker buggereth a Mare. I will not positively determine
whether it were lawful to do it or no: Yet this I will say in the defense of
our brother; that truly man has a very great liberty as being Lord of the
Earth and of every creature that is therein. There is also your unlawful
Conjunction copulative, and that is, when a Man lies with another Man's Wife.
And lastly there is your lawful conjunction copulative, and that is when a Man
lies with none but his own Wife: but when that will come to pass we know not
for it is now adays out of fashion. Now these Copulative Conjunctions do
produce Monstrous Children, and Cuckolds. But to a Ball, whether am I going:
Truly I had almost forgotten my text, but my beloved it is the same thing; for
so a man keep talking, you know, it is no great matter what he talks of; however
since we have a beaten road, we will keep it if we can, let us see then what is
next. And they. Now here arises a another doubt, to puzzle a Prophet, yea even
Daniel himself. For how can any body tell, who these They are, unless they
behold. For my part I cannot divine who these They, should be for my life. I do
believe they were men; and men that did not use to eat Plum pies; for the text
says, that when they had Eaten them, they rejoiced exceedingly. Our brother
James Naylor in his learned comment upon Reynard the Fox, says that these They
are Women. But Cardan in his book of Subtleties utterly denis it. But you will
say, what reason do they give? Nay, they neither of them give any reason for
what they say, only they tell us flat and plainly, like our brother Hinderson,
that it is so: now one of these two must lie; but which of them, I profess I
cannot conceive. Truly my beloved I am in a wood: I wish some person of
judgment and industry that has nothing else to do, would endeavor to
satisfy us in this difficult question; for, for my part, I think it is of as
great concernment, as many things that were handled at the Council of Trent.
Now let us go on, And they did. He does not say, they did not, but they did. I,
but what did they do? Why? they did that which no body could do for them: what
was that you will say? why then in plain English they did Eat. Marcus Tullius
Cicero is of an opinion they did Drink too, as you may read in his Tusculan
Questions. But Harry the eight writing against Luther taks an occasion to
quarrel with Cicero and to deny it. For, says he, it is not usual to drink
after sweet things: because that sweet things never relish drink: neither is it
probable they were such fools to put the sweet taste of their good Plum pie out
of their mouths by drinking. Truly my beloved, had he not bin a KING, I should
have agreed with him: but being that he was a KING, yea an Idolatrous KING, I
am resolved to contradict him: and therefore I do hereby openly declare before
ye all, my beloved, that they did drink. But you will object and say, how came I
to know, I was not in their company: it is no matter for that, I will have it
so, and if you will not have it so too, I Will be your Pastor no longer. But what
did they eat all this while? why mark the words, And they did eat plum-pye. O
ho! did they so? notable cunning rogues, they knew what was good for themselves
I warrant ye. Here now we are to consider what sort of Plum-pye this was, and
how many sorts of plum pyes there are. For you must know, my beloved, that
there are more then one sort of plum pyes in the world: I my self have seen
plums put into an apple pie, and it has tasted exceeding savoury. There is you
neats foot pie, there is your calves chaldron pie, there is your Lamb pie,
there is your veal pie, and all these pyes have plums in um; but there is your
Christmas pie and that has plums in abundance, that is your Metropolitan plum
pie, it is the cream of all plum pyes, and in brief there is no plum pie like it.
Truly my beloved, I wonder at the little wit of our brethren, that persecuted
these pyes so furiously in their pulpits: for can they undergo a worse
persecution then to be eaten? take away Christmas I say, if you take away our
pyes, especially our plum pies. Truly my beloved, I wonder who invented these
pyes, who ever it was, Gods blessing on his heart; surely it was a man for
certainly a woman could never have so much wit. They talk of the invention of
Guns and Printing; but doubtless the invention of plum pie does far exceed it.
He that discovered the new Star in Cassiopea the other day, deserves not half
so much to be remembered, as he that first married minced meat and Raisins
together. Mark but the ingredients. There is first your Neats tongue boyld; Now
you know a Neats tongue boyld alone with turnips how good it is; but being mixd
with plums and spice, there is your precious creature-comfort my beloved. The
Ephod was beset with precious stones, and every one of them had their
signification, and minced pyes are beset with plums and spice; and they have
also their virtues and their Hieroglyphical significations. Your Neats tongue
is the Hieroglyphic of pastoral authority. And therefore the Pope, who calls
himself Christ's Vicar has got a cap, which is called a Miter, and this cap is
made in the shape of two tongues. Your Currants are purgers of the blood and
purify the seat of Anger which is the spleen; therefore do they cause mirth in
men, and revive the spirits of times. Your raisins being mixed with wormseed
preserve a man in the d grave, and destroy those crawling enemies of mankind, A
New way of embalming.
that would continually diet upon his flesh. Now as concerning the original of
these pyes, we are in a very great quandary what to say. For our brother
Starkie a man excellently learned in Chronology, attributes the invention
thereof to St. George, one of the seven Champions, who traveling with the King
of Egypts daughter, was mightily called upon by his stomach for victuals, for
that the Kings daughter and he, had had nothing to feed on but his greasy
socks for three days together: but at length meeting with a giant he chopped him
to pieces with his sword, and put plums to his flesh, lest it should offend the
squeamish stomach of his Mistress. But Kitchen an ancient English author and of
good authority, tells us a story how that the Goths and Vandals coming into
Italy, and being angry at the Romans, did threaten to cut them as small as
herbs to the pot; now it so fell out, that having slain a very great number of
them, they were (as every honest man ought to be) as good as their words; then
searching further they found a great quantity of plums which the Romans had
brought along with them to put in their puddings, for as you may read in
Lipsius, the Romans never went without store of meal; then said the Vandals one
to another, (they made a very fair speech,) let us be merry, and let us put
these plums to our minced meat, and eat up the carcasses of our enemies; with
that the Vandals shouted so loud that they shook the very Alps themselves.
Others relate and among the rest Dr. Harmar in his treatise of the excellency
of mustard, how that the daughter of Astragon, she was the sister of Gondibert,
did by chance being a liquorish dame, and not knowing what to do with some
cold meat that was left at supper, mince the same meat and put plums thereto,
she also mixed some herbs with her meat, which was well approved of; so that
having tasted the sweets thereof, she commended it to her father and it became
the fashion to eat plum pyes, and has been used in the Court of Princes ever
since, so that there was hardly any time of the year but you might have had
these Lombardy pyes at White Hall. But Col. Pride a Saint of the Greek Church
writes in his Comment upon Tom Co^iats Travels, how that St. James of
Compostella a Spanish Saint, being in the Wilderness of Arabia, was overtaken
with hunger. Now seeing that in that place he could have no assistance from
Earth, he fell to his prayers; now as he was at prayers, gaping and winking, as
our brother Case uses to do, it so fell out that a mince pie dropped from the
sky into his mouth, even as Ancilia or sheilds of Mars dropped from heaven into
the Capitol. He could pray no longer because his mouth was stopped: therefore he
Eat what Heaven had sent him. Now you must consider that this miracle was soon
divulged abroad; so that this sort of Pie became to be in a kind of sacred and
reverent esteem among the people. And this was the reason of our forefathers,
out of their great wisdom and piety did set this Pie aside among all the
wonderful variety of Pyes for the celebration of that solemn Feast called
Christmas.

Now you will say how are these Pyes to be eaten? why they are to be eaten hot, or
to be Eaten cold; Now if you eat them hot, you must take a great care least
you burn your Chaps. But if you Eat them cold, there is no great danger of
that, and you eat them more securely and with less trouble. And therefore my
advice my beloved to you is, that you eat them cold. For I have heard of a
Bridegroom that was killed before he could lie with his Bride, for adventuring
to shovel hot minced Pie down his throat for a wager. Truly, my beloved, Sweet
meat must have sour Sauce. Dr. Harmar, who, much good may it do him good man,
did eat up a whole Rump of Beef for the love of the mustard, and would have eat
up the Parliament for its name sake, had Fleetwood employed him and given him
Mustard enough; I say this Dr. Harmar says, that a man ought not to make above
two bits of an ordinary Minced Pie. But Dr. Mariot a notable Casuist, in these
disputes, and a Man of a sharp Stomach, is of opinion that a man ought to
Swallow them whole. And therefore he was the first in the world that caused
them to be made after the fashion of Boats that they might swim down his gullet
the easier: and indeed he was a mighty enemy to four cornerd pies, for he said
they were used to stick in his throat. How these persons mentioned in my text
did eat their Pyes I cannot tell, or whether they did put any Sack in them or
no: yet it is very probable; for Wine makes the heart of man glad; and it is
said in my text when they that had eaten their Plum pies they rejoiced
exceedingly. Now my beloved to tell ye how they rejoiced will be a matter of
great difficulty. Only this we can say in General, that their hearts leapt
within them, that is to say their hearts danced Sarrabands and Corants for joy
that they had eaten their plum pyes. Now there are several ways to express a
man's joy. Some men weep for joy, whether these people wept for joy I cannot
tell, and because my text does not speak at all of it, I would not have you to
believe any man that tells you so: for that the world is now very full of
Seducers and false teachers. But Secondly some men dye for joy. Truly I do not
believe that these men did so. Nay I will adventure for once though the words
of my text speak nothing as to the point, to assure you out of my text that
they did not dye. Not that it is any thing to me, for I confess had they bin
hanged I had not cared a straw. But only to show you that a man is not always
bound to keep close to his text. Thus Don Lewis de Haro's Uncle died Embracing
his Mistress, for joy that he did Embrace her; but was not he a Fool? yes
truly: Why? Why? because he died before he could enjoy that thing which caused
that joy within him.

But the joy which proceeds from the Eating of Plum pyes is worth a thousand
of these joys, for it causes men to rejoice exceedingly. But you will say when
does a Man rejoice exceedingly? Why when a Man or a Woman laughs till they Piss
again, then may they be said to rejoice exceedingly; when Men otherwise Grave
and Reserved, sit after dinner, opening their hearts and telling the wanton
stories of their Youth, then are they said to rejoice exceedingly. When a
Citizen Kisses his Wife before all the Company, after Dinner, then is he said
to rejoice exceedingly; but when she Kisses her Servant in private then is she
said to rejoice exceedingly. And thus you see how it is the Duty of every one
that Eats Plum pie to rejoice exceedingly.

Is it so then that every Man who Eats Plum pie ought to rejoice exceedingly.
Then let us Eat Christmas or Plum pie and rejoice, Drink, Eat, and be Merry,
Play at Cards and win Money, for that the days of the Year, are now like the
days of Man, short and soon Vanishing.

FINIS.
printer's or publisher's device ICH DIEN



