THE CASE OF Mr. BENJAMIN LEECH Brick-layer, AT THE OLD BAILEY, THE Fourteenth
day of October, 1682.
THE Poll for Election of Mayor for the year ensuing being continued by
Adjournments from Michaelmas-day to the second of October, one Benjamin Leech
Brick-layer, being a Freeman and Livery-man of the City of London, came to
Guild Hall to Poll, wherein in Discourse he was Charged to have said to this
Effect, That Sir William Prichard should never be Lord Mayor, unless he came in
by Stealth, as North and Rich were Sheriffs; for which he was without any
Constable or other legal Officer, carried before Sir John Moor Lord Mayor,
before whom he owned the Words, or Words to that effect; whereupon he was by
the Lord Mayor Committed immediately to the Compter, from whence he was Bailed
next day, giving his Recognizance, with Sureties, to appear at the next
Sessions at Guild Hall; which Sessions of the Peace being Adjourned to the 13th
of October to Old Bailey, there was a Bill of Indictment preferred and found
against the said Mr. Leech, the Tenor of which follows, (viz.)

London. ss.
JVratores pro Domino Rege, super Sacramentum suum praesentant, quod Bejaminus
Leech nuper de London, Bricklayer, existens persona mala and perversae
dispositionis, secundo die Octobris, Anno Regni domini nostri Caroli secundi,
Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis fidei Defensoris,
etc. tricessimo quarto; machinans, and false and maliciose intendens Pacem
dicti Domini Regis infra Civitatem London. inquietare and perturbare, ac
diversas Differentias and Dissentiones inter Cives Civitatis predictae, and
alios Legeos and Subditos dicti Domini Regis infra hoc Regnum Angliae, de and
concernens Electione Maioris Civitatis predictae, and Vicecomitum Civitatis
predictae and Comitatus Middlesex, suscitare, movere, and procurare; and
quendam Willielmum Prichard Militem, adtunc, and adhuc unum Aldermannorum
Civitatis predictae, and adtunc in Electione pro Maiore Civitatis predictae,
existens pro uno Anno adtunc and adhuc venturo; necnon quosdam Dudley North
Armigerum, and Petrum Rich Armigerum, qui quidem Dudley North and Petrus Rich
nuper pro antea debito legitimo modo secundum antiquas Privilegias and
Consuetudines Civitatis predictae, electi and jurati fuerunt Vicecomites
Civitatis London and Comitatus Middlesex; and Electionem prefat. Vicecomitum
per Cives Civitatis predictae, factam in maximum odium, contemptum, and
scandalum, infer ipse predictus Benjaminus Leech postea, scilicet dicto
secundo die Octobris Anno supradicto, apud London, videlicet, in Parochia
sancti Michaelis Bassishaw, in Warda de Bassishaw, London. predict. in
Guild Hall Civitatis predictae, ibidem ad predict. Machinationes and
intentiones suas melius perficiend. habens Colloquium cum quodam Thoma Smyth in
Guild Hall predicta, adtunc and ibidem falso, illicite, injuste and maliciose
dixit, retulit, and in auditu diversorum Legeorum and Subditorum dicti Domini
Regis, Civium Civitatis predictae, publicavit, Quod Prichard (prefatum
Willielmum Prichard Militem, innuendo) non foret Dominus Mayor, (Dominus Mayor
Civitatis predictae innuendo) nisi foret Dominus Mayor illicite, and per
furtum, Anglice by Stealth, prout Vicecomites (prefatum Dudley North and Petrum
Rich, Vicecomites Civitatis predictae and Comitatus predictae innuendo) fuerunt
Vicecomites Civitatis and Comitatus predictae: Ad magnam disturbationem Pacis
dicti Domini Regis, ad magnum opprobrium Gubernatorum and Gubernationis
Civitatis predictae; necnon ad Scandalum, Opprobrium, and Defamationem prefati
Willielmi Prichard Militis, and prefati Dudley North and Petri Rich debito modo
electi Vicecomitum Civitatis and Comitatus predictae, in malum exemplum omnium
aliorum consimili Casu delinquentium, ac contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc,
Coronam and Dignitatem suam, etc.

Whereunto the Defendant offered the Plea following.

Leech ads Domini Regis. ET predictus Benjaminus Leech, in propria persona sua
venit and defendit vim and injuriam quando, etc. and omnem Contemptum and
quicquid, etc. and petit Judicium de Indictamento predicto, quia dicit quod
Juratores pro Domino Rege predicto, qui Indictamentum illud fecerunt and
presentaverunt, adinde Retornati and Impannellati fuerunt per quosdem Dudley
North Armigerum, and Petrum Rich Armigerum, tanquam Vicecomites Civitatis
London, quiquidem Dudley and Petrus tempore Pannelli and Retornatus illius per
eos sic facti, non fuerunt nec eorum alter fuit Vicecomites dictae Civitatis
London, per quod idem Indictamentum sic factum and presentatum per hujusmodi
Juratores sic ut prefertur, Impannellatos and Retornatos per Personas tunc non
existentes Vicecomites Civitatis predictae, vigore Statuti in hujusmodi Casu
editi and provisi vacuum in Lege existit and nullius effectus, and hoc paratus
est verificare; unde petit Judicium de Indictamento illo, and quod
Indictamentum illud Cassetur, etc.

W. Thompson.

London. ss.
THe Jurors for our Lord the King, upon their Oaths do present, that Benjamin
Leech late of London Brick-layer, being a Person of an evil and perverse
disposition, the second day of October, in the thirty fourth Year of the Reign
of our Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. devising, and falsely and
maliciously intending the Peace of our said Lord the King within the City of
London to disquiet and disturb, and diverse differences and dissentions amongst
the Citizens of the City aforesaid, and other the Liege People and Subjects of
our said Lord the King within this Kingdom of England, of and concerning the
Election of a Mayor and Sheriffs of the City aforesaid, and County of
Middlesex, to stir up, move and procure; and one Sir William Prichard Knight,
then, and yet one of the Aldermen of the City aforesaid, then in Election of
Mayor of the City aforesaid, being for one year then, and yet to come; and also
one Dudley North Esquire, and one Peter Rich Esquire, which Dudley North and
Peter Rich lately before that time, in a due and lawful manner, according to
the ancient Privileges and Customs of the City aforesaid, were Elected and
Sworn Sheriffs of the City of London and County of Middlesex; and the Election
of the aforesaid Sheriffs by the Citizens of the City aforesaid made, into the
greatest hatred contempt and scandal to bring, the aforesaid Benjamin Leech
afterward, that is to say, the said second day of October, in the year
abovesaid, at London, viz. in the Parish of St. Michael Bassishaw, in the Ward
of Bassishaw London aforesaid, in the Guild Hall of the City aforesaid, there
his aforesaid Contrivances and Intentions the better to perform, having
Discourse with one Thomas Smyth in Guild Hall aforesaid, then and there falsely,
unlawfully, unjustly and maliciously did say, relate, and in the hearing of
diverse the Liege People and Subjects of our said Lord the King, Citizens of the
City aforesaid, publish, That Prichard (the aforesaid Sir William Prichard
Knight, meaning) should not be Lord Mayor, (Lord Mayor of the City aforesaid
meaning) unless he would be Lord Mayor unlawfully, and by stealth, as the
Sheriffs (the aforesaid Dudley North and Peter Rich, Sheriffs of the City and
County aforesaid, meaning) were Sheriffs of the City and County aforesaid: To
the great disturbance of the Peace of our said Lord the King, to the great
disparagement of the Governors and Government of the City aforesaid, and also
the Scandal, Disparagement and Defamation of the aforesaid Sir William
Prichard, and the aforesaid Dudley North and Peter Rich, in due manner Elected
Sheriffs of the City and County aforesaid, to the evil example of all others in
the like Case offending, and against the Peace of our said Lord the King that
now is, his Crown and Dignity, etc.

Whereunto the Defendant offered the Plea following.

Leech at the Suit of our Lord the King. ANd the aforesaid Benjamin Leech, in
his proper Person does come and defend the Force and Injury, when, etc. and all
Contempt and whatsoever, etc. and Prays Judgment of the Indictment aforesaid,
because he says the Jurors for our Lord the King aforesaid, who that
Indictment made and presented, were thereunto Returned and Impannelled by one
Dudley North Esquire, and one Peter Rich Esquire, as Sheriffs of the City of
London, which Dudley and Peter at that time of the Panel, and the Return
thereof by them so made, were not, nor either of them was Sheriffs of the said
City of London, by which the said Indictment so made and presented by such
Jurors so as aforesaid Impannelled, and Returned by Persons then not being
Sheriffs of the City aforesaid, by force of the Statute in the like Case made
and provided, is void in Law and of none Effect, and this he is ready to
verify; whereupon he Prays Judgment of that Indictment, and that that
Indictment might be quashed, etc.

W. Thompson.

Which said Plea being engrossed in Parchment, and Signed by William Thompson
of the Middle Temple, Councellor at Law, was on Saturday morning delivered into
Court by the Defendant, who pressed that the Plea might be received, and he and
his Bail dismissed from further Attendance for that time: Whereunto it was
Answered, that the Court would consider thereof till the Afternoon; In the
Afternoon the Defendant attended with Mr. Thompson his Council, and Mr. Osborn
of the Inner Temple Councellor at Law attended for the King; the Court being
Sat, the Plea was read, and then Mr. Osborne moved that the Plea ought not to
be received, for that it was a new Plea without a precedent, and that it could
not be Tried or determined there; that it was a frivolous Plea, and ought not
to be received, and so left it to the Judgment of the Bench. Upon which Mr.
Thompson allowed that such a Plea had rarely been made use of, because the like
Case had rarely or never happened, but the reason thereof did justify its
Legality, and therefore pressed that the Plea might be accepted; that it never
was hitherto denied to any-man to Plead to an Indictment of this nature, what
he thought fit in his own Defense, especially when he offers the same under
Councels hand; that this was a ready way to determine who were legally
Sheriffs, if the Plea was not good in Law, the Attorney General or the Kings
Council might demurr to it; that if the matter alleged in the Plea was false,
Issue might be taken thereon, which might soon be Tried by a Jury; but if the
matter should appear to be true, there was not so much as any color in Law for
those worthy Gentlemen Mr. North and Mr. Rich to take upon them to Return
Juries; and therefore in the behalf of his Client, demanded again that the Plea
might be received; the truth or validity thereof being not to be determined,
till some Answer should be made thereunto by Replication or Demurring in
Writing. In Answer thereunto Mr. Justice Levinz (being the only Judge then
present) was pleased to express himself to this effect: That he desired to see
the Statute mentioned in the Plea, whereupon it was read, (viz.) The 11 H. 4.9.
Then Mr. Justice Levinz spoke to this effect: That this Statute was made to
prevent the nomination of Juries to the Sheriffs; and though it be thereby
provided that Pannels should be Returned by the Sheriffs without denomination
of any, yet he was of Opinion that it could not extend to the Case in hand,
seeing the worthy Persons that attended there, were owned as Sheriffs by Lord
Mayor, Mr. Recorder, and several Aldermen there present, and that he made no
difference between Sheriffs de facto and de jure, and that these persons being
there so allowed, he must look upon them as Sheriffs de jure: That a
Jail-deliver had been held, wherein above forty Prisoners had been tried; and
that if this Plea should be allowed, all the proceedings against them would
come in question: And then asked Mr. Thompson, What if all the Felons at an
Assizes should insist upon the like Plea, must all further proceedings stop,
till the Sheriff goes home and fetch his Letters Patents? Whereupon Mr.
Thompson said, That he thought in that Case such stop could not be prevented,
the Law being plain. Then Mr. Justice Levinz said further to this effect, That
he had considered of this matter; and that in his Judgment the Plea was a
frivolous Plea, and ought not to be received; but yet he being the only Judge
then present, he should advise my Lord Mayor and the rest of the Bench to take
Advice of all the Judges, before an absolute Determination whether the Plea
ought to be refused or not. Upon this Sir John Peak said, We will not receive
the Plea; with whom agreed Sir James Edwards, Sir James Smith, Sir Thomas
Beckford, and Sir Robert Jefferies, and the Lord Mayor also; Sir George Treby
the Recorder said, That he was of Opinion with Mr. Justice Levinz. Upon this
Leech was pressed to Plead Not Guilty: which he refused, saying several times,
He would plead no other Plea than what he had offered. Then the Court gave him
half an Hours time to advise with his Council, who withdrew and advised
accordingly, and returned with the same Resolution not to alter his Plea, and
tendered his Plea again to the Court, who again rejected it: And because he
would plead no other Plea, (he being first asked, Whether he would Submit to
the Court and ask Pardon; and refusing so to do, having as he apprehended done
no wrong) was Fined Twenty Marks, and committed to Newgate till he should pay
the same; which was done that Night, and Leech thereby discharged.

Printed for A. Green.


