THE CASE OF Andrew Fountain, Esquire In Relation to a Bill under the Name of Sir
CHARLES HOLT, Baronet.
Rob. Holt borrowed of Andr. Fountain Esquire the sum of 5000 l. and procured him
an Assignment of the Mortgage of the Manors of Bushwood and Lapworth as a
Security for his money.

The Money was paid to Sir Rob. Holt by one Gwavas, who was Agent both for John
Coke of Norfolk Esquire and for the said Mr. Fountain, who knowing this to be Mr.
Fountaine's Money, took this, and another additional Security, in Mr.
Fountaine's name, and gave all those Deeds into his hands, which still remain
in his custody.

Mr. Fountain often demanded the Money of Sir Rob. Holt, and was by him in
several Letters (which will be produced to this Honorable House) earnestly
desired to give him further time for the payment of the Money.

Fountain delivered Declarations in Ejectment upon the mortgaged Estate, and
had Judgment; and some time after a Bill was exhibited in Chancery against Mr.
Fountain by Sir Rob. Holt for Redemption of his Estate, and for an Account.

Hitherto no other Person was mentioned in this Case but Mr. Fountain; the
Security given in his name, and lodged with him; the Application for
forbearance made to him; the Declarations brought by him; and the Bill
exhibited against him only.

Gwavas having enticed Mr. Jo. Coke to alter his former Will, and to leave him
Executor, endeavored to give himself a Title to this Money, by pretending that
the Property of the Money was in Mr. Coke, and that Mr. Fountain was only a
Trustee for him; and tho for that end he could not produce any Declaration in
writing; yet (the Act against Frauds and Perjuries being not then made,) he
offered by color of some presumptive Proof to make out a secret and implied
Trust in Mr. Fountain.

Whereas, it was made out, and will be proved to this Honorable House, that the
Property and Owner-ship of the said Money was legally vested in Mr. Fountain,
and that Mr. Coke had, as well before the Loan of this Money, as after it, by
nine successive Releases, fully and absolutely discharged Mr. Fountain of all
Account^, sum or sums of Money before received, and of all demands whatsoever.

These Releases were given not only out of that Affection and Respect which Mr.
Coke always bore and expressed to Mr. Fountain for his former kindnesses to
him in his Extremities, and for his Subsistence upon him, and for saving his
Life in the time of his Travels; but were granted likewise upon good
Considerations in lieu and satisfaction of the Arrears of a Rentcharge of 1000
l. per annum due to Mr. Fountain out of Mr. Coke's Estate, of which no demand
had been made for several years.

Mr. Coke was so far during his life from pretending to have any interest in
Holt's Mortgage, that upon Mr. Fountaine's Marriage with a Kinswoman of Coke's,
Holt's Security with the rest, were (with Coke's privity) settled on the Wife
and Children of that Marriage. And albeit a misunderstanding was a little
before Mr Coke's death created between him and Mr. Fountain by the ill means
of Gwavas, and the differences referred to Council to settle, yet Mr. Coke did
not in the least pretend to any interest in this debt, tho he and Gwavas then
endeavored to take all advantages against Mr. Fountain.

And immediately before Mr. Coke's death, Gwavas and Mr. Coke were so
conscious, that Mr. Fountain was both in deed and intention discharged by the
said Releases of all sums within that time; that he did therefore make
provision out of the real Estate for payment of Debts and Legacies; and neither
claimed nor expected any advantage from this Mortgage.

And afterward, it was upon Rob. Coke's Bill, ordered, in Chancery, that Mr.
Fountain should not insist on the Arrears, during Mr. Coke's life, in respect
of the moneys discharged by the said Releases.

Nevertheless, afterward in the Exchequer, without any Trial at Law and
pending an Appeal, without any Declaration or Proof of a Trust; and
notwithstanding the said Releases, and no pretense ever made in Coke's life
time; and notwithstanding a Judgment against Holt in Coke's lifetime for Mr.
Fountain, and Mr. Coke's privity thereto, and to the Settlement on Mr.
Fountaine's Marriage; it was Decreed that Mr. Fountain was only a Trustee for
Mr. Coke; and the Court of Exchequer, contrary to all former practice, took
upon them to send out a Sequestration upon this Decree.

When afterward upon Appeals to the Lords the Decree of the Exchequer was
confirmed, (except as to Holt's 5000 l.) A Trial at Law was touching this Debt
directed by their Lordships, and the Issue directed was, Whether the said 5000
l. or any part of it, was the Money of the said Mr. Coke at the loan thereof,
and whether Mr. Coke at any time after the Loan thereof, gave the same to Mr.
Fountain? And Mr. Fountain provided for the Trial accordingly.

But afterward before the said Trial, upon the 24th of Apr. 1690, in another
Parliament without any new Petition or Hearing at Bar, and without any Notice
given to Mr. Fountain, upon a motion made at the Rising of the House, there
was a new Order made by the major part of such of the Lords as were then
present, and a new Issue was directed, viz. Whether Mr. Coke at any time after
the Loan thereof, gave the same to Mr. Fountain by any other Deed or Writing
than by the Releases?

The Issue was thus altered: And all that defense at the Trial, which both by
the Court of Exchequer, and their Lordships former Judgment was allowed to Mr.
Fountain, was wholly taken away, so that by these Proceedings, and the
Sequestration, not only the Rentcharge of 1000 l. per an. out of Mr. Cokes
Estate, adjudg'd to Mr. Fountain in all Courts whatsoever; but his paternal
Estate, and the Fortunes he had with two Wives amounting to 10000 l. that is,
all his Estate Real and Personal, the produces thereof were without any
satisfaction or allowance for the Arrears of the Rentcharge hitherto waved in
lieu of the said moneys, and which would go far in discharge of the Decree; and
without any provision for Mr. Fountains Wife and Children, by color of the
said Decree and Order, wholly and entirely sequestered to the use of the
GUARDIAN of Mr. Coke.

In this Session a Bill is brought in under the name of Sir Cha. Holt. The
Scope of which is that, in pursuance of the said Decree, thus affirmed by this
Order of the House of Lords, the money due to Mr. Fountain, may be paid to the
GUARDIAN of Mr. Coke; and upon that payment the Acts, Releases, Discharges, and
Reconveyances of the Trustees therein named, shall be deemed, adjudg'd, and
enacted, to be the Act, Releases, Discharges, and Reconveyances of Mr.
Fountain.

Mr. Fountain being very desirous to ease Sir Cha. Holt by all methods
imaginable in his power, made Proposals to him for contracting the security,
and offered, after the discharge of all other encumbered Lands, to have so much
Land only subject to his Mortgage, and to his Recognizance, as would, upon a
purchase, after an Account stated, answer the Debt. By which means Sir Cha.
Holt who designed a Sale of this part of his Estate, would be wholly relieved;
And the Claims of the present pretenders, kept on foot, and the Land remain as
a Stake to attend the present Order in, and the final issue of this Cause.

But forasmuch as these reasonable Proposals were, upon what grounds is not
known, refused by Sir Cha. Holt, and Mr. Cokes Counsel; And forasmuch as this
Bill not only sets aside all those legal Assurances and Conveyances, which are
the only Supports and Evidences of Mr. Fountains Title, but also wholly
precludes him from any prospect of any future relief; and forasmuch as
Sequestration, under which he lies, is of the first Impression, and without
Precedent, and that this supposed Interest of Mr. Coke arises not from an
express, but an implied Trust, and a Trust which is only presumed by the Court
of Exchequer, and not found by a Jury upon proof: And forasmuch as the said Mr.
Fountain designed to have a Trial at Law, (if the said Order had not in great
measure debarred him from his defense,) and now desires nothing more, than that
his Cause may be referred to a Jury, and determined by a Verdict: And forasmuch
as the Settlements on Mr. Fountains Wife, made on valuable considerations,
will, by the consequences of this Bill, be defeated, and his whole Family
entirely ruined, without any hope of remedy. It is hoped and humbly prayed,
that this whole matter, being of very great consequence, may be heard by the
Honorable House of Commons, before any further procedure upon this Bill.


