JVS REGIMINIS: BEING A JUSTIFICATION OF Defensive Arms IN GENERAL. And
consequently of Our Late Revolutions AND TRANSACTIONS TO BE THE JUST RIGHT OF
THE KINGDOM.

LICENSED, June 17. 1689.

J. FRASER.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

Benedictus sit prae caeteris Principibus Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae

Macti virtute conculcate Inimicos Religionis Protestantium, Legum Anglorum,
Libertatum Parliamenti, ut nomina vestra eant in Mill saecula sciantque
posteri, and filii nascituri surgentes enarrent filiis suis; and semper fugiant
infesti Osores a conspectu vestro.

Sic comprecatur, sic vovet omni supplex humilitate WILHELMUS DENTON, M. D.

ADVERTISEMFNT TO THE READER.
THIS Treatise has been written several Years and kept close, because the
Government would not bear such Prints, and might still have lain snug, but that
I daily see great endeavors by various Prints and Pamphlets, casting false
glosses upon a good Cause, designing to bring us back to Onyons and Garlic,
and to Popery, the worst of Tyranny. Among which Prints the History of Passive
Obedience, at first view, seems to carry in it is Front for its better
countenancing of Non-resistance, the most flourishing show of our Articles,
Injunctions, Canons, Homiles, Liturgy, both our Universities, Bishops, Martyrs,
Confessors, etc. Which at first view presents a wonderful and an amazing cloud
of Witnesses, ready to confound the Doctrine of Resistance and Defensive Arms
without farther Inquiry, and to make good that enslaving Doctrine of Passive
Obedience absolutely absolute without reserve, of which I shall make but one or
two plain Remarks, leaving the rest to better Pens. 1. Granting all the
Quotations to be true, yet are they to be understood of private Men, and of
private Authority only, and not of Ordines Regni, States, and Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths. 2. Calvin, though quoted in this History as an Assertor of such
Passive Obedience, of which he Treats very Learnedly, giving it all its just
Allowances and Dimensions, yet concludes, notwithstanding all those specious
Expressions which seem to favor Passive Obedience, That he is to be understood
always speaking of private Men: For if there be at this time any Magistrates
for the behalf of the People, as the Ephori amongst the Lacedaemonians, or
Tribunes at Rome; as the Demarchi at Athens; or the same Power also, which
peradventure as things are now, the Estates have in every Realm when they hold
their Dyets, Parliaments, principle Assemblies; he does not forbid them
according to their office to withstand the outrageous licentiousness of Kings.
And farther he affirms, That if they wink at Kings wilfully ranging over and
treading down the poor Commonalty, their dissembling is not without wicked
breach of Faith, because they deceitfully betray the Liberty of the People,
whereof they know themselves to be Protectors, appointed by the Ordinance of
God. Calvin, Instit. lib. 4. c. 20. par. 32.

Likewise his Quotation of Dr. Jackson in the Chapter of the Bounds of
Christian Obedience, will serve his turn as little as that out of Calvin; for
in the same Chapter, p. 929. it being objected to him by the Author of the
Prince and Prelate, That many besides the Separatists and Enthusiasts, many of
note in reformed Churches have published in writing, that Kings and Princes may
in some cases be deposed; which, says Dr. Jackson, if spoken universally,
their Doctrine is false; and for such condemned by our Church, if thus they
taught indefinitely only, as that some Kings, some chief Magistrates may be
deposed, he knows no Church that justly condemns them: But for Divines to
determine or dispute what Princes in particular may be deposed, or in what
cases, is matter without their Commission, unless commanded by their Princes,
p. 927. And I think he knew the Doctrine of this and other Churches as well as
the Author of this History.

So Bishop Jewel explains St Paul and himself in the very same Quotation, viz.
That whosoever strikes with the Sword by private Authority, shall perish with
the Sword; which Opinion, if rightly considered, is the sense or meaning of
all, or most, of this Historians In 4^ printed 158^.
Quotations, and are so to be understood. Bishop Bilson (how slightly soever
represented by this Historian) was as profound a Scholar and Divine as ever
sat upon that See: in his Book of Christian Subjection, and Unchristian
Rebellion, treats of nothing else but of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance
at large, and no Man better or more solidly in defense of them, yet will not
rashly pronounce all that resist to be Rebels. If a King should go about to
subject the Kingdom to a Foreign Realm (which happily is not much dissimular to
our present constitution and transactions) to change the Form of a Commonwealth
from Impery to Tyranny or neglect the Laws established by common consent of
Prince and People to execute his own pleasure: in those and other cases, if the
Nobles and Commons join together to defend their Ancient Liberties, Regiment
and Laws, they may not well be accounted Rebels, (very modestly expressed) p.
520. And more at large to the same purpose may be read in several places of
this Book; which Opinion of these great and learned Men, are a justification of
the present Transactions of our Ordines Regni, who have so considerable a share
in the Government, that no Law can or ought to be made without them. And I may
truly say, without prejudice, that those very Authors (being all of the
Historians own quoting) have written as profoundly and solidly for Passive
Obedience and Non-resistance as it will bear, or that all his other Quotations
do or can make out: And Bishop Bilson, that great Scholar and Divine, printed
his Book 1585. and dedicated it to Queen Elizabeth of ever blessed Memory,
whose happy Government was such, as she did not think such Resistance unlawful,
and therefore she soon promoted him to be Bishop of Worcester, Anno 1595. and
soon after, viz. Anno 1597. translated him to Winchester: And I think these Men
understood the Doctrines, Articles, Canons, Liturgy, Homilies, Universities,
etc. of this and of other Churches abroad, as well as this Historian, or as any
of the other Authors as he has named. Besides, Queen Elizabeth did not only
approve the publication of such Doctrines in her Government, but being willing
to avoid the Curse, that bitter Curse of Meroz, on her and her Kingdom, she
gave this farther Testimony and Demonstration, by her owning and countenancing
such Resistance, and by her en^ring into Contract with the Protestants of
France, against the Mighty, by sending Money and Forces to their aid and
assistance: She did the like by sending Succors to the Scots, whereby she
delivered them from Slavery and Popery, against Mary Queen of Scots and the
Guises: So she did most earnestly mediate and interceed by Letters and
Embassies with the King of Spain, who had violently Tyrannized and Oppressed
the Netherlanders by his bloody Edicts, both in their Laws, Liberties, and
Religion: and not prevailing, she sent them Money and Arms, and took them into
her Protection; by which she relieved and established them in that flourishing
Condition they now are in, both able and willing gratefully to return the same
Kindness to this our Kingdom, in her great distress, by the like bloody
Papists; In which she had not only the Judgment and Assistance of her
Parliaments, but their Purses also: And also the Opinion and Approbation of her
Clergy in their Convocation, with their Subsidies; all which they would not
have done, if they had held all Resistance unlawful. And sure this Historian
will not deny, that the Queen, and her Parliaments, and Convocations, were true
Church of England Men: so he may make it the Cornerstone, and distinguishing
Character, if he please, of a true and of a mungril Church of England Man* And
if he do, I doubt he will approve himself no Nathaniel, no true Church of
England Man. To what then does all this Bravado of Articles, Canons, Homiles,
Liturgies, etc. tend? but to the bespattering of the purest Church in the World
with such Doctrines as she is no ways guilty of, and to introduce and usher in
Popery again, which was rushing in upon us with a mighy torrent by the slight
of such prevaricating wits that lay in wait to deceive, until his Majesty did
Abdicare se magistratu: but thanks be to God we are not such Children, as to be
tossed to and fro, and carried away from the Truth with such cunning Craftiness.

Happily King James I. if consulted, may be found to favor the same Opinion,
when in his Speech in Parliament 1603. declares himself to be a Servant, and
that as he was Head and Governor of all the People in his Dominions, who were
his natural Vassals and Subjects, considering them in Number and distinct
Ranks; but considering the whole People as one Body and Mass, then as the Head
is ordained for the Body, and not the Body for the Head, so must a righteous
King know himself to be ordained for his People, and not his People for him:
and therefore professes, that he will never be ashamed to confess it, to be
his principal Honor, to be the Servant of a Commonwealth, and ever to think
the Prosperity thereof to be his greatest Felicity. And in his Speech at
White Hall, Anno 1609. March 21. says, That every just King, in a settled
Kingdom, is bound to observe the Paction which God made with Noah after the
Deluge; therefore a King leaves to be a King, and degenerates into a Tyrant, as
soon as he leaves off to Govern by his Laws: as the poor Widow to Philip of
Macedon, Either Govern according to your Laws, Aut ne Rex sis. Therefore all
Kings, that are not Tyrants or Perjured, will be glad to bound themselves
within the limits of their Laws: And they that persuade them to the contrary
are Vipers, and Pests, both against them and the Commonwealth. Which Premises
do naturally yield this Conclusion, without wresting. viz. That Kings, not
Governing according to their Compact and Laws made by their Subjects, are
Perjured, and become Tyrants, and may be curbed, opposed, and withstood.

Thus much only by way of Specimen, to encourage other more learned Pens to
make farther proof; it being every Man's Duty to contribute what he can toward
the support of that Government under which he lives: no Government being
obliged to support those who will not support it; which incourageth me to cast
in my Mite also, and the rather, because I observe some Prints so virulent as
to ill-characterize the greatest Wisdom and wisest Men of the World, and to
make common Sense, and truest Equity, and the most undoubted Right of the whole
World, Treason and Rebellion, and so to be owned and practiced in Extremities
by all Nations, Vim vi repellendo: Which being always to be understood of
unjust Force, the Defense must be just; and it is impossible to be made either
Treason or Rebellion by any other Law, than that the Foxes Ears were Horns: And
others would make this wild conjecture of Passive Obedience without reserve, as
the Cornerstone and distinguishing Character of the Church of England from all
other reformed Churches; which deserves a Sponge and Reprimand, and not an
Answer.

AN ADMONITION TO ALL Christian EMPERORS, KINGS, PRINCES, etc.
ALL Emperors, Kings, Princes and Governors, ought most seriously to consider,
That though by the Providence of God, and good will and choice of Men, they are
set on high, yet they are not Kings and Lords and Princes in their own right,
and in such manner as that they are not obliged to acknowledge a Superior
Dominion. What are they but Vassals to God, by whose Providence they hold their
Crowns and Scepters, Lives and all, by fealty and homage? And what are they but
Administrators and Trustees of the Governed, to see the Laws made by them
indifferently and equally executed for the Peace and Happiness of whole
Kingdoms? And who knows not that in recompense of their Care and Pains, that
this is one of the chief Conditions or Laws of Subjects, that they do Support
their Kings and Governors, and that they keep Fidelity with, and pay Tribute,
Reverence, and Service unto them? So strict is this Obligation, that in all
cases of danger Subjects are bound to aid and assist them, and to yield all the
Duties of Honor, Friendship, Reverence and Respect, and to take up Arms on
their behalf, against their very Brethren and Children, and to pay them
Tribute for their Grandeur and Support: where Faith and Honor are concerned,
an Eternal blemish will remain on the violation thereof. If they offend their
Kings by unjust contrivances, and blemish their Dignity and Honor by unjust
aspersions; if they plot, contrive and wage War unjustly against them; if they
desert them in a time of danger; if they treacherously conceal any that
endeavor to kill, imprison, or damnifie them, if they do not deliver them when
in danger, if it be in their power to do it, they are then guilty of Treason.
Seeing therefore Kings require so much Fidelity from their Subjects, for
defending their Persons, States, and Dignities, (who are but Men on both parts)
in how much greater Obligations, and under what severer Penalties are Kings
themselves bound toward the giver and bequeather of their Crowns and Scepters,
for the defense of his Kingdom and People, against all Rebels and Traitors to
his and their Laws. But ah the misery of human blindness! All Princes are ready
to cry out, that when any Man becomes guilty of such breach of Faith toward
them, it is a Crime unpardonable; and that it must be punished with the loss of
Goods, Lives, and Estates. Men to Men still. But when they themselves break
Faith, plighted to God and Men by Solemn Oaths, and do things ten thousand
times worse, against their Supreme Lord and Master, and the Governed; yet such
is the wonderful perverse ends of their Judgment, that they imagine themselves
to be innocent and unaccountable: Whereas by right they ought to hazard and
spend their own Lives and Scepters in Defense of his Glory, from, and under
whom they hold those Lives and Scepters, and for Defense, Support, and well
Governing of the Governed, that they may live in Wealth, Peace, and Godliness,
they being the Church of God, whose Nursing-Fathers and Mothers, Kings and
Queens, and all other Rulers, as in duty bound of right ought to be; more
especially, if they confer Honors, Dignities, or Places of Profit, on any of
their Subjects (Prerogatives given them even by the Governed) if they say not
as they say, and do not obey all their Commands right or wrong, what a huff and
Fustian fume are they in? What? eat of their Bread, drink of their Drink, and
live at Ease, and in great Plenty and Pleasure, by their Favors and Graces
bestowed on them, and yet so ungrateful as not to subordinate their wills to
the wills of their Princes. Which arises from corrupted nature and their own
great mistake. For Kings themselves, and all their Officers, are the Kingdoms
Officers, clothed with their Fleece, warmed with their Wool, fed with their
Bread, their Oil, and their Wine, and paid with their Tribute: And is it not
much more sinful and ungrateful in them to do violence, or oppress any of them?
Do they not Dig and Delve, Plow and Harrow, Sow and Reap, Plant and pull up
with the labor of their Hands, and sweat of their Brows? and all this to pay
them Tribute, that they may live in great Glory and Plenty; that they may eat
the Fat, drink the Sweet, lie upon the Soft, chant to the sound of the Vial,
drink Wine in Bowls, that they may be gorgeously clad, and fare deliciously
every day? Is it not therefore much more abominable, wicked, and ungrateful in
them, to oppress or violate the Laws of them that set their Crowns on their
Heads, and maintain them in all their Glory and Excesses, not only for
necessity, but for delight? Consider seriously with your selves, whilst you are
yet on this side the Grave: (For there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge,
nor wisdom, in the grave, Eccl. 9. 10.) And all your Pomp must be brought down
to the grave, even Lucifer, the Sun of the morning, who did weaken the Nations,
how did he fall from heaven, and was cut down to the ground? Isaiah 14. 12.)
That you cannot oppress the Governed without being guilty of Ingratitude (the
vilest and basest of Crimes) in the esteem both of Heathens and Christians, and
by the practice even of Bruits and Beasts. First, Gratitude is natural (and
therefore ungratefulness must be unnatural) witness Beasts themselves, not only
tame and domestic, but even wild and cruel; among whom there are many
excellent and true examples, as of the Lion toward the Roman Slave. etc.
Officia etiam ferae sentiunt: even wild Beasts are sensible of good and evil
done unto them; by which it is easy to guess how unnatural, how unpleasing and
odious, how base and villainous Ingratitude is unto all Men; quatenus Men only.
Dixeris maledicta cuncta cum ingratum hominem dixeris: thou speak all the
evil that may be said of a Man, when thou call Man ungrateful: It is against
Nature, and therefore Plato, speaking of his Disciple Aristotle, calls him an
ungrateful Mule: it is without all excuse, and cannot come but from a wicked
Nature. So Seneca, Grave vitium intollerabile quod dissociat homines. A
grievous vice and intolerable, which breaks the Society of Men. If by the
instinct of Nature, and the examples of Bruits, unreasonable Creatures,
Ingratitude be so vile a Crime, that it becomes a reproach to Men, as being
reasonable Creatures, how much greater reproach is Ingratitude in Men as
Christians? God's Commands are, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and
persecute you, that you may be children of your Father which is in heaven: for
he makes the sun to rise on the evil and the good; and sends rain on the
just and on the unjust, Matthew. 5. 44, 45. So Luke 6. 27, 35. for he is kind to
the unthankful, and to the evil. So ought all Kings and Rulers to love their
People, though Enemies, out of gratitude they owe to God, who has both
commanded us so to do, and whose daily practice it is. How does God upbraid and
reproach the ungrateful Jews! Hear, O heavens, and give ear O earth, for the
Lord has spoken: I have nourished and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me: the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib;
but Israel does not know, my people does not consider, etc. Isaiah 1. What
Reproaches and Woes are pronounced against those ungrateful Jews, for whom God
had done so much (when Israel was a Child then God loved him, and taught
Ephraim also to go, taking them by the Arms, drew them with Cords of a Man,
with Bands of love, and was to them as they that take off the Yoke on their
Jaws, and laid meat unto them, etc. Hos. 11. All the Prophets testify
throughout the whole Bible that Gratitude is the universal Precept and Command
of God himself, and he is the Avenger of all Ingratitude and Disobedience: Do
you thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Deuteronomy. 22. 6. God is so
gracious as to let the Sun shine on the Just and on the Unjust, to requite good
for evil.

How ought Kings then as his Ministers, his Vicegerents, not to requite evil
for good, but good for evil? How much more are Kings then obliged to God and
Man by their greater Obligation to keep Faith and Covenant with their People,
who choose them from among themselves to be their King, setting them on Thrones
in a more Eminent and glorious Station and Figure above all themselves, paying
them all the Ensigns of Honor, Duty, and Majesty, giving them abundant Tribute
to support the same? What to do? to tear them with Thorns and Briars, or whip
them with Scorpious, or grind their Faces as many have done; no, no, but to
have their Laws run in their Names, and executed by legal Powers in their
Names, that Justice might be equally and indifferently administered to all: They
claim and glory in the Title of being Gods Vicegerents and Ministers, and
therefore their Ministrations ought more especially to be for the happiness and
Salvation of their Kingdoms; if otherways, know, that God will cut off the
Spirit of Princes, he is terrible to the Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 76. 12. and
in his due time will relieve the oppressed and afflicted. If we make diligent
and exact Scrutiny into other Relations of human and civil dependencies, our
Judgments may be assisted for the more clear apprehending of truths of
Government, wherein we shall find some obligations between them so strictly
enjoined, that they cannot be violated without the brand of Impiety, as between
Parents and Children, Husband and Wife, Master and Servant, Col. 3. 18, 19. 20,
21, 22. Job 31. 13. between whom, although by the Laws of God and Man there be
many reciprocal Duties; yet are they nothing if weighed in a just Balance, in
comparison to what Kings themselves owe to God and the Governed, who are also
the Church of Christ: for what ever injury is done to a Christian Commonwealth,
is at the same time done against the Church of God, whereof Christ is Head, and
King, and those whom we call Kings thereof are but his Substitutes, and
Vicegerents, and ought to govern as he has commanded, and as he will do when
he shall come again in Glory to reign on Earth. Besides they are constituted
and ordained by the Governed, under Conditions, Covenants, and Agreement; not
that themselves may live at ease only, and command, and rule at Pleasure, but
as Gods Vicegerents, and as Trustees and Administrators of the Governed, to
rule and govern according to his and their own Laws (quas vulgus eligerit) for
what a madness should we esteem it in human Affairs, if Deputies, Viceroyes,
and Lieutenants of Earthly Kings, should for their own private ends and
interest prefer them before the Honor, Glory, and Service of their Kings. They
who so administer Affairs, take not right measures of their Masters Glory, and
the Peoples good, but comply with the flatteries of their own Lusts, their
particular Advantages, sinful Ends and interests, or hatred, furiously
transporting them to the public ruin, privati Commodi vel odii pertinacia in
publicum exitium stimulante. Tacit. lib. 1. hist. Private Interest and
concerns, says Livy, always have, and always will hinder public good
Councils, privatae res semper officere officientque publicis consiliis, Livy
lib, 22. The Heathen, taught only by the light of Nature, could discern the
truth of these things, and have left Monuments thereof on their Tombs and
Coins. They doubted not, says Valerius, that Empires were made to serve holy
Purposes, and that all things, even such where the Luster of Supreme Majesty
was to appear, were to be placed after Religion. Kings, Princes, and
Governors, being partakers of the same human Nature in common with their
Subjects, are equally obliged by the same Laws of God and Nature, to keep Faith
and Covenant (the common Law of Nature) with them; and therefore the Obligation
of keeping Faith and Covenant, is equally obligatory both to Prince and People.
As by the Law of Nature, so by the Law of God, Covenants are inviolably to be
kept, and not broken by either Prince or People. And as Covenants between God
and the King, and between God and the People, so between Kings and the People;
which as they are most solemnly made, so they are as sacredly to be k^pt* and
that under great Menaces, Pains, and Penalties. God has given his lord* that
^e will never break his Covenant, Jud. 2. 1. and Psalm. 89. 34. My Covenant I
will not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my Mouth, and requires
and expects the like punctual performance from his Vicegerents, and bitterly
curses those that do infringe and break plighted Faith and Agreements: Cursed
be the Man that obeys not the words of this Covenant, J^r. 11. 31. and God
for the breach of Covenant gave the Princes of Judah and the Princes of
Jerusalem, the Eunuchs, and the Priests, and all the People of the land, into
the hands of the Enemies, and into the hands of them that sought their lives,
and their Bodies for meat unto the Fowls of Heaven, and to the Beasts of the
Earth, Jer. 34. 19, 20. Besides God is no respecter of Persons, Kings and
Peasants are all alike to him, all the Works of his own Hands, all made of the
same Mould, all redeemed with the same previous Blood, all his own Images and
Temples, and shall stand in an equal distance before his Tribunal, who will
judge all breakers of Covenant, whether Kings or Peasants, according to his own
Righteous Judgment. Neither Kings nor People have any Privilege or Prerogative
to break Covenant; and they that do, be they Kings or be they People, are
justly esteemed Rebels to the Laws and Covenants; and the injured Persons have
just Cause to right and defend themselves if oppressed by such Violation. Kings
accounting themselves as Gods Ministers, and Vicegerents, and Fathers of their
Countries, ought so to govern in good earnest, and they being placed on their
Thrones as such by the People, ought to keep Laws and Covenants punctually with
them, and which they cannot break or sham without being perjured, and becoming
guilty of Tyranny and Oppression.

No Kings nor Princes can be so indulgent, nor so really fond and ambitious of
their Peoples Love and Welfare as God is of the Love of Mankind; like as a
Father pittieth his Children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him, Psalm.
103. 13. testified by his making them a little lower than the Angels, and
crowning them with Glory and Honor, and giving them Dominion over the works of
his Hands, and by putting all things under their Feet, all Sheep and Oxen, etc.
Psalm. 8. And indeed the whole Creation, for his own Glory and the good and
Solace of Mankind: Did he not command Moses to carry his people in his Bosom,
as a Nursing Father bears his sucking Child? Number. 11. 12. Can a Woman forget
her sucking Child, that ^he should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb?
yea they may forget, yet will not I forget them, Isa. 49. 15. If God hear but
Ephraim bemoaning himself, how passionately does he expostulate with himself?
Is Ephraim my dear Son, is he a pleasant Child? For since I spoke against him,
I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my Bowels are troubled for him; I
will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord, Jer. 31. 20. Does God who is
Lord alone of all the Kingdoms of the Earth make known his excessive fondness
of his People by such Bowels of Compassion? How then dare his Vicegerents
requite evil for good, contrary to Gods own Commands and Practice, and not seek
the Good and Welfare of their People, without having Hearts harder than the
nether Millstone. Again, How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? How shall I
deliver thee O Israel? my Heart is turned within me, my Repentings are kindled
together, Hos. 11. 9. Tho you will neither turn nor repent, yet how shall I
give thee up? So desirous is he of his Peoples Repentance, that he beseeches
them till he is weary of repenting, Jer. 15. 6. even passionately with Oaths
does he expostulate with Sinners, his great Enemies, As I live, says the Lord,
I have no pleasure in the death of the Wicked, but that the wicked turn from
his way and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die?
Ezekiel. 33. 11. Would ye would but consider the price and value of this his
fondness, you would never harrass his People as you do; God himself thought it
worth the Incarnation of his own Son, by sending him out of his own bosom: and
so the Word was made Flesh, Joh. 1. 1. of which God gave abundant and signal
Testimony, when he smote Egypt in their First born, and brought oppressed
Israel from among them, with a strong Hand and stretched out Arm, and divided
the Red Sea into parts, and made Israel to pass through the midst of it; but
overthrew Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea; who led his people through the
Wilderness, and smote great Kings, and slew famous Kings, Sihon King of the
Amorites, and Og King of Bashan, and gave their Land for an Inheritance, even
an Heritage to Israel his Servant, and redeemed them from their Enemies, Psalm.
136. Thus has God done, and thus will God do when he shall stand up in the
quarrel of his Covenant, and arise to shake terribly the Earth: The whole
History of the Bible is full of such exemplary punishments, and of frequent
delivery of his oppressed People. And as God, so ought all his Vicegerents to
be tender and watchful over all their Governed. So Moses, whom Philo reckons
among Kings, as does the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 33. 5. And he was King in Jesurun;
for tho he had not the name, yet he had the Power and Authority; yet even in
that Power he was no more Regal then in his Tenderness over the People, which
was so great toward them, that at Tabera, because he could not do them so much
good us he desired, he besought the Lord to kill him out of hand, Number. 11. 15.
At another time he was so concerned with the fear of their destruction, that he
requested of God, either to forgive them their sin, or to blot him out of the
book of Life, Ex. 32. 32. hereby showing himself, not only the Miracle of
Nature, as Philo calls him, but of Grace too, in plighting for them that which
was more worth than his life, his very Salvation. So transcendent is the
Example of David, who (besides that he urges it in most Psalms, the peace of
Jerusalem, the salvation of Israel, the Felicity of Gods chosen, the blessing
of the people) wrestled with God near the threshing floor of Araunah, (2 Samuel
24 16, 17,) for his mercy and favor toward his People, that he cries out, It
is I, even I that have sinned and done this evil, etc. let thine hand, I pray
thee, O Lord my God, be on me and my Fathers House, but not on thy people, that
they should be plagued, 1 Chro. 21. 16, 17.

Consider yet farther, how passionately fond God (who is jealous even to fury
for the good of his people) has demonstrated himself for his People, over whom
he has made you his Vicegerents. Did he not send his own Son out of his own
bosom, to take on him the form of a servant, and to become obedient unto the
shameful death of the Cross, both for them and you? Can Kings then imagine,
that if they oppress them by violent perverting of Justice and Judgment, or
multiply unjust Exactions, or chastise them with Whips or Scorpions, that they
shall escape unpunished? I tell them nay, that except such Kings that so
tyrannize, do repent, the time will come that they shall bemoan themselves in
vain, when their groans shall be as the groans of a deadly wounded man, and
their hopes as the giving up of the Ghost. Was not Christ our Common Purchaser?
Did he not take our Rags, our Sores, our Diseases, our pains upon him? Was he
not wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, that with his
Stripes we might be healed? Why do you not then imitate him in being Nursing
Fathers, not in name only, but in deed and in truth to the people? and do not
oppress and tyrannize over them, in denying them just Rights and Liberties, by
condemning many more Righteous than your selves to Inquisitions, Goals,
Galleys, to beg their Bread in strange Countries; Chastising them with Whips
and Scorpions, and with diverse sorts of Tortures, as grievous as tearing their
flesh with the Thorns and Briars of the Wilderness: Consider, I say, well with
your selves, and that in very good earnest, (it being your truest Interest, and
of everlasting Consequence, whilst you are on this side Hell and the Grave, in
which there is no wisdom.) How contrary do Kings, Tyrants, act and govern to
God Almighty, whose Precept and Practice it always has been, and still is, to
do good for evil, and not evil for good, as all Tyrants do. Has he not
mitigated the rigor of the Law, which was once published with thunder, fire,
tempest, and darkness, by removing the curse from it, as it was a killing
Letter, and Ministry of death? And has he not published it in the hand of a
Mediator? Does he not woo us by his Spirit, tho we resist it? Court us by his
Mercies, tho we abuse them? threaten us in much Mercy by his Judgments, to
forewarn us to fly from the Wrath to come? Does he not daily cry unto us by his
Prophets, tho we despise them? proffers to teach us, tho we stop our Ears? to
lead us, tho we pull away our Shoulders? to convert us, tho we harden our
Hearts? and millions more inexpressible Mercies, showered down daily upon his
people committed to your care and charge, manifesting his fondness and
tenderness over them; which considered, I cannot but wonder then how his
Vicegerents have dared to act quite contrary, by returning evil for good, by
violent perverting of Justice and Judgment, and by multiplying unjust exactions
on them. Have they made their peace with death? or their Agreement with Hell?
can they bribe their Tormentors? or can they dwell with devouring fire, or
everlasting burnings? or can they quench the flames of Tophet, which is
ordained of old? yea for Kings it is prepared; he has made it deep and large;
the pile thereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord, like a
stream of brimstone, does kindle it, Isa. 30. 33. Are Kings the Anointed of the
Lord, and boast thereof? so are the People; He suffered no man to do them
wrong; yea, he reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed,
and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105. 14, 15. Whosoever touches them, touches
the Apple of his eye, Zech. 2. 8. The Lord takes pleasure in his people, (so
should all Kings) and he will put a Sword into their Hands to execute vengeance
upon the Heathen, and punishment upon the people; to bind their Kings with
Chains, and their Nobles with fetters of Iron; to execute upon them the
Judgment written; this honor have all his Saints, Ps. 149. 4, 5, 8, 9. It is
Piety alone that enobles Kings, gives them a mighty Character, and establishes
their Thrones: Therefore Kings ought to be like the Sun in the Firmament,
comfortably influencing all their Subjects, by governing justly, and living
uprightly, having their Eyes on the faithful of the land, and on them that
excel in virtue, and not suffering those that make Kings glad with their
wickedness, and Princes with their Lies, (Hos. 7. 3.) to tarry in their sights;
it being an abomination in Kings to work wickedness, for the throne is
established by righteousness, if Solomon, (the wisest King that ever did, or
ever will sit upon a Throne) can judge, Prove. 16. 12. So Pope Leo, Ep. 7. to
the Emperor Theodosius, Tune est optimus regni vestri status quando sempiternae
and incommutabili Trinitati unius Dei confessione servitur. Then is the State
of your Kingdom in it its Glory, when it serves and acknowledges one eternal
God in the Immutable Trinity. This God has demonstrated by an Iliad of
Examples, both of old and more puny days, by punishing Kings governing
tyrannically, more signally, and especially in Nebuchadnezzar, who not
conforming to the Counsel of Daniel, by breaking off his sins by righteousness,
and his iniqities by showing mercy unto the poor, was turned into a very Brute,
being driven from men to dwell with wild asses, to eat grass with Oxen, till
seven times had passed over him, his body wet with the dew of Heaven, his hairs
grown like eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws, before his
understanding returned unto him to bless God, and to acknowledge that the most
high rules in the kingdom of men, Dan. 4. So averred David, a King after God's
own heart; Man that is in honor, and understands not, is like the beasts
that perish, Psalm. 49. ver. 20. What this Understanding is, is declared, Job
28. 28. The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil, that is
understanding. All other Wisdom, in respect of this, is but Brutish: which made
Constantine the Great to esteem all Principalities, not subservient to the Laws
of Heaven, to be far worse than the Government of Goat-Keepers, Shepherds, and
Cow-herds, Eusebius. Orat.

In the Kingdom of Insidels, who have no right knowledge of God, nor of his
Laws, the Supreme Law is only the safety of the Civil State, and its Temporal
Happiness: but when a Gentile State becomes Christian, then consequently it
becomes also a Church; whereby it loses nothing which it had before but
acquires a new Perfection by accrument of Divine Powers added to the Civil; and
consequently a greater Duty incumbent on the Governors thereof, to seek and
procure the Welfare and Happiness: Such Kingdoms, so united and so interwoven,
are in a more special manner the Inheritance and Kingdoms of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which his Father gave him as the Purchase of his bitter Passion; Ask of
me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for thy possession, Psalm 2. 8. And Christ does embrace the
Glory of this his Kingdom, so incorporated, with so much more tenderness and
affection, than the Pomp and Pride of all earthly Kingdoms, as that he
threatens those Kings, Nations and Kingdoms, that will not serve him, shall
perish and be utterly wasted, Isaiah 60. 12. Speak every man truth in his heart
to his neighbor: execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates:
therefore love the truth and peace, Zechar. 8. 16, 19. are Divine Oracles, and
shall challenge Obedience from every Individual; but more particularly, and
especially, they seem to have respect unto those that sit at the Helm, that
execute the Judgment of Truth and Peace in the Gates.

It is, no doubt, as great a fault to be silent when one ought to speak, as to
speak when one should hold his peace: sins of Omission being no less dangerous
than sins of Commission. I think I do no dis-service to the Public, or
transgress the duty of Honesty or Loyalty, if I endeavor by Pen to set the
Right of Government on a sure and right Foundation, when I see daily so many
false Principles, exorbitant Powers, and Vnaccountableness, attributed to Chief
Magistrates, as may make very Saints to transgress in Government, that happily
otherwise would not; and these not Written by vulgar Pens only, but Preached
and Printed by Ministers of the Gospel, that they might be delivered with the
better grace and greater authority, though not without most palpable wresting
of Scripture to wrong senses and purposes; which in Ministers of the Gospel is
the more abominable: but God shall cut off all flattering lips, and tongues
that speak proud things, Psalm 12. 3. There are so many Sermons full fraught
with such Principles, that they who are esteemed the Governors of our Church
cannot be ignorant of them; yet they, (whom it most concerns to take notice of
true and*false Doctrines) being silent, (which seems to argue consent) has
encouraged me to put Pen to Paper, to assert the truth. It ought not to be
imputed as a Crime to any, who bring the Actions of Princes, Popes or Prelates,
to the Touchstone of Truth. Truth, (though it begets hatred to the Asserters
thereof, yet) like the Sun, is a public good, which neither exempteth Princes,
Popes, private Men, no, nor Angels, from her Laws. I have followed, as near as
I can, the Beams of that Sun, by adhering close to true Principles of Nature,
of Reason, and of Scripture: If any Light I have given has discovered false
Glosses, or Truth from Error, no reason to quarrel either with the Truths
themselves, or with the Assertor of them. Truth, seasonably spoken, can hurt no
Body. If false Principles are censured and adjudged by Divine by Laws of Nature
and Reason, and disapproved by Christian Religion, be pleased or displeased who
will, it matters not, the care is taken; It being more than human Tyranny, to
deprive Faith and Truth of Tongue or Pen for their Defense: where Truth makes
no distinction of Persons, I dare not; I only condemn what she does, without
respect had to Persons great or small, if they clash with Truth, or endeavor
to obscure her brightness. To assert Truth, is no point of Arrogance; and to
search for Truth when it is concealed, is the beginning of Charity; and to
assert it with constancy when it is apparent, is the consummation of Charity;
and to walk in the Light thereof, is the beginning and consummation of
Happiness. For who can be more blessed than he who enjoys Truth in its
Excellency, Constancy, and Immutability? I am not ignorant, that Fear, Honor,
and Reverence are due to Magistrates, but more to Truth; for God is Truth. Nor
is it Reverence, with base flattery, or ignorant blindness, to hide the public
Blemishes and Miscarriages of the Actions of great Men. No, no, it is downright
flattering Profaneness, dissembling and betraying the Truths of God. It Is much
more Christian Honor, to declare them with Christian Charity, and reprove them
with Christian Modesty. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart: thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin to fall upon him,
Levit. 19. 17. whether he be of a great or little Figure in the World, it
matters not. Go tell Judah of her sins, and Israel of her transgressions, be
who will pleased or displeased therewith. By which it appears, that though
Reproofs and Admonitions have been the Duty of every person from the very
beginning of Religion (Cry aloud, spare not, lift up your voice like a trumpet,
(proclaim defiance, sound a challenge, and charge against them;) show the
people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins, Isaiah 58. 1.)
yet they are seldom or never acceptable; but on the contrary, get hatred to
those that discover their Dalilah's, their bosom sins: but their comfort is,
that by reproving, they fulfill God's Precepts, and he that hates reproof
erreth, is brutish, and shall die, Pro. 10. 1. 15. Pro. 12. 15. Pro. 10. A
most strange and unhappy temper, to return hatred for good will, to hate those
that show the greatest kindness that possibly mortal Man can show: he that
regards reproof shall be honored, and is prudent, Prove. 13. 18. Pro. 15. 5.
He that refuses instruction, despises his own soul: but he that hears
reproof, gets understanding, ver. 32. As to despise Dominion, and speak evil
of Dignities, is a great Crime, to be punished by the Judges; so there is a woe
to them who call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and
light for darkness, Isaiah 5. 20. Wherefore if they whose immediate Duty it is
to tell Judah of her Sins, and Israel of her Transgressions, will by a sinful
compliance be silent, or daub with untempered Mortar, not daring to declare
plain Truths; which is tant a monte, a tacit giving consent and countenance to
public Sins and Injuries, by such their connivance and dissimulation: I hope
they will not blame those who dare call Vices by their proper names.

I am ignorant of such quirks of Conscience, which so much injure Justice and
Piety, as by such perverting the plain Truths of Religion, and prevaricating
with God Almighty, by pleasing Men rather than Truth, as if both might not, and
ought not to stand together; as if a due respect to Men, even to great Men, and
a just censure of Sin and Wickedness, might not justly be maintained. So that
if any thing in this present discourse seem more harsh or severe than usual, it
is intended against the Vices and Abuses of the Powers, not against the
Persons, nor any just Powers. If they are Truths that I have declared, I ought
not to be blamed; if Errors, they will easily be discovered and refuted, and the
greater Truth will appear. If I have committed Errors, and injured Truth, I am
sensible of my own Infirmities; and that Reason is seldom so perfectly reduced
to Science, but that I and all others may be mistaken: Humanum est errare. Let
those that shall discover such Errors consider, that they themselves are Men,
and subject to like Errors, and Frailties, and may be deceived; and that
possibly when by disquisition a greater Light may discover that that may be the
Readers mistake, which he esteems may be the Writers Error.

In sum, All the Glory of Kings and Kingdoms ought to serve God, (by judging
righteously, by countenancing the Faithful of the Land, and not suffering the
Wicked to influence their Councils, and by walking wisely in a perfect way, and
by hating the Works of them that turn aside, and by not suffering those that
have high Looks and proud Thoughts,) as being made choice of by him to
administer in his Kingdom, as Nursing-fathers of his people, Isaiah 49. 23.
God, blessed for ever, who sets up Kings, and removes them, does only love
the Principality and Kingdom of his own Eternity, and himself continually
adds to the Glory and Enlargement thereof, but wills and expects the same
from all Kings, Princes, and Governors of Temporal Scepters, to do the same,
and that under severe Menaces and Penalties. Whatever therefore of Enlargement,
Glory, Stability, the carking Cares or Designs of the great Men of the Earth
may project and promise to themselves, by being Kings and Princes on the Earth,
they are all but magnificum nihil, toys, gewgawes, and vanity in the sight of
God, when put into the Balance with that Kingdom which Christ alone loves,
respects; and desires; and unto which, unless they be heartily subservient,
to serve and enlarge the Kingdoms of our Lord Jesus Christ, they shall become
like the chaff of the summer threshing-floor, and the wind shall carry them
away; and the God of Gods, and Lord of Kings, shall set up a kingdom which
shall never be destroyed, and the kingdom shall not be left to other people,
but it shall break in pieces all other kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever,
Dan. 2. 44, 45, 47. If Kings will not kiss the Son, nor do their Duty, in
purging the House of the Lord, may not Eliah and the People do their duty, and
cast out Baal 's Priests? Reformation of Religion is a personal act that
belongs to all, even to every private Person, according to his place: they
may swear a Covenant without the King, if he refuse, and build the Lords House
themselves, 2 Chr. 15. 9. and relieve and defend one another, if oppressed; for
our Acts and duties of defending our selves, and the oppressed, do not tie our
Consciences conditionally, so the King consent, but absolutely, as all duties
of the Law of Nature do, Jer. 22. 3. Prove. 24. 11. Isaiah. 1. 17. and 58. 6.

Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed ye Judges of the earth. Serve
the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the son lest he be angry,
and you perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little: blessed
are all they that trust in him, Psalm. 2. Therefore it becomes you, that sit
upon Thrones, to observe and obey the true unquestionable divine Lex Regia: to
you it is commanded, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20. viz. to read in the Book of the Law
all the days of your lives, that you may learn to fear the Lord your God, to
keep all the words of the law and the statutes, to do them: that your hearts be
not lifted up above your brethren; (by whom, and from among whom, ye your
selves were chosen, and set in great Glory, Honor, and Dignity: to go in and
out before them, judging righteously) and that you turn not aside from the
commandment, to the right hand, or to the left: do violence to no man; for God
hates the violent man, and evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him,
Psalm, 140. 11. Be content with your Tribute, and exact no more than what is
appointed you by public consent; take care that there be no violent perverting
of Judgment; no shamming of Laws, or prevaricating with false constructions of
Laws, or by Innuendoes, lest thereby the Lives and Fortunes of your Subjects be
taken away: and it shall be your Wisdom, and your Understanding, and all your
People will call you Blessed; and it will be your Comfort at the end of your
Days (a time speedily approaching) when all Crowns, Scepters, and Royalties
must be resigned to God, the Judge of all Men, when you shall all stand in an
equal distance with those you now call Vassals, and use rather like Beasts than
Images of God and Christians, before his Tribunal, when no Titles of Honor, no
Eminency of Station, no Treasures of Wealth, no Strength of Armies or
Dependencies will accompany any of you into the Presence of the Lamb, to stand
between you and the Judgment of the great Day: for God is no respecter of
persons, and will not be mocked.

Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, even to day, whilst it is called to day,
before the irreversible Decree of Wrath be gone forth, and esteem that Lex
Regia, all his other Laws, Statutes, and Judgments, more than your necessary
Food; and that they may be sweeter to you than the Honey and the Honeycomb, lay
them up in your Hearts, and in your Souls; bind them for a sign upon you hands,
that they may be as frontlets between your eyes, that you may teach them to
your subjects: (as was commanded to Josiah, Deuteronomy. 17. 17.) speaking of them
when you sit in your houses, and when you walk by the way, when you lie down,
and when you rise up; write them upon the door-posts of your houses, and upon
your gates, bind them upon your hearts, and tie them about your necks, and make
them your continual Ornament, that when you go they may lead you, that when you
sleep they may keep you, and that when you awake they may talk with you, and
teach you to keep sound wisdom and discretion, that in all your ways and
conditions they may be your Safeguards, your Companions and your Comfort.

Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth. Let
your provident care reach beyond the forecast of the Fool in the Gospel, even
for immortality it self; make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts
thereof, for there is but one thing only necessary. Do not desperately slight
and condemn the purity and simplicity of the Gospel, but abstain from all
appearance of evil, and resist unto blood, striving against sin: Be not like
those Fools that make a mock of sin, and so cursedly cruel to your immortal
Souls, as to dote on Mediocrities of Grace, by understanding God otherways then
he will be understood, and so delude your own Souls, and be forced at last to
sing Lachrymae, when you shall see the poor despised righteous stand in great
boldness in the presence of the Lamb, and you your selves thrust out, with A go
ye cursed, and then cry, when it is too late, We fools counted their lives
madness, and their ends to have been without honor, and now how are they
numbered among the Children of God, and their lot is among the Saints? Wisdom 5.
1, 4, 5. Break no Laws, nor Covenants made with your People: Consider with what
terrible Solemnity God published his Laws and Covenants on Mount Sinai, with
Thunder and Lightning, Fire, and Tempest, Smoke and Darkness, with expectation
of an exact performance of all his Laws; and tho in much Mercy, Pity, and
Compassion to us, he has since removed the curse from it, as it is a killing
Letter, and ministry of death, and has now published it in the hand of a
Mediator: And consider withal, that he has so great a detestation and hatred
against sin, that it amazed the very Soul of Christ himself, and made him (who
had more strength then all the Angels in Heaven,) to shrink and draw back, and
to pray with strong cries and bloody drops against the Cup of his Fathers
Wrath, and against the work of his own mercy, and to decline the business of
his own coming. Now or never be wise O ye Kings, and be instructed ye Judges of
the Earth, and consider that what I have written is for the true interest of
your immortal Souls, and is of everlasting consequence, and that within a few
years, you must bid an everlasting farewell to all your Kingdoms and Glories;
that your Winter-houses, and your Summer-houses, that your Houses of Ivory, and
your great Houses shall be smitten and have an end; and as you brought nothing
with you into the world, so shall you carry nothing out but your own
Consciences, which will be as a thousand Witnesses to testify against you, and
that Heaven and Hell will divide the whole World; and when God makes
Inquisition for blood, he will remember the cry of the poor, Psalm. 9. 12. and
revenge the Persecutions and Blood of his Saints, shed either in War or Peace:
Think not more highly of your selves than you ought to think, but think
soberly, that at the day of Judgment you shall have no more favor than the
meanest of your Black-Guard.

Humi-repentis est Indolis nunquam insanire sine timida Apologia, and yet not
quite mad, most Noble Kings, Princes, and Potentates; for if you will seriously
and Christianly consider your own most true and eternal Interest, and that unum
necessarium, (which is and ought to be the greatest and deepest concern of all
Princes, as well as of all Peasants) you will find that I have written the
words of truth and soberness, and am so far from doing you wrong, that it will
lead you to the true way of happiness both here and hereafter, and to give up
our Accounts with comfort at the great and dreadful day of Account.

Consider how mighty prevalent your Examples are to good or evil, more than
Twenty thousand Pulpits: The sins of the Vulgar hurt little by infection, but
the sins of the Mighty are pestilential and poisonous. I have done, only beg
your favor, that what I have written, I have written as Advisoes and
Admonitions, not as Imputations.

Hear therefore, O ye Kings, and understand, learn ye that be Judges of the
Earth, give ear ye that rule the People, and glory in the multitude of Nations;
for power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the Highest, who shall
try your works, and search out your Councils; because, being Ministers of his
Kingdom, you have not judged aright, nor kept the Law, nor walked after the
Council of God. Horribly and speedily shall he come upon you, for a sharp
judgment shall be to them that be in high places, for mercy will soon pardon
the meanest, but mighty men shall be mightily tormented: for he which is Lord
over all shall fear no man's person, neither shall he stand in awe of any man's
greatness: for he has made the small and great, and cares for all alike; but
a sore Trial shall come upon the mighty. Unto you therefore, O Kings, do I
speak, that you may learn wisdom, and not fall away, Wisd. chap. 1. ver. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

THE Right of Government, AND JUSTIFICATION OF DEFENSIVE ARMS, etc.
THough there can be nothing so exactly, so accurately, so cautiously written,
that prevaricating, and searching Wits, and Men of different Principles and
different Interests (who take and measure only by their own Plummets and their
own Lines) will not quarrel and throw Stones at, when sound Reason and solid
Arguments are wanting to refute: Yet I presume to expose my Sentiments
concerning Government and Governors, and to run the same fortune and risk with
others (not vainly expecting to pass currantly without snaps and snarles)
laying a very short, but firm Foundation, as a solid Rock, able to bear and
justify all the Superstructures which I shall Build thereon, relating to any
Form of Government whatsoever; thereby avoiding multiplicity, and ministering
less occasion of Disputes, and less Fuel to kindle the fire of Contention, and
less scope to pick and make Disputes and Quarrels upon. I shall not
particularly meddle with the several Forms of Government, nor how rightly or
abusively exercised in any Nation, State, or Kingdom, but shall endeavor
quantum in me, to set the Right of Governors and Government on a right
Foundation in general, without respect to this, or that Form, or to this or
that Nation, Commonwealth, or Kingdom, and without particular Reflections, as
much as is possible (unless by way of instance) on any particular Kingdom, or
Commonwealth.

CHAP. I.
Shows the absolute necessity of Government; of what Nature it ought to be; and
how Governors ought to behave themselves in the Management thereof. To what
Governors Obedience is due.
I Shall First show the absolute necessity of Friendly Assotiations and
Government. Secondly, Of what Nature it ought to be. Thirdly, Who of right have
the Power of Government. It is a Maxim most Christian an undeniable, That pure
Religion and undefiled, Holiness of Life and Conversation, is every Man's
bounden Duty in particular; and is, and ought to be, the highest of all the
Cares and Concerns of all public and private Governors, and Governments in
many respects. 1. In respect of gratitude toward God, who has done so great
things for us Men, and for the Eternal Welfare of our Immortal Souls; and who
gives to all Men liberally and upbraideth not, and not only for necessity, but
for delight also. 2. In respect of his Almighty Power, who is Lord alone of all
the Kingdoms of the Earth, and does whatsoever he pleases in Heaven above, and
in Earth beneath, and in the great Waters. 3. In respect that righteousness and
judgment are the habitation of his throne, Psalm 97. 2. and he will judge the
World with Righteousness, and all Persons with his Truth; and who only can give
Peace within our Walls, and Plentiousness within our Palaces: but that only
Hypothetically on condition, that our ways do please him. 4. In respect of the
great power Religion has to qualify all unnatural exorbitant humors and
passions of Men, even most rebellious against God or Men, and to incline all
Governors to Rule with Conscience, and the Governed to obey for Conscience
sake. It is no Phanatick whim* but a matter of ^ound and undeniable
consequence, That all Duties, both of the Governors and Governed, are by* so
much the better executed, by how much they are the more Religious.

For it is not possible, that good Government can continue without good
Governors; which being most certainly true, Policy must submit, and be
subordinate, and d^ homage to Religion. This is more demonstrable in that all
good Christians do own these very Truths in their very Prayers; to which the
several Lyturgies, of several Nations, give abundant undeniable Testimony.
Besides, they have God's own Command and own Pattern for such Government, and
Governors, viz. H^ that rules over*men must be just, ruling in the fear of
God, 2. Sam. 23. 3. Before the Israelites (God's own peculiar People, for whom
God has done so much, and showed so many Miracles, by bringing them out of the
Land of Egypt by a strong Hand) entered that good Land beyond Jordan, he taught
them by his Servant Moses, Laws, Statutes, and Judgments, to govern themselves
by, saying, Behold I have taught you Statutes, and Judgments, even as the Lord
my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the Land whether ye go to possess
it: keep therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom, and understanding in
the sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these Statutes, and say, Surely
this great Nation is a wise and understanding People. For what Nation is there
so great, who has God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is in all things
that we call unto him for? and what Nation is there so great, that has
Statutes and Judgments so righteous, as all this Law which I have set before
thee? Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, and teach them
thy Son, and thy Sons Sons, etc. What human Oracles can contrive and dictate
better Laws, Statutes, and Judgments, than is commanded in Holy Writ? And
therefore greatest prudence and safety to make them their Pattern. But we have
not only Divine, but Human Sanctions also for what is averred. That great
Prince Augustus was wont to say, That Religion did Deifie Princes: And Tully
tells us, That the Roman State did increase and flourish more by Religion than
by any other means. All the Laws of Solon and Lycurges, of Greece and Rome,
etc. come far short of the Laws of God, for the most pure, just, and excellent
Government. And whoever shall consult the Ancients of the very Heathens
themselves, as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and others, shall find that they all
center (be the Form of Government what it will) in just Laws, and just
Execution, without creating Subtilties or coining Evasions to sham good Laws,
made in simplicity and in sincerity. Thus by Testimony both Divine and Human,
Religion is the best and surest Basis of Human Society, Union, Peace, Liberty,
Plenty, and distributive Justice to all indifferently, without respect of
Persons, high or low, rich or poor.

Consider also what Edward I. has left as a Pattern of good Government,
concerning the Office of a King: Rex autem, etc. The King, because he is the
Vicar of the great God, is ordained to this, That above all he should reverence
Holy Church; that he should govern the Earthly Kingdom and People of God, and
defend them from injuries, and should discountenance and dispel all lewd People
out of Church and State; which if he do not, the name of King remains not in
him. But Pope John testifying he loses the name of King; to whom Pepin and
Charles his Sons not yet Kings, but Princes under the French King, wrote
foolishly, complaining, that if so, the Kings of France ought to be content
with the Name and Title of King; by whom it was answered, That it belongs to
them to be called Kings, who carefully defend and govern the Church and People
of God, imitating David King of Israel, Psalm 101. He that works deceit,
shall not dwell within my house: he that tells lies, shall not tarry in my
sight: I will early destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off all
wicked doers from the city of the Lord, etc. The King ought in all truth and
sincerity, fully and wholly to observe all the Dignities, Rights, and Liberties
of the Kingdom, and to reduce them to their Pristine condition. The King also
ought to do all things in his Kingdom righteously, and that by the judgment of
the Nobles of the Kingdom; and Right and Justice ought rather to bear Rule in a
Kingdom than sinful Wills and Pleasures. Law is always that which does right,
but Will and Pleasure is violence; and force is not right. And much more to the
same purpose by Edward the First; to whose Laws also William the Conqueror
subscribed, Vid. Lambert. Collect. p. 142. No 17.

The true Religion of God and honest Conversation (even) of Priests
(themselves) is our chiefest care, says Justinian, Novel. constit. 6. The
search of true Religion we find to be the chiefest care of Imperial Majesty,
Legum Theodos. Novel tit. 2. de Judaeis and Samaritanis. So Gregory the Great
earnestly exhorted Edelbert unto, the first that was Christened of the Saxon
Kings in England. For this cause the Almighty God brings the good Princes to
the Regiment of his People, that by them he may bestow the gifts of his mercy
upon all that are under them. Beda hist. Aug. 32.

Consider in the Creation we were all created in Adam equal, and equally
innocent and upright, and had we so continued in that state of Innocence, there
would have been no need of Impery one over another, every one would have been a
King to himself, God and Nature their only Lawgivers: but lapsed Man sought
out many Inventions, and broke the Laws both of God and Nature, and thereby
provoked God to anger, and to vengeance, and instead of being homo homini Deus,
as in their fist Creation and state of Innocence, they soon became homo homini
Lupus, which unavoidably introduced a necessity of Government, framed by human
Wisdom, that they may not like Brutes devour one another, but live in Unity,
Wealth, Peace, and Godliness; that they might have Liberty preserved, Justice
equally distribute^ Honesty upheld, Religion and Piety maintained and
propagated; all which could not be done, when the Race of lapsed Mankind was
multiplied, but by Laws ordained by Common Consent, as sociable Parts united
into one Body; which Laws, in common Prudence and of right, do bind each to
serve other, and all to prefer the good of the whole before what good soever of
any particular; without which no House, no City, no Nation can long subsist in
any happy condition. For to govern and to be governed is not to be esteemed
amongst things only necessary, but as things profitable also for the benefit
and sollace of all Mankind, and has its ground and warrant in Scripture, in
Nature, in Heaven, Hell, the Creatures, Man's nature and Conscience.

In Scripture, by me Kings (and consequently all other Forms of Government)
reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the
Judges of the earth, Pro. 8. 15, 16. says Gods essential wisdom, viz. not only
by the secret disposition of his Providence, but by the express warrant of his
Ordinance; by Divine Institution, not by naked approbation, there being no
power but of God, either by his commission or permission: The powers that are
(i. e. the several Forms of Government) are ordained by God, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. i. e. politic Power in general is warranted by a Divine Law, but the
several Forms of Government is by the Law of Nations. Princedom, Empire,
Kingdom, and Jurisdiction have their Rise from a positive and secondary Law of
Nations, and not absolutely from the Law of God, or of pure Nature, which the
Lawyers call Secundario Jus natural, or Jus gentium secundarium. In sum,
Government is immediately from God, but this or that Form of Government is
immediately from God, by the Interposition and Mediation of the public consent
of Kingdoms and States, and so the application of the Persons to the Office is
wholly in the Governed. The several Forms of Government differ not in nature
(Morally and Theologically speaking, the end of all Government being the very
self same) but only politically and positively: For God appointed not Kings
absolute and solely Independent, but constituted with them also Judges, who
were equally obliged to judge according to the Law of God. 2. Chron. 19. 6. as
Kings 17. Deuteronomy. 15. and have a coordinate share in the Government, because the
Judgment is neither the Kings nor the Judges, but the Lords, and both their
Consciences are in immediate subjection to the King of Kings, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6,
7. The persons are sometimes Usurpers, sometimes Abusers of their Authority; as
when they tyrannize or oppress; such powers God owns not, the Rulers that he
ordains are not to be a Terror unto good works, but to the evil; for they are
the Ministers of God to the governed for good, revengers to execute wrath upon
them that do evil: To such Rulers we must needs be subject, not only for wrath,
but also for Conscience sake; therefore whosoever resists such powers
resists the ordinance of God: And for this cause pay we tribute, but not to
those that are a terror to good works, the reason subjoyned, is, for they are
Gods Ministers, attending continually on this very thing; but if they attend
not continually on this very thing, there is no absolute necessary Obligation
expressed, incumbent upon us for our Obedience, or for our paying of Tribute,
Suit, or Service, but rather on the contary, It is better to obey God than Man,
Acts 5. 29.

The same Power St. Peter terms human Ordinances: Submit your self to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as supreme; or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. so that S.
Paul and S. Peter run parallel to one and the self same Sense, and the Sword in
the Magistrates Hand to revenge, is not a material Sword to hack and hew, kill
and slay at pleasure, but the Laws made by the common consent are the true
Sword (so Bishop Bilson) to which both Magistrates and People are equally
obliged to submit, the Magistrates being but the Conduit and Pipe, the
Administrators (not Patrons) of the Powers for the sake of order, through
which, and by whom all Laws are to pass and be executed; and by the same Texts
they have the like Obligation to praise them that do well, as to punish those
that do ill: so David was taught, and practiced: I will not know a wicked
person, mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell
with me: he that works deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that
tells lies shall not tarry in my sight, etc. Psalm. 101. 4, 6, 7.

In Nature it self are found impressions of this Ordinance.

In Heaven, amongst Angels are Principalities and Thrones, Ephesians. 1. 21. and
Michael the Archangel, Jude 9.

Amongst the Sphaers, there is a primum Mobile, one first moveable Commander of
all the inferior Orbs with his Motion.

Amongst Stars there are greater and lesser Lights, ^^^ers amongst the rest,
the sun to rule by day, and the Moon and Stars by night.

Nay so absolutely necessary is Government, that it reaches even to Hell.
Devils themselvet have their Principalities, Mat. 25. 41. not only over other
Creatures, but respectively among themselves: therefore it is said, the Devil
and his Angels, and Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, Mat. 12. 24.

To say nothing of Brutes, amongst which yet Philosophers have observed a
perfect form of Regiment and Polity, among Bees a Commonwealth, Locusts go out
by Bands, etc. And see we not plainly, that Obedience of Creatures unto the Law
of Nature is the stay of the whole World.

In man, if nothing else evince it, methinks that awful submission to Regiment,
which natural Conscience suggests to Savages sufficiently proves it. As far as
that Principle is heard of, that there is a King of Kings and Lord of Lords:
wherever it is known that there is a God that judges the Earth, it is known
also and received, that there are Nominal Gods on Earth, with reverence, next
to the Supreme Majesty to be adored. But above all, natural Conscience, amongst
other common Notions, has received the impression of this natural Principle;
how else comes it to pass that (a few extravagant Natures and profligated
Consciences only excepted) such awful Submission is found in all, to Men of our
own Mould? Yet in our Apprehension, clad with such venerable Majesty, that the
guilty scarce behold them without trembling, and the Guiltless yield willing
reverence to their Persons; so every way God has pleased to make known his
Ordinance for Government, Magistracy, and Laws.

CHAP. II.
Shows the ultimate and final end of all Government: Shows the Laws of God and
Nature to be the best Guides; and that Covenants made between King and People,
are to be kept both by King and People, and the breach thereof alike Penal to
King and People; and whoever breaks either Laws or Covenants, they are Rebels
to the Laws, and that the People are still the Lords People.
HAving showed the absolute necessity of Government, it is requisite also to
declare the ultimate and final end of all Governments, which by confession of
all, is primarily and especially the Declaration of the infinite Wisdom,
Goodness, and Glory of God, propagation of the Gospel, and the good of the
Governed, for whose good all things were created: Unto these two all kinds of
Governments (how variously soever framed according to the different Modes,
Wisdoms, and Understandings of Men and Nations) ought to be conformable. Let
Christ be our great Exemplar, who denied himself his own natural will and life,
and bestowed himself on us, that we likewise might not seek every man his own,
but every man the good of another, employing our selves on the benefit and
service of Church and State, and so grow and be built up together in love,
which is the Consummation and perfecting, as of all Saints, so of all
Governments. For as God (who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the only
Monarch of the World, and whose understanding is infinite) in the Government
and Administration of this inferior World, designed his own Glory, together
with the Good and Salvation of the whole Race of Mankind; so he expects
submission and perfect obedience unto his Laws, Statutes, and Judgments from
all Kings, Princes, and Governors, as his Ministers: Be wise now therefore, O
ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, and serve the Lord with fear in
all your Administrations according to the purport of his Laws, and for the ends
designed, lest the sad Fate of Solomon betide you, 1 King. 11. 11. Because thou
have not kept my Covenants, and my Statutes which I have commanded thee, I will
surely rend thy Kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant*

Now without all peradventure the Law of Nature is the best and most equal Law,
and most fit to be imitated; which being strictly observed, nothing can be
wanting to any body, and what every one has is his own for ever: For as those
who preside over Celestial Bodies are blessed* and just minds and Spirits, and
every one does most justly govern his own Body; so Nature being derived from
those Superior just Souls, keeps the most just and equal order in all her
actings, which she makes known to all the World. Now the nearer all human Laws
do come to the Laws of God and Nature, the more certain and the more glorious
must their way of living be, who live and are governed by such Laws. Unto these
Laws had those ancient Lawgivers respect, which eternized their Names and
Memories famous to all succeeding Ages: Above the rest are celebrated the Laws
of Lacedaemon by Licurgus; of Athens by Solon; of the Locrenses (a Town in
Italy) by Zalencus; of the Thurii (a City in Greece) by Garondas; of the Getae
(a People of Scythia in Europe) by Zamolxis a Scholar of Pythagoras: and Divine
Plato commends the Laws of Crete; Isocrates of the Carthaginians; but* above
all, the Roman Laws, by the Judgment of Polybiis do excel. These Laws of these
Lawgivers, tho not the self-same but differing one from the other, yet they
all tend to one and the same end, the Peace, Happiness, and welfare of the
several Nations and People, tho they did not march all in one and the same Road
and Path thereunto. The first Law givers had always the Laws of Nature (in
which there is nothing unequal to be found) before their Eyes, to imitate and
conform to them as near as they could: but when they made Judicial Laws, as
they were not all under one Climate, nor sucked the same Air, so they had not
all the same Reason, the same* Judgment, which made the difference in their
Laws; but yet they all tended to the good and happiness of the People and
Nations for whom they were made: All right being either from the Law of Nature
(which is the Law of God) or from Custom, or from Human Laws. The right of
Nature always stands on its own Legs by its self, without the assistance of
Custom, or of other Laws, and always points and leads to happy life and
condition, which every Man, Society, and Nation might enjoy, if they would but
follow her Dictates, and take her for their Guide and Rule to walk by. But
above all Laws no Laws like to those of the Almighty, who is the Lord alone of
all the Kingdoms of the Earth, for they had respect not to this life only, but
to that of a better, even to Eternity, which no other Lawgivers had: therefore
Moses exhorted the Israelites, that when they should possess the Land whether
they were going, that they should keep and do the statutes and judgments as the
Lord had commanded him, and it should be their wisdom, and their understanding
in the sight of the Nations which shall hear all those statutes, and say,
surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding people: And what Nation is
there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous as all this Law,
which I set before you this day, Deuteronomy. 4. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Having declared the necessity, usefulness, and benefit of Government, and the
final end thereof, it is now requisite to show the true and efficient cause and
right of Government, where, and in whom the just right of appointing Governors
and Government is undoubtedly inherent and instated. God, beyond all
contradiction, reigns by his own Plenipotentiary Power, and does whatsoevor he
pleases in Heaven above, and in Earth beneath, and in the Waters under the
Earth; Kings and other Governors only precario, at the good will and pleasure
of others; God by himself, Kings by God and the Governed; God by his own
Jurisdiction, Kings by deligated Authority from others: the Jurisdiction of God
is immense, that of Kings limited: So the power of God infinite, that of Kings
not so; the Kingdom of God endless, boundless, that of Kings, limited to
certain Regions, and fading. When God sets Kings upon Thrones, he sets them
there as his Substitutes to go in and out before his people, and to do Judgment
and Justice, 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. and upon condition, that the governed should still
be the Lords people, 2 King. 11. 17. 2 Chronicles. 1. 10. So that God still remains
Lord, and Proprietor of the same People, but sets Kings and other Magistrates
over them, to govern and feed them like good Shepherds, not to pill, poll, and
fley them; so all good Kings acknowledged, as David, Solomon, Jehosaphat and
others: So Nebuchadnezzar, tho an Ethnic did acknowledge, Dan. 2. 47. Hence it
necessarily follows, that Kings are set over a People to nourish and cherish
them as God himself, and not to wrong or oppress them: So Jehojada made a
Covenant between the Lord, and the King, and the People, that they should be
the Lords People, and between the King also and the People, 2 King. 11. 17.

In the Inauguration of Joae, we read of a holy Covenant between God and the
King and the people, as it is elsewhere expressed between Jorada the chief
Priest, and all the people and the King, that they should be the people of God.
So Josiah and all the people made Covenant with God, 2 King. 11. 11. 2 Chr. 23.
13, 16. 2 King. 23. from which is to be understood, that the high Priest in the
name of God, covenanted between the Lord and the King, and the People, that
they should be the Lords People; and between the King also and the People, that
God should be truly and purely worshipped by both King and People of Judah. And
was not the King so to reign, that he should suffer the People to serve God
according to the Law of God, and the People so to obey the King, that in the
first place they were to obey God, and both King and People sworn by Solemn
Sacrament, in the first place to worship God, and keep his Laws: matter of Fact
does manifest it: And all the People of the Land went into the House of Baal
and brake it down, his Altars and his Images brake they in pieces, etc. and
restored the Worship of God; the sum of the Covenant being, that all should
worship God, and all should take care that God be worshipped according to his
own Precepts and Prescript; which if they did perform, God would be with them
and bless them, if not, then he would destroy them. So Moses before his death
rehears^th the Conditions of the Covenant made with their Forefathers, and all
the Blessings and Curses attending the breach or performance thereof, Deuteronomy. 29.
30, 31. commanding them to take the book of the Law and put it in the side of
the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord your God, that it may be there for a
witness against thee, etc. Deuteronomy. 31. 26, 27, 28. After Moses was dead, God
himself constituted Joshua to go in and out before his People on the same
conditions, Josh. 1. which if they transgressed they should be delivered into
the hands of the Canaanites.

One and the self-same Covenant, which was made between God and the People
under the Judges, was made under and with the Kings. After Saul was constituted
King, Samuel said to the People, Fear the Lord and serve him in truth with all
your heart; but if you shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye
and your King, Josh. 12. 24, 25. thereby showing that God expects as strickt
performance of his Laws from Kings as from the People. Saul being rejected
because he brake Covenant, David was constituted King on the same Conditions;
and so Solomon his Son; which Covenant was, That if they and their Children
kept his Commandments, and observed his Statutes, they should sit on the Throne
of Israel for ever, if otherwise they should be destroyed, 1 Kings chapter 2. ver.
12. 2 Chronicles. 6. 16. chapter 7. 17.

Hence the Book of the Law found in the Temple in the days of Josiah, is called
the Book of the Covenant of the Lord, which he commanded his People to deliver
to the King, 2 King. 23. 2. Deuteronomy. 7. 18. (which Samuel did to Saul, 1 Samuel 10.
25.) and Josiah accordingly did covenant before the Lord: So the Law which was
kept in the Ark, is called the Covenant of the Lord with the Children of
Israel; who being delivered from the Babylonish Captivity, renewed their
Covenantwith God, which they had violated, 2 Chronicles. 6. 11. whereby it is
manifest, that Kings, as Vassalls to the Law of God, solemnly swear to be
obedient thereunto. We make a sure Covenant, and write it, and our Princes,
Levites, and Priests seal unto it, Nehem. 9. 38. the breach of which Covenant
is a like penal to King and People; which is manifested in Saul, who for
offering Sacrifice, and for sparing Agag King of the Amalekites was accounted a
Rebel and punished accordingly, 1 Samuel 13. 12, 13. and thereby taught, that
Kings, if they break the Laws, are as truly Rebels as Subjects, and that
obedience is better than sacrifice: thou have rejected the w^rd of the Lord and
the Lord has rejected thee from being King over Israel, 1 Samuel 15. 26, 27.
which crime does not terminate only in the Persons of Kings so rebelling, but
is extensive also to their Children. So God did rend the Kingdom out of the
hand of Solomon, and gave ten tribes to his servant Jeroboam, because he
forsook God and worshipped (...) etc. 1 King. 11. 32, 33. he breaking his
Covenant, God became free and discharged of his promise, and rent his Kingdom
from him. The same Jeroboam erecting tw^ Calves in Dan and Bethel became ^in
unto the House of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and was first punished by the
death of his Son, and then destroyed it from off the face of the Earth, 1 Kings
13. 34. And why? Because they kept not God's Covenant. The Scripture is full of
such Examples of the Kings of Israel and Judah. As the Gospel succeeded the
Law, so Kings Christian are in the place and stead of Jewish Kings, and are
under the same Covenants, the same Pacts and the same Punishments, and the same
God is the same Revenger of all Perjuries, and Perfidiousness, and
Covenant Breaking. As the Jewish Kings were strictly obliged to the observation
of the Law, so Kings Christian to the observation and propagation of the
Gospel, unto which they Swear at their Inauguration. Herod (who ought to have
advanced the Kingdom of the Lord Christ) fearing Christ himself, as a
Competitor for his Kingdom, condemned him to Death. Behold how soon he
miserably perished and lost his Kingdom! How soon was Julian the Apostate in
despite of all his obstinacy and perverseness, brought to his scornful
Exclamation and Acknowledgment of Vicisti Galilae? Histories both Sacred and
Profane, Old and New, are full of such fearful Examples, which may teach all
Kings and Princes, That though they set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel
together against the Lord, and against his anointed (which are his People,
Psalm. 105. 14, 15.) yet he that sits in the heavens shall laugh them to
scorn; and the Lord shall have them in derision, and in his due time, shall
break them with a rod of Iron, and shall dash them in pieces like a potters
vessel, and make all their enemies their foot-stools, Psalm. 2. and 100. And
they shall confess the Lamb Christ Jesus to be King of kings, and Lord of
lords; and that they that be with him, to be the chosen and faithful, Rev. 17.
14. It is wonderful and ineffable to consider that the great God of Heaven and
of Earth did not create Men only a little lower than the Angels, and in his own
Image, and give them also dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl
of the air, and over the cattle, and over every living thing that moves upon
the earth, Genesis 1. 26. but such was his admirable Love to Mankind, that he has
in some measure given him a share and part with himself in the External and
Worldly Administration and Government of themselves, and of the things below,
in directing them to a Government according to his own Pattern displaied in the
Old and New Testament; and given them Laws to Govern themselves, and Honors,
and dignifies them with the Title of his own Lieutenants, and Vicegerents;
nay, of Gods: I have said ye are Gods, etc. Psalm 82. 6, 7. viz. By me Kings
reign, and Princes decree justice, Prove. 8. 15, 16. who, in the days of the
Prophets and since, has left them unto their own free choice and discretion,
still observing his Laws and Commands, against which no Law can have force. And
God himself remembering his Covenant, the Word which he swore to a thousand
Generations, became a Pattern to all his succeeding Vicars and Vicegerents to
imitate. When he sent Joseph before him into Egypt in his due time, to bind
Princes at his pleasure, and teach his Senators wisdom; when he sent Moses his
Servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen to hector proud Pharaoh King of Egypt,
and bring out his people Israel with a high hand and stretched out arm, and
deliver them out of the Iron furnace and Egyptian bondage: reproving Kings for
their sakes, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; when
he led them through the wilderness, by spreading a cloud for their covering,
and fire to give light in the night; when he made the red sea a wall unto them
on their right hand and on their left, and at the same time overthrew Pharaoh
and all his host in the midst of the same; so that there remained not so much
as one of them: but brought Israel forth with Gold and with Silver, and not one
feeble person among their Tribes, and gave them the Land of the Heathen for
their inheritance, and uttermost parts of the Earth for their possession. Of
such vast and near consequence and concern was the Happiness and Welfare of the
People of the Jews (though a rebellious generation) unto God himself, that he
used ^his Almighty Power, and wrought Miracle after Miracle, rather than not
deliver them from the Hands of their Enemies and cruel Bondage.

A notable Document to all Christian Kings, who pride themselves and glory in
being styled and esteemed his Vicegerents, to imitate God and his Vicegerent
Moses in all their Governments, in keeping Covenants, and being in good earnest
Nursing-fathers to the governed, and carry them in their Bosoms (as
Nursing-fathers bear their sucking Children) and not vex them with their Wyles,
nor yet with any Oppressions or Tyranny.

CHAP. III.
The true Basis and Foundation of all Governments, and right of Legislation, is
consent of Parties; who may delegate and devolve the use of their own power on
one or more Persons, without devesting themselves of the Supreme Dominion
thereof. And that common Good is the main end of all Governments. Kings made by
the People.
THESE things thus premised, I lay this for an undeniable Truth, as the Basis
of all true Government, viz. That (Paternal Government excepted, to which
within their own private Families Nature has given a Supreme Power throughout
the World, even from the first Creation thereof, and have ever been reputed as
Lawful Governors therein) no Man, nor any number of Men, can have complete
Lawful Power or Authority over any number of society of Men, but by consent of
Men, or by immediate appointment of God; which position will justice all
subsequent Superstructures; all other Governments being unnatural, violent, and
usurped, and therefore unlawful: whereby it is manifest that the whole Right
and Power of Government is originally in the Governed, who may transfer, and
vest as much of their own Power as they please on one or more Governors,
without devesting themselves absolutely of the Supreme Dominion thereof, which
still remains virtually in them, they delegating the Use only (not the
Patronage and Dominion) of their own Power, for the better Execution,
Administration, and Regulation of those Laws which by common consent they
should make and choose for the sake of Justice, Peace, Order, and Piety; Common
good being the main end for which Societies and Governments were instituted by
God and Man, and without they tend unto that end, they are not perfect. And in
all such delegations, salus populi, the good of the governed is, and so ought
to be the Supreme Law, and is always so expressed, or employed, and so to be
undertaken and understood. This is so natural an obligation, that it cannot be
dispensed with: And for Governors to procure the good of Commonweals, is but to
do their duty: he that is above all, should be best of all, for Example
prevails more than Law; and there can be no reason for sin, violence, or
oppression.

Princes, Councils, Love, and Hate,
Must do homage to the Law of State:
The Peoples Safety has no Mate.
So King James of happy Memory in his Speech to the Parliament 1603. When I
have done all that I can for you, I do nothing but that which I am bound to do,
and am accountable to God upon the contrary. For I do acknowledge that the
special and greatest point of difference that is between a Rightful King and an
Usurping Tyrant is in this, That whereas the proud and ambitious Tyrant does
think his Kingdom and People are only ordained for satisfaction of his Desires
and unreasonable Appetites; the righteous and just King does by the contrary
acknowledge himself to be ordained for the procuring of the Wealth and
Prosperity of his People, and that his greatest and principle Worldly Felicity
must consist in their Prosperity. If you be rich, I cannot be poor: if you be
happy, I cannot but be fortunate: and I protest that your Welfare shall ever be
my greatest care and contentment; and that I am a Servant it is most true: that
as I am Head and Governor of all the People in my Dominions, who are my natural
Vassals and Subjects, considering them in numbers and distinct ranks; so if we
will take the whole People as one Body and Mass, then as the Head is ordained
for the Body, and not the Body for the Head, so must a righteous King know
himself to be ordained for his People, and not his People for him. For though a
King and People be relata, yet there can be no King if he want People and
Subjects, but there be many People in the World that lack a Head; wherefore I
will never be ashamed to confess it my principal honor to be the great Servant
of the Commonwealth, and ever think the Prosperity thereof to be my greatest
Felicity, 494, 495. The reason is demonstrable, viz. God, not the King, made
the People, and those all equally of one and the self-same Mould, but the
People make Kings; Nature was Father to the People, but the People make some of
themselves Kings, and are the rightful Patrons of all their Power, Honors,
Privileges, and Prerogatives; and therefore as God ordained the Sabbath for
man, and not man for the Sabbath, Mark 2. 27* so (...) ordained Kings and all
other Governors and Governments for (...) and not Men for Kings. The prospect
and foresight of the wise, That to be governed by one Man's Will might become
the cause of all Men's misery, prevailed with them (...) and (...) Laws (...)
all might see their Duties, and (...)

There are that (...) with great (...) truth* that Kings receive their (...)
according to Prove. 8. 15. and not from the (...) are set, and that they are
accountable to non^ bu^ (...) on, the just Right of all Pol^^^^k Power, (...)
and of Nature, and of Reason, is originally in the (...) use thereof from them
may be transferred and deligated unto whom (...) devesting (...) their
Administrator^ (...) them, who deligated it, and to (...) countable. If such
Ass^^tor^ (...) old, when God by (...) the People had (...) Prophets for Rules
(...) much more might have (...) yet even in those days the (...) far complied
with common consent* (...) change of that Government his own Wisdom (...) him
and his Government (...) his peculiar People) only because they* (...) King
over us, maugre all that Samuel could (...) as Solomon* was dead, all Israel
come (...) King, who refusing to be a Servant to the^ (...) for ever,
threatening that his little finger should be (...) would whip them with
Scorpions, etc. they soon (...) have we in David? neither have we inheritance
in the (...) and see to thine house David, 1 King 12. and then chose* (...)
Rehoboam the Son of Solomon.

But such choice being now quite out of doors and (...) the least pretense of
Title from such Nomination* and therefore (...) can only be meant the
institution of the Office, and not the designation (...) and cannot possibly be
understood any other ways, (...) instituted, has, together with other
Government^* the (...) And it stands sure, that all Royal Power* (...) in the
People, as in the first Subject, which they may confer on this or that Man with
^^at ^^mitations they please, and on condition, that if conditions be not
performed* they (...) Power they entrusted him withal. And therefore no King
can have (...) so just Powers* as from the suffrages of the People: all other
Governments (...) Tyrannies, and continued Injuries, of which the People may
ease themselves when they have just reason and a neat opportunity so to do*
because their just and natural Right is wrongfully invaded; for, that naturally
no sort of Men have full and lawful Power to command whole politic multitudes
of Men, and therefore utterly without the Peoples consent they ought not to be
at any Man's commandment living. This is plain, and natural reason, and ought
to have the stamp of a public Law. Laws positive are mutable; natural not so*
and therefore these Laws ought to stand unrepealed because they always bind.

The Kings of Israel and Jud^^ were not so immediately and absolutely from God,
as that the People were (...) excluded from their Right and Power of Electing,
and Approving, and (...) of them* that had been to deprive them of that Power
that God and the (...) Nature had given them to Covenant and Agree with them
before they would admit of them; that had been to wrong the People, and to bind
them up from the use of their reason by Covenanting for their own Happiness,
and against Tyranny, in ease they should break Laws and Covenants solemnly made
with them by Oath, which cannot be broke without Perjury. By me Kings reign,
was only an Index and Declaration of God's Will and Pleasure, which does not
take away or destroy the Peoples Right or Liberty. Saul was not King so
absolutely and so immediately from God, that it excluded all Election of the
People, but was afterward chosen by Lot by all the People at Mizpeh. And all
the People shouted, and said God save the King, 1 Samuel 10. 17, 24. and
afterward, Behold the King whom ye have chosen, Chap. 12. 23.

Did not all the Elders of Israel Capitulate and Covenant with David before the
Lord in Hebron, and then, and not till then, anointed him King over Israel? 1 Chronicles. 11, 13. All the Men of War came with a perfect Heart to Hebron, to make
David King over all Israel; and all the rest also of Israel were of one Heart
to make David King, chap. 12. 38.

Did not all the People of Judah take Azariah (who was Sixteen years old) and
made him King instead of his Father Amaziah? 2 King. 14. 21.

Did not Jeroboam and all Israel come to Sechem to make Rehoboam King, etc. as
before? 2 King. 12. 16.

Have not all Nations the same undeniable Right to Capitulate and set Kings
over them, and bind them by their own Laws and Terms, and by Solemn Oaths?

It is clear, that the Jews in their Sanhedrim Melec, and other parts of their
Talmud with the Writers thereon, that it was the Law and Custom of their
Kingdom, that their Kings (of the House of David especially) were to be judged
as well as to judge.

Have not all our English Kings, as well as their Subjects, had English bounds
by Laws? (quas vulgus eligerit.) Have not our Kings confessed and owned, that
we are not bound to serve them but according to our Laws? And our Allegiance is
not Absolute, but bounded and limited by Law. Nay, the old Oaths in Saxon, and
first in Norman times, did respect the Kingdom and its common good and profit,
to defend the Kingdom with the King. Sicut Conjurati fratres ad defendendum
regnum contra Alienigenas and contra injurias una oum Domino Rege, etc.

That which is said before concerning the Right of Government, is as justly and
as undeniably applicable to the Right of Legislation whereby to Govern; which
Power God uncontrolably has over all the World. And by the Law of Nature,
whereunto the whole Race of Mankind is subject, the lawful Power of making Laws
to command and govern whole Nations, Kingdoms, and Politic Societies of Men,
belongs so properly unto the same entire Societies, that for any Person, how
Mighty, and of what Degree or Kind soever on Earth, to exercise the same of
himself; and not either by express Commission immediately and personally
received from God, (unto which there can be no possibility of pretense but by
Impudence) or else by authority derived by consent, and suffrages of those
Nations and Kingdoms on whom they violently impose Laws, it is no better than
mere Tyranny. Just Laws therefore they are not, which public approbation by
their own consent has not made so. For what Princes or Potentates soever,
Govern they never so wisely, and with never so good intent and design, with
never so good success, yet nevertheless they transgress both divine and human
Laws if they have not the public Sanction and Stamp of the governed for their
right of Governing them.

The Will, Pleasure, and Commands of God, are the only perpetual and immutable
Rule of Justice, to which all Men, without exceptions, ought to submit and obey
absolutely. The Commands of Princes (though his Vicegerents) are to be obeyed
only on conditions, viz. so that they command nothing that is sinful, or
contrary to the Law of God, or Nature, or municipal Laws of the Country.
Princes that require such Obedience to their Commands, do, as much as in them
lies, make their Thrones equal to the Throne of the Almighty, who never has
given, nor never will, his glory to another, Isaiah 48. 1.

The command of Pharaoh, to slay the Hebrew children, Exodus 1. 21. was unjust,
and God blessed the Midwives that refused to obey it. So God blessed Daniel and
the rest that refused to fall down and worship Nebuchadnezar's prodigious Idol.
So Abdias refused to slay the Prophets, contrary to the command of Jezabel* but
on the contrary, hid them from her fury, and nourished them, 1 King. 18. 13. So
Matathias opposed and resisted Antiochus commanding Sacrifices to be offered to
Idols. So Christ, and after him the Apostles, preached the Gospel publicly and
privately, contrary to all commands of Cesars, chief Priests, and Scribes
alleging for their Justification, Acts 5. 22. Whose examples the holy Marters
followed.

The Authority of all Magistrates, be it never so great, is bounded and
circumscribed by God himself by Piety and Charity: and if they trangress those
Rules, the 5. of Acts 22. takes place: lest we be found in the company of those
mentioned, Mich. 6. 16. whom God cursed, for that they obeyed the wicked
commands of Kings.

CHAP. IV.
Examination of some different Opinions. Kings, though nominated by God* yet
had their Confirmation by the People on their own* terms; and have a just
right to choose or reject, to limit and bound them.
HAving thus demonstrated the absolute necessity and profitableness of (...)
the final end and efficient cause, and just right thereof* where* and in whom
vested; wherein I have not used cunningly devised Sophismes, or (...) to the
custom of some Priests and Jesuits) but plain demonstration of Truth according
to the Law of God, of Nature, and of Reason: neither (...) I singular in th^se
Positions, and Fundamental Basis, and right of all just Dominion, but have
followed herein Judicious Hooker, that English Oracle, and Padre Paolo that
Oracle of (...) and diverse others: And whoever will peruse the Collection of
the Authors (...) Goldastus, or the Avant-Proposdes Lettres and. Embassade de
Missire, Philipe Canays (...) de Fresne, wherein are the Names and Titles of
145 Tracts, wherein you (...) diverse good Authors of the judgment, backed with
sound Reasons for such (...) But because nothing can be so advisedly, so
carefully, so punctually (...) as to escape the contradictions of subtle
prevaricating and perverse wits I shall (...) the liberty to examine the
different Opinions of some others, and those not (...) but shall not clog this
Paper with many Names, it is enough to name (...) viz. It Is certain that Kings
have their Power from none but God: boldly said* (...) be justified by any Law
of God, of Nature, or of Reason, it is pure (...) Doctrine, and diametrically
opposite to those who affirm, That all (...) Laws of God and Nature, is
immediately in the Multitudes, as in its (...) confer the same on one or more,
by the same Laws of God and Nature: The (...) give, is, Obj. That by Natures
Law no Man can give that which he has (...) has just power of his own Life
and Death, or Members, therefore much less of (...) therefore the People cannot
establish Government, because they have (...) or Death, no not of their own,
and therefore cannot confer any such power (...) who gives Life, has that
Power, and they to whom he gives it. Sol. No more have Kings without some
lawful Power conferred on them so to do; which they cannot (...) have
immediately from God, and therefore must have it aliunde, viz. from and by
consent of others. Hence that Command, Thou shall not kill, Exodus 20. 13. wh^s^
sheds (...) by Man shall his blood be shed. At the hand of every beast will I
require it* (...) hand of man, at the hand of every man's brother will I
require the life of man; G^n. 9. (...) Thou shall not kill, is the general
Precept of God and Nature, and obliges (...) private Men. And whosoever shedeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; by (...) is, by the Magistrates,
whose Power is here established for sheding the Blood (...) Murderers: as the
Chaldee expresses it, saying, With Witnesses* by (...) of the Judges, shall
his Blood be shed; which was one of the Seven Commandments given to the Sons of
Noah, which is confirmed by the more particular Laws and Judgments established
by God himself, Numb. 25. 9. 34. The man slayer shall not die, until he stand
before the Congregation (not before the King) in judgment* ver. 13. And the
Congregation (not the King) shall deliver the slayer out of the hand of the
reve^ger of blood* and the Congregation (not the King) shall restore him to the
city of his refuge, etc. By which it manifestly appears, That the Avenger of
Blood, i. e. the Magistrate appointed for that purpose was to be governed by
the Congregation. Here not a word for the Kings in the case, but much for the
governed.

In sum, Though no particular Man, Kings, or others, have Power to destro^
^^^mselves and be guiltless* yet the (...) People, the Congregation of the
governed, by the (...) of God and Nature, have a just right to make Sanguinary
Laws (observing God's (...) to take away any of their own lives, if
transgressors: And Kings have no more* (...) just Right to take away the Life
of any Man, but what is deligated to them by public^ Con^^^^ of the governed,
expressed in their Laws: if otherwise, i^ they will violently (...) ^o take
away the life of any private Man, then resistance may by the Law of Nature be
made by force. Two striving together cannot both have just Right; but of
necessity, that if he that uses force, do it lawfully, the defense must be
unlawful: and where the force is unlawful, the defense must needs be lawful:
And vim vi repellere, is always to be understood of that force, which is
unjustly used. He that does violence to the life of a man, by man shall his
blood be shed, Genesis 9. 6. Lawful power of Life and Death, Kings cannot now
personally and immediately have from God, and therefore must have it from, and
by consent of the governed.

And what Powers Kings thus have, the same have all other Forms of Government:
Therefore it is easily granted, that Men having no such Power, cannot transfer
any such, and that they that do are but felones de se, and sin as much as they
that fall on the points of their own Swords; for that which is not permitted to
us to do against our selves, we cannot justly commit to others to do: so that
upon the whole matter it is the Law that has the power of Life and Death, to
which both Governors and Governed are alike subject. And they that live under
another Government, as most Heathens do, do not live, but languish, dwinder,
and pine away. When the People of Israel were governed by Judges about Four
hundred and fifty years together, there was no King then* yet the Laws against
Murder, etc. were put in execution then; and why is it not as lawful now, as
then, for any Form of Government (be it Aristocracy, Democracy, or any other
Form whatsoever) to execute the Laws (not contradicting the Laws of God and
Nature) made by common consent? And without all doubt, those Kings sit surest
on their Thrones, and serve God and their Subjects best, that so Reign, and so
Govern by consent of the People. So Jepthah by consent of the elders of Israel,
was made their head by covenant: and the Lord was chose witness between them,
Judge. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And so is God still Witness to this day between Kings
and their People when they Reciprocally Swear to conditions: so the elders of
the tribe of Judah anointed David King over the house of Judah, 2 Samuel 2. 4.
which showed their consent, power and interest, though set over them by God's
own appointment.

So Saul, whom God did choose, yet he sent him to all the People to have their
consent and approbation, which they unanimously testified and declared by their
general shooting, and crying God save the King, 1 Samuel 10. 24. And all the
people made Saul King before the Lord in Gilgal, chap. 11. 15. whereby it is
manifestly apparent that common consent has the approbation of God himself,
the Judge of all the Earth, and that therewith he is very well pleased. So when
the Elders of Israel came to Samuel to Ramah, 1 Samuel 8. 4, 6. when he was old
and not like to live long, and his Sons not walking in his ways, and
consequently not likely to Govern as they ought; they desired him to make them
a King to judge them like all the Nations. Which thing not only displeased
Samuel, but even God himself* for that they refused to be governed by God
himself, who had delivered them out of the hand of their Enemies on every side;
so that they dwelt safely under that Government that God had erected and
established: and though Samuel had told them, that the custom and manner of
those Kings of Nations (Heathens, and who lived without God in the World, whose
Government they were so fond* off) was, to take their sons and appoint them for
themselves, for their chariots, to be their horse*men, and to run before their
chariots: And would appoint them captains over thousands, and over fifties, and
will set them to ear their grounds, and to reap their harvest, to make
instruments of war, and of his chariots. And would take their daughters to be
confectioners, cooks, and bakers: and would take their fields, vineyards, and
olive-yards, even the best of them, and give them to their servants: And would
take their men servants, and their maid servants, and their goodliest young
men, and their asses, and put them to his work: and would take the tenth of
their sheep, etc. 1 Samuel 8. contrary to the Precepts God had prescribed for
Kings to Govern by, Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. A Government very ill
becoming and befitting God's own People and Inheritance. But no sooner had they
experimented their new fancied Governments, but they were as soon weary of it,
and then perceived and confessed, that their wickedness was great that they had
done in the sight of the Lord in asking a King* and besought Samuel to pray for
them, that they might not dye, for that they added to all their sins the great
evil to ask a King, 1 Samuel 12. Of such esteem and prevalency is Public
Consent, with God himself, that he waved his own Omnipotent Prerogative, to
gratify a rebellious and ungrateful Nation, in granting them their desire* A
Document to all Kings to hearken unto the public desires of their People: And
also to consider, that it was a Crime and a Wickedness in those days to set up
Kingly Government.

Since the Days of the Prophets (which were until John, Luke 16. 16.) It is
manifest that God has devolved the Right of choosing Kings on the People. 1. By
his own Precept, Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 15, 16, 17. with Instructions whom they shall,
and whom they shall not choose, viz. one from among the brethren shall thou set
King over thee: thou may not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy
brother* 2. By the constant practice of the jews under the Prophets, and since.
And not without this moral reason, That one from among themselves being by
their consent and suffrages set King over them, that what Authority soever they
grant unto Kings, they may acknowledge to have had it from the People; and
therefore obliged more readily to employ all their times, studies, strengths,
and endeavors for the good of them, who set them over themselves to take the
burden of the Government upon their Shoulders: and therefore they consent to
pay them all Honor, allow them great Privileges and Prerogatives, and give
them Munificent Tributes and Maintenance for the Support of them and the
Governm nt; and swearing Allegiance unto their Kings, and the Kings swearing
unto the People, to keep Faith with them in the due performance and execution
of the Laws already made, and to be made.

The reason formerly set down does warrant this, viz. No Man has or can have
any lawful Power to Govern Kingdoms and States, but he must have it either
immediately from God himself (which no Man now can possibly pretend unto) or by
consent of the Pa^t^^s.

The Elders of Israel being the representative (1 Samuel 10. 19.) of the whole
Kingdom, (for by that name are generally meant Centurions, Captains, Judges,
Princes of all the Tribes ^f Israel, etc.) came to Samuel in Ramah, desiring a
King to (...) in and out before (...) like the Nations; at whose instance
Samuel did anoint Saul to be their King: neverless, Samuel (that Saul might
know that he was chosen by the People) called all the Pe^^^ together in Mizpeh,
by their Tribes, and by their Thousands, where (as if the farmer Election and
Anointing had been insignificant) they cast lots, which ^ell upon the Tribe of
Benjamin, and Saul the Son of Kish was taken, and all the People shouted, and
said, God save the King, 1 Samuel 10. 17, etc. All which was done at the Peoples
instance^ And lest the Election of the King should be attributed wholly to the
chance of Lots, all the People, by the advice of Samuel (some few grumbling
Dissenters excepted, having said, Shall Saul reign over us? 1 Samuel 11. 13.)
went to Gilgal and renewed the Kingdom there, and made Saul King before the
Lord in Gilgal, ver. 14. 15. Which manifests, that though Saul was chosen by
God himself, and also by Lot, yet was constituted, confirmed, and approved by
the suffrages of the People. God indeed (before ever there was a King in
Israel) knowing that they would reject him, and foolishly desire a King like
all the Nations round about them, prescribed Rules and Laws whereby they ought
to Govern, Deuteronomy. 17.

So David: Samuel (Saul being rejected by God from Reigning over Israel) by
God's command anointed David at ^ethl^m, whom God had chosen King over Israel.
Did David therefore Reign, though so chosen by God himself, and anointed by his
own command? No, sure! he was so far from it, that he avoided the presence of
Saul, hiding himself from him, and arming himself with the Sword of Goliath, and
armed Men, against the evil designs which Saul had against him, and fled from
him, wandering up and down, and became as it were an exiled and Out*lawed
Person, and was not King till Saul was dead, nor then neither, until all the
People of Judah first chose him King of Judah by their suffrages: And seven
years after all the Tribes of Israel, and all the Elders of Israel came ^o
Hebron, and made a Covenant with him before the Lord: and then they anointed
David King over Israel, 1 Samuel 16. 13. 1 Chronicles. 11. 3. 2 Samuel 5. 3. Besides, if
Samuel's first anointing of David King, had formerly made him King, then either
Saul was thereby deposed, or else there were two Kings of Israel at one time
(which is mon^^ous to conceive; for, according to their Doctrine, Kings have no
Royal Power from the People:) but it is manifest David was not King, for that
after his being so anointed, he often called Saul, the Lord's anointed; and
that by the Inspiration of God's Spirit. Moreover, he neither challenged, nor
executed any Royal Authority till he was crowned King by all Israel at Hebron,
but was persecuted and hunted as a Partridge on the Mountains, and that as a
Rebel to Saul (of which he acquitted himself, when he had the Life of Saul in
his power, and yet would not take it) which he justly might have done had he
been really King* and it had been a crime in him, being King, not to have
executed his Royal Authority, in doing Justice and Judgment, by cutting off
Saul a murther^r, who killed the Priests of the Lord; especially seeing Saul,
according to such doctrine, must be but a private murther^r, and David the only
lawful King. Whereby it is apparent, that not Samu^^*s Oil, but the consent and
suffrages of the People, that made both Saul and David Kings. Whereby it is
apparent, that though God appointed David to be their King, yet not so
Absolute, but that he should be under and subject to agreements with his
People* and make a Covenant with them on terms, to which he should be obliged
to perform with them, as they with him: and this before the Lord; by which
Covenant he was obliged to keep within the Boundaries which God and the People
had set. So David was twice anointed. 1. By the Prophets by God's command in
token of his Election. 2. By the instance and suffrages of the People in
Confirmation of his being constituted King by them, 2 Samuel 4. 11. and 5. 13. So
it is true, that by God Kings Reign, yet so as not without the Peoples Consent,
Approbation, and Covenants first had, that he may Reign over them for their
good. Besides Kings receive not their Kingship immediately from God, nor the
Sword, because the People were first girt with the Sword. Moreover will any
Christian say that the Kings of Nations (who lived without God in the World)
did Rule and Reign by Gods immediate appointment? I trow not.

The like is observable in Constituting Solomon King, who, though David 's Son,
and God chose him to sit upon his Fathers Throne, and to be a Father unto him
as he had promised David, 2. Sam. 7. 13, 14, 15. And though David had promised
his People that Solomon should succeed him, and sit upon his Throne, yet this
was not sufficient; and therefore David assembled all the Princes of Israel,
and the princes of the Tribes, and the captains of the companies, and captains
over the thousands, and the stewards over all the substance of the possession
of the King, and of his Sons, with the officers, and with the mighty men, and
with all the valiant men which bear any public office, and as it were the
representative of all Israel; and consequently had a share in the Government,
and in the Election, unto Jerusalem. This great congregation made Solomon the
Son of David King the second time, and anointed him unto the Lord to be chief
Governor, and Zadock to be Priest, 1 Chronicles. 28. 1. and 29. 22, 24.

Solomon being dead all Israel came to Sechem to make Rehoboam King, 1 Kings
12. 11. 2 Chronicles. 10. 1. Amaziah being slain, Uzziah his only Son was made King
by all the people, 2 Chronicles. 26. 1. To what tended that saying of Hushai unto
Absalom, nay, but whom the Lord and this people, and all the men of Israel
choose, his will I be, and with him will I abide, 2 Samuel 16. 18. but to
demonstrate that that King is rightly and lawfully constituted King whom the
People choose? And all the men of Sechem gathered together, and all the house of
Millo went and made Abimelech King, Judge. 9. 6. And he that was over the house,
and he that was over the city, the elders also, and bringers up of the
children, sent to Jehu, saying, We are thy servants, and will do all that thou
shall bid us, we will not make any King: do thou that which is good in thine
eyes, 2 Kings 10. 5. And all these men of war, that could keep rank, came with
a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David King over all Israel: and all the rest
also of Israel were of one heart to make David King, 1 Chronicles. 12. 28. Several
times the making of a King is ascribed and given to the People, viz. Wherefore
is it recorded, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. when thou shall say, I will set a King over me,
if it were not their Right and Power to make a King? and without such Power, no
Law could be imposed on them. Not to make a stranger King, and yet to choose one
of their Brethren, is certainly a warrant from Heaven to choose, beyond
contradiction. All the congregation made Jeroboam King over Israel, 1 Kings 12.
20. So they have power both to make and not to make a King over themselves; and
also to limit and bound their Kings to what conditions they please, or else to
fall from them, as the people of Israel did from Rehoboam, and choose another, 1
Kings 12. 19. Nor was Saul himself formerly King as soon as Samuel had anointed
him, nor yet because another Spirit was infused in him, no, not until all
Israel chose him King at Mizpeh. Jehoash and Jehoiada made a covenant between
the Lord, and the king, and the people, that they should be the Lord's people;
and between the king also and the people, 2 Chronicles. 23. 16.

By all which it appears, that though Kings were so constituted and influenced
by the Prophets from God himself, yet not so absolutely as to exclude common
consent, but that they were to be under Covenants and Agreements with the
People, whereunto they were equally, strictly, and reciprocally obliged to
performance: and that their just right of admitting Governors over them was
reserved unto them upon their own Terms and Conditions; even then, and
certainly much more now: seeing God does not now immediately interpose in any
such choice, the same right by the Law of God and Nature is so undeniably in
them, that it cannot be denied unto them. And all Kings Governing otherwise
than by the consent of the People, are but Intruders, Usurpers, and Tyrants.
And whoever violates those Covenants, in a high degree, are undoubtedly Rebels
to the Law; and whoever commits any unjust force against the Law, the defense
must necessarily be just and warrantable before God and Man.

Consult profane Histories, and it will be found the Power and Liberty of the
People is asserted and defended, and practiced accordingly, even among the
Heathens: And in all well-governed Kingdoms, the Children did not succeed their
Parents, until the People by their Magistrates had de novo invested them by the
Diamond and Scepter. In Christian Kingdoms which to this day Reign by
succession, the same is evident. The Kings of France, Spain, etc. are all
Inaugurated and Crowned by the Peers, Patritians, and Magistrates
(representatives of the Kingdom) no otherwise than the Emperors of Germany are
by the Princes Electors thereof, and the Kings of Poland by the Vayvodes or
Palatines. Neither is their Kingly Honor owned in the free Cities till so
Crowned, Constituted, and Confirmed; neither was the time of their Reign
computed but from the day of their Inauguration; which manifestly appears in
the Kingdom of France, and other Kingdoms, where the States often preferred a
Kinsman before a Son, a younger Son before an elder: which Kingdom, by the
Authority of the People, was translated from one to another without regard had
to the right Heir.

As to the Franks, before they came into France, it is manifest that their petty
Kings were subject to the Ordines Populi, as Julius Caesar testifies, lib. 5.
c. 8. f. 57. De bello Gallico. Whilst Ambiorix and Catileucus Eburonum rex, (i
e. King of a People inhabiting between the Rhyne and the Mose, the People of
Liege or Luke beyond Brabant) in a certain Oration rehearsing the words, says,
That such is his Empire, that the People have not less right against and over
him, than he over them. Ut non minus in se juris multitudo, quam ipse in
multitudinem. The same also appears by the words of Vercingentorix Arvernorum
Rex (a People of France by the River of Loyer) defending his Cause in a public
Assembly, as it is recorded by the same, Caesar lib. 7. c. 4.

Afterward the Franks and the Gauls became one, under the name of
Franco-Galli; who, although they chose their Kings first out of the Family of
Merovey, then out of the Posterity of Charles the Great, and after out of the
Successors of Hugh Capet, yet from the beginning they so constituted their
Monarchy, that their Kings did not Reign only by the right of Succession, but
were also chosen Consensu Ordinum Regni.

And such was the Oath of the Franco*Galli Kings, according to Aymoinus, lib.
5. c. 23. which Charles the Bald spoke, Quia sicut isti venerabiles Episcopi,
etc.

Because you venerable Bishops have proclaimed me chosen to the Government for
your safety and profit, know ye that I will preserve the Honor and Worship of
God, and of holy Church, and of every one of you according to your Ranks and
Qualities, and according to my Knowledge and Power will honor and keep safe;
And to every one, both Clergy and Laiety, preserve and maintain Law and
Justice, that Kingly Honor and Obedience of the People may be preserved and
defended, as your Forefathers did to my Predecessors, justly and faithfully.

And so the Sons of Pepin, Charles the Great, anno 751. Lewis the Third, and
Carloman, anno 768. Bastards to Lewis, and no regard had to the Institution of
Lewis's Will, who had named Ends for Regent, and so were both Crowned Kings.
Lewis the Idle, Son or Brother to Carloman, takes upon him to be King, but not
being acknowledged by the States, as they were ready to dispossess him, he
died. Charles the Second, called the Gross, Emperor of Germany, confirmed in
the Regency by the States, following the example of the Bastards, is Crowned
King, and afterward was degraded from the Empire and the Crown. Charles the
Simple, after Twenty two years, was forced to renounce his Crown, though a
lawful King. Lewis the Fourth, his Son, carried into England by his Mother,
etc. And Ralf or Raoul, Duke of Burgundy* called to the Crown, though an
Usurper; after whose death the said Lewis the Fourth, called Doutremer, is
restored to the Crown. Lewis the Pious, though the Son of Charles the Great,
yet was elected, anno 812. in whose Will (extant in Naucler) Charles the Great
besought the People that they would choose one of his Nephews, which they
pleased, by the public Council of the Kingdom, and commanded his Uncles, by
the public decree of his People, to acquiesce. Hence Carolus Calvus, Charles
the Bald, a Nephew by Lodovicus Pius and Juditha, confesses himself chosen
King. Aymoinus Historiogr. 85.

From the Merovingiens (being Twenty two Kings) of the Merovees, to the
Garlovingiens by Charles Martel, Major of the Palace in name, but King in
effect, of which Race there have been Thirteen Kings, then the Crown came to
the Capets. In the choice of Pharamond, first King of France, after many
Harangues pro and con about all kinds of Government, at last they resolved on
Kingly Government, as the best sort of Government, then the Lords, Peers,
Magistrates, and chief Captains, as Representatives of all the People, chose
him King, and was Inaugurated or Crowned by setting him on a great Shield or
Target and carrying him into the Field; where also both the common Soldiers in
Arms and the People were assembled, who confirmed and approved the choice by
their Acclamations about the Year 419 or 420. And then they did Swear to the
King to keep Faith and Allegiance, to Honor, Serve, Maintain, and Defend him
against his Enemies, but on condition that he be Religious, Valiant, Just,
Merciful, Impartial, Diligent, understanding in management of Affairs, skilful
to resist their Enemies, to punish Evil doers, and to preserve the Good, and to
defend the Christian Faith likewise. This Mutual and Reciprocal Swearing and
Covenanting, equally obligatory on both sides, was the Custom from Pharamond to
Pepin: and afterward in the Race of the Carliens, descended of Pepin, the
French of their own free will choosing their Kings, the Crown in those Days not
descending Hereditarily. If at any time the Crown came to the Son, or Brother
did succeed the Father or Brother, it was not by any right of Inheritance or
Succession (to which they could not possibly have any right or pretense by any
Law of God or Nature, that wholly depending on consent of Parties to be
governed) but only through the affection which the French did bear to the
memory of the good King deceased.

After Pharamond they chose one Daniel a Monk, whom they surnamed Chilperick,
whom for his Debauchery they banished, and chose one Gillon or Gilles, a Roman
Senator or Master of the Roman Militia, for their King; who Governing as ill as
Chilperick, they sent and entreated Sigibert, King of Metz, to take the Crown
of France, and Crowned him.

Les Burguignons and les Austrasiens having made Peace with the other French,
chose Clotaire for their King in all the Three Kingdoms, and afterward chose
Childerick King of Austrasie; who delaying to come, they chose one Odon. After
the decease of Dagobert, his Son Clovis being young, they chose him: after his
decease they chose his Son Clotaire King; who dying Four years after, they
chose Thyerre his Brother, whom they afterward deposed, and chose Childerick
in his room. Histories are full of the like examples in other Kingdoms.

Afterward in the Posterity of Pepin, who having been Ten years Master of the
Palace to Childerick, a weak Prince, set up for himself, and by his Power and
Artifices, by the help of Pope Zachary his ghostly Father, dispensing with the
Oath of Allegiance, which the People had Sworn to Childerick, the last King of
the Race of Clovis, whom the People caused to be put into a Monastery. And
after the death of Pepin, the French by common consent chose Charles and
Carloman his Son for their King, with a charge that they did equally part and
share the Kingdom between them.

At the end of the Race of Pepin, Lewis King of the Francs being dead, they
being willing to transfer the Kingdom to Charles King of Austrasie; or,
according to others, Duke of Lorrain: but whilst he deferred his coming, Hugh
Capit took possession of the Crown. It is also evident in Story that one Kings
Son has been rejected, and another inthroned. For the French not being pleased
with the Infancy and Weakness of Charles, Son of Loys de Begue, about Nine or
Ten years old, chose for their King Odon, Son of Robert Saxon, which was killed
by the Normans in Battle; and that Two years after, they being displeased with
the Government of Odon* they discharged him of the Government, and set up
Charles again, who misbehaving himself was imprisoned; and they put in his
place Raoul King of Bourgongue: by which examples it is apparent the Kings of
France were Elective, not Hereditary. But after they obtained Hereditary
Possession of the Crown, the Custom of the Election by the People (which had
lasted long) being laid aside, the Kings were Crowned and Chosen at Rhemes by
the Peers of France, in the name of the Church, of the Nobles, and of the
People. Bernard de Gerard. Sieur Mezeray. Jean de Serres.

In sum, All Kings were at first Elected and Chosen by the People: and though
now many succeed by Inheritance, as by much the better way, yet that way also
is Constituted, Approved, and Confirmed by the People or their Representatives.
No Kings drop out of the Clouds, neither do they start out of the Earth; though
the People choose the Root, yet do they not so absolutely choose the Stems or
Branch, but if they do degenerate, they in Prudence and Justice may make a
better choice. The Heirs of such Roots are not so much born Kings as adopted
so, not so much Kings as fair Candidates for Crowns. Presumptive Kings only
where Succession is not settled by Laws made by public consent.

CHAP. V.
Some Opinions of Hobs's Machiavil, Pulpits, and others, examined. The Peoples
Power asserted in choosing, refusing, and rejecting Kings, according as they did
or did not observe Laws and Covenants. Covenants equally oblige. If broken by
one, the other is thereby set free. Vsages and Customs of other Nations. Sad
examples of Perjury.
IT is true that Machiavil, Hobs, the Pulpits, and others do inculcate, That
Kingly Power is so founded by God immediately, that there remains nothing
human in it, and that public consent is nothing at all requisite, and that
Kings are responsible to God only: which is the ground of all Tyrannical,
Arbitrary, and Unbounden Sway. For if Kingdoms by common consent can neither
set Bounds nor Conditions, nor judge of them when limited to Kings, but must
consider them as things merely Divine (the greatest tie in the World) above all
human Laws, Consent and Comprehension, then all Nations are equally Slaves, and
born to no more Liberty than the Subjects of Rex Asinerum, whose Wooden Shoes
and Canvas Breeches proclaim what a blessedness it is to be born under a mere
divine Prerogative.

But the surest Basis of all right Government is common consent; and the most
just and honorable End is common good, and not such a divine Prerogative as
none can understand, nor possible for any Mortal to prove.

God is not more the Author of Regal then of Democratical, Aristocratical, or
any other Form of Government or Power; nor more the Author of Supreme, than of
Subordinate Powers: Subordinate Magistrates have their Power as much from God
as Kings have, and as responsible to God only as they, and yet their Powers are
not beyond human reprimand and determination. Laws are not now to be understood
to be any special Ordinances immediately sent from Heaven, as of old by the
Ministry of Angels or Prophets: they now can be nothing else amongst Christians
but the Pactions and Agreements of such and such Politic Societies and Power;
nay, the very Essence of Power is so Originally inherent in the People (that
they cannot justly, without injury to God and Natures Law, divest themselves
wholly of it,) and it is nothing else but the Might and Virtue, which such or
such a Society of Men contains in it self; and when by such and such Laws of
Common consent and Agreement it is derived and deligated into such and such
Hands; God confirms that Law, and so Man is the free, natural, and voluntary
Author; the Law is the Instrument, and God is the Establisher of both. All
other Powers, not derived from common consent of the People, are but
Sophisticate and Adulterate in all Princes, and they that embrace such Powers,
embrace a Cloud instead of a Juno. The Fountain or Efficient Cause of Power is
most certainly in the Governed: And from hence the inferrence is just, That
Kings, though singulis majores, yet are universis minores; for if the People be
the true efficient cause of Power (as undeniably they are) its a Rule both in
Nature and Politics quicquid efficit tale est magis tale. Hence it is manifest,
that as the Governed are the efficient cause, so they, and their happy estate
and condition, are the final end of all Governments. And it were strange, nay
monstrous, that in conferring and deligating their own Power and Virtue to this
or that Man, or to these or those Persons, to command in Chief for Order and
Regulation sake only, should aim at any thing but at their own Good and
Happiness, both in the first and last place. Or to express it in another
Dialect, the Public Power and Authority of all Societies, is above every
individual contained in the same Societies, of what quality soever, Kings or
not Kings.

All Imperial and Royal Dignities are instituted by the Commonwealth to
preserve it self, and not erected to preserve Royal Dignity otherwise or
farther than it conduces to the Honor, Safety, and Happiness of the
Commonwealth. And that which is the End, is far more honorable and valuable,
both in Nature and Polity, than that which is the Means, which leads us to the
transcendent Law of Salus Populi; to which all Imperial and Prerogative Laws
are justly subservient: and were they not conducing to those ends, they were
neither necessary nor yet expedient.

Plea of Force or Conquest cannot acquit Princes of that which is due to the
People, who are the Authors and Ends of all just Power, for mere force ought
not to alter Laws of Nature, or frustrate the tenor of Laws of God or Man; and
if it could, yet there were more reason why the People might justify force to
re-gain their undeniable Rights and Franchises, than the Imperialists might to
subvert the same. It being unnatural that any Nation, by it is own inherent and
natural Virtue and Prowess, should merely establish Tyranny, and countenance
Slavery, and to make that which is most Excellent subservient to that which is
most Vile, or to advance one from among themselves to the Throne, that they
themselves might be brought under Axes and Harrows. Even Heathen Princes, that
have been Absolute, have acknowledged themselves Subject and Servants to the
Public, and born for that service, as being well satisfied, Populi rem esse
non suam. No Captain General has such unlimited, and uncircumscribed Power,
but that, if he should turn his Cannon upon his Soldiers, they were ipso facto
absolved of all Oaths of Allegiance, and bound by a higher Duty, both to God
and Nature, to preserve themselves by Resistance and Defense: such tacit and
implicit Trusts and Reservations are in all Public Governments, though of the
most Absolute Nature; and there must be these necessary conditions, viz. that
the Governed be Safe, Free, and Happy.

There is in all Laws a literal and an equitable sense. No Government did ever
give Power to their Kings for their woe, but for their happiness. If by the
Letter of the Law Kings mis-improve their Power against the equity thereof,
then they give liberty to the commanded to refuse Obedience to the Letter: for
the Law taking abstract from its Original Reason, End, and Equity becomes a
Shadow without a Substance, a Body without a Soul; which distinction, if not
allowed, the very end of all Laws (which is to minister impartial Justice
indifferently to every Man, and to give bounds and limits to the exorbitant
wills of Princes and Governors) will be disappointed, Salus Populi being the
Suprema Lex. Execution of Laws according to their Equity and Reason is the
Spirit; that gives life to Authority, the Letter kills. Equity is so naturally
implied in all Laws, that are not merely imperial from the Analogy, that all
bodies Politic hold with the natural; whence all Government and Governors
borrow a proportionable respect, except we deem Obedience binds Men to cut
their own Throats or their Neighbors. For Kingdoms must not be without means
to preserve themselves, which always is entrusted in some certain hand with a
Power to provide in an orderly way for the good and safety of the whole.

All the Privileges, Prerogatives, and Authorities conferred on Kings by any
People, are but as so many Trusts reposed in them to improve for the good and
glory of King and Kingdom, and not to abuse or use at their own pleasure, what
ever the exegency of the Kingdom should be. If that were so, all our Laws would
signify little; and therefore if Kings Govern not according to Equity, and the
Trusts reposed in them, that Nation, or it is Representatives, may demand an
Account and Redress: For Kingdoms by no Law of God or Nature are to be left
without a power and means to preserve themselves.

The Charter of Nature entitles all Subjects of all Countries to safety and
freedom by its Supreme Law. If Kings receive all Royalty from the People, and
for behoof of the People, and that by a special Trust of safety and liberty
expressly by the People limited, and by their own Concessions and Oaths ratified
(as for certain they do) then Emperors and Kings cannot be said to have so
unlimited and high a property in our Lives, Liberties, and Possessions; or in
any things else appertaining to their Crowns, as the Governed have in their
Dignity, or in themselves. The safety of Kingdoms is to be valued above any
right of any Monarch, as the end is to be preferred above the means. It is not
just, nor possible for any Nation so to enslave it self, to resign its own
Interest to the will of one or many Lords, as that they may destroy or abuse it
without Injury, and yet to have no right to preserve, or right it self: For
since all natural Power is in those that obey, they which contract to obey to
their own Ruin or Slavery, or having so contracted, they which esteem such
contract before their own preservation, are fellonious to themselves, and
rebels to Nature.

Livy lib. 1. ab. V. C. describing the beginning of the Roman Kingdom, Records,
that among those Hundred named Kings after the Death of Romulus, who succeeded
and governed that People successively, That if they did not please the People,
it was ordained by common consent, that the People should choose their Kings,
and that the Authority of the Senate should confirm them.

It Is manifest that Kings being set up by the People on conditions, which if
they perform not, the People being Convocated according to their distinct
Orders and Ranks, by the same Authority they had to set up Kings on Terms and
Conditions, by the very selfsame Authority they may curb and dethrone them;
which they made good against proud Tarquin their last King. Moreover Seneca
observes out o^ Cicero de Republica, that Appeals do lie from the King to the
People, (as in the case of Horatius that killed his Sister, who by Delegates,
appointed by Tullus Hostilius the King, was condemned, yet was afterward
absolved and quitted by the People.) Dionysius testifies the same, that
Romulus, when he consulted about settling the Kingdom, did declare, That the
King was the keeper of the Laws, yet in the mean time, that the Power of
creating Magistrates, making Laws, War, and Peace, was still left with the
People, as inherent in them. Populi suffragia sunto: Magistratus creanto: leges
sciscunto: pacem bellumque jubento. Calv. 985. Which farther appears by the
History of Collatinus, who first was Consul with Brutus, that the People (by
which Title is understood the Plebeian State, which now is called the Third
State, as among the Romans, viz. Patritian, Equestrian and Plebeian) had the
same Power against the Consuls, although they had the Supreme Power when there
were no Dictators. To this Livy lib. 2. ab. V. C. gives Testimony. Timens the
Consul fearing to be called to Account at the end of his Consulship, quitted
it: But Collatinus the Consul, though accused of no crime, yet being of the
Name and Family of the Tarquins, was suspected and removed by the People. Hence
it is easily gathered, that the People would much more use their Authority on
any Consul, if criminally accused, although by the Law they were not to be
questioned till their time was ended. It Is true, after the Decemvirate was
constituted (which was Anno 302.) no Appeal did lie from them to any other
Magistrates: But when they alternately Governed, it was lawful to Appeal from
the Judgment or Sentence of one to the Judgment and Sentence of another. So far
unpleasing was an unlimitted Power to the Romans, that at last the Decemvirate
was forced to quit their Power. It Is true, no Appeal lay from the Dictatorship,
but that Power was never erected but in very perilous times, and extreme
oppression necessitating, and lasted but a very little while. Call. 1050.
Semestre scilicet. And (which is yet more admirable) if at any time an Appeal
to the People, from the Supreme Power of the Dictator was brought, he of his
own accord consented: As may appear by the Transactions between L. Papyrius
Dictator and 2. Fabias, Anno ab. V. C. 429.

Though Julius Caesar violently obtained his Power over the Romans, yet would
seem and did pretend to have had all his Dignities and Gifts, according to the
ancient custom from the People; for which Usurpation he was afterward slain.
So Augustus, no Heir of the Empire, but adopted by him to be his Successor,
pretended that he was of right chosen by the consent of the People: Neither did
Tiberius by any other way succeed him: and after him Caligula was chosen by the
consent both of the Senate and the People; but Claudius first obtained the
Empire and the Military Power by Bribes, but did not govern without the consent
of the People. Nero having poisoned him, succeeded him, and reigning
tyrannically, the Senate resumed their Power (which had a long time slept)
condemned him as an Enemy to the Roman State: By all which it appears, that
Caesar's becoming Tyrants, may lawfully be resisted and censured; and tho their
Empire seem very large by the Lex Regia (made for Augustus and confirmed for
Vespasian,) yet it was circumscribed and limited; neither was it approved of
without exception, as long as there were places for Law and Equity. So the
Athenians, when they changed their Democracy into an Aristocracy, they set over
themselves, first Thirty, then Ten, who abusing their Poower, they soon removed
and punished them by the same Power by which they created them.

The Lacedaemonian Kings having been wont to be chosen out of the Family of the
Heraclides, which Lysander endeavored to have altered but could not, Plutarch:
their Kings being chosen on Terms and Conditions, the People appointed certain
called Ephori, to be a Bridle to them. These Ephori sometimes deposed, banished
and beheaded, till at last Cleomenes the Tyrant traitorously slew them all.
Zenophon records of the Lacedaemonians, that both the Kings and Ephori were
wont every Month mutually to swear to each other; these in the Name of the
People, and the King in his own Name, That he would govern according to the
Prescript of their Laws, and that they would keep the Citizens true to him, if
he kept his Oath. This was the Right, Power, and Practice of the Heathen, of
which more hereafter.

Let us now consider the State of the Israelites, the most perfect Government
in the World, if they would have been contented with it; for they had God for
their only Monarch, not only because he was Lord of the whole World, but
because he chose them to be his peculiar People, in that he gave them Laws by
Moses, and gave them the promised Land by Jeshua, who governed them by Judges;
at which time the Government was Monarchical, tho by the Ministry of the
Judges; which if Kings would now imitate and govern accordingly, there would be
no need of these Disputes, as it is now most necessary.

Tho God appointed David King, yet he was to be chosen by the People, 2 Samuel 5.
1. So Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 29. 22. and tho the Crown of right did belong to
David's Family, yet the People did choose which of the Family best pleased
them, and that by a double Obligation, as may appear by the History of Joas, 2
King. 11. 4. and 17. For the King and the People by a Solemn Oath, did promise
to God, that they would keep his Laws both Ecclesiastical and Civil. Afterward
there was another Oath between King and People, at which time there was a Right
in the People (i. e. Ordinibus Populi) to call him to Account, whom they had
ordained King if he performed not his Duty.

Which is made out by Examples. If it were lawful for David to defend himself
from the Tyranny of Saul, and for the City of Libnah (the City of the Priests
and inferior Magistrates only) to withdraw themselves from the Obedience of
Joram (the sixth Successor from David) because he had forsaken the Lord God of
his Fathers; which City belonging to the Priests, it is very apparent that
their case was far different from that of the Idumaeans which happened at the
same time, under the same King; for it is not likely that the Edomites withdrew
themselves from the Subjection of the Israelites, that they might serve God
whom they never served, but hated him and the Israelites, but desired to free
themselves from their Subjection.

But the Priests and Inhabitants of Libnah, not being able to serve two
Masters, God and the Tyrant, threw of his Yoke, that they might the better
serve God; will it not naturally follow, that the States of a Kingdom may
lawfully defend and free themselves from Tyranny? The Fact also of the Rulers
over Hundreds, with the Captains, by the Advice of Joida against Athalia, and
of the Israelites against Amasia, 2 King. 14. 19. whom they slew, which was not
seditiously but lawfully done, for it is no where said that Amasius was slain
by his Servants, (as it happened to his Father Joas, and to Ammon the Son of
Manasses) but by the common consent of Jerusalem, and that not treacherously
(the end of most Tyrants) but by public force, and public Authority; not
tumultuously, but after he had fled to the City Lachish, from whence his Body
was carried to the Sepulchers of his Fathers; which is confirmed, for that
after his death, we do not read of any Inquisition made how he came to be
slain, or that any Body was punished or called in question for it, either by
the People, or his Children (as there was for Ammon and Joas, 2 King. 12. 10.
and 14. 5. and 21. 24.) but on the contrary, in respect to Kingly Dignity and
his Fathers Family, they chose Azariah his Son King. Hence we may conclude,
that the chief States or Ordines of Jerusalem had a rightful Power to choose a
King out of the Family of David, whom they pleased, and when elected, him
either to eject or punish according as he did or did not observe the Laws.

So the Danes dethroned and imprisoned Christiern their Tyrant King till he
dyed, and chose his Uncle in his room.

It is not unknown how Gustavus Erickson freed himself and his Subjects from
their Subjection to the Danes, and also how they kept their King Captive for
Male-Government, which they translated to his Brother.

To say nothing of England and Scotland, Poland keeps its ancient Right of
choosing their Kings on certain Terms and Conditions, with this Salvo, That it
may be lawful to be quit of their Oath if the King keep not his, as it may
appear by their Election of Henry, Brother to the King of France, which agrees
with Bishop Valentine, Procurator for the King in that Election, who in his
Oration to the People, publicly made and printed, commended them for that they
did limit and circumscribe the Power of the King by wise Laws.

So the Venetians, whose General Council has Authority of choosing their Duke,
reserving Power to themselves of deposing or punishing them if he endeavor or
do any thing Tyrannically.

So the Venetians constitute their Duke, not as an Idol, but as a Prince and
Monarch, from whom, without any danger of Tyranny, all the Lawful Privileges
and Prerogatives of Kings do issue and flow. Now as their General Council have
all the Authority of choosing him (observing their ancient Rites and Customs
used therein,) so the same Council retain to themselves the Right of deposing,
or punishing him if he govern Tyrannically; without which Power all the rest
would signify little.

So consider that Wise and Prudent Nation of Spain. In the Fourth Council of
Toledo, cap. 74. held 1144. according to Sigibert's Computation, and consisted
both of Ecclesiastics, and of the States of that Kingdom, it is thus recorded,
viz. Nullus apud nos sub presumptione regnum arripiat, etc. Let no Man presume
to take upon him the Government of this Kingdom, no Man move or stir up
Sedition among the Citizens, no Man design the Destruction of the King, but
when the King dies, let the Princes and Peers of the Nation, with the Priests,
constitute the Successor in Common Council; that whilst Unity and Concord are
preserved amongst us, no Discord may arise: But if this Admonition do not quiet
our Minds, and move our Hearts to endeavor the common Good, then hear our
Sentence: Whoever of us, or of all the People of this Nation, shall by any
Conjuration or Study, violate the Sacrament of his Faith or Allegiance, (which
for the State of his Country and of the Gothic Nation, or for the Preservation
of the Welfare of the King he had promised or plighted) or shall compass the
Kings death, or divest him of his Power, or by any Tyrannical Presumption,
shall attempt or usurp the Crown, Let him be Anathema, Accursed in the sight of
God the Father and his Angels, and from the Catholic Church, which by Perjury
he has profaned, and from all the Company of Christians, with all his
Associates in iniquity be for ever debarred; because it must needs be, that the
same Punishment is due to all the Accomplices and Companions in the same Crimes;
which we again the second time repeat, Quod iterum secundo replicamus dicentes
quicunque a modo, etc. And therefore may it please all here present, by your
consent, to confirm this Sentence the third time, by the Universal Clergy or
People it is pronounced, that whoever shall presume against this our definitive
Sentence, Let him be Anathema Maranatha, i. e. Accursed at the coming of the
Lord, and that he and his Fellows may have their Portion with Judas Iscariot.
Amen. Wherefore we admonish the whole Church of God and the People, that no Man
presume to condemn this dreadful Sentence, but that they keep their plighted
Faith toward our glorious King Sisenand, etc. And we humbly require thee our
present King, and all future Princes, that you be moderate and mild toward
your Subjects, and that you govern them with Justice and Piety, and that none
of you in your own Person give Judgment on any Captive or guilty Person, but
that it be done by the public Judgment of the Judges appointed thereunto,
using both Severity and Indulgence with great Wisdom and Moderation; that
whilst a pious Temper is used by us all, the King may rejoice in his People,
and the People in their King, and God both in King and People. And concerning
our future Kings we pronounce this Sentence, That if any of them contrary to
the Reverence of our Laws, by Regal Haughtiness and proud Domination shall
treat us Tyrannically, Anathema sit, Let him be accursed from Christ, and be
separate from God, for that he presumed to bring the Kingdom into trouble and
distress.

De Smithilane vero, etc. As for King Smithilane, who being guilty and sensible
of his own heinous Enormities and Wickednesses, deprived himself of the Kingdom
and laid down his Royal Ensigns, and we decreed with the consent of the Nation,
that neither he, nor his Wife, nor his Children for his Tyrannical Government,
should never be joined to our Society, neither would we at any time promote
them to Honor or Dignities. This is a singular and excellent Example, to which
we may add a another Decree of the sixth Synod, Toledo, cap. 3. In which, after
the Statute of banishing the Jews, it is said, That in vain they did ordain
good Laws, except they did also provide that they should be kept. Therefore
afterward if the King, having the Reins of Government, do violate the
Observation of his Faith promised, Let him be Anathema Maranatha in the sight
of God, and made Fuel of Eternal Fire, and whoever else, Priest or Christian
shall comply with him in so doing. By which it is plain what Power the States
of that Kingdom have over their Kings if they violate their Oath, when by the
Feudary Right (which comprehends the Kingdom) a Vassal or Slave owes no Service
to his Master, if excommunicated, but is free from his Oath of Fidelity, lib.
2. Feud. tit. 28.. 1. v. de Jure Magstr. p. 67, 68, 69.

Take here also the ancient Form, whereby the Kingdom of Arragon did oblige
their King, not only at his Inauguration, but iterated it also in their
Triennial Conventions, in which the King was present, that he might receive his
Power from them, and they theirs from him; where after many Ceremonies
performed and past, between that which is called the Justice of Arragon (which
represents the Person of the Supreme Power, and to which the King by Oath is
obliged to submit) and the King himself either to be created, or already
created. Formula qua Hispaniarum reges inaugurantur. Nos qui volemos tanto
comme vos, y podemos Mas que vos Elegimos Rey: con est as y est as conditiones
intra vos y nos, un que manda mas que vos, i. e. We that are as great as you,
and can do more than you, choose you King on these and these Conditions between
you and us, and one can command more than you: By which you may see that that
wise and Prudent People, do honor their Kings as they ought, Ibid 71, 72.

If we consult the Empire of Germany, what Power the Princes Electors have
there, it is manifest to all the World both in choosing the Emperor and
deposing of him, as it happened to Adolphus Anno 1296. and to Wencesla^s Anno
1400. Emperors; for there was such an Oath, whereby their Caesar's were bound
and obliged, as is described in a Treatise entitled Speculum Saxonicum, lib.
3. 54. For when the King is chosen he is obliged by Oath to perform Faith and
Homage to the Empire, and promise that with all his might he will promote the
Administration of Justice, and punish all Injuries, and by all endeavors
maintain the Rights of the Empire.

Now, that they that had power to choose them Kings, had power also to curb and
punish them, is manifest by undisputable reason and matter of Fact. Ejus est
tollere, cujus est ponere. Childerick was expulsed, Anno 361. and Gilo
substituted, who was not of the Family of the Meroves, and Chilperick Anno 578.
and Theodorick Anno 667. Moreover Anno 890. the States neglecting Charles the
Son of Lewis Balbus, chose Euden alias Oden, to be King. We read also that Hugh
Capet cheated Charles the Brother of L^thari^s whilst he neglected the
Government. In short, if the Kingdom of Fra^cegalli had no Power to choose,
then neither Pepin nor Capet had any right to the Crown, there being no want of
Heir Males of Merovey when Pepin usurped the Crown; nor were wanting Sons of
Charles the Great when Capet challenged the Crown. How great the Power of the
States (ordines regni) of that Kingdom in the first Constitution thereof was,
and how long it continued so, and how the Face of that Government is now
altered and degenerated into Tyranny, Histories are full; which no Prescription
of what date soever, by any Law of God, Man, Nature or Reason can justify, it
being contrary to the Solemn Oaths they take at their Inauguration, which
justifies all the rest. It was but about Anno 1380. that the States of that
Kingdom cancelled and made void the Will of Charles the Fifth, surnamed the
Wise: and but Anno 1467. when Lewis the XI. (endeavoring to turn that Monarchy
into Tyranny) was deservedly impeached for Male-Government; and therefore the
States being assembled at Turin they appointed Thirty Curators (alias 20. 16.)
by whom he should be governed; but he soon got quit of them, because (under
pretense of the Idol Claronensis, which he worshipped with great Superstition)
he slighted and ridiculed all his Oaths and Promises, but with so much
unsuccessfulness, horror, and unquietness even to his death, that he sadly
experienced which was the better and more happy Condition to be loved or feared
of his Subjects.

Take the sad Example following of Perjury: Charles VII. whilst yet the Dauphin
most wickedly caused John the last Duke of Burgundy, of the Stock of the
Gallick Kings to be miserably slain in his presence, contrary to all Faith,
Peace, and Friendship plighted unto him a little before, near Melo dunum, i. e.
Melun. This Perjury was afterward expiated by the death of many Millions of
Souls, almost to the subversion of the Kingdom; and Charles himself the King
reduced to that misery, that he was disinherited of his Father, and saw his
Capital Enemy Inaugurated by the Kingdom at Paris, and from thence was rather
Rex Biturigum, i. e. King of a People of Aquitane, inhabiting Bourge, then King
of France: at last was forced to redeem his Peace on shameful and dishonorable
Terms, as may appear in a treatise Apud Atrabates with the People of the
Province of Artois; in which (the King himself treated with Duke Phillip, Son
of the said murdered John his Subject) this Clause was expressed, to which the
King himself did assent, and by his Diploma approved of it. Which Transaction
if violated by him, all his Subjects, Feudataries, etc. both present and to
come, shall neither obey nor serve him, but shall rather be subject to obey the
Duke of Burgundy and his Successors. Such was the issue of the violation of
Royal Faith plighted. And may not all Kingdoms expect the just performance of
their Oaths and Stipulations made by their Kings at their Inaugurations, who
are thereby made the Keepers and Protectors of their Laws? And what better
Issue can any Kings expect that violate their Oaths and Trusts, though by
Wiles, and Shams, and Royal Influences only on Judges and other Officers of
their Kingdoms, through whose Hands the management of Laws do pass Judges,
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Constables, Privy-Counsellors, Juries? etc.

In sum, The chief Impery is so in Kings and other Supreme Magistrates, that
if they transgress the Laws and turn Tyrants, and will not be governed by just
Laws, unto which they have Sworn, it is the just right of Inferior Magistrates,
and Ordines regni to hinder their Tyranny, and reduce the Government to its
Pristine State and Condition. And in so doing they are so far from being
seditious or rebellious, as that they do but their Duty to God and their
Country, as by the above-recited examples appears. The truth of which appears
by many reasons. 1. By the Law of Nature (on which depends the preservation of
all human Societies) of which there can be no doubt. In all Pacts and Contracts
mutually made and consented unto, the same Parties by whom the Obligation was
made, have the same Power to dissolve the same as often as just Reason shall
require. So they that have Power to create Kings, have Power also to curb and
censure them. So if the Essential Conditions of the Contract, for which the
Contract was made, be manifestly violated and broken, the Contract (as between
Rahab and the Spies) is absolutely void. Let those that hold Kings accountable
to God only, show if they can, any Nation so foolish and unwise, that willingly
and wittingly, without force or fear, ever submitted so absolutely to any King
or Government, that they did not expressly or tacitly provide for their own
safety and good, by observance of their own good Laws. It a Conqueror oblige
the conquered by Oaths, then according to the Civil Law, that those that are
extorted by force and unjust fear ought not to be accounted Lawful. I confess
the Pulpits Preach a contrary Doctrine; but it is not possible that irreligious
or unnatural Conditions, got by force, unjust fear, fraud, or wicked practices,
should be binding or esteemed as Lawful, it being a general Rule of right and
just founded on the common Principles of Nature, so firm and jure, that nothing
that is manifestly adverse and repugnant to the Laws of Nature, can be held for
right and just amongst Men. This is generally to be understood of Pacts
manifestly unjust or irreligious, which no Man can justly require, nor any Man
justly submit unto, though required. Such was the reproachful condition
required of them of Gabesh Gilead, by Nahash the Ammonite, that he might thrust
out all their right eyes, 1 Samuel 11. 2. Such and worse was the condition
required by Antiochus (the cruel Tyrant) of the Citizens of Jerusalem, viz.
that they should abjure the true religion, 1 Macc. 1. 51. In such cases where
the conditions of Temporal estate are only heard, and Religion not concerned,
it is better to have respect to their Oath than to their Lives: But when
Religion is concerned, Oaths must be very strictly observed.

Though all God's Covenants and Promises are Yea and Amen, yet are they all
tacitly or expressly conditional; so that if they keep not Covenant with God,
God will not keep Covenant nor Promise with them. So, though God did solemnly
swear unto the children of Israel, that he would bring them into that very good
land that flows with milk and h^^y, yet suffered he none of them to enter but
Caleb (who was of another spirit;) and Joshua; doubtless ye shall not come
into the land, concerning which I swear to make you dwell therein, Numb. 14.
30. and ye shall know my breach of promise, or altering of my Purpose, verse
34. I the Lord have said, I will surely do it unto all this evil congregation
that are gathered together against me, verse 35. and that justly, because they
first broke with him, Neh^m. 9. 16, 17, 18. there being always some tacit or
explicit condition expressed or implied in all such Promises as well as
Threatenings: Therefore as to one and the other God has given us this general
Rule, not only with particular Persons, but with Nations, Jer. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10.
At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, or concerning a Kingdom, to
pluck up, and to pull down, and to destory it, if that Nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil I thought to
do unto them: So when ever I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom, to build and to plant it, if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not
my voice, then will I repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them,
i. e. will not do it. Whereupon St. Jerome says, Non ergo quod pollicetur Deus
statim futurum est, sed in eos sua promissa implet qui custodiunt manda^a
illius. Covenants and Promises on Conditions are equally obliging: whoever
fails, the other is free. It is the same amongst Men that are in mutual
Stipulation and Covenant, whoever first breaks Covenant, is a Rebel to the Law,
and the other is ^r^e.

For which cause God blamed and punished Zedekiah (the last King of the Family
of David) for that contrary to his Oath he fell from the King of the Chaldeans.
As I live, says the Lord, surely in the place where the King dwells that
made him king; whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with
him, in the midst of Babylon, he shall die, Ezekiel. 17. 16. ver. per 110. And
Zedekiah, not only by his Oath, but by the express Command of God, he and his
were to be subject to the King of Chaldaea; which circumstances made Zedekiah
guilty of that Defection, and of Perjury. I like not that Subjects should on
every breach of Oath withdraw their Obedience, and depart from their Oath;
neither do I approve of that Proverb, Fragenti fidem, fides frangatur cidem:
but on the contrary, do deem it unlawful to break Faith justly plighted; but I
do deny that Subjects do violate their Faith against Tyrants, if they keeping
within their own Bounds and Province, do use their utmost to make Tyrants keep
their Conditions agreed on, and hinder them from breaking of them: For the Rule
is general, That Contracts and Covenants (either plainly expressed, or tacitly
to be understood) are broken and dissolved by him who violates them, and not by
him who was obliged only on Conditions, and thereby becomes free of the
Obligations not by his own Acts, but by him who first broke the Conditions.
Therefore Supreme Magistrates, becoming Tyrants by their own Perjury, and
breaking their Covenants, do free their Subjects from their Oaths and
Allegiance, and not the People, when they deservedly make use of their Power to
curb them, and to right themselves. That Kings should not be obliged by Law, is
contrary to all the received Opinions and Sentences taken from the right of
Nature, by the most profound and judicious Lawyers. Eos qui leges ferunt,
legibus quoqu^ ^btem^^rare: and quod quisque juris in alium statuerit, ipse ut
codem jure utatur: and nihil ^^perio magis conducere, quam ex legibus vivatur:
dignam denique vocem esse, Principem leg^^us ^^se ^ubd^tum pr^fitert?

Itaque quod alibi a Juris consultis dici videtur. Principem esse supra leges,
aut Principem a Legibus s^lutum, non nisi de legibus civilibus, deque
particulari privatorum jure est intelligendum: verbi gratia de testamentis, de
detractione Trebellianae, aut Falcidianae: non autem de Jure public^, and ad
statum, ut dici solet, pertinent^: mulcoque minus de jure naturali, aut divino:
cui quum on^^es and singuli homines subjiciantur quatenus homines nati sunt:
omnino efficitur, aut Reges homines non esse, aut illos hoc jure teneri.

CHAP. VI.
Principles and Tenets of some Divines, and others, destructives to all human
Societies. Kings made and chosen by the People, and to them accountable. His
greatest Authority is in his Courts, and not in his Personal Commands. The
People choose their Kings, and oblige them by Laws, which they swear to keep.
MAchiavel I know, and so does the Ecclesiastical Politician instruct Princes,
how they may treat Subjects, not as Brethren, but as ^^asts, as the basest
Beasts of drudgery, teaching them by subtilty, and by the strength of the
Militia, to support their own will, and to make mere Spunges of the public
Coffers; with which his Writings are full fraught. Leviathan, or Malmsbury Hobs
's Positions or Sentiments, smell rank of the same Leaven, or more abominable,
if more abominable can be, viz. That the Power of Kings cannot without his
consent be transferred to another; that he cannot forfeit it; that he cannot be
accused by any of his Subjects of injury; that he cannot be censured by them;
that he is Judge of Doctrines; that he is sole Legislator, and Supreme Judge of
Controversies, chap. 20. p. 102. Some Pulpits also preach much after the same
rate, viz. That it is the Sacred Privilege of Kings only, for their offenses
to be exempt from all human Jurisdiction: That Kings, as such, are above the
Law; That though they transgress, yet they are not in the least liable to the
censure of any Man: no Tribunal under Heaven has Power to take Cognizance of
them, or call them into Question, p. 5. That they have Power to Dispense with
the Laws at their Pleasure, p. 7. That for Subjects to question the Actions
(though offensive) or Authority of their Princes, is inconsistent with the
nature of the Kingly Office, and diametrically opposite to the Liberty of the
Subject, p. 7, 8. The Scepter being put into their hands by God Almighty alone,
and with that, the Power he gives them is so great, as that he makes them
capable of being accountable to none but God himself, according to Prove. 8. 16.
By me Kings reign, p. 16. That Kings may alter Religion at their pleasure,
according to the old unalterable Maxim, qualis Rex, talis lex, p. 25. William
Clifford 's Sermon preached at Wakefield, October. 30. 1681. Salmasius (more
excusably, as being a stranger to our Laws) dances after the same Pipe, That
Kings have none to judge them but God only; That they are above Laws; That by
no Law written or unwritten, natural or divine, can they be made guilty of any
ill by their Subjects, or toward them. In which Positions there is a woundy
deal of wicked Policy, but not one Iota of true Religion and Piety, highly
injurious to the Liberty and Happiness of the whole Race of Mankind (for whose
Happiness and Solace the whole World was created) as if a few Princes and
Potentates were born like Leviathan, only to take their Pastimes in this World,
to be clothed in Purple and Scarlet, to lie upon Beds of Ivory, and to stretch
themselves upon Couches, to chant to the sound of the Vial, and drink Wine in
Bowls, and to nourish their Hearts as in a day of Slaughter, and all others to
be governed with Whips and Kicks, Thorns and Briers, and yet we must not so
much as mutter or peep against them, or say, What do thou? Not considering
that God that made them in the Womb, made these, and made them all equal, and
that they were created out of one and the self-same Clay, and redeemed by one
and the same precious Blood, without respect of Persons; and that it was the
People that differenced them by making them Kings, and Queens, and Princes,
sitting upon Thrones, riding in Chariots, and on Horses, they and their
Servants, and not they the People. What is this but to be brutish in Knowledge?

That Machiavel and Hobs should belch out such Principles, I do not much
wonder, but that any Protestant Pulpits should Preach out such Doctrines, I
stand amazed. To such the 21st. verse of the 10th. chapter of Jeremiah may
justly be applied, the Pastors are become brutish.

In populo regendo Rex habet superiorem, legem per quam factus est Rex and
Curiam suam, viz. Comites and Bar^nes: Comites dicuntur quasi socii regis, and
qui habet socium habet Magistrum, and ideo si Rex fuerit sine fraeno, i. e.
Sine lege debet ei fraenum ponere. Bracton. lib. 2. c. 16. ^^^ta. l. 1. c. 17.
In Government Kings have Superiors, viz. the Laws by which they are made Kings,
and his Court of Parliament: therefore if Kings are without a Bridle, i. e.
without the Laws, they ought to have Bridles put upon them. Every single Person
has his remedy by Law in the Courts of Judicature against Kings; how much more
just is it, reasonable and necessary, that if Kings injure all, all should have
their remedy to Bridle him. It Is great simplicity to provide against petty
Injuries of Kings against private Persons, and yet to be lawless against common
and public injuries, whereby they may destroy all without Law, that by Law
could not injure any single Person. As for the Title of Supreme Head and
Governor, as it is meant of single Persons, not of Courts, or of the Collective
body in Parliament: so it is meant in Curia, not in Camera, in his Courts, that
his Majesty is Supreme Head and Governor over all Persons, and in all Causes,
and not in his private Capacity: And most truly and most properly, it is only
in his high Court of Parliament wherein and wherewith his Majesty has
absolutely the Supreme Power; and consequently is absolutely Supreme Head and
Governor, from whence their is no Appeal. And without doubt the Parliament may
take an account of what is done by his Majesty in his Inferior Courts, and
therefore much more of what is done by him without the Authority of any Court.
What more usual than for Parliaments to call to an account all other Courts of
Justice, and all Officers and Ministers under his Majesty, even for such things
as they shall do against the Law, though by his Majesty's express command? And
what is this but to take an account of the discharge of his Majesty's Trust?
The Law exempts his Majesty from account in no other sense than it exempts him
from fault, because he is to do public Affairs of the Kingdom by his Officers
and Ministers of State, and not by himself, and they are to give an account of
that which the Kings does by them. In which respect Sir William Thorp, Chief
Justice in Edward the Third's time, was charged for breaking the Kings Oath as
much as in him lay. The King's Authority is above his Person, and his Personal
Commands ought not to control those that proceed from his Authority, which
resideth in his Courts, and his Laws, and in his Person, acting by the one and
according to the other.

We are really such admirers and so fond of Kingship, and so willing to excuse
all his Peccadilloes, that we retain it as a Maxim, That the King can do no
wrong, i. e. he can do nothing but by Law, which can do no wrong: And if he do
against the Law, his personal Acts, Commands, or Writings oblige no more than
if they were a Child's, and the Books call him an Infant in Law (though his
public capacity be not in nonage, as the Parliament declared in Edward VI.)
which is not to exempt him from Errors, or excuse his Crimes, but to show that
he ought to be guided by his Council, and that his own personal Grants or
Commands cannot hurt any more than an Infant, which may be reclaimed, or
recalled; not to say corrected by the Courts of Justice or the Council of the
Kingdom.

King James of happy memory in his Speech to the Parliament at White Hall,
March 21. 1009. told them, That a King Governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves
to be a King and degenerates into a Tyrant as soon as he leaves off to Rule
according to his Laws. In which case the King's Conscience may speak unto him,
as the poor Widow said to Philip of Macedon, either Govern according to your
Law, Aut ne Rex ^is. Therefore all Kings that aren^t Tyrants or Perjured will
be glad to bound themselves within the limits of their Laws, and they that
persuade them the contrary are Vipers and Pests both against them and the
Commonwealth. Ibid. 531. I will ever prefer the Weal of the whole Commonwealth
in making of good Laws and Constitutions to any particular or private ends of
mine, thinking ever the Wealth and Weal of the Commonwealth to be my greatest
Weal and Worldly Felicity, p. 493. The Arguments brought for Kings being
appointed by God only, and their Power derived from him only, are grounded on
some few wrested and misunderstood places of Scripture, viz. By me Kings reign,
and Princes decree justice. By me Princes rule and Nobles, even all the Judges
of the earth, Prove. 8. 15, 16. which are applicable to all other Governments as
well as Regal, and make only for the institution of the Kingly Office, and
nothing at all for the designation or application of the Person to the Office,
or Gods immediate nomination or appointment of Kings, but for approbation of
Kingly Government, among other Governments by Judges, or others; whereby it
manifestly appears, that Kingly Authority has no more of Divine Right than any
other form of Government. And it is manifest to all the World, That God did not
of his own free choice primarily erect and establish Regal Government (but that
of the Judges) as the best Form of Government, but waved his own Prerogative
and Wisdom, and to gratify the public desire of a froward, ungrateful and
rebellious People, who were used accordingly by such their choice, and felt the
smart thereof accordingly as Samuel foretold: so indulgent was God himself to
National desires; which should be a Document to Kings to comply very readily
with the desires of their People in Government of their Kingdom, as God here
did. Besides, I must repeat again, That no Man can have Lawful Authority to be
King over any Nation, but he must have it either immediately from God Almighty
(unto which there can be no possibility of pretense) or from the public
consent of the Nation, therefore Kings must have their just Authority from the
People. Let Scripture it self be judge, all Israel made Omri (captain of the
host) King over Israel, not Zimri; and his Son Achab rather than Tibni the Son
of Ginath, 1 Kings 16. 16, 21, 22. And the People made Solomon King, not
Adoniah, though he were the elder Brother, 1 Kings 1. God by the Peoples free
suffrages creates such a Man King, because by the Authoratative choice of the
People the person is made of a private Man and no King, a public Person and a
crowned King, 2 Samuel 16. 18. The men of Israel said to Gideon, Rule thou over
us, both thou and thy Son, and thy Sons Son also. And all the men of Sechem
made Abimelech King, Judge. 9. 6. So the elders of Giliad made Jepthah head over
them, Judge. 11. 8, 9, 10, 11. So all the people of Judah made Azariah King
instead of his father Amaziah, 2 Kings 14. So in the change of Government, when
Israel not pleased with their Government by Judges, whom God himself had
appointed over them, but would have a King like other Nations: Wherein God so
far waved his Prerogative, that he complied with their public desire, and
gratified them therein, though contrary to his own Infinite Wisdom. And Samuel
said unto all Israel, Behold I have hearkened unto your voice, and in all that
ye said unto me, and have made a King over you. And all the Congregation made
a Covenant with the King: Behold the Kings Son shall reign, 2 Chronicles* 23. 3. God
himself by Moses gave the People power to choose themselves a King; and withal,
directions and qualifications whom and how qualified they should choose: when
thou shall say, I will set a King over me like all the Nations round about me,
thou shall in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall
choose; (i. e. according to his Rules, and Prescriptions, and Dictates, viz.)
one from among thy Brethren shall thou set King over thee, thou may not set a
stranger over thee which is not thy Brother, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Consider also those
Kings whom God most immediately caused to be anointed Kings, and it will be
manifest that the People even in such choice had their share, their influence,
and their power also: as in Saul. And all the People went to Gilgal, and there
they made Saul King before the Lord in Gilgal, 1 Samuel 10. 15. And several
Writers are of opinion that Saul was not only anointed with Oil first
privately by Samuel, 1 Samuel 10. 12. but also at two other times before the
People; once at Mizpah, an another time at Gilgal. So David though he were
anointed of the Lord by Samuel, yet all the m^n of Israel came with a perfect
heart to Hebron and anointed David King over Israel, and made a Covenant with
him before the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 11. 2. and 12. 38.

In sum, Many Writers of several Persuations, from these examples conclude,
that the People under God make the King. Beside, the want of the public Stamp
of the People made Zimri (who had usurped that Title and Office) no King, and
yet made Omri King, 1 Kings 16. 16. And those whom the rulers of Jezreel at
Samaria, 2 Kings 10. refused to make a King were no Kings. This Power of the
People made Athaliah a Princess no Princess, by their translation of the Crown
to Joah, 2 Cron. 23.

There Is now no Voice, no immediate Oracle from Heaven, no Samuel, no Elisha,
no inspired Prophets to anoint David, not Eliab; Solomon, not Adoniah, no
particular persons, and therefore no persons can have a just Title to Crowns
but by choice and approbation public. God has only ratified the Kingly
Office, and described fit qualifications, viz. Men of truth, hating
covetousness, etc. Exodus 18. 21. Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. but does not now name or
appoint particular Persons, but has left it wholly and freely to the People to
choose for themselves, and make their own Conditions. It is farther observable,
that Saul (after Samuel from the Lord had anointed him) remained a private
Person, and no King, till the People had elected and made him a King. So David
though anointed by the same Divine Authority, yet remained formally a Subject
and not a King, till Israel made him King at Hebron: So Solomon though by God
designed and ordained to be King, yet never was King till the people made him
King* 1 Kings 1.

What greater demonstration can there possibly be than such Scriptural, both
Precepts and Examples as are here set down for justifying of the right of the
People in the choice of Kings, and not only in the free choice of this or that
Person to the Diadem, or to this or that Government, but also in the alteration
and granting of Succession, and in the change and alteration of the very Form
of Government? Moreover, by God's owning Kings to reign by him, Prove. 8. 16. is
no more than God's general owning and constituting all things else, viz. thine
is the greatness, and the power; and the glory, and the victory, and the
majesty; for all that is in Heaven and Earth, is thine; thine is the Kingdom, O
Lord, and thou art exalted above all, both riches and honor come of thee; and
thou reignest over all; and in thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand
it is to make great, and to give strength unto all, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12. This
general Right and Power of the Almighty does not abolish or impeach the Natural
Right of his People in choosing themselves a King on their own Terms, and Laws,
woeful experience having taught them, that to live by one Man's will, would be
the cause of all Men's miseries; (the truth whereof we see experienced to this
very day, both in the Eastern and Western Empires;) which constrained them to
devise Laws for the Regulation of every Man's just Right, that no Man might by
lawless Dominion oppress another, but that all should be governed by their own
consent, by Laws of their own making, respect always being had (Christianly
speaking) to the Laws of the Almighty. Cui plus licet quam par est, plus vult
quam licet.

A People may be without a King, but there can be no King without a People, and
therefore Kings not particularly and immediately named by God, must own their
Establishment and Inthronization to the People, and ought to be accountable in
some cases to them; for they that give Power are by just Reason accounted
greater and more honorable than they that receive it, according to that old
Maxim, Quicquid efficit tale est magis tale: and though Kings are to be
accounted singulis majores, yet are universis minores: For Kings are not
Patrons of their Kingly Power, but Administrators and deputed Executioners
thereof.

Now it necessarily follows, that by the same Reason Kings have their Authority
from the People; so to them they are of right to be accountable, for they choose
them, and covenant with them for their own good. If by God Kings do reign, by
God also the People have right, and liberties to be governed how they please;
for the immediate appointment of Kings, by God himself by his Prophets, being
now ceased, the application of the Powers of the governed to this or that
Person is left wholly to the common consent of themselves. Be the right of
Kings and of the People what it will, from God they both equally derive it.
Wherever the People create themselves a King, by the same right he is
accountable to them; and it participates as much of Divine right for the People
to curb and oppose oppressing wicked Kings as to make Kings, according to the
149 Psalm 8, 9. To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters
of iron. To execute upon them the judgment written: this honor have all his
Saints. Nay, God's own People (on whom he had set his Love) had his own
Command, that when he had brought them into the Land whither they were going to
possess, That they should smite them, and utterly destroy them, and show no
mercy unto them, Deuteronomy. 7. 1, 2. Kings are constituted by God and Man to go in
and out before them for Protection and Comfort, not for Violence and
Oppression; and it is by righteousness that the Throne is established; and
iniquity will be the ruin of any Nation: fury is not in him, Isaiah 27. 4. And
God himself has given no Power to Kings, Princes, or Potentates but what is
just and honest; and has tied them up, and bound them by Laws, viz. He shall
not multiply horses to himself, he shall not multiply wives to himself, that
his heart turn not away: neither shall be greatly multiply to himself silver
and gold. And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his kingdom, that
he shall write him a copy of this Law in a Book: And he shall read therein all
the days of his life: that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all
the words of this law, and these statutes, to do them: That his heart be not
lifted up above his Brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment
to the right hand or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in
his Kingdom, Deuteronomy. 17. 16, 20. If they so Reign, then by me Kings reign is well
applied; but if they walk contrary, then they are no more God's Vicegerents,
but the Devils. For God never gave encouragement to Princes to work wickedness,
or to oppress, or harrass Subjects, but punished them for not Governing
righteously.

The Premises considered will certainly yield this undeniable conclusion, That
(because God has given the governed Power and Instruction whom to set Kings
over them, viz. this Man, not that, one from among their Brethren: not a
stranger which is not their Brother,) therefore the People have a Power to
choose this or that Man for their King. The Reasons are clear; for that God's
Law does not empower an Ignis fatuus, a non-ens; nor can God's Law countenance
or abet an unlawful Power, or an unlawful Action, but interdict it.

Besides, there being now no immediate inspired Prophets, as Samuel, or Elisha,
to anoint David, not Eliab; Solomon, not Adoniah: nor any Man by Natures Law
born with a Regal Diadem on his Head, or Scepter in his Hand; It must
necessarily follow, That Kings must have their Power from the suffrages and
consent of the governed, if they will Govern Lawfully, and not be Usurpers.

And it was so from the first Institutions of public Government. For when the
World began to multiply, and reciprocal Injuries, Injustices, and Oppressions
did increase among them, the Light of Nature and common Sense did dictate unto
them, That there was no way to prevent and redress all evils of Oppression,
Injustice, etc. incident to the whole Race of Mankind, but to come to an
Agreement and Composition among themselves, by Constituting some kind of
public Government, and by submiting themselves thereunto; And that unto whom
they granted Power and Authority, by them the Peace, Tranquillity, and happy
Estate of all might be procured.

Men always knew, that when Force and Injury was done, they might by the Law of
Nature defend themselves: They likewise knew by the Instinct of Nature, that
howsoever Men might seek their own profit and happiness, yet if this were done
with Injury unto others, it was not to be suffered, but by all Men and all good
Means to be withstood. They knew also by the same Light, that no Man might in
Reason take upon him to determine his own Right; and therefore debates and
troubles would be endless, except they gave their common consent, all to be
ordered by some whom they should agree upon; without which consent there were
no Reason that one Man should take upon him to be Lord or Judge over another:
and therefore for manifestation of this their Right, and peaceable Contentment
on all sides, the Assent of them who were to be governed became absolutely
necessary. So Judicious Hooker, and all prudent Authors, writing of Government.

CHAP. VII.
Whole Kingdoms to be preferred before Kings. Deputators to be preferred before
Deputies. Kings are not immediately from God, but from the People, who may
limit and bind Royal Power as they please. The People give only their Politic
Power to Kings, reserving their Natural Power for selfpreservation and
happiness; which they cannot resign nor deligate without sin. Law acknowledges
no Supremacy nor Sovereignty but according to Law. Covenants have been made
with Kings both under the Law and since, and are equally binding both to King
and People. The People cannot absolutely and unaccountably resign their whole
Power to Kings without sin, manifestly thereby breaking Covenant first made
with God.
SEeing Kings are constituted and appointed by the People, and for the People
to preside over them, and manage their own Government, and to defend them by
going in and out before them to fight their Battles, and to see that Judgment
be impartially and indifferently administered, it naturally and undeniably
follows, that whole Kingdoms are to be preferred before the Kings thereof; as
the good of the whole is to be preferred before the good of any part.

Mr. John Turner in his Sermon, September 9. 1683. though he extends Passive
Obedience and Prerogative far beyond their just limits; yet ingeniously
confesses, That the Interest of Nations is to be preferred before the Interest
or Welfare of any one Man; and grounds it on the Prophecy of Caiphas, John 11.
45, 50. That it is expedient that one man should die for the People, and that
the whole Nation perish not; which he accounts a sure word of Prophecy, that
is, the Testimony of God himself, that a greater Interest of Mankind is to be
preferred before a lesser, p. 20, 21.

Such force there is in conferring Authorities, that they who receive
Authorities are necessarily to be esteemed inferior to those who give them.
Potiphar the Egyptian set Joseph over all his Family. Nebuchadnezar set Daniel
over all the Province of Babylon, Dan. 2. 48. Darius set One hundred and twenty
Presidents over his Kingdom, and yet did not divest themselves of the Dominion
of their own Power and Authority. So the People set Kings over them as chief
Ministers of their Government, without devesting themselves of the vertual
Power and Dominion thereof. Which title of Minister, good Kings refuse not to
acknowledge, but embrace: and for some Ages among the Roman Emperors, none,
unless manifest Tyrants (such as Nero, Domitian, Caligula) would be called
Lords. And therefore Holy Writ styles them Shepherds to feed them, Psalm 78.
79, 71, 72. Captains to defend them; and go in and out before them, Ministers
of God for their good, Romans 13. 4. Nursing-fathers to carry them in their
bosoms, as a Nursing-father bears the sucking Child, Numb. 11. 12. Isaiah 49.
23. A Kingdom or Commonwealth may be compared to a Ship, where the Master
chooses the Pilot, who is chosen to steer the Ship in its right course, that it
strike not on the Sands, nor against the Rocks; in which employment, as all the
rest, so the Master himself obeys and submits to the Pilot, who notwithstanding
is Servant to the Ship, and to the Masters. So Kings are in the place of
Governing, but the People in the place or right of Dominion. Besides, a
Commonwealth, when Christian, is the inheritance and anointed of the Lord,
Psalm 105. 15. made of the same Mould, redeemed with the same precious blood as
Kings are, Act. 20. 28. and whose deaths are precious in his sight, and the
destruction but of one of them is the violation of God's own Image, Genesis 9. 6.
And therefore the death and destruction of a Kingdom, considered as a Church of
an innumerable company of Men, is of more concern with the Almighty than the
death of a King. For Kings are not God's Inheritance, nor his Chosen, nor the
Sheep of his Pasture, nor the Redeemed of his Son, because Kings, but as they
are the created Images of God in common with all other Men their Subjects. And
all those high and mighty Titles, Prerogatives and Privileges by which they
sit on Thrones, are given unto them by Men, as Men chosen from among
themselves; and if upon just occasion dethroned, then they are but as one of
themselves again.

Moreover, If God gives Kings to be a ransom for his Church, as Pharaoh King of
Egypt, Isaiah 43. 3. and slay famous Kings, as Sihon King of the Amorites, and
Og King of Bashan, Psalm 136. 18, 19, 20. If he puts a two-edged sword into the
hands of his Saints to execute vengeance: to bind their Kings in chains, and
their Nobles with fetters of iron, to execute upon them the judgment written,
Deuteronomy. 7. 1, 2. This honor have all his Saints, Psalm 14. 7, 8, 9. If God plead
with Princes and Kings for having the spoil of the poor of his people in their
houses, and for beating his people to pieces, and grinding the faces of the
poor, Isaiah 3. 13, 14. If God make Babylon and her King a threshing floor, for
the violence done to the inhabitants of Sion: and plead the cause of Sion, and
take vengeance for her: and make Babylon a heap, a dewlling place for Dragons,
an astonishment and hissing without an inhabitant: and make them roar like
Lions, and yell like Lions whelps, Jer. 51. 36, 37, 38. Then Christian
Commonwealth, as his People, are more precious in the sight of the Lord than
Kings because they are Kings. Besides, Kings are but single Persons, and
Kingdoms and the Church consists of Millions: and certes the Lives, Welfare and
Happiness of Millions are to be preferred before one, though he should be worth
Ten thousand of them in respect of outward splendour and pomp: for there is no
respect of Persons with God, for all God's delight is in Saint-ship, not in
King-ship.

Besides, Nature prompts unto a necessity of Government, but not unto Kingly
Government: for that innumerable People may and do live without a King, but
there can be no King without a People. And the very Essence of Government and
Governors is preserved safe and entire in Aristocracy or Democracy in the
People, though there should be no Kings Besides, the People were a People
before there was any Government (Paternal and Domestic excepted,) and there is
a People where there is no King, but there can be no King without a People.
Take away the People, and Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant will be but a pitiful
Pedant. Take away the Basis of a Collossus (though that of the Sun at Rhodes)
and the whole Fabric and Superstructure must necessarily fall to the Ground.
If the People do but withdraw and re-call their own Powers to its proper
center, Tarquin will quickly quit Rome. Besides, How came they to be Kings?
Were they created of any ^iner dust? or were they redeemed by a more precious
Blood than any of the rest of the Race of Mankind? Dropped they out of the Skies?
Or sprung they out of the Earth like Mushromes in a night? If not so, nor so,
How came they by their Kingly Dignity? Even by the choice and gift of the
People, who make choice of one from among themselves to sit like a Pilot to
Steer the Government for the good of the governed; and therefore they
contribute all their Eyes, Ears, Hands, Feet, nay, their whole Bodies and
Purses, to exalt, enoble, and enable him the better to go in and out before
them, to judge Uprightly, to plead their Causes, and to minister Justice
indifferently. Do Kings misbehave themselves? then may also the People withdraw
their Eyes, Ears, Hands, Feet, Strength, Purses, and then Kings will be like
one of themselves again.

Seeing therefore Kings are made by the People, and for the good of the People,
and cannot subsist without the People, and the end is more to be preferred than
the means, Why should it seem strange to Christians, rational Men, that
Kingdoms are to be preferred before, and to be held Superior unto Kings? Kings
are given of God, as gifts, for the preservation, comfort, and good of his
People, his Chosen, his Inheritance, the work of his own Hands, and the
redeemed of his own Blood, to be Nursing-fathers to them, and therefore must be
of less esteem in the sight of God than those to whom, and for whose good and
happiness they are given, since the gift, as the gift is in worth much less
than Kingdoms, for whose sake Kings were given. Besides, who by office were
obliged to Fight the Kingdoms Battles, by going in and out before them, and to
Jeopard their lives, for the safety of the People must be inferior to the
People.

Moreover, The Royal Legislative Power is joint and coordinate with King and
People, and consequently the Power also, and so no necessity to fetch a Royal
Power from Heaven to be immediately infused in them, seeing the People have
such a Power in themselves. The People in all well*constituted Kingdoms, can
and do limit, and bind Royal Power by Law; and those who can limit, and take
away, can give Power: and it is ahsurd to conceive that the People can put
restraint upon Powers immediately derived from God. Though Kings command, in
some sense, the People by their executive Power of the Laws above them, yet the
People have the Original and Natural Power above them, because they make Kings:
and in God's intention Kings are given wholly and entirely for their good; and
if Kings do not so execute, they do, as much as in them lies, make void and
frustrate the whole design of their Government, instituted and established by
God and Man, and forfeit their right of Governing. The People give to Kings a
Politic Power for their own safety, and quiet living, and they keep their
Natural Power to themselves; of which they cannot divest themselves, and they
do not break their Covenant nor their Laws when they execute Natural Power for
their self*preservation. The People by their Original or Natural Power make
Kings after Kings, as when Saul died they made David at Hebron, after him
Solomon, after him Rehoboam, and so on. And therefore there is more Fountain
and Natural Power of Royalty in the People than in David, Saul, or any King in
the World: for it is not any where read that Saul, or any other King, made an
other absolute King. Those Tribunals that make Kings must necessarily be above
Kings: and though there be no Tribunals formally above Kings, yet there is
naturally and virtually a Power in the People, in those who have a joint
coordinate Power in the Legislative Power, and share in the executive part of
the Laws (as all Officers of Kingdoms have) to erect a Tribunal over them. It
is false and absurd to conceive that any People have or can lawfully resign
their whole Liberty into the Hands and Power of any Royal or other Government,
it being against the Law of God and Nature so to do. Obj. Nemo dat quod non
habet. For the People have not an absolute Power to destroy themselves, or to
authorize Violence, Oppression, Injustice, or other acts of Tyranny, and
therefore cannot resign it to any Government: no more have Kings, for neither
God nor the Law of Nature has given any such Power to Men. And God gives Kings
as a Blessing, (and happily as the best of Governments;) but if thereby the
state of Slavery must uncontrolably be intailed upon them, as it necessarily
must be, if they renounce their whole Liberty, it is a Curse rather than a
Blessing; but they can no more give it away than they can give away their
rational Nature, and deny themselves to be reasonable Creatures; for it is a
Power natural, to preserve themselves essentially, adhering to every created
Being.

Besides, they cannot resign their whole Power (as Priests would have them)
without manifest sin. God having made an express Covenant with all the People
of Israel, that they should be his peculiar People, and he would be their God;
the purport of which Covenant was, That all the People should take care, that
he should be purely worshipped throughout all the Land; which Power they cannot
resign to Kings unaccountably, and absolutely without manifest breach of
Covenant, and so sin in breaking Covevant with God, and thereby provoking his
wrath and indignation, would pull down Vengeance upon whole Kingdoms. Of which
more fully hereafter.

O! Sovereignty is not in the People, no more than a whole Kingdom can be one
Man, Sovereignty being the Abstract, and Sovereign being the Concrete. What
then? yet the Power of giving Sovereign Power to this or that Man, according to
Laws, is naturally and radically in the People.

Obj (...) May, 4 Car. 1628. the Commons having framed a Petition of Right to
be presented to his Majesty, and desiring the Concurrence of the Lords, they
made this addition, viz. We present this our humble Petition to your Majesty,
with the care not only of our own ^^berties, but with due regard to leave
entire that Sovereign Power wherewith your Majesty is trusted for the
Protection, Safety, and Happiness of the People. Which terms of Sovereign
Power were so distasteful and chagreen to the Commons, that they would by no
means admit of them: alleging for their justification, That they seemed to be
another distinct Power from the Power of the Law: They were never used in any
Parliamentary Petition, or Magna Charta, or in any Confirmation thereof. If
they should grant it, it would seem to imply a Sovereign Power above our known
and established Laws, which are well known to the Kingdom, but they know no
Sovereign Power. It was a new thing, and they would by no means have it
inserted into the Petition. And the Statute of Magna Charta did bind the King
and all his Sovereign Power. Upon which ground it was left out.

Besides, Titles of Supreme and Sovereign are verba Solemnia, words of course,
titular, and complemental, relating only to their Persons, but confers no
Power: what Sovereign Power Kings have, are given and limited by Laws of common
consent, and not absolute. What other Laws of Sovereignty there are, of right
belonging to them, nemo sit, is past all understanding. Absolute Sovereignty in
Kings has no warrant by any Law of God, or Nature; that belongs to God only,
who is Lord of all Kingdoms of the Earth: and therefore there is no Sovereign
Power wherewith Majesty is entrusted, either by God or Man, but only that which
is for the Protection, Safety, and Happiness of the People; which is the
Suprema Lex: and the cause is very reasonable, for that uncontrolable Authority
easily degenerates into Tyranny. And that Sovereign Power which is in all
Governments, is in the Legislative Power of that Government settled by Laws of
common consent. And King James in his Speech to the Parliament, March 1609.
stigmatizeth Power not bounded by Laws with the black Character of Tyranny;
yea, Tyranny accompanied with Perjury.

Obj. The People have not Power of life and death. What then? No more have
Kings, until empowered by Laws of common consent; yet the Power of life and
death is eminently and virtually in the People, collectively taken, though not
formally, yet they have Power over their own lives radically and virtually; for
that they may subject themselves to Magistracy, and to Laws made by common
consent, the violation of which may be capital and sanguinary. And Kings have
no other lawful Power over the lives of their Subjects, but by Laws made by
like common consent.

That under the Law, and since, there have been mutual and reciprocal Covenants
between King and People, is without all dispute, and beyond all contradiction,
2 Samuel 5. 3. 1 Chronicles. 11. 3. 2 Chronicles. 23. 2. 2 Kings 11. 17. And that they were
as equally and reciprocally binding is as true; else, Why should such Covenants
be made publicly before the People, if Kings did not in the Covenant tie and
oblige themselves to the People? And why so solemnly to be made before the Lord
in the House of God, if not intended to be kept? or might uncontrolably break
them at pleasure? Was God to be called upon, and to be a Witness to a figment,
nay to a cheat? Ab sit! no; all the Covenants mentioned in Holy Writ, whether
between God and Kings, or between Kings and People, are mutual. I will be your
God, and you shall be my Poople, Levit. 26. 12. The Covenant is so strictly
mutual, that if the People break the Covenant, God is freed from his part of
the Covenant, Zach. 11. 10. All Covenanters are under a Law before Men. So if
Kings break Covenant with their People, the People are freed of their
Obligation to them. If the Oath of God be broken, as the Covenant between
Abraham and Abimelech, Genesis 21. 22, 23. Jonathan and David, 1 Samuel 18. 3. So
the Spies profess to Rahab, in the Covenant that they made to her, Josh. 2. 20.
And if thou utter this our business, we will be quit of thine Oath, which thou
have made us to swear. The Obligation of Kings in their Oaths and Covenants to
the governed, flows from the peculiar Obligation National betwixt them and
the governed, and binds Kings as Kings; for that such Oaths and Covenants are
entered into, and taken in relation to Government only, and therefore are not
taken merely as Men (as some vainly suppose, but as Kings, or as they are to be
Kings over them, because it is the specific act of Kings, that they are to be
obliged unto, to Govern the People in righteousness and holiness with their
Royal Power, which is given them by the People for no other end: and they
undoubtedly sin before God, if they break their Oaths and Covenants made with
the Commonwealth: And to assert otherways, is to suppose Kings to be under no
Law of God, and so consequently make them either above God, or coequal with
him; which is no other than downright Blasphemy. Therefore it is undoubtedly
true, that Kings Covenanting with the People, to Govern according to the Laws
of God, and their own municiple Laws; and on that Condition receive Thrones,
Crowns, Tributes, etc. from them, and are obliged to the People for the just
performance of the same: Omnis promittens facit alteri, cui promissio facta est
jus in promittentem: Whoever makes a Promise to another, gives to that other
a right or jurisdiction to challenge the performance of the same Promise. But
if Rehoboam will make his little finger thicker than his Fathers loins, and
chastise Israel, not with whips only, but with Scorpions: And will send Adoram
to gather tribute without the common and free consent of Israel, Israel will
stone such Ministers to death, and will rebel, (as in the Text;) or fall away
(as in the Margin,) recesset, (says St. Jerome,) defecerunt, (say Junius and
Tremelius) from the house of David, and will make Jeroboam King over all
Israel, as they justly might, and without the just imputation of Rebellion. And
though Rehoboam did raise 180000 Men, intending by Force of Arms to bring the
Kingdom again to Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, yet God would countenance no such
act, and therefore forbade them by Shemaiah the man of God, 1 Kings 12. 19. 2 Chronicles. 11. 12. Which demonstrates, that if Kings keep not Covenants with their
People, they may withdraw their Tribute and Obedience, and choose another King,
or another Government, and be no Rebels. This is not to assert or justify,
that for every act of Male government, or a few acts of Tyranny or Oppression,
Kings may be dethroned, and divested of their Royal Power: but upon supposition
that the Violencies, Oppressions, and Tyrannies, are of such a Nature, as that
thereby the whole intention and ends of the Covenants and Agreements made with
the People for the Government of themselves, viz. the safety of the People, the
Laws of God, and of the Commonwealth, are thereby endangered to be frustrated;
and that on presumption of such usages and outrages the People would never have
conferred their Crowns upon them. David held Saul for his Prince, and
acknowledges him to be the Lord's anointed, so long as the People had not
recalled their grant of Royal Dignity, so that no single Person (though Six
hundred Men with him) may lawfully Assassinate any King. All Governments are
likened to the History of the Gordian Knot; which if not so hard tied, but that
the People may have some ease, some relaxation; they ordinarily are willing to
endure some reasonable bonds; but if excessive, they ever have, and I doubt
ever will, endeavor to free themselves, though by means indirect.

If the People, as God's Instruments, Crown Kings on Conditions, that he will
rule them according to God's Word, then are Kings made Kings by the People
conditionally, and are but adopted Fathers, Tutors, Politic Servants, or Royal
Watch men of the Commonwealth; and the Royal Honor, and Royal Tributes given
to them, are Rewards of their Labors and Kingly Hire, and so expressed by
Paul, Romans 13. 6. For this cause pay you Tribute also, (there is their Wages)
for they are God's Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Qui
non implet conditionem a se promissam, cadit beneficio.

The People setting of Kings over themselves, is an act warranted by God
himself, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Romans 13. 1, 2. Which act, though done without written
Conditions or Oaths (and only by a Vive le Roy, or God save the King,) yet even
such choice can never be understood or interpreted an Investiture of them with
an Absolute, but with a Conditional Power; for that such a Power is against the
Law of God and Nature, a preposterous and absurd Power to do good, and yet to
work wickedness impune. Besides, the Common Law of Mankind allows all Donors to
Interpret and Expound their own meaning, why they Crowned Kings over them, and
why they give such large Tributes, so great Privileges and Prerogatives; and
certainly they will never Interpret that they conferred Royal Power on them to
Oppress, Persecute, and Destroy themselves without control, and leave
themselves without a remedy.

The Covenant made by Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. that
whosoever would not seek the Lord God of their Fathers, should be put to death,
whether small or great, man or woman. Which did equally oblige the King, as
also the Princes, and People to performance: And therefore Asa, as in duty
bound, removed Maacha his Mother from being Queen, because she had made an Idol
in a grove; which Asa also cut down, stamped it, and burnt it at the brook
Kidron, verse 14.

Diodorus Siculus, lib. 17. says, that the Kings of Persia were under an Oath,
and that they might not change the Laws: and so were the Kings of Egypt and
Aethiopia. The Kings of Sparta, which Aristotle calls just Kings, renew their
Oaths every Month. Romulus so covenanted with the Senate and People. Carolus V.
Austriachus swears he shall not change the Laws without the consent of the
Electors, nor make new Laws, nor dispose of any thing of great concern
belonging to the Empire without the public consent.

1 Samuel 8. 11. This will be the manner of the King, who shall reign over you;
which place is brought to prove the absolute Power of Kings, and the
unlawfulness of Resistance. Which words being rightly interpreted, can have no
such meaning. It only declares what the Manner and Custom was, what they would
do, not what of right they might do. For God had long before in Deuteronomy
prescribed them what Laws they should Govern by: and in this place is only
described the Tyranny of Kings, what they would do, not what they might justly
do. And to aver that God has given Power to Kings to Tyrannize, Worry,
Oppress, and Destroy Subjects, is Blasphemy: for God has not given, nor can
give any Moral Power to do wickedly; which is License to sin against his own
Law, which is inconsistent with his Holiness; and therefore no such Power can
be from God. And all best Expositors declare the Law of Kings to be described
in Deuteronomy. 17. And in 1 Samuel 8. is described the usurpation and tyranny of Kings.
So it only demonstrates their wicked Usages or Customs, not a Law prescribed by
God. And it is obvious to common sense, that God by his Prophet in this place
was not instructing Kings in their Duty, but by foretelling the Israelites the
evil of Punishment that they should suffer under tyrannous Kings; thereby
terrifying them, if possible, from their wicked purpose of seeking a King, and
thereby reject not Samuel only, but God himself: and farther menacing and
declaring, That in the day when they should cry out, because of their King,
that the Lord would not hear them, verse 18. And therefore God did protest
against their unlawful course, yet nothing at all would prevail: nay, but we
will have a King over us, verse 19. If Samuel in this place did not dehort them
from Kingly Government, how could they be said to refuse to hear the Voice of
Samuel?

In sum, All God's Covenants are Yea and Amen, and so ought his Vicegerents
to be: And for Priests to Pulpit it, that if they do break their Covenants, yet
they are accountable to none but God; What is this less than like false
Prophets to create Subtilties, and coin Evasions, to rob Kingdoms of their
Laws, Liberties, and Religion, and to seduce and betray Kings to the pit of
Hell, even to Tophet itself? A very trick, to tempt Kings to break Covenants,
and Perjure themselves.

CHAP. VIII.
Judges-not less essentially Judges and the immediate Vicars of God than Kings:
What Powers and Prerogatives Kings have, they have them from the People. The
Peoples Prerogatives: They are to be governed by Laws of their own making; quas
vulgus eligerit.
JUdges are not less essentially Judges, and the immediate Vicars of God, than
Kings. They who judge in the room of God, and exercise the judgment of God, are
as essentially Judges and the Deputies of God, as Kings. Inferior Judges
appointed by King Jehosaphat, were commanded by him to take heed what they, did
for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. By which it
appears, that they were Deputies in the place of the Lord, and not the Kings
Deputies, in the formal and official acts of Judging, and so owned by the King
himself. If they were not, then Kings might command his Judges as his Servants
to give what Judgment they pleased, but Kings ought not to guide or limit the
Consciences of Inferior Judges, because the Judgment is not the Kings, but the
Lords; the reason is demonstrable; for that Kings have no Authority to command
any other to do that as King, for the doing whereof he has no Power from God
himself. Moses appointed Judges, but not as his Deputies, to judge and give
Sentence as subordinate to Moses; for the judgment, says he, is the Lords, not
mine, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. and their directions to guide them in judgment is from God
himself by Moses, viz. ye shall not respect persons in judgment, etc. Yet the
Judges may quodam sensu be termed Deputies of the Kings, because they have
their external call from them. If Kings are to be obeyed because they are
Powers from God, so are Inferior Magistrates also, for they also are Powers
ordained of God.

By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. By me Princes rule, and Nobles,
even all the Judges of the earth, Prove. 8. 15, 16. By which it is apparent,
that the Power of Judges, Nobles, Princes, etc. (all Officers of the Kingdom,
not of the King) is as really and truly from God as that of Kings, and differs
not in nature from that of Kings, but secundum magis and minus only, both being
Powers ordained of God, and to resist either, is to resist the Ordinance of
God, both being Minister of God for the good of the governed; both obliged so
to Govern, that the governed, for whose good they are equally entrusted, may
lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. and
to judge righteously between every Man and his neighbor, and not to respect
persons in judgment, but to hear the small as well as the great, and not to be
afraid of the face of men: and the judgment administered by all is Gods, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Deuteronomy. 17. 19, 20. Isaiah 1. 17. and God owneth inferior Judges as
a Congregation of Gods, Psalm 82. A Senate of Kings not so styled any where.
Yet all are equally called Gods, John 10. 35. and that rightly; for as Kings
are God's Deputies by the mediation of the People, so inferior Judges are God's
Deputies also by the mediation of Kings and of the People: and we find that
Judges were some time chosen by the People. So Jepthah was made Judge, then
Jepthah went with the Elders of Gilead, and the People made him Head and
Captain over them, Judge. 11. 11. But that God gave Power of Tyrannizing to
Kings so as they cannot be resisted, or called to an account, which he gave not
to Judges, cannot be made out by any Scripture. What Scripture does warrant
that the People might rise up in Arms to defend themselves against Moses,
Gideon, Ely, Samuel, and other Judges, should they have Oppressed or Tyrannized
over the People? Or, that it is not lawful to resist the most Tyrannical Kings
of Israel, Judah, and yet lawful to resist Oppressing and Tyrannical Judges?
But certainly God Almighty that made the whole Creation not only for his own
Glory, but also for the Good and Happiness of the whole Race of Mankind, would
never give any Power to Kingly, or any other Form of Government, to Oppress and
Tyrannize over the governed uncontrolably and unaccountably, whose Blood is
always precious in his sight, and in whom is all his delight. It is monstrous
so to conceive, and derogatory to the very Mercy, Justice, and Purity of God,
that he should Create the whole World for the Comfort and Solace of Mankind in
general, without respect of Persons, and yet at the same time subject them to
Kings to be used as slaves, or (which is as bad) not to be resisted, or not to
be accountable to any human Power, if they at any time should Tyrannize.
Certainly such Opiniators and Preachers of such Doctrines do as much as in them
lies to frustrate and defeat the whole design of the Creation, which was
designed for the benefit, joy, and delight of the whole Race of Mankind in
general, and by this Doctrine it shall be at the pleasure of every pettish
haughty Prince to make every Principality, every Kingdom an Aceldama, a
Golgetha, an Iron Furnace, an Egyptian Slavery, what not? Which God the Great
and Wise Creator abhors, and manifested his Wrath and Indignation against it,
by pouring his severe and manifold Judgments upon that very Nation, which
pleaded, nay, hectored for his Prerogative so long with God himself, till he
overwhelmed him and all his Host, with his Prerogatives, in the red Sea.

Obj. Abstracta concretis sunt puriora and perfectioria. The Powers that Kings
have, they have it from the People, who make them Kings, and they having no
absolute Power over themselves, cannot contribute any such Power to Kings. The
Powers that the People have are only Natural, and Legal, and Political, viz. to
make and submit to such Laws as may preserve themselves in Peace, and
Godliness, and from unjust Violence, and Oppression, by the Conduct and
Management of good Rulers. Now, absolute Power, above a Law, is a Power to do
ill, and to destroy Nations; which no People have, it being against Nature,
that any should have a Power by the Law of Nature (which is the Law of God) to
destroy themselves. Therefore though the People should invest Kings with all
the Power that they have, yet if Kings Tyrannize over the People to their hurt
and destruction, they usurp a Power which the People never gave them, it not
being in their Power to give them; the Power it self being against the Law of
Nature, and consequently against the Law of God; for that all acts of Tyranny
are Oppression, and sinful Injustice, and therefore cannot be from God. Dum
contra officium facit, Magistratus non est Magistratus, quippe a quo non
injuria sed jus nasci debet; and consequently they who resist the tyrannous
acts of Kings, do not resist the Ordinance of God. What were it less than
Blasphemously to charge God with prevaricating with his People, if in
Authorizing Kings to preserve them, should give them liberty without all
Politic restraint to destroy them? Which is contrary to God's end in the Fifth
Commandment, that one Man, a King, should have absolute Power to destroy
Millions of Souls and Bodies uncontrolably.

If the Kings of Israel and Judah were under censures and rebukes of the
Prophets, and sinned against God and the People in rejecting such rebukes, and
in persecuting the Prophets, and were under and liable to all the Laws of God,
as all other People, though their Subjects, were, then is their Power not above
any Law, nor absolute. That these matters of Fact are true, sit liber Judex.
Samuel rebuked Saul; Nathan, David; Elias, Achab. Jeremiah is sent to Prophecy
against the Kings of Judah, Jer. 1. 18. and the Prophets practiced it, Jer. 19.
3. Ahab could not take Naboths Vineyard against his will, without the formality
of Law, and without the help of Men of Belial to boot; for which violence
offered to Law and Justice, in the place where Dogs licked the Blood of Naboth,
(shed by shamming of Laws by Innuendoes and false constructions of Laws) the
Dogs did lick the Blood of Ahab, and did eat that cursed Woman Jezabel, by the
wall of Jezrael, and her Carcass became as dung upon the face of the field.

A Document to all Kings and Princes for giving any countenance to Violence, or
Oppression, or to shamming any Laws by any irresistible or prevalent
Influences; and the Inferior Judges ought not to accept the Persons of any in
judgment, whether small or great, for the judgment is the Lords, and their
office as much of divine right as that of the Kings; then certainly we may
justly conclude, That Kingly Power is neither above Law, nor yet absolute; for
Kings, who swear to Govern according to Law, it is contrary to common sense,
nay, impossible they should have an illimited or absolute Power, either from
God, or the People; for foedus conditionatum, or promissio conditionalis mutua,
facit jus alteri in alterum, it is not to be thought that Kings can at one and
the same time, and in the same breath, justly swear to Govern according to Law,
and at the same time interpretatively and secondarily swear to Govern
absolutely and without Law.

If the governed in Senates, Parliaments, and Dyets, may call in question the
Acts, Previledges, Charters, and Commissions of Kings granted to any Persons,
and null and vacate them, circumscribe and dock any of their Prerogatives, may
increase or diminish his Revenue and State, may call into question any of his
Friends, Counselors, or Ministers of State, and punish or remove them: If the
governed may appeal from Kings to Senates, Dyets, or Parliaments, and may not
appeal from them to Kings, all which may and have been done, as the public
Monuments of Laws do testify, who of sound judgment can deny the Power of the
People in Dyets, Senates, and Parliaments, to be above that of Kings? If in an
Interregnum, Senates, Dyets, and Parliaments have Power, and (which is plain by
Histories, without regard had to right of Inheritance) have created Kings, whom
they pleased, and altered Successions.

In sum, If Dyets, Senates, Parliaments, are the Supreme Council of Nations,
constituted by the People, endued with Power from them to this very thing, that
they may consult in common of the weighty matters of Kingdoms and common good,
and Kings therefore created that they should see executed what they did advise
and agree upon, quis nisi mentis inops, can deny, upon such plain evidence and
demonstration, that the People in Parliaments, Dyets, and Senates, are not only
coordinate, and have a share in the Government, but are also in some sense and
some places, superior to them, for that they can do more than Kings.

Kings have their Prerogatives: true, and very fit they should have. So have
all other Governments, be their Prerogatives what they will (Power of the
Militia, making War and Peace, calling of Councils, Dyets, Synods, Senates,
Parliaments, nominating Judges, and other public Officers of Kingdoms, etc.)
they are all derived from the People, and transferred for their own good, and
so always expressed, or implied. If they make ill use of the Militia, it is a
breach of trust, and no obligation of Obedience and Submission is due; if they
make ill Leagues, the People not bound to confirm, or assist; if they call
Dyets and Parliaments, it is not for their peculiar interests, but for the good
of the whole; and nothing done therein can be of force, unless the free assent
of the convocated be first had: Which demonstrates it is the Office and Duty of
Kings to call those great Councils as often as the People see cause and desire
it, and to continue them till they have the benefit designed. And though the
Royal Assent be desired, it is but for the Honor of the business: for what
concerns common good, safety, and liberty, they ought to pass by virtue of
their Oaths and Office. Non negabimus, non differimus cuique jus aut justitiam.
Chartae Artic. c. 29. Will not Kings deny Justice, and may they deny just Laws?
Not to private Persons, and yet to the Representatives of Nations? Not in the
Inferior Courts, and yet in the Supreme? They are created and elected Kings
that they should do Justice to all indifferently. Bracton l. 3. c. 9. Ad hoc
creatus and electus est ut justitiam faciat universis per eas nimirum leges
quas vulgus elegerit. Hence in Archivis. H. 4. Rot. Parl. No. 59. Non est ulla
Regis Prerogativa quae ex justitia and aequitate quicquam derogat. Kings have
no Prerogative, which derogate from Justice and Equity. And when Kings have
refused to make or confirm Magnas Chartas good Laws, they have been compelled
by force of Arms, and such Laws accounted as good and valid by the best
Lawyers; the reason given is, That they of right and of their own accord ought
to have assented unto that which they were forced to do.

All Courts of Judicatory are Authorized and Confirmed by Parliament, in which
it is Lawful for the meanest of Subjects to implead Kings; in which Courts
Judgment is often given against Kings, which though endeavored to be
contradicted or countermanded by Kings, yet the Judges by the Laws of God and
Man, and by their Oaths, are obliged to refuse their Mandamus's, and to give
right Judgment, for the judgment is the Lords.

Kings can justly Imprison no Man, nor punish any Man, nor seize their Goods or
Estate without Citation out of Courts where the Judges, not Kings have all the
Power. So Bracton l. 3, c. 9. Regis potestas Juris est non Injuriae, and nihil
aliud potest Rex, nisi id solum quod de Jure potest. The Power that Kings have,
is to do right, not to wrong the least of their Subjects. The most ancient
Records do evidence, that they own what Power they have, not to Force, or Arms,
not to Inheritance, not to Succession, but unto the Grant of the People;
Records tell us, that such Kingly Power was given by the People unto Hen. IV.
and before him to Rich. II. Rot. Parl. 1. Hen. IV. No. 108. And accordingly
Kings by their Edicts, Patents, Commissions, Diploma's, do Authorize their
Deputies, Lieutenants, and Presidents. So the House of Commons granted to Rich.
II. that he should enjoy such Liberties and Franchises as Kings his
predecessors enjoyed before him, which when he contrary to his Oath did
violate, and abuse, to the subversion of the Laws, was by the same Power
deposed: The same Roll testifies that they gave like Power to Hen. IV. which
Powers were plainly fiduciary; and which the Parliament would not have given,
but that they had a right so to do: neither would the King have been so
injurious to Posterity, as to have accepted of it from the Parliament, had they
had a just right to such Powers in themselves without such deligation; which
plainly shows Kingly Powers to be fiduciary, acquired, not innate, nor inherent
in their Persons, such Powers as Generals of Armies (Imperatores Bellici) have,
deligated to Defend, not to Subdue, or Oppress them, from whom their Power is
deligated. It were impar congressus, great folly, nay, madness, for Parliaments
and People to choose Kings, and swear them to the observance of a Chart of Laws,
how great soever, that they may have Power of the Militia absolutely in their
own Power to play Rex with all unaccountably.

In sum, Kings do not Govern by a mere Kingly or Divine Power, but by a
Politic Power, the People being to be governed by the same Laws which they
themselves do make, and not by such Laws as Kings shall please to impose at
their own will and pleasure.

In sum, We are all born free, and may make what Laws we please, and commit
the Administration and Execution of them to one or more as we please, always
observing one above the rest most Ancient and most Authentic, even the Law of
Nature, ever to be had in greatest Veneration; which directs all Laws, all just
Right, all civil Impery not to the will, pleasure, and lust of Kings, but to
the Good of the governed.

CHAP. IX.
What was Lawful for the Jews to do for the keeping of the Law, and maintaining
and propagating of Religion, is Lawful now for all Christians under the Gospel:
certainly God never Covenanted, nor ordained Covenanting in vain, whether for
Religion or Civil Rights.
FROM what was Lawful for the People of the Jews to do, and from what was
commanded them by God to do concerning the keeping of the Law and observation
of his Commands, we may conclude, that the same is now Lawful for Christian
People of any Kingdom to do concerning the Care, Practice, and Defense of both
Law and Gospel. God having chose the People, the Jews, above all the Nations of
the World, to be his peculiar People, made a Covenant with them, That when they
came into the Land of Promise they should be his People, and he would be their
God. This is expressed, as in many places of Holy Writ. so more especially
Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 14 2. The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special and
peculiar People unto himself, above all People that are upon the face of the
Earth. And the force of the Covenant was, That all the People should take care
that God should be purely worshipped and served of all the Tribes, and that he
should have a pure Church in the midst of them, Deuteronomy. 27. 9. where Moses, and
the Priests, and Levites, as Ministers, and as in God's stead spoke unto all
Israel, saying, Take heed, and hearken, O Israel, this day thou art become the
People of the Lord thy God; thou shall therefore obey the voice of the Lord thy
God, and do his Commandments, and his Statutes, which I command thee this day,
Deuteronomy. 17. 9, 10. But more fully yet in Joshua, who gathered all the Tribes of
Israel to Sechem, and said unto all the People, thus says the Lord God of
Israle, your Fathers, etc. Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in
sincerity, and truth, etc. And the People answered, We will serve the Lord, for
he is our God. And Joshua said unto the People, ye are witnesses against your
selves, that you have chosen you the Lord, to serve him; And they said, We are
witnesses, the Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey. So
Joshua made a Govenant with the People that day, Josh. 24. 2, 14, 18, 22, 24,
25. and Joshua read all the words of the Law, the Blessings and Cursings over
against mount Gerazin, and mount Ebal, according as they kept or violated the
Covenant. There was not a word of all that Moses commanded which Joshua read
not before all the Congregation of Israel, with the Women, and the little Ones,
and the Strangers that were conversant among them: And all the People answered,
Amen, Deuteronomy. 27. Which Premises will yield this natural conclusion, That this
Stipulation did not oblige one single Person only, but all the People of every
Nation, to take care that God's Laws and Covenants be kept and performed, and
that Idolatry, Superstition, etc. be banished and destroyed.

For the same reason all the Tribes did Encamp and pitch their Tents round
about the Ark where it lodged, to show that that which was recommended to the
care of all, should be governed and defended by all, Numb. 2. 2, 17. Consider
the practice hereof.

The Gibeonites having abused the Levites Concubine to death, the Levites
divided her into Twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel:
then all the Children of Israel went out, and the Congregation was gathered
together as one Man in Mispeh; considering that so great a sin committed in
Israel ought to be expiated and punished by all; to whom, after the Levite had
declared the wickedness, they by common consent resolved to have satisfaction
of Gibeah and the Benjamites; which being refused, they fought against them and
destroyed them; to which God gave encouragement and success, Judge. 19. 20. Thus
was the breach of the Second Table of the Law expiated on a whole Tribe, which
had so offended, by all Israel. So ought all Nations to do their utmost to
revenge such Impieties. We have the like Example for the breach and violation
of the First Table, Josh. 22. When the Children of Ruben, and the Children of
Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasseh had built an Altar by Jordan, verse 10.
Which, when the Children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to
go up to War against them; for that in so doing they had rebelled against the
Lord, and rebelled against them (for having thereby violated the Covenant which
they all made with God) in building an Altar besides the Altar of the Lord
their God, verse 19. not for worshipping (as they truly professed) but for
memorial; so fearful they were of God's Wrath, that they presently dispatched
an Embassy by Phineahs, and with him ten Princes, of each chief House a Prince
throughout all the Tribes of Israel, to their Brethren, to expostulate the
matter, and to prevent their sin. And see how pithily they dealt with them. Is
the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which ye are not cleansed to this
day, but that ye also must depart from following the Lord, verse 17. and it
will be, seeing ye rebel to day against the Lord, that to morrow he will be
wrath with the whole Congregation of Israel, verse 18. Therefore rebel not
against the Lord; nor rebel against us in building you an Altar besides the
Altar of the Lord your God, verse 19. Did not Achan the Son of Zerah commit a
trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the Congregation of
Israel? And that Man perished not alone in his iniquity, verse 20. But they
returning Answer by the Ambassadors, That they built it not to turn from
following the Lord, nor for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifice, but for
memorial only, and for a witness between us and you, and our generation after
us, that we might do service to the Lord, etc. verse 26, 27. Then Phineahs, and
the Princes of the Congregation, and Heads of the Thousands of Israel which
were with him, said to the Children of Reuben, etc. This day we perceive that
the Lord is among us, because ye have not committed this trespass against the
Lord, but have delivered the Children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord,
verse 30, 31.

These practices are sufficient warrant and Authority to all Nations, and
degrees of Christian Men, to maintain and defend the true Christian Religion in
it is purity against all opposers; for as the Covenant was made with all, so all
are obliged to stand to it: and qui non vetat peccare quum possit, Jubet. What
sins of others we labor not within our Province to prevent, are ours in the
guilt as well as those of our own personal commission. Besides, this Fact of
the Children of Reuben and the rest, had it not had that just excuse, it had
been Rebellion as well against their Brethren as against God, and is so
declared, verse 19. Rebel not against the Lord, nor rebel against us, and would
have provoked God's Wrath, and pulled his Judgments on the whole Land; in which
common Calamity the just and innocent must have suffered, and been involved, as
well as the unjust Offenders; and therefore by the natural Law of self
preservation, they justly might endeavor to prevent the Judgments and Curses
threatened by their own strength and endeavors; for which reason also all
Nations are obliged, and have just warrant by the Law of God and Nature, to
prevent both by Council and Force, as far as in them lies, and they sin if they
do not. The Law warrants it. Thou shall rebuke thy neighbor plainly, and not
suffer him to sin, Levit. 6. 17. The Gospel countenances the same. Communicate
not with other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5. 22.

This Covenant was first made between God and the People. Afterward when Kings
were set over the People, the very same Covenant was renewed and confirmed. At
the Installation or Inauguration of the King, there was a twofold Covenant
made; first between God, the King, and the People, or between the high Priest
(God's Substitute) the People and the King, (the People being preferred to the
first place, 2 Chronicles. 11.) The end and design of which was, That the People
should be the Lords People, 2 Chronicles. 23. 16. 2 Kings 11. 17. And the King went
up into the house of the Lord, and all the men of Judah, and all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the Priests, and the Prophets, and all
the People both small and great: and he read in their Ears all the words of the
Book of the Covenant, which was found in the House of the Lord. And the King
stood by the Pillar, and made a Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the
Lord, and to keep his Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with
all their heart, and with all their soul, to perform the words of this Covenant
that were written in this Book: and all the People stood to the Covenant, 2
Kings 23. 2, 3. Most certainly God never ordained this Covenanting between King
and People in vain. If the People had no Power nor Authority in promising and
performing, Covenanting and Reciprocal swearing had been mere superfluous and
vain appointments. And for certain God never created nor ordained any thing in
vain. Most probably, nay, most certainly, the Covenant was made inter King,
Priest, and People, for the more certain performance thereof, that if either
the one or the other did the Work of the Lord negligently, or violate the
Covenant, the other might force obedience and performance, and be a check to
each other: The Priest to teach them the Law. If the People transgressed, the
King to use his Authority: if the King, the People to use their utmost, and
all, to prefer the good and benefit of the whole before any private Interest
whatsoever. Both King and Israel plighted their Troths together, not separately.

If two are joined in Covenant of such a nature as cannot be broken by the one,
but the other must necessarily and unavoidably be damnified and endangered by
such breach, the injured Party may in common Justice, and by the Law of Nature,
defend and right himself. If Israel forsake God and worship Idols, the King may
punish. If Kings sin after the same manner, Israel may reform by the same Law.
Thou shall make no Covenant with them, nor with their Gods; they shall not
dwell in the Land, lest they make thee sin against me, Exodus 23. 32. But ye
shall destroy their Altars, break their Images, cut down their Groves, etc.
Exodus 34. 13. Of the self-same nature is the Covenant here treated of.

God in his infinite Wisdom thought it best not to commit the care and
oversight of his Covenant, and of his Church and People, to the will and
pleasure of one single Person, but as both King and People are all the anointed
of the Lord, and equally concerned in the keeping or violation thereof; and
consequently, in the Blessings and Cursings denounced on Mount Gerazim and
Mount Ebal, so his Charge was equally incumbent both on King and People, that
it being equally every Man's concern, so it is every Man's duty and care, both
jointly and severally, that it be kept inviolably, and he will require
performance accordingly at their Hands.

Saul being constituted King over Israel, Samuel being Priest and Prophet of
the Lord, renewed the Covenant, viz. If ye will fear the Lord, and serve him,
and obey his voice, and not rebel against the Commandment of the Lord, then
shall both ye, and also the King that reigns over you, continue following
the Lord your God. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed
both you and your King, 1 Samuel 12. 14, 15, 25. By wickedness, in this place, is
most especially meant, in that they had rejected the Government which God
himself had appointed, as best for them, and chose a King to be set over them;
and we rebelled against God. The reason assigned is, because they were God's
own peculiar People, hereby it is manifest, that both King and People were both
equally joined in the Stipulation.

So Asa, King of Judah, by the Prophecy of Azariah the Prophet, congregated all
the People, viz. Judah and Benjamin, where were also many of Ephraim, Manasseh,
and Simeon, and made a solemn Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers,
with all their heart, and with all their soul: that whoever would not seek the
Lord God of Israel should be put to death, whether small or great, man or
woman, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 13. 9. and 17. 7. Here you see the King
himself is not exempted.

These Examples, with those before, and those that follow, will justify this
Kingdom in all that they have done, to free us from unreasonable and cruel Men,
and Popish Tyranny; and also the Auxiliary Expedition of the Prince of Orange
to be the most glorious and most righteous Action that ever Prince undertook,
because he came to help the Lord against the mighty, who both at home and
abroad, had in their imaginations and endeavors, designed the Inslaving of all
the Protestants of Europe; which Action God has hitherto signalized by
prospering his Arms with very little Blood. Whosoever is wise and will observe
these things, shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm 107.

CHAP. X.
Whole Kingdoms and Nations have Power to reform. Faith equally plighted
between King and People ought equally to be kept. Care of Religion, Peace,
Justice, Safety, Liberty, etc. are incumbent on all the People, especially on
the Ordines Populi. The common and true Cause of Rebellion is abuse of Power,
not Disobedience to the lawful Commands of Kings. Obedience to unjust Commands
of Cesars is sin, and to assist in such is to make themselves Participes
Criminis. Opposition to Popes or Kings tyrannizing, is not Rebellion against
Christ's Vicars or Vicegerents, but opposition to wicked Men acting wickedly.
Defensive Arms justified by Authorities.
NOW, who should have Power to reform things done amiss by Kings but all the
People, to whom he has sworn as solemnly, as they to him, and both to God
Almighty, who is witness between them. So Josiah the King, with the Priests,
Prophets, and all the People both small and great went up into the house of the
Lord, and made a Covenant before the Lord to walk after the Lord, etc. and all
the People stood to the Covenant; 2. King. 23. 2, 3, 4. Why should the Common
consent of all the People be so solemnly required? Why should Israel and Judah
be so strictly obliged to the observation of Gods Holy Laws and Commandments?
Why should they so sacredly promise to be the Lords People, unless Power and
Authority were given to them also to free themselves from Covenant*breaking and
from Perjury, and to defend Holy Church? Wherefore was a Covenant made with the
People, that they should be the People of God zealous of good Works, if they
must obey the unjust Commands of Kings, it may be to worship strange Gods, or
to permit monstrous sins to reign among them, if it be not lawful to put to
their assistance, and endeavor to hinder and reform? And why should they be
blamed, or Judgments poured upon them if they have no Power from on High to
perform what was so solemnly required, and so solemnly promised? that God
should so solemnly require their Vow and Promise, and yet not give them Power
and Authority to perform, is monstrous to conceive. God never requires more
than he gives; Brick without Straw, that is the Property of Pharaoh and his
hard Taskmasters: Its much more agreeable to truth, that all Covenants of like
nature and purport are equally obliging both to King and People, and the care
and Authority of each over the other for adjusting of performances, is
reciprocal and equal; it being a Gospel Principle, That Gods peculiar People
(which are his true Church) ought to be sollicitous, not only to abstain from
evil themselves, but also to prevent it in otheers: A notable Example whereof
is before mentioned in the People of Israel, Josh. 22. who out of abundant
Caution, minding the Concerns of their Brethren as their own, when they heard
that the Reubenites, Gadites, and half the Tribe of Manasseh had erected an
Altar, not for worshipping (as they truly protested) but for memorial and
witness: So fearful they were of Gods Wrath falling on them, that they soon
dispatched an Embassy to their Brethren to prevent their sin as before. Hence
it is that the Prophets of old standing in the Gate of the Children of the
People, whereby their Kings came in, and by which they went out, did so often
put them in mind of their Duty, and of keeping Covenant; and not only that they
should not sacrifice to Baal, but that they should destroy both Baal and his
Priests, and root them out of the Land whether the King will or no; for when
Ahab had killed the Prophets of God, Eliah the Prophet congregated all Israel,
not tumultuously, but by public Authority and common consent, unto Mount
Carmel, and the Prophets of Baal Four hundred and fifty, and the Prophets of
the Grove Four hundred, which did eat at Jezabels Table, and had convinced them
of their Idolatry, and to be false Prophets, the People at his command killed
them all at the Brook Kishon, 1 King. 18. whereby it appears, that the King
neglecting his Duty, all Israel as obliged ought to discharge theirs. On the
contrary, as often as Kings violated their Covenants, or profaned the Worship
of God; and the People of Israel (as we said before of Covenants, where the
breach of one party manifestly prejudiced, the other Covenanters threatening
Ruin and Destruction to the Innocent) through Negligence, sinful Connivance, or
any other sinister By-end, or Respect did not restrain him, their Judgments
came also upon the People as well for their nonperformance, as on Kings for
theirs, which mostly happened, for that the People are more apt to follow the
Examples of their Kings, than to repent and amend, or mind him of the Errors of
his ways. Wherefore did the Host of Israel, with Saul and his two Sons fall
down slain in Mount Gilboa by the Philistines? 1 Samuel 31. Would God (think you)
revenge the Sins of the King upon the People if innocent? Far be it from the
Judge of all the Earth to stay the Righteous with the wicked, Genesis 18. 25. or
take vengeance on the People for the Sins of the King; the Soul that sins it
shall die, Ezekiel. 18. 4. Every Man shall be put to death for his own Sin, Deuteronomy.
24, 16. was it not rather because the People did not resist, or restrain, but
assisted Saul their King, violating the Law of God, and wickedly persecuting
the Man after Gods own Heart, and killing the Priests of the Lord.

Saul desiring to enlarge the^ Borders of the Tribe of Judah at his entrance
into Canaan, broke public Faith with the Gibeonites, and destroyed many of
them (the Children of Israel having sworn unto them) by which he broke the
third Commandment, God being witness to his Covenant with the Gibeonites: he
broke also the sixth Commandment, and so the breach of both Tables God himself
would revenge; the breach of which Covenant and Oath was justly laid to Saul
and his Family. Now Saul being dead, and David constituted King, 2 Samuel 21. 1,
2. God sent a Famine in the days of David three Years, Year after Year upon the
whole Land; and David inquired of the Lord, and the Lord answered, It was for
Saul and his bloody House, because he slew the Gibeonites, which Famine ceased
not till David delivered seven Sons of Saul to the Gibeonites, whom they hanged
in Gibeah of Saul unto the Lord, v. 6. 8. But was the Famine over all the Land
for Saul's fault only? No, both King and People were both punished, the one for
breaking Covenant, the other for not resisting, and not hindering the King, or
as being accessory to do this Evil. How came it to pass that God never
punishes the sins of the King upon the People, nor the sins of the People upon
the King, and yet he sent a Famine on the whole Land, Saul the chief Actor
being Dead, (and consequently Actio moritur cum persona;) but because the
People suffered so manifest a Sin to be committed by their sinful connivance,
and used no endeavors to resist or hinder him as they ought* Can Punishment by
any right be inflicted on any for a Crime whereof they are not guilty? Alieni
secleris quenquam poenas pati Jura non sinunt, 2 Kings 14. 6. Wherein did the
Israelites sin, if not by tolerating Saul to do as he did, when they ought and
might have hindered him?

When Menasseh had polluted the Temple of the Lord, and shed Innocent Blood,
which the Lord would not pardon, 2 Kings 24. 4. why did the Lord threaten not
only Menasseh, but his People with Judgments; but because they being under the
same Covenants with Manasseh, they would not restrain the King from persisting
in his wickedness, but did connive, countenance and assist him in his
Impieties, 2 Chronicles. 33. 17.

Herod and Pilate condemned Christ, the Priests delivered him to Death; yet the
Curse fell upon the whole Nation; and why? because the People might have
delivered him as well as they did Barrabas, and did not, but impricated Curses
upon themselves and their Children.

It is the duty of all Nations to take care not only that Criminals be
punished, but that no Crimes be committed; which made Hezekiah pull down the
Brazen Serpent, though set up by Moses, (when it came to be abused:) 2 Kings
18. 4. It being the duty of the People by common consent to hinder Kings as
much as in them lies, from violating the Law of God, and from injuring his
Church and Saints; and if they do not, they are guilty of the same crime, and
liable to the same punishment. Resist they may, by opposing words to words,
force to force, stratagem to stratagem, (always avoiding perfidiousness, which
is always disallowed and hateful to God and Man.) For in War it matters not
whether it be managed by open Force or secret Stratagems. By People is not
meant the Many*headed-Monster-Multitude, but by the Universal People is to be
understood those who have any share in the Government, or any Authority from
the People conferred upon them by any Laws made by public consent, as inferior
Magistrates either chosen by the People, or any other way constituted to take
care of public Peace, and concerns of the Laws of the Land, and worship of God
in their several qualifications, be they Tribunes of the People, Ephori,
Praefects, Praetors, Judges, Justices of the Peace, Constables, Captains of
Thousands, Captains of Hundreds, Captains of Fifties, or other inferior
Officers or Magistrates, which are as Consorts of the Empire, and are in the
vacancy of the public Sanhedrims, Dyets, Parliaments, etc. As it were the
Epitome of every Kingdom, and Ephori of Kings, and Conservators of the Public
Peace thereof, to and among whom all the public concerns of a Nation are
referred, of which sort in a manner were the Seventy Elders in the Kingdom of
Israel, among which there was a Chief Priest, which did judge de Arduis Regni,
which were not to be Hobby-horsed in and out by the High Priest, according as
they would or would not serve a sinister turn; and they were chosen out of the
Seventy Families which went down into Egypt, the Elders of which were first
chosen and made Heads over the People, Rulers of Thousands, Rulers of Hundreds,
Rulers of Tens, and the hard causes they brought unto Moses, Exodus 18. 25.

We read often in Scripture of all Israel, of all Judah, and Benjamin etc. when
in all probability every Individual did not at all times meet, of which sort
and kind there is in all well constituted Kingdoms several Congregations of the
Kingdoms, Officers of the Kingdom, as the Privy Council, Peers, Patricians,
Judges, Sessions, Assizes, Lord Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Mayors,
Bayliff's of Towns and Cities, as the ordinary Councils and Officers of a
Kingdom; and as Councils extraordinary chosen out of them all to consider de
Arduis Regni, which are Officers of the Kingdom, and called by several names in
several Kingdoms, as Dyets, Parliaments, etc. which provide that no detriment
come to either Church or State, in which though every individual be inferior to
the King, yet the Joint Body, being the Representative of the whole Kingdom, is
superior, and to be preferred before him. For as the Council of Basil and
Constance decreed, that a General Council was superior to the Pope, and the
Chapter to the Bishop; for that they which receive any Authority from any
Company of Men, must needs be inferior to that Company, though he be personally
superior to every Individual of that Society. So without all doubt, Israel
which petitioned for, and chose Saul from among themselves to be their King, as
a public Actor for the common good of them all, was superior to Saul. When we
attribute any power to the People, it is to be understood of the Officers,
Princes, Elders, Parliaments, Dyets, that have a share in the Government and in
the Legislative Power. Take Athaliah 2 Chronicles. 24. for an Example, in which Act
the Kingdom was not opposed, but Tyranny; which Conspiracy though acted so very
privately, and as it were by stealth, yet blamed neither by God nor Man, but
justified by all Writers both Sacred and Profane, and the success answered the
end designed.

As the King, so all Israel as one Man, the several Cities as parts of the
Kingdom, and their Magistrates did covenant with God to keep his Laws, etc.
Joshua when old and near his end, congregated all Israel in Sechem in the
Presence of the Lord, (for the Ark of the Covenant was there,) and called for
the Elders of Israel, and for their Heads, and for their Judges, and for their
Officers, and they presented themselves before God, Josh. 24. 1. And he said
unto them, fear the Lord and serve him, etc. and the People answered and said,
God forbid that we should forsake the Lord to serve other Gods, ver. 14. 16.
And Joshua said unto the People, ye are witness your selves, that you have
chosen you the Lord to serve him. And they said we are Witnesses, ver. 22. So
Joshua made a Covenant with the Lord that day, and set them a Statute and an
Ordinance in Sechem. And Joshua wrote these words in the Book of the Law of
God, and took a great Stone, and set it up there under an Oak that was by the
Sanctuary of the Lord; and Joshua said unto all the People, Behold this Stone
shall be a Witness unto us, for it has heard all the words of the Lord which
he spoke unto us, it shall be therefore a Witness unto you, least you deny your
God, ver. 24, 25, 26, 27.

Hence it is evident, that as every individual Person, so more especially all
Officers in a Kingdom, that have any public Authority, ought every one in
their several stations to take care that God's Law be fulfilled, and of the
Peoples happiness; which Officers are Officers of the Kingdom from whom they
have their Authority, according to Laws of their own making, and to them they
are accountable.

If the Ark of God be to be brought back, then all of the Congregation of
Israel are to be summoned and consulted, and to give their help. 1 Chronicles. 13. 2 Chronicles. 15. So if a Temple be to be built to the Lord, the chief of the Fathers
and Priests of the Tribes of Israel, and the Captains of Thousands and of
Hundreds with the Rulers are summoned, and moved to offer willingly, 1 Chronicles.
29. So that there is no power committed to Kings to alter or change the Laws,
Covenants, or Worship of God. So in the Covenants under Joah and Josiah,
between God, the King and the People, all the Kingdom were present, and all
were particularly bound to keep and stand to the Covenant; so that not the King
only, but the Kingdom, nor the Kingdom in general only, but all the Parts
thereof, promise Faith and Allegiance to God Almighty. Not the King only, but
Israel; not Israel only, but the Cities and chief Governors of them did
secretly bind themselves to God, to do him homage and liege Services against
all Infractors of his Laws. 2 Kin. 11. 23. 2 Chronicles. 23.

For Example, Libnah revolted from Jehoram, because he had forsaken the Lord
God of his Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 21. 10. So Mattathias, and all they that fled from
the Persecution of Antiochus, joined themselves together, and smote sinful men
in their anger, and wicked men in their wrath; and they pursued after the proud
men, and the work prospered in their hands. So they recovered the Law out of
the hand of the Gentiles, and out of the hand of Kings; neither suffered they
the sinner to triumph, 1 Macc. 2. 42, 47. saying, We will not hearken to the
Kings word to go from our Religion, either to the right hand or to the left,
verse 22. So his Son Judas Maccabeus was valiant for the truth, and fought for
the People and the Sanctuary, so prosperously, Deo favente, against Antiochus,
that he recovered Jerusalem, and restored the pure worship of God from the
Gentiles, 1 Macc. 3. Though others took part and were obedient to Antiochus,
and they fell together with the Persecutor for their so doing by the edg of the
Sword.

When Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, he sold them into the hand of
Jabin, King of Canaan, whom they served twenty years, (a fair prescription for
a Kingdom) worshipping strange Gods; among whom especially were the Tribes of
Reuben, Ephraim, Benjamin, Dan, Asser, etc. who adhered to Jabin. Nevertheless
Deborah, who judged Israel at that time, levied force with the assistance of
the other Tribes of Zabulon, Napthaly, and Issachar, over whom they made Barack
Captain, and went along with them, being ten thousand men, and discomfited the
Host of Sisera, Captain of Jabin, and restored the true Worship of God to
Israel: and then sang Deborah, etc. Judge. 4. 5.

Happily some may say, that these Facts of Deborah, Jael, Mattathias, and
Libnah, ought not to be drawn into imitation and practice, as being stirred up
by motions extraordinary, like that of Phineahs, and the Book it self but
Apochypha, and not so Authentic as Scripture. What then? It Is certain, that
not only the King, but all Israel and the parts thereof, viz. the several
Cities and their Magistrates (as in Josh. 24.) covenanted before God, and did
swear to worship the true God according to his Law; which Covenant is expressly
in force to this day in all Christian Kingdoms, where King and People Covenant
each with other, and tacitly or interpretatively; also where Kings Rule Vi and
Armis, or by fraud, or any other unjust way, which is downright Tyranny. The
People are the People of God, and obliged in the first place to God, and then
to the Kingdom, and to the King: and though the King have the formality and
executive part of Power (all Writs, Executions, Proclamations, etc. issuing in
his Name,) yet the People have the true Dominion originally. Sunt enim universa
in Regis Imperio, non in Patrimonio. Seneca lib. 7. de Benef. c. 6, 7. Omnia
Rex imperio possidet, singuli dominio.

Consult all Histories, search all Antiquity, and you will find the true cause
of all Rebellion, in all Ages, and in all Countries, to have risen originally,
and most especially, from the abuse of Power first, and not from the
disobedience of Subjects to the lawful commands of Kings. If Kings command
unlawful things, as they have no Authority so to do, so Subjects have no
Obligation to obey. When Covenants between Prince and People are of such a
nature as cannot be broken or violated by either King or People, without doing
manifest Injury to the other: The injured party may seek his Redress and
Relief, though it be vim vi repellendo, which is always to be understood of
unjust Force. For if the Force be unjust, the Defense must be lawful; and,
contrariwise, if the Force be just, the Defense must be unlawful. So that Kings
and Princes, if transgressors, are as truly Transgressors and Invaders against
their Kingdom and their Laws, as the People are against them and the Laws when
they transgress.

Do Subjects obey the commands of their Princes, which they may lawfully
command, and which they of right ought to obey, without intrenching on God's
commands? Do they pay them Tribute, Suit, and Service, not contrary to God's
Laws, as they ought? So to obey Caesar is just, lawful, and praiseworthy. But
to obey Cesar's, exceeding their just bounds, commanding without warrant of
Law, affecting, and designing a greater Impery without the consent of the
governed; or, if they invade or violate the Laws of God, perverting the right
Worship of God, (who is above all Kings and Governments) it is unjust; and to
assist Cesar's in such cases is unlawful, and they that do, make themselves
partakers of other Men's Crimes.

Anno Domini 1300. Pope Boniface VIII. challenged some Regalia which belonged
unto Phillip the Fair, King of France, whereupon Philip sharply reproved the
Pope by his Letter, even in those days when the Pope was accounted the Vicar of
Christ on Earth, and Head of the Universal Church, according to Communis error,
Juris loco erat. Notwithstanding, the Sorban answered, That both King and
Kingdom might safely withdraw themselves from their Obedience to the Pope
without any guilt of Schism, because not Separation, but the Cause, made
Schism; and that they did not oppose the Vicar of Christ, but a wicked Man,
guilty of many Crimes. Sieur de Mezerai: Annals Franciae Archivae Camerae
Ratiociniorum Lutet. L. Barbar. Ph. de Senate. If the Cause be just, the
Separation is from the high Priest or Bishop, not from the Church. Or more
properly from Boniface, not from the high Priest. Unless such distinctions and
discriminations are allowed for true and Authentic, how can the Souls of whole
Kingdoms be distinguished and separated from the Church?

If Kings invade the Rights of God Almighty, and oppress his People (who are
the Temple of God) with servitude, denying their Rights, Privileges, and
Liberties which God has given them, and for which Christ died, we may much
more use the same distinction, and in opposition to such Kings, or rather
Tyrants, we may justly say, That not the King, but the Tyranny, is opposed.

Anno 1408. Benedict XIII. did grieviously oppress the Gallican Church with
Tributes and Exactions; whence a Convocation of the French Clergy being called
by Charles VI. they decreed, That the King and Kingdom ought not to obey
Benedict, as being an Heretic and Schismatic, and unworthy of any honor;
which the States of the Kingdom allowed, and the Parliament of Paris approved
by their Arrest. Annals Car. 6. Monstreletus. Moreover, they whom Benedict did
excommunicate as Enemies of the Church, they judged them forthwith absolved of
such Excommunications; and that thereby they were not excluded or deprived of
any Benefit or Privilege of the Church. Ibid. The like we read to have been
done as at other times in France, so in other Kingdoms.

Which evidently shows, That if Kings, and Princes, or States, do tyrannize, or
extend their Power beyond it is just bounds, Subjects may without any just
imputation of Delinquency or Rebellion withhold their Tributes, withdraw
themselves from their Obedience, or resist their Tyranny: It being one thing to
resist an evil Pope, another thing to resist the Church; one thing to resist a
King, another thing to resist a Kingdom or Tyranny.

We read, That Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a King over
themselves: And Libnah revolted from Jehoram, 2 Kings 8. 20, 22. yet after the
true Worship of God was restored, we find Libnah numbered among the subjects of
Ezekiah, Chap. 19. 8. If this distinction be of force when the Pope (who
arrogantly assumes to himself Superiority over Kings and Princes, invades their
Rights, or the Rights of the Church, is it not much more just, if Princes, I
might say Vassals, invade the Rights and Regalia of the great God of Heaven and
of Earth? It stands therefore sure, that Princes commanding unlawful things, or
forbidding Holy things, or introducing a False or Idolatrous worship, the
People, or rather Parliaments, Dyets, Senates, the several Officers, or
inferior Magistrates, having a share in the Government, and entrusted with the
common concerns of the Kingdom by the People, both may and ought to hinder or
resist unlawful commands. All, or at least the Governing Magistrates of
Kingdoms and Cities, as first empowered by God, and then constituted by Princes
by Authority derived from the People, ought to promote in their several
Stations and Provinces, first the Glory of God, and of Holy Church, and then
the Good and Welfare of Kingdoms, Cities, and Free States; and if they do not,
it is in them Crimen laesae Magistatis, and they become participes criminis by
such their sinful connivence.

Let us now consider what Bishop Bilson, Bishop of Winchester, as learned and
as honest a Bishop, and as sound a Divine as ever sat on that See, and who
has written a most learned Treatise of the difference between Christian
Subjection and Unchristian Rebellion, in the days of Queen Elizabeth.

The Romans did not love the name of King, and the Commonwealth of Venice,
Millan, Florence and Genoa, are of the same mind: many States have Governors
for Life, and for Years, and yet a Sovereignty still remaining in the People or
Senate, or in the Prelates and Nobles, that elect, or assist the Magistrate;
who has his Jurisdiction allotted and prefixed unto him, and may be resisted
and recalled from any tyrannous excess by the general and public consent of
the whole State.

In Germany the Emperor himself has his bounds appointed him, which he may not
pass by the Laws of the Empire; and the Princes, Dukes, and Cities, that are
under him, have Power to use and govern the Sword as God's Ministers in their
own charges. And though for the Maintenance of the Empire they be subject to
such orders as shall be decreed in the Convent of all their States; and
according to that direction are to furnish the Emperor with Men and Money for
his necessary Wars and Defenses: yet if he touch their Policies, infringe their
Liberties, or violate the Specialties, which he by Oath and Order of the Empire
is bound to keep, they may lawfully resist him, and by force reduce him to the
Ancient Government; or else repel him as a Tyrant, and set another in his
place, by the Right and Freedom of their Country. Bilson's Subjection, p. 513.

Zuinglius says, That if the Empire of Rome, or any other Sovereign should
oppress the Truth, and they negligently suffer the same, they shall be charged
with contempt no less than the Oppressors themselves. Zuingl. lib. 4. Epist.
Zuing. and Occol. f. 186. And elsewhere, when Kings rule unfaithfully, and
otherwise than the Rule of the Gospel prescribes, they may with God be
deposed; as when they punish not wicked Persons, but especially when they
advance the ungodly and idle Priests, such may be deprived of their Dignity, as
Saul was. Art. 42. Expl. f. 84. So God by Jeremy threatened to destroy the men
of Judah and Jerusalem, for that they suffered their King Manasseh to be
unpunished, King. 4. 21. Jer. 15. And yet the People of Israel had no declared
Sovereignty over their Kings, but only a tacit and implied Sovereignty by the
Laws of God and Nature. So when Saul would have put Jonathan his Son to death,
the People would not suffer him so to do, but delivered Jonathan that he died
not, 1 Samuel 14. When David purposed the reducing of the Ark, his Speech to the
People was, If it please you, we will send to the rest of our Brethren, that
they may assemble themselves unto us: and all the Congregation said, that they
would do so; for the thing was right in the Eyes of all the People, 1 Chronicles. 18.

After Solomon's death, all the Congregation of Israel said to Rehoboam, 1
Kings 12. make thy Fathers yoke which he put upon us lighter, and we will serve
thee: because it lay in their choice to subject or free from the Kings Power.
The People likewise took Jeremy when he had prophesied against them, and said,
Thou shall die the death, Jer. 26. And afterward reversed their Sentence, upon
Jeremy's declaring, That the words he spoke were commanded from God. Bilson
514, 517.

The Duke of Saxony and the Lantzgrave answered the Emperor, Forasmuch as Caesar
intends to destroy the True Religion, and our Ancient Liberties, he gives us
cause enough why we may with good Conscience resist him, as both by Profane and
Sacred Histories may be proved. The Ministers of Magdeburgh delcare, how the
Inferior may defend themselves against the Superior, compelling him to do
against the Truth and Rule of Christ's Laws.

The German Lawyers made evident demonstration, That the free States by the
Laws of the Empire might defend their Liberties against Caesar, to whom they
were subject with that condition; so may any other Nation, if their Magistrates
infringe their Laws and Liberties. In the Troubles of Germany Anno Dom. 1546.
when the Duke of Saxony and the Lantzgrave were Prescribed or Outlawed, they
remonstrated, That if the Emperor had kept his Covenants, they would have done
their Duties, but because he began first to make the breach, the fault is his.
For since he attempts to root out Religion, and subvert our Liberties, he
gives us cause enough to resist him with good Conscience; matters standing as
they do, we may resist, as may be showed both by Sacred and Profane Stories.
Unjust violence is not God's Ordinance, neither are we bound to him by any
other reason, than if he keep the Conditions on which he was created Emperor.
Sleid. 18. p. 212, 213. So the Magistrates and Ministers of Magdeburgh
declared, That if our Religion and Liberties, left us by our Forefathers, be
preserved, we refuse no kind of Duty that ought to be yielded unto Caesar or the
Empire. Now, by the Laws themselves it is provided, that the Inferior
Magistrates shall not infringe the right of the Superior; and so likewise if
the Magistrate exceed the limits of his Power, and command that which is
wicked, we need not only not obey him, but if he offer force we may resist him.
Lib. 22. p. 266. Anno 1550.

If a Prince should go about to subject his Kingdom to a Foreign Realm, or
change the form of a Commonwealth from Impery to Tyranny, or neglect the Laws
established by common consent of Prince and People, to execute his own
pleasure. In these and other cases which might be named, if the Nobles and
Commons join together to defend their Ancient and Accustomed Liberties,
Regiment, and Laws, they may not well be accounted Rebels, (modestly expressed)
Bills. 520.

The People may preserve the Foundation, Freedom and Form of their Commonwealth
which they fore prized when they first consented to have a King, the Law of God
gives no Man leave to resist his Prince. But Kingdoms and Commonwealths may
proportion their States as they think best by their public Laws, which
afterward the Princes themselves may not violate.

By Superior Powers ordained by God, we understand not only Princes, but all
Politic States and Regiments, some where the People, some where the Nobles
having the same Interest to the Sword that Princes have in their Kingdoms, and
in Kingdoms where Princes beat Rule. By the Sword, we do not mean the Prince's
private will against his Laws, but his Precepts derived from his Laws, and
agreeing with his Laws: which though it be wicked, yet may it not be resisted
of any Subject with armed violence. Many when Princes offer their Subjects not
Justice but Force, and despise all Laws to practice their Lusts, not every, nor
any private Man may take the Sword to redress the Prince; but if the Laws of
the Land appoint the Nobles, as next to the King, to assist him in doing right,
and withhold him from doing wrong, then be they licensed by Man's Law, and so
not prohibited by God to interpose themselves for the safeguard of Equity and
Innocence, and by all lawful and needful means to procure the Prince to be
reformed. 520, 521.

Bishop Bedel, a Reverend worthy Divine, in his Answer to Mr. Wad^sworth to
satisfy him, quo Jure, the Protestant Wars in France and Holland are
justified, says, That the Law of Nature does not only allow, but enforce every
living thing to defend it self from violence. Then the Law of Nations
permits those that are in the protection of others, to whom they owe no more
than an honorable Acknowledgment, in case they go about to make themselves
absolute Sovereigns, and usurp their Liberty, to stand for the same. And if a
lawful Prince, which is not yet Lord of his Subjects Lives and Goods, shall
attempt to despoil them of the same, under color of reducing them to his own
Religion, after all humble Remonstrances, they may stand upon their own Guard,
and being assailed, may repel Force with Force, as did the Maccabees under
Antiochus. In which case, notwithstanding the Person of the Prince himself,
ought always to be Sacred and Inviolable, as was Saul to David. And lastly, if
the enraged Minister of a Lawful Prince will abuse his Authority against the
Fundamental Laws of the Country, it is no Rebellion to defend themselves,
reserving still their Obedience to their Sovereign inviolate.

I mention these Two Bishops only, as being above all exceptions, against whom
no just objection can be made, either for Learning, Piety, Loyalty, or right
Church of England Men. Which considerations I presume kept them from being
burnt in July, 1683. Which Act surprised not a few sober Loyal Men; because, if
the learned Men of all the Reformed Church of Europe be consulted, they will be
found Asserters of the like Principles. Alas! to sacrifice so many Worthy,
Learned, Pious Men's Judgments to Fire and Faggot unheard, unrefuted, as it is
not for their honor, so it is no more convincing, nor confuting, than that
Doctors Argument, who would confute Bellarmine in Three words, viz. Bellarmine
thou L.

CHAP. XI.
Kings not lawless, but bounded by Laws, and are accountable to those who
entrusted them with their own Power. Oaths and Covenants between King and
People are equally binding: Reciprocal Duties between Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, King and People. The Power of the People is by the Law of
Nature; that of Kings is from the People, and fiduciary. As the Sword of the
Spirit is the Word of God, so the Sword of the Magistrate is the Law of God and
of Man. Obedience is a Holy thing when yielded to just commands; but void and
sinful when referred to unjust; and then natural Defense succeeds in its room.
No mean between a Saint and a Bruit. Law, by the Judgment of the wisest
Heathen, is both Lord and Kings of Men. Vujust force may lawfully be resisted
by force.
WHAT has been hitherto written, is diametrically opposite to that Pulpit
Leviathan Doctrine of quod libet licet; and that Kings are obliged to no Laws,
nor accountable to any but to God. So Julia, the Mother-in-law to Antoninus
Basianus Caracalla the Emperor, her Son-in-law, most impudently, Si libet,
licet, nescis te imperatorem esse, and leges dare non accipere? Do thou now
know that thy Will is a Law, and that it is thy right to give, not to accept,
Laws from any? And he acted accordingly. If this be good Doctrine, that Jure
Regio they are absolved of all Laws, and though they violate all human
Constitutions, yet are guiltless, or unaccountable to any but to God alone;
certainly then there never was a Tyrant, nor ever can be, if they had been so
capacitated by any Law of God or Nature (as some most impudently have printed)
God would never have prescribed them Laws, nor have punished them for breach of
them. What is this less than to render Mankind (made a little lower than the
Angels, and after the similitude of God himself) to be governed no better than
Bruits?

Can it ever be supposed, that God would ever subject his own similitude, the
Race of Mankind (for whom he has done such great things) to be harrassed,
pilld, poled, governed tyrannically, without any hope of Redress till the day
of Judgment? Or, that any People should be so void of Counsel and Sense, as
voluntarily to subject themselves and their Posterity to such abominable
slavery, and to make Kings to govern, and Laws to be governed by, and both
sworn to the observation of them in the presence of God Almighty, and yet to
esteem Kings not obliged by those Sacred Ties to keep them. The Basis and
Establishment of God's own Throne* are righteousness and judgment: and mercy
and truth go before his face, Psalm 89. 14. and 97. 2. And if they, who call
themselves God's Lieutenants or Vicegerents, govern by Violence and Oppression
(as they all do that govern, not by an immediate appointment of God, or by
common consent of the governed:) a fire shall go before them and burn them up
as enemies to God and man, Psalm 97. 3. And whoever acquires a Power over any
People, whether by dint of Sword, or by cunning Craft, or by consent of
Parties, and uses it to the detriment and not for the good of the People, are
not to be esteemed as rightful Kings, but as Enemies and Tyrants. Be it so, say
the Pulpiteers, but by what Law shall they be punished or reproved? Even by
them, and by the same Right and Law that they themselves are; there is no
exceptions. And no Law of God or Nature ever prescribed Impunity for Oppression
and Tyranny, and Wickedness over Men: He that rules over men must be just,
ruling in the fear of God. So spoke the rock of Israel unto David himself, a
King, 2 Samuel 23. 3. It Is righteousness that establishes the Throne: and it is
an abomination for Kings to work wickedness. So King Solomon, Prove. 16. 12.
When Solomon Eccl. 8. 2. 34. prescribes to keep the Kings commandment, and that
in regard of the Oath of God, and not to stand in an evil thing: for he does
whatsoever pleases him, and where the word of a King is, there is Power: and
who may say unto him, What do thou? All these are ever to be understood of
things lawful to be commanded, and*of things lawful to be done; otherwise this
undoubted Truth is to be observed, viz. we ought to obey God rather than man,
Acts 5. 29. Besides, Solomon's counsel here was to single and particular Men,
not to Assemblies, and Dyets, and Senates, and Parliaments, and great Councils,
who have a share in making Laws, and consequently coordinate in the
Government. Though all Writs, Processes of Law, Executions, and Edicts, pass
under the Title of one single Person for the sake of order, yet he that sends
out Writs is to be obedient to those very Writs, and to those Laws, as well as
they to whom they are sent.

Besides, what Generation of Christians in the World so void of Reason as to
swear Fealty and Allegiance to Kings, except they again reciprocally swear to
observe the Laws Divine, and of their Country. So the Rubenites, and the
Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasseh promised obedience to Joshua, but as
they did to Moses, on condition that God be with him, as he was with Moses,
Jos. 5. 17. If they can show a Patent from Heaven, as Moses and Joshua had, by
an immediate Call, and God's Promise to be with them as he was with Moses and
Joshua, never to fail them, nor forsake them, then may we all lay our hands on
our mouths, and proceed no farther, Job 40. 5. And yet if they had the like
Patents, yet from such Patents, no Authority could be drawn to oppress or
tyrannize over any People; but if not so, nor so, why should not Christians (in
whose inward parts God has put wisdom; and who has given understanding to
their hearts) who make Kings from among themselves, and take Oaths of them for
performance of Agreements, maintain and defend their own just Rights and
Liberties: God never broke his Covenants, but punished the People that brake
theirs; and why should his Vicegerents break their Covenants, and yet be
thought guiltless, or unquestionable?

The Jews who were the most stif-neckt, most rebellious, and most ungrateful
Nation under the Cope of Heaven, and provoked God to the uttermost (as if they
did it purposely to non*plus and pose his very Mercy;) and they provoked Moses
also (the Man of God, and the meekest Man upon Earth) beyond all his Patience;
so that he cast the very Tables of the Testimony (the Work of God, and the
Writing of God, graven upon the Tables) out of his hands, and brake them
beneath the mount, Exodus 32. 11, 16, 19, 32. yet was he so far from oppressing
or tyrannizing over them, that he wrastled with God Almighty with strong and
importunate Prayers for their Good: Why does thy wrath wax hot against this
People? nay, so importunate was he for their Pardon, that though God had
promised to make of him a great Nation, though he should destroy them, yet he
besought God so earnestly, that if he would not forgive their sin, that he
would blot him out of the Be^k of Life.

If Magistrates now adays had the like zeal for the good of the Bodies and
Souls of their People, how happy would Kings, how happy would the People be?
When the Israelites by reason of the ill Government of Samuels Sons, desired a
King like all the Nations, God (whom by such desires they had rejected, yet)
told them the manner and custom of those Kings, (Heathens you may be sure, who
knew not God nor his righteous Judgments,) 2 Samuel 8. 11, 12, 13. was very
Arbitrary governing by an Army, that they may go in and out before them, and
fight their Battles, and judge them Arbitrarily; yet so peremptory were they,
that they rejected the just, and a righteous, and easy Government that God had
appointed over them: Nay but we will have a King over us as other Nations, and
they had one that used them accordingly. Therefore Solomon might well say as in
Ecclesiastes, I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, for he does
whatever it pleases him. Where the word of a King is there is Power, and who
may say unto him, What do thou? It being then the manner of the Kings of
Nations (Heathens,) so to govern and volenti non fit injuria; which manner
remains even to this day among the Eastern Princes; and let them that delight
to be so governed, have their Belly full of it. But God has provided better
Laws, Judgments and Statutes for his People, whom he has chosen out of all
Nations to be a Peculiar People, Redeemed by the Blood of his only begotten Son
Jesus Christ, blessed for ever. Where the Word of a King is there is Power, and
who may say unto him what do thou? This he wisely advised to those who would
be so governed, and to Single Persons, but not to whole Kingdoms, or their
Representatives; the practice was otherwise even by Gods own command. Elisah
told Ahab that he and his Fathers House had troubled Israel, 1 Kings 17. 18.
Samuel told Saul, thou have done foolishly, 1 Samuel 13. 3. So Nathan told David
thou art the Man. 2 Samuel 12. 7. Obj. But these Men were extraordinarily
commissionated. Sol. Be it so, so are all they Commissionated that follow their
Example, though not immediately from God himself, yet tacitly, by his general
Commands universally and eternally true. Viz. Thou shall not hate thy Brother
in thy heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin
upon him, Levit. 19. 17. Is it fit to say to a King thou art wicked, and to
Princes ye are ungodly? Says Job. 34. 13. Reprove not a Scorner lest he hate
thee, rebuke a Wise man and he will love thee. Prove. 9. 8. These are prudential
Documents how to manage rebukes, but exempts not Kings and Princes from being
rebuked. He that rebukes the wicked gets himself a Blot, ver. 7. In such
case the Apostles give good Advice, Give not that which is holy unto Dogs,
neither cast Pearls before Swine, lest they trample them under their Feet.
Indeed if Kings and Princes are such Bruits, then Tophet is prepared for them,
and shall be their Doom, Isa. 30. 33. And Men will be wiser than to run their
Heads against Brick Walls: But Truths seasonably spoken, can do no man no
wrong, and ought graciously to be received. Solomon's intimation is good, Where
the word of a King is there is Power, and who may say unto him what do thou?
Eccl. 8. 4. Indeed it is a folly in any Man to contend with any Man, King or
not King, that is mightier than he, Eccl. 6. 10. But all these Apothegms relate
chiefly to Private Persons, not to whole States and Kingdoms, who have just
Power to defend their just Rights against Princes that usurp more Power to
themselves than ever God and the People gave them. And to urge Samuel a Prophet
in a wrong sense, is with the Witch at Endor, to raise a False and Counterfeit
Prophet. 1 Samuel 28. 11, 12. Can it ever be imagined that God gave countenance
or encouragement to Kings to work Wickedness, to oppress, or violate all Laws
and Covenants, and yet be blameless and unaccountable here on earth? He has
commanded no man to do wickedly, neither has he given any man license to sin.
Eccl. 15. 20. God never breaks his own Covenants, but keeps them for ever, and
always punished them that did; and shall they who call themselves his
Vicegerents, like Wild Boars of the Forest, or like Bears robbed of their
Whelps, break through all Laws and Bounds, and yet be blameless and
unaccountable to them who made them Kings, designedly to be subject to Laws,
and not to destroy them; or like Foxes of the Wilderness, by craft and
subtilty, by shamming Laws, or perverting Righteous Judgment; or by packing an
Alteration in Government, and slide thereinto insensibly by tricks and querks
of Law; or to draw Arguments from the manner and custom of Kings Heathen, for
Jus Regium to be the Right of Kings Christian to do as they list, quod libet
licet, uncontrolably, is as much as in them lies to do as the Rebellious and
Ungrateful Israclites did, vilify, set at naught and reject the Government
which God established by his infinite Wisdom.

Where such Doctrines are embraced as true, what better conditions are
Christians under than Heathens, nay, then Brutes? Did God, think you, create
the whole Race of Mankind, without respect of Persons, after his own Image, a
little lower then the Angels, and crown them with Glory and Honor, and give
them dominion over the works of his hands, and put all things under their Feet,
and yet at the same time to subject them to Axes and Harrows, to Thorns and
Briars, to the lusts and pleasures of a few Kings, chose by themselves from
among themselves, for the sake only of Order, Peace and Welfare of them all?

It Is true, that seeing the Israelites (notwithstanding God cautionating of
them,) were so foolhardy as to reject God in rejecting his Government, yet he
did gratify them, but in his displeasure, in what they desired, and they felt
the sad effects thereof. But from Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 16. it may be gathered and
concluded that the People have a just Right and Title to choose whether the
Commonwealth shall be governed by one or more, and may change it from one kind
of Government to another, as shall best please themselves. But in all
Governments God is always to be President, i. e. His Laws are always to be had
in remembrance and observed; and they who govern otherwise, are not to be
accounted as Kings, but as Enemies, not as Gods Vicegerents, but as the Devils,
and may be proceeded against accordingly.

O, but ye shall be his Servants, 1 Samuel 8. 17. Very well, and well they
deserved to be so, and Slaves to boot, as they afterward were, that after
Samuel from the mouth of God himself had solemnly protested unto them, read
their destiny, showed them what would betide them, and that when it did happen,
though they should cry out in that day because of their King which they had
chosen, the Lord would not hear them, ver. 18. that yet notwithstanding all
these forewarnings, would yet reject God's Righteous and easy Government for a
Heathenish; they were but justly served, and their usage afterward was but a
just recompense and reward of their rejection and folly: for Saul had never
been King if they had not chosen him, and it was in wrath and displeasure that
God gratified them therein, as a punishment of their Folly and Rebellion, which
is no Justification, but a Condemnation rather of that kind of Arbitrary
Government; and therefore the same Prophet told them also, That if still ye
shall do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, ye and your King; and so it proved.

Those our Teachers are but false Prophets, that teach, that the Right of Kings
is set down by Samuel, chap. 8. and ought to be punished; for neither did the
People of Israel ever allow; or the Kings avow any such power to be their just
Right, as appears by the Story of Ahab and Naboth. Some indeed did exercise it,
but that is no more a proof of the right thereof, than their practice of
Adultery, Idolatry, or of any other sin, was of the lawfulness of such sins.
When Cambyses designed to marry his Sister, his Magi told him that no Law did
allow it, yet there was a Law which did allow the King of Persia to do what he
would. Just such Magi are our Priests, that teach that there is no Law for
Kings to Tyrannize or Oppress, yet if he do, he is unaccountable. If this had
been the right of the Kings of Israel, that lex Regia commanded, Deuteronomy. 17. and
the strict enjoyment of the perpetual reading, perusing and observing the Book
of the Law, was in vain and to no purpose.

What if the Rebellious, Stubborn and Stiff necked Jews, a foolish People and
unwise, had a mind to be so governed? what does it concern Christians, those
that know better things, have more wit and more grace, and willing to enjoy the
liberty and freedom that God has given them in a Government where their Kings
are solemnly obliged by Laws and Oaths, as well as themselves, whereby their
duties become reciprocal, and obedience due, and expected accordingly.

Besides, is it rational to believe any People except Jews (that to day will
have a King like other Nations, and to morrow will not have this man rule over
them, and that with cursed Imprications, Let his Blood be on us and our
Children, which is still executing even to this very day,) to be so sottish to
give Kings such vast Revenues, and such absolute unquestionable Powers, as to
whip them with Scorpions, and tear their Flesh with Briars and Thorns impune,
and none to say unto them, Why do you thus? O, but the Prophet tells you, Ye
shall be his servants, 1 Samuel 8. 17. True; and the Prophet tells you, their
Kings shall minister unto thee, i. e. to the Church, Isa. 60. 10. And thus
says the Lord, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, (i. e. The Church which
shall be gathered by the Preaching of the Gospel, which Church we are) and they
shall bring thy Sons in their Arms, and thy Daughters shall be carried on their
Shoulders. And Kings shall be thy Nursing fathers (to carry them in their
Bosoms, as Nursing-fathers bears the sucking Child, Numb. 11. 12.) and Queens
shall be thy Nursing-mothers; they shall bow down to thee with their Face
toward the Earth, and lick up the dust of thy Feet, Isa. 49. 22. 23. in which
Church Christ her Head is always included, and always to be understood. As for
the place in Samuel, ye shall be his Servants, it is but a foretelling and
premonition that he would make them so, be it right or wrong; not that they had
any just right to make them so, but be it so, what then, even then also there
is a reciprocal duty between Masters and Servants: Servants are to obey their
Masters in singleness of Heart as unto Christ, with good will, doing service as
unto the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8. So the Masters are to do the like things
unto them, forbearing Threatening, knowing also that your Master is in Heaven,
neither is there respect of Persons with him, ver. 9. Such Service all Subjects
owe to their Princes, and other Services no Prince ought to command. Job who
was the greatest man of the East, solemnly protested to God his Integrity
toward his very Servants, If I did despise the cause of my Manservant, or of
my Maidservant when they contended with me; what then shall I do, when God
arises up, and when he visits, what shall I answer him? Did not he that made
me in the Womb make him? And did not one fashion us in the Womb? chapter 31. 13,
14, 15. By which it is apparent that there are reciprocal duties between King
and Subject, between Master and Servant. So the Gibeonites, who were sent from
the Elders, and all the Inhabitants of their Country, became Servants unto
Israel, with whom all the Elders of the Congregation made a League with them,
and did swear unto them, which though the Gibeonites got surreptitiously, yet
they solemnly kept it, and would not smite them when they came before their
Cities, because the Princes of the Congregation had sworn unto them, Josh. 9.
11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

As there were Laws for Children, Strangers, Menservants, and Maidservants,
so there were Laws for Kings, Parents, and Masters by Gods own prescription,
and to be reciprocally observed; If a Stranger sojourn with thee in your Land,
ye shall not vex nor oppress him, but he shall be unto you as one born amongst
you, and thou shall love him as thy self, for ye were Strangers in the Land of
Egypt, I am the Lord your God, Exodus 22. 21. 19. Lev. 34. Shall these have
their remedy against their Lords and Parents? And shall a free People, whole
Nations, be left to merciless Tyrants without Remedy? Laws for the King, Deuteronomy.
17. 17, 18, 19, 20. So Jerem. 22. 3, 4. Call to mind the bondage and cruel
usage of Gods own People the Jews in Egypt, who because they were under no
reciprocal Covenants, nor had power to relieve themselves, therefore God
himself stood up in quarrel of his own Covenant, and pleaded their cause, and
brought them out of that Iron Furnace with a high hand, and stretched out Arm,
in despite of the Lawless Hectoring Pharaoh, whom neither the Plague of Frogs,
nor Lice, nor Flies, nor Murrain of Cattle, nor Boyls, nor Blains, nor Hail,
nor Locusts, nor loss of Cattle, of Fruits, of Water, and of the Firstborn of
all the Land could prevail with him to let go his sin, nor the Israelites, but
will once more rush into the midst of a wonderful deliverance of Israel, and
venture his own and his Peoples Lives; and for what? for but the bondage of his
Enemies, and satisfaction of his Lusts. And if Herod's Son stand in the way of
his ambitious security, it were better be his Hog than his Child. Melius
Herodis Porcum esse quam Filium, Macr. Satur. 72. So that the Advocates of
Arbitrary Power must justify Pharaoh in all his opposition against God, and
oppression of Israel. Moreover Pharaoh had more to say for the Justification of
his Tyranny, than some other Zamzummims can pretend to, viz. that he was under
no ties of Civil or Religious engagements, no reciprocal Oaths between him and
Israel, but having them in Bondage, he seems to have something like a right of
imposing his will for Law upon Israel, yet accounted this Tyranny and
Wickedness in Pharaoh, Exodus 3. 7, 8. So caitiff and prevalent a sin is the
impetuous desire of Impery and Revenge tho to our utter ruin and destruction.

We all naturally love Domination and our Lusts better than our Lands; we had
rather part with Thousands of Rams, and Ten Thousand Rivers of Oil with the
Fruit of our Bodies, than with the Sins of our Souls, which was the Leaven
which fermented and boiled in the breasts of these Lawless Hectors. And does
not the same leaven of Haughtiness, of Oppression and Revenge, ferment and boil
in the Hearts and Breasts of those in our days, who so rule and so reign and
ravage over whole Nations their Subjects? Is it probable that God who having
seen the afflictions of his People, and heard their groaning, and after he had
showed wonders and signs in the Land of Egypt, and in the Red Sea, and in the
Wilderness Forty Years, who for their sakes smote great Nations, and slew
mighty Kings, Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og King of Bashan, and all the
Kingdoms of Canaan, Thirty one in number, Josh. 12, and gave their Land for an
Heritage unto Israel his People, Psalm. 135. 10, 11, 12. and taught them
Statutes and Judgments to do and govern themselves by and in that good Land
which he had given them in possossion which were so righteous that no Nation
under Heaven had the like, and which all Nations would confess that this great
Nation was a Wise and Understanding People, who has God so nigh unto them? Is
it probable I say that God after he had delivered them so miraculously from so
great thraldoms (of quod libet licet) should yet subject them to the like
Lawless Persons or Governments in the world? Examine all his Laws, observe all
his Statutes, search all his Judgments, and you will not find any the least
footsteps that way tending, only he foretold them what their Kings would do;
therefore they conclude that it was their just right so to do. And because he
said they shall be his Servants, 1 Samuel 8. 17. therefore he had Right to make
them his Slaves, and use them like Bruits; whereas nothing probably is thereby
meant more than that they should be his Servants to pay Tribute, Genesis 49. 15.
and to serve in his Army, when he went out to sight their own Battles, Genesis 49.
15. But if Slaves be meant thereby, yet it was violent and tyrannous, because
they had no Law of God or man to entitle them justly so to rule over them; so
that the Prophet did only declare what they would do, not what was their Right
to do. Now if it be lawful to cry unto God for deliverance, it is lawful also
to use any rational lawful means and endeavors to extricate and relieve
themselves. They that will choose a King to the displeasure of God Almighty,
its but just they should endure the Iron Furnace without his Relief. Can any
men (not brutishly prepossed,) believe that God who never breaks his Covenants,
but keeps them even with his greatest Enemies and Rebels, even with the most
ungrateful and stiff-necked Jews, and yet should establish a Right in Kings and
Princes not only to break theirs, but to leave the People without a Remedy till
Doomes-day in the Afternoon, till the day of Judgment; there is no doubt then
but that they would be all of the Welsh-Mans mind, and cry, Let her alone till
then, and drive on still. When Samuel told the Israelites the manner of the
King that was to reign over them, was it any more or other than what Elisha
told Hazael when he should be King what he would do unto the children of
Israel, viz. Their Strong Holds will thou set on Fire, and their Young Men will thou slay with the Sword, and will dash their Children, and rip up their Women
with Child. Did Elisha by this his Prophesy declare, that Hazael when a King
had just right so to do? Surely no; for Hazael being convinced of the contrary,
with great Indignation answered, What is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do
this great thing, 2 Kings 8. 12. 13. And yet to urge Samuel for proving an
unlimiting power to be of right in Kings to do what they list uncontrolably,
what is it less then matchless Impudence and horrible Impiety? When the Prophet
Jeremiah told Coniah, this has been thy manner from thy Youth, that thou
obeyest not my voice, Jer. 22. 21. Did he by telling him of that wicked manner
and custom of his, in not obeying his voice, reproach him, or declare a right
that he had to do so? No more did Samuel by telling the Jews the manner of the
Heathen Kings derive a right to the Jewish Kings so to do; but be the true
meaning what it will, what does it concern Christians, who choose Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Emperors and Captains general from among themselves, grant them
Commissions, give them Tribute, grant them Powers, oblige them by solemn Oaths
to govern (it is true) in their own names, but by their Power conferred on them
and for their Goods, which if they abuse, it devolves and returns back to them
who gave it, and they cannot divest themselves of it, in which God concerns not
himself immediately with it, either by Dreams, or Vision, or by Urim, or by
Prophets, but has 1 Samuel 26. 6. given them general Precepts in holy Writ to
govern themselves by, to choose able men, such as fear God, Men of Truth,
hating Covetousness, and place such over themselves, etc. Exodus 18. 21. and
has given Laws and Bounds to Kings, etc. Deuteronomy. 17. 17, 18, 19. which Laws though
they most particularly concern Kings, yet they are not thereby disobliged from
the observation from all the other Laws of God, to which the whole race of
Mankind without respect of Persons is bound to observe and keep; so that since
the days of the Prophets the Christians neither ask a King by them, neither do
receive any one by his immediate appointment, but make Kings of one from among
themselves according to the Law of Nature, and of Nations, observing Gods holy
Laws and Precepts. When Samuel 1. 10. 25. told the People the manner of the
Kingdom, he wrote it in a Book, which Book say the Hebrew Doctors the Kings
either tore or burnt, that they might more freely tyrannize.

Though the Pulpits do not march quatuor pedibus along with Leviathan in his
Dogma's of Arbitrary Power in Kings and Princes, of quod libet licet in the
Twentieth Chapter of his Second Part, and elsewhere sparsim, yet they go hand
in hand with him thus far, That if Kings do act contrary to the Laws of God,
and Nature, and of Man, yet they are responsible and accountable to none but to
God himself: Whereas there is not one plain Text or Syllable in the whole Bible
(maugre all false glosses) that concludes any thing for Kings being
unaccountable unto human Judgments, or that they have an absolute Power, or
Divine Prerogative: So that in sum, The Pulpits and Leviathan are so far
agreed, as to dogmatize Lies and false Doctrines, for to justify that Kings
(maugre all mutual and reciprocal Laws, Pacts, and Covenants,) may act and
govern how they please: And to justify and assert, that they ought not so to
Govern, but to observe the Laws of God, of Nature, and of Men; but yet if they
do not, they are notwithstanding responsible and accountable to none on Earth
but to God only for their so doing; which in truth differ in their consequences
no more than Herringmen do from Fishermen, and both stink in the Nostrils both
of God and of all good Men, as destructive to the well being and good
Government of all human Societies, and have no sound Foundation in the Law of
God, of Nature, or of Reason, but are contrary to them all; for sans doubt,
they that have Authority to give and apply Power to this or that Person, have
Authority also to consure his Actions against the Law of Nature. 1.
Self-preservation (than which nothing is more dear, and which Nature seeks by
all means and endeavors to preserve as inviolable) is common to a Man, with
all other Animals, (if you tread but upon a Worm it will turn; and if it have a
Sting, or a Fangue, or a Poison, have at you.) 2. Then whatsoever may conduce
to its other Happiness of its well-being, it labors to obtain them, and to
avoid the contrary, and to hate and revenge the Opposers, so that vim vi
repellere is as natural to Man as to all other Animals. Other Laws of Natural
consequence implanted and grafted in him in his first Creation for the better
Reglement of Communities throughout the whole World, as to do good to all, to
hurt no Innocents, to keep Covenants, Promises, and Contracts faithfully, to
contribute their utmost to procure the Happiness of the whole of that Kingdom,
that Commonwealth, or that Society, or Community, whereof they are Members. All
which are utterly confounded and destroyed by such Leviathan Pulpit Doctrines.
3. It Is against the Law of Men and Nations, for where ever there are Laws
between Kings and People (wherein Salus Populi is ever to be presumed to be the
Supreme Law, for that God made the whole Creation not only for the Necessities,
but for the Delights also of the whole Race of Mankind in general, and equally,
without respect of Persons,) solemnly made, and sworn unto by mutual consent;
there they do mutually, reciprocally and solemnly bind each other: And the
Sword placed in the Magistrates hand, is not as the material Sword in the hand
of Alexander, not to untie but to cut the Traces of that fatal Gordian Chariot;
but the established Laws are the true Sword to which both King and People must
submit, and be responsible; if otherwise, making of Laws were but Leonis
Catulum alere. vid. Eras. Adag. p. 1. 709. For as the Sword of the Spirit is
the Word of God, so the Sword of Magistrates are the Laws of God and of Man:
All which Rights and Privileges of Mankind are utterly destroyed if this
Doctrine be good Doctrine; Oaths between King and People being of the same
nature with that between Rahab and the Spies; which if not performed by her,
they were to be quit of the Oath which She had made them to swear: For Kings
though in Title, in the execution of Laws, and in many Prerogatives, they are
singulis majores, yet in the main they are universis minores; the reason is
irrefrigable, for that the People make Kings, and not Kings the People: And the
like reason, Christ is the everlasting Head of the Church, because Christ made
and ordained the Church to be his peculiar People, and not the Church Him the
Head of them. In Paternal Government which is indisputable, there the Fathers
beget the Children, and not the Children the Father, and they owe him
Obedience, though morose and bitter to them; yet if he prove a Tyrant over them
their Obligation to him is cancelled; and if he Murder any of them, he himself
shall suffer Death. Nature gives Fathers to the People, but the People make
Kings to themselves, and therefore Kings are constituted for the People, and
not the People for Kings.

Some places of Scripture are urged, though of very little force when brought
to the Test and well examined. As first, let my Sentence come forth from thy
presence: let thine Eyes behold the things that are equal, Psalm. 17. 2. What
has this Text to do more particularly with the Government between Kings and
their People, than with all other troubles and afflictions that Mankind in
general is subject unto, etc. being as applicable to every particular Person
persecuted and in troubles, as to King David; here, in confidence of his
Integrity, craveth defense of God against his Enemies, and so may any Body
else; but it proves nothing that Kings if they oppress their Subjects shall be
accountable to none but to God Almighty: It does prove that any oppressed King,
or not King, may appeal unto God to plead their Cause, and Protect and Defend
them; And if it be lawful so to Pray, it is lawful to put to their own helping
Hands to relieve themselves by any lawful means and endeavors, and pray to God
to bless their endeavors, and so by their prayers and endeavors to cooperate
together: it is an Appeal to God to judge between him and his Enemies. And is it
not lawful, nay, the duty of all States and Kingdoms to make the like Appeals
and Supplications to God Almighty? It Is probable that David wrote this Psalm
when he was troubled and persecuted by Saul, even after he was anointed of God,
and because he did then make Supplications and Appeal to Jonathan for his life,
if there be iniquity in me slay me thy self, for why should thou bring me to
thy Father? Will it follow therefore that court was to be made to Jonathan
only? I doubt not. This is a great Example and Encouragement to those that are
falsely accused to appeal to God by Prayers and Supplications for help; and the
reasons that follow are great, viz. thine Eyes behold the things that are
equal, and he tries the heart, verse 2, 3. But what signifies this to prove
that Kings are accountable to none but God for Male Government? Another abused
place of Scripture is Psalm 51. 4. Against thee only have I sinned, and done
this evil in thy sight, that thou might be justified when thou speak, and
be clear when thou judge. That Men of the same temper and complexion with
Leviathan should urge places of Scripture and make false glosses upon them, I
wonder not at all, but that the Pulpits should Chime and Ring to the same Tune,
I am in an amaze. Do they believe themselves? Or have they forgot their Pater
Noster? Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
If one Man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him, but if they sin
against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2. 25. So 1 Cor. 8. 12.
when ye sin against the Brethren to commit Murder, Adultry, etc. and yet sin
against God only, happily may be good Doctrine according to the Alcoran or
^^viathan, but certainly can have no place in Scripture, no not in this Psalm,
which is a Psalm of David's deep repentance, confessing his sins to God and
begging his pardon. David's heart having smote him for these his sins against
God and Uriah, did in the bitterness and anguish of his Soul prostrate, make
his court to God his Judge, and besought him more especially; who only tries
the hearts and reins, acknowledging his sins and begging his pardon, who only
had power of Soul and Body, of Life and Death eternal, and so only could acquit
or punish eternally, and to create in him a new heart, and to renew a right
spirit within him, which no mortal had the like; and therefore by only in this
place, can be meant no other but thee chiefly, thee especially, according to
Matthew. 10. and Luke 12. He did not fear them which had power to kill the Body
only, but not able to kill the Soul; but did fear him which after he had killed
the Body had power to cast into hell. For David had already condemned himself
to death before he knew himself to be the Man mentioned in Nathan's Parable, 2 Samuel 12. 5. And David's anger was greatly kindled against the Man, and he said
to Nathan, as the Lord lives, the man that has done this thing shall surely
die. Have they not read what Jonathan said to Saul? Let not the King sin
against his servant, against David, because he has not sinned against thee, 1 Samuel 19. 4. did Saul a King sin against David a private person, and his
Subject, in seeking his innocent Blood? And shall David when King covet his
Neighbor Uriah 's Wife, and seek the innocent Blood of Uriah himself, and yet
not sin against Uriah? Quis discrevit? Who has made the difference, who
exempted him? Falsest Teachers, that would be esteemed Men of God, Priests of
the most high, and yet teach Doctrines more becoming Priests of Baal, Men of
Belial. Did not David sin against the Tenth Commandment, and against his
Neighbor also, when he coveted his Neighbors Wife, and purchased her
adulterous embraces at the rate of innocent Blood, may they not as well plead
the like plea, and justify Ahab sinning against God only, and not against
Naboth, when he purchased his Vineyard at the price of his innocent Blood? 1
King. 21. 19. 2 King. 9. 33. 36. If David had Power to shed the innocent Blood
of Uriah, and debauch Bathsheba uncontrolably by Man, it is either from God, or
not from God; if it be from God, it must be a Power against the Six and Seventh
Commandments; which God gave to David, and not to any Subjects; and so David
lied when he confessed it a sin which was none, and consequently needed no
pardon; and so consequently Kings, because Kings, are under no Obligation of
Duties, of Mercy, Truth, Justice, etc. to their Subjects, which is contrary to
all Scripture, Deuteronomy. 1. 15, 20. and 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7. Romans 13. 3. 4.

If this Power be from God, as it is unrestrainable and unquestionable by the
Subject, it cannot be from God at all, for God cannot give a Power to do ill,
that is unpunishable by Men, and not give that Power to do ill; for in this
very thing that God gives to David a Power to kill and commit Adultery with
this respect, that it shall be punishable by God only, and not by Men, God must
give it as a sinful Power to do ill, i. e. a Power of Dispensation to sin, and
so not to be punished by either God or Man; which is contrary to the whole
design and purport of the Scriptures.

If such a Power as is not restrainable by Man be from God permissive, as in
Devils and Men, then it is no Regal Power, nor any Ordinance of God, and then
to resist such Power is not to resist the Ordinance of God. For Priests to
preach Kings to be Nursing-fathers of the People, and to be custodes utriusque
tabulae (as indeed they ought to be) and yet to preach that if Kings do break
the Commandments, yet they sin against God only, and are accountable to God
only, is Divinity becoming only Micha's Priests, that for a little better
reward and hope of preferment will with gladness of heart take Ephod, take
Teraphim, take graven Images, preach any thing, swallow down theft and idolatry
together, pervert any Text, though thereby whole Nations are robbed and
despoiled of their Laws, Liberties, and Religion. Falsest Prophets! that thus
flatter profaneness, betraying God's truth, and smothering and dissembling the
strictness and purity of his ways, striking at sin with the Scabboard and not
with the Sword; extenuating evil, palliating Vice, daubing with untempered
Mortar, and by divining Lies to seduce Kings and Princes.

If Kings can do no wrong to their People, and are accountable to God only,
what made Samuel to make public proclamation, Behold, here I am, witness
against me before the Lord, and before his anointed: Whose Ox have I taken? or
whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of
whose hand have I received any bribe to blind my Eyes therewith? and I will
restore it to you, 1 Samuel 12. 3.

So Lewis IX. for his great Piety and Devotion surnamed the Saint, the French
King, being fully satisfied in his Conscience, that Sovereigns are responsible
by Laws both divine and human for all the miscarriages of themselves and of
their subordinate Ministers, caused to be published through all his Kingdom,
That whoever had suffered any wrong or damage by him, or by any belonging to
him, should make it known, and he would give them satisfaction out of his own
Estate; which was punctually performed accordingly. To me it is a wonder, and I
am in an amaze, how any Man can be so biassed or corrupted in Judgment (except
possessed with an evil Spirit) as to draw such Conclusions from such Premises.
Can any thing be more ridiculous in Nature, in Reason, in Wisdom, in
Understanding, to give Laws to Kings, and cause them to swear to keep them, and
yet to be understood at the same time to be lawless, and not obliged to keep
them, according to some, or at least cannot be questioned if they break them,
(according to others) which is as Caitiff a position as the other, and differs
nothing but in words only? Shall all others be punished for the breach of the
same Laws, and Kings only excepted, who by solemn and sacred Oaths have bound
themselves to performance, and the Laws make no exceptions? Absit? Does God
make any exceptions? Does not God punish Kings as severely as he does others?
Is not Tophet ordained of old which is deep and large, the pile whereof is fire
and much wood, and which is kindled by my breath as by a stream of brimstone:
yea for Kings it is prepared, Isaiah 30. 33. and shall we give such
encouragement to break Laws and to work Wickedness, God forbid? Are not such
Doctrines encouragements to Kings to lift up their Hearts above their Brethren?
against which God has forewarned and forbid them, that they might know
themselves to be but Men. God made his own Sabbath for Man, and not Man for the
Sabbath, and has he not made Kings so too? Moses was a King with Supreme
Power. Well, what then? and so let all Kings have if they have the same
Warrant, Commission, access and freedom with God Almighty, to have constant
recourse unto him to carry the Causes of their People unto him, and receive his
Commands, and communicate them to the whole Congregation, and prosecute them as
punctually as he did, and be as faithful in his House as he was. But though
Moses had this great and mighty Power, being as it were God's companion,
speaking unto God, and God answering him, Exodus 19. 19. yet it no where appears
that quod libet licet, that he could do what he list, and be accountable to God
only. It Is true, the People came to him to ask counsel of God for them, but not
to do his own commands without God's commands and advice first had; and all
this was but to teach them the Ordinances and Laws, and show them the way
wherein they were to walk, and the works they were to do, Exodus 18. 20. not to
oppress, or injure them, or tyrannize over them to give Laws, not receive or be
obliged by any themselves. So that upon the whole matter God was the King of
the Jews, Moses only his Interpreter and Ambassador; and if Kings will not be
as faithful as Moses was, in judging and acting according to the Laws and
Ordinances of their and our God, there will then be no leading into captivity,
no complaining in our streets, no breaking in, nor going out; but happy would
be the People that were in such a case; yea, happy that People whose God is the
Lord, Psalm. 144. 14. 15. to make Laws to bind King and People, and yet Kings to
break them impune, when the very Laws themselves do not exempt them, is very
ill becoming reasonable men, and that all but Kings should be punished for the
breach of them is wicked and unjust. It may happen in all Kingdoms (most
probably in those that are Haereditary,) that some Kings may be Idiots, or mad,
or follow mad Councils and Advisors, (a crime of the same Leaven,) as did
Rehoboam, and must whole Kingdoms then also be subject to their Tyranny, to be
chastized not with Whips but with Scorpions, without making use of their power
to extricate themselves out of their hardships and miseries? Is it not then
natural to cry, What Portion have we in David? We have no Inheritance in the
Son of Jesse, every man to your Tents, withdraw your Services, withhold your
Tributes, fight not against the Interest of your Nation; and now David see to
thine own house, 2 Chronicles. 10. 16. Though Kings have the great title, yet the
Laws are to govern both them and their Subjects, and though all Laws run in
their names, yet they cannot do what they list, but as he is to command
according to Law, so his Subjects are to obey him according to Law, not against
Law.

Does God himself keep Covenant for ever, and never break any; and shall Kings
who claim their Titles and Powers from him, take greater liberty and freedom to
break the Covenants and Agreements with their Subjects than God himself, or
pretend to be unaccountable? I doubt they themselves would not accept such a
Plea from their own Ambassadors or Ministers transgressing their Commissions.
Had the Israelites power to cast off their corrupt Judges, (a Government well
pleasing to God himself, and to choose them another form of Government even
Kingly (contrary to the mind even of God himself,) and did not God gratify them
therein, though they rejected not Samuel only, but God himself thereby, Sam. 8.
7, 8. For he gave them a King in his anger, and took him away in his wrath,
Hos. 13. 11. Had they such power under the Law, and have not Christians the
same under the Gospel? if not, show when, where, and by whom it was taken away.
Certainly whoever sets up himself to be supreme and above all Laws, or to be
accountable to none but to God for breach of them, does as much as in him lies
make himself an Idol or a strange God to be revered without contradiction. If
Nebuchadnezzar erect his Prodigious Idol, must all People, Nations and
Languages fall down and worship it? Gideon whom the men of Israel Commissioned,
saying, Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy Son, and thy Sons Son also, but
Gideon answered, I will not Rule over you, neither shall my Son rule over you,
the Lord shall Rule over you, Judge. 8. 22, 23. By which it appears that Gideon
by this Commission was as Supreme, and had as large Powers as any King had, or
as the Israelites could give him, without formal Covenants or Laws to tie him
up; and yet his Answer is a document upon divine Record for ever to all Kings
and Princes, that it is not the right of Men to domineer over Men, but it
belongs and appertains to God only, to rule without control* And indeed it is
both against the law of nature, and precept divine, for Kings so to lift up
their hearts above their Brethren, as to rule over them Rigorously,
Uncontrolably; for God created them all equal, and we shall all stand in an
equal distance before Gods Tribunal, where there shall be no respect of
Persons. What difference and distance of stations and of honors there is
amongst us, is from our selves, and of our own framing, naked came we into the
World, and naked shall we return. It is ill, very ill, offending little ones
whose Angels do always behold the face of God in Heaven, Mat. 18. 10. By all
which it manifestly appears, that the Mosaic Kings and Judges were equally
obliged to keep the Laws, together with the rest of the People, and that there
is not any one Law either in the old or new Testament that makes any exception
or exemption, or to free one more than another from censure, if a Transgressor
either against God or Man.

To assert that God has reserved to his own Tribunal the punishment of Kings
and Princes more than others, so as to free them from being called to an
account and censured here on Earth, is a false Maxim without sound reason, or
good authority: Examine the Gospel, and see if that does allow that which the
Law does not, and whether the Divine Herald of Liberty inward and outward, or
civil to all Christians, do deliver us up also Captives and Slaves to Tyrant
Princes, without a power or liberty to extricate our selves from such Slavery
and Thraldom. We read in the Gospel that Christ at his coming should scatter
the Proud Imaginations of their Hearts, and put down the Mighty from their
Thrones, Luke 1. 51, 52. but no where that he did establish the Thrones of
Tyrants for good government. Christ himself was born under Tyrants, suffered
under them, made himself of no Reputation, took upon him the form of a Servant,
and thereby purchased for us an honest and just liberty, as to bear with
patient minds a necessitated servitude; but we no where read that he took away
from us our just powers of procuring our own Liberties when oppressed, but
rather confirmed them. Art thou called being a Servant, care not for it, but if
thou may be made Free use it rather. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye
the Servants of Men. 1 Cor. 7. 21, 23. In vain therefore is the example of
Christ brought for our enduring of such servitude, who by the price of his
Servitude purchased and confirmed our civil Liberties; Christ having asked
Peter at Capernaum, of whom do the Kings of the Earth take Custom or Tribute,
of their own Children (i. e. their Citizens) or of Strangers? (i. e. though
under a conquerred condition;) Peter says, of Strangers. Jesus says unto him,
then are the Children free; notwithstanding, least we should offend them, pay
for me and thee. Matt. 17. 25, 26, 27. Thus much rationally and naturally may
from hence be concluded, viz. That Christ and Peter as private Persons paid
Tribute to Caesar, though they had no obligation to pay it, nor Caesar any just
right to require it; yet because they would give no offense, but would be at
quiet, and avoid trouble, Christ did command payment. But from hence it never
can be concluded, that whole Kingdoms or Commonwealths, being unjustly
oppressed with exorbitant Taxes contrary to Law, and without their consent are
therefore obliged to pay them, or that they are thereby forbid or hindered to
right and relieve themselves. Whether by Children are meant the Citizens or
Subjects of Kings, according to some, or by Children be meant the Children of
God, the whole Race of Christians according to St. Austin, it matters not if
Peter was of the Children or Citizens, he was therefore free. We also (Christ
testifying) are free likewise either as Citizens or as Christians. God
certainly would never give his Vicegerents or Patres Patriae (as they desire to
be esteemed) authority to oppress those whom he would not tyrannize over
himself, and for whom he made the whole Creation for their comfort and solace;
no nor yet so unlimited Powers, as that if they did oppress or tyrannize, they
should by no means for such their Tyranny be questioned, which is an absurdity
of the same nature as great as the other. Is it not a wonderful injury to Gods
infinite wisdom, grace and goodness toward man, to suppose that God should
appoint Kingly Government, and oblige him to keep Laws for the well government
of his Charge as his Vicegerents, for whose good he is set over them, and yet
at the same time if he violate them all, he may do it without contradiction
till the day of Judgment, and to aggrevate the injury, they endeavor to
support that injury by wresting his own word, by coining evasions, and creating
subtleties to overshaddow the true and genuine meaning thereof, and foysting
false glosses upon them. No doubt but when a fair opportunity offers it self
to an oppressed People, to extricate themselves out of any Tyranny, Gods
Providence is therein manifested, and its their own fault if they make not use
of it. Is not Gods Image as manifestly seen in man, as Caesar's on the Coin? Is
not as much respect and regard to be showed to Gods Image as to Caesar's? I
appeal to all rational men, if it be not an injury of the same nature to give
Kings and Princes power to do what they list, or to swear them to keep Laws,
and yet in the same breath to leave them accountable to God only at the day of
Judgment, and so leave the governed to be without remedy. Caesar's have their
Rights, and the People have their Rights also. Caesar's are the Ministers of God
to the People for their good, and to see that all render to all their
reciprocal dues, not to take them away from them; and in those things wherein
they minister otherwise, they are not Ministers of God but of the Devil. Romans
13. 4. 7.

The Liberty and Freedom of the People is their propriety both by the Law of
God and nature, born with them, and ought not to be defrauded or deprived
thereof by any subtilties; but the rights and powers of Kings over the People
are given them by the People, either expressly or employed, and to be always
understood for their good; the Inscription upon Coins does not confer any more
right to Kings than unto the People, it only denotes its intrinsic value, and
that it is pure, and without base mixture or allay. Christ therefore in this
place did not so much demonstrate Subjects duty toward Kings, as to tax the
Pharisees, who feigned themselves Just Men, and took council to entangle him in
his talk, cogging with him, crying, Thou art true, and teaches the way of God
in truth, etc. of malice and wickedness designing to betray him, by taking hold
of his words, that so they might deliver him to the power and authority of the
Governor, Luke 20. 20. and therefore put that captious question to him, is it
lawful to give Tribute to Caesar or is it not? But he knowing their Hypocrisy,
answered them accordingly, Mark 12. 14. 15. Thus sophistically by false
reasonings and counterseit glosses on plain Texts of Scripture, what is it
less, or other then to represent the great God of Heaven and of Earth a
Deceiver of his People, whilst he sets Kings over us as his Ministers for our
good, and yet at the same time to allow them a Latitude to tyrannize over them
at their pleasure without control: Can men gather Figs of Thistles, or Grapes
of Brambles? then may these men gather such false conclusions from such right
premises as cannot yield them. Its undeniable that God never gave any Power to
Kings and Princes but what is just and right, and equal. Righteousness and
Judgment are the Basis and establishment of his own Throne, and shall Kings
pretend to govern otherwise? When the Pharisees pretending kindness (but
designing mischief) to Jesus, advised him to depart out of their Coasts, for
that Herod sought to kill him, Luke 13. 32, 33. Christ did not depart, nor yet
return any low pitiful answer, but boldly answered, Go tell that Fox, I do
cast out Devils, and do cures to day and to morrow, etc. thereby intimating,
that Kings have no lawful Power to wrong their Subjects, or to hinder any from
doing good to others, or their duty toward God, though by Fox-like advisoes
they usurp dominion beyond all just right, and that God himself esteems them no
other, or better than Bruits according to Psalm. 49. 20. Man that is in honor,
and understands not, is like the Beasts that perish, now what is here meant
by understanding, is declared by Job the greatest man of the East, Job 28. 28.
The fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from evil that is
understanding. So David a King tells us the same, Psalm. 111. 10. and so King
Solomon the wisest of men, Prove. 1. 7, 8, 9. chapter 10. with promises of great
Blessings, He that fears the Lord, his soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed
shall inherit the Earth, and the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him,
and he will show them his Covenant, Psalm. 25. 12, 13, 14. All other wordly
wisdom that has not respect to eternity, is but foolishness and brutish, and
the esteem that God himself has of the greatest men on earth without this
wisdom, is but as that of Bruits. So John Baptist esteemed the Pharisees and
Sadducees but as a generation of Vipers, Matthew. 3. 7. So God by Jeremy to the
voluptuous, when he had fed them to the full, they then committed Adultery, and
assemble themselves by Troops in Harlots Houses, they were as fed Horses, etc.
Jer. 5. 8. So David, Dogs have compassed me, the assembly of the wicked have
enclosed me, Psalm. 22. 16. So Isaiah calls ignorant and blind Watchmen Dogs, ye
greedy Dogs, Isaiah 56. 10, 11. And Christ forewarned them not to give that
which is holy unto Dogs, neither cast Pearl before Swine, Matthew. 7. 6. So was
Paul's caution to the Philippians, 3. 2. Beware of Dogs, beware of evil
workers, whereby it is apparent that there is no mean between a Saint and a
Bruit, be they great or small, rich or poor; Heaven and Hell will divide the
whole world, without respect of Persons. And therefore the advice of David a
King is to be followed, Be ye not like Horse and Mule which have no
understanding, Psalm. 32. 9. A Brutish man knows not, neither does a Fool
understand this, Psalm. 92. 6. All the Machiavilians and Leviathans, and
timeserving Pulpiteers of the world and their Council, without such
understanding, are but as Bruits and Brutish, void of true sense and
understanding.

Christ suffered under a Tyrant; true, but how could be suffer but under a
Tyrant, that feared neither God nor Man? Christ came into the world in the form
of a Servant and to suffer; what for? not to bring us under, but to free us
from the yoke of Bondage both Spiritual and Temporal. Consider well the answer
which Christ gave to the Mother of Zebedee's Children, desiring that her two
Sons might sit the one on his right, the other on his left hand in his Kingdom.
viz. Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and
they that are great exercise Authority over them; but it shall not be so among
you, but whoever will be great among you, let him be your Servant, even as the
Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister.

Zebedee's Sons dreaming of a Kingdom, that Christ should suddenly have on
Earth, and affecting to be chief in that Kingdom and next unto him, there arose
among them a strife, (through Pride comes Contention) who should be greatest
among them, whence that proud demand that one might sit on his right hand, and
the other on his left. But Christ gently rebuked their proud aspiring humor,
and in them all Christians, showing that the Princes of the Gentiles did
domineer and play Rex among their Brethren, (a temper very ill beseeming
Christians,) but it shall not be so among you (in whom the spirit of the living
God should dwell,) but whoever will be great among you, let him be your
Minister, and whoever will be chief among you, let him be your Servant; and
made himself the great exemplar of so great humility, who came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, of which he gave real testimony through the
whole course of his life, first coming down from Heaven his Imperial Residence,
then refusing to be made a King here on Earth, when 5000 designed to have taken
him by force to have made him a King. Then by washing his Disciples feet,
breaking Bread unto them. And to consummate all, he became obedient to death,
even that shameful death, the death of the Cross, for us men and for our
Salvation; and indeed the whole course of his Life was but administration of
all good to all, Rich or Poor, without respect of Persons, which is the proper
duty of all Kings.

But it shall not be so among you; i. e. Proud and aspiring domination ought
not to be among Christians, though they bear the glorious Titles of Evargitae
or Benefactors, nay of Emperors, Kings or Princes. Kings, Christians
especially, though Kings by name and title, yet in truth are but Servants to
the governed. So Moses, who certainly had as great and as unquestionable
authority over the Israelites as ever mortal had, to whom God himself did
dictate Laws, yet did he never proudly domineer over them, (though provoked to
the uttermost, so that he desired God to kill him, that he might not see his
wretchedness) to their prejudice or detriment, but did bear the burden of them
all, carried them in his bosom as a nursing Father bears the nursing Child,
and pleaded importunately with God himself to save them from destruction, when
the Fire of the Lord was consuming them at Taberah, and prevailed: worthy the
imitation of all those who style themselves Gods Vicegerents: then should the
governed have no oppression, no complaining in our Streets, but should every
man sit quietly under his own Vine and under his own Fig Tree. So Plato called
Magistrates not Lords, but Ministers and Servants of the People, and calls
the People not Servants but Benefactors, as those that allow and give them in
gratitude and recompense for their service, wherewithal to keep a Kingly State
and Grandeur, and depute them also their Conservators and Executioners of their
Laws. So Aristotle calls them Ministers and Keepers of their Laws; the Apostles
call them Ministers both of the Laws of God and of the People; and no doubt but
they are so, and therefore they ought to be as Faithful as was Moses in not
deviating from Gods Commandments.

Christ in the Scriptures is not against Superiority, Kingship, Government or
Governors, but against the haughty and insolent deportment and tyrannical
abuse of the power committed to their charge, as the Heathen Princes did, which
he rebukes here, intimating that so to govern, is to rule over others to their
own hurt, and that to such, a Woe is denounced, Woe to them that decree
unrighteous Decrees, and that write grievousness, which they have prescribed,
to turn aside the Needy from Judgment, and to take away the right from the
Poor, that Widows may be their Prey, and that they may rob the Fatherless. But
be not ye like unto the Heathen who govern after such a rate, but the greater
you are in Honor and Power, be ye more humble, and as him that serves, and
being as Gods Vicegerents (in which appellation you all glory and boast) be ye
all Imitators of him, and follow his example, doing good to all, executing
judgment and Righteousness, and delivering the spoiled out of the hand of the
Oppressor, and do no wrong, no violence to the Stranger, the Fatherless nor to
the Widows, neither shed innocent blood, least his fury go out like Fire, and
burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of such doings. The greater
you are, the more humble ye ought to be, and then ye shall find favor with the
Lord. In lowliness of mind let each esteem others better then themselves. As
were his Precepts, so was his example, who though he was chief Priest, King and
Lord, yet was he in the midst of his Disciples as he that serves. It is not
Regality but Piety that ennobles and makes Princes in good earnest Gods
Vicegerents.

Carry them in thy bosom as a Nursing Father carries the sucking Child into
the Land which thou swearest unto their Fathers, (a prescription and document
for all Emperors, Kings and Princes:) so God to Moses, whom he made Prince and
Lawgiver over the Jews his peculiar People, i. e. lovingly, tenderly,
carefully, which shows the great love, mildness, gentleness that should be in
Governors. So Christ, He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather
his Lambs in his Arms, and bear them in his bosom, and he shall gently lead
those that are young, Isaiah 40. 11. So Paul, We were gentle among you, even as
a Nurse cherishes her children, we exhorted, and comforted, and charged every
one of you as a Father does his Children, *1 These. 2. 7. 11. Accordingly the
Hebrews have this Rule for all Governors, It is unlawful for a man to govern
with Stateliness over the Congregation, and with Haughtiness of Spirit, but
with Meekness, and Fear. And every Pastor that brings more terror upon the
Congregation, than is for the name of God, he shall be punished: and so it is
not lawful for him to govern them with contemptuous carriage, although they be
the Common People of the Land; neither may he tread upon the heads of the holy
People, although they be unlearned and base, they be the sons of Abraham, etc.
But he must bear the toil of the Congregation and their burden, as Moses our
Master, of whom it is said, as a Nursing Father bears his Child, etc. Maimon
in Misn. tom. 4. in Sanhedrim chapter 25. Sect. 1. 2.

When the burden of the Government grew too heavy for Moses, God commanded him,
saying, Gather unto me Seventy men of the Elders of Israel, whom thou know
to be Elders of the People, and Officers over them, and bring them unto the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, that they may stand there with thee, and I will
come down and talk with them, and I will take of the Spirit which is on thee,
and will put it upon them, and they shall bear the burden of the People with
thee, that thou bear it not thy self alone, Number, 11. 16, 17. By so doing, Moses
spirit was not at all diminished, for as Sol Jarchi says, Moses in that hour
was like unto the Lamp that was left (burning) in the Candlestick (in the
Sanctuary,) from which all the other Lamps were lighted, yet the light thereof
was not lessened, but God showed hereby, that none without gifts of his Spirit
are fit for Office and Government. So Jethro to Moses, Choose able Men, such as
fear God, Men of Truth, hating covetousness, and place such over them, Exodus
18. 21. Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Acts 6. 3. The Hebrews have this rule, viz. Any Synedrion,
King or Governor that shall set up a Judge for Israel that is not fit, and is
not wise in the wisdom of the Law, and meet to be a Judge; although he be
wholly amiable, and have in him other good things, yet he that sets him up
transgresses, etc. Maim. in Sanhedrim, Chap. 3. Sect. 8. to Kings and Queens
not Governing as they ought Jeremy is sent, Chap. 13. 18. Say unto the King and
to the Queen, Humble your selves, sit down, for your Principalities shall come
down, even the Crown of your Glory.

Obj. Submit your selves to every ordinance of men for the Lord's sake, whether
it be to the King as a Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent
by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do
well, for so is the Will of God, the with well doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men.

Peter writ his Epistle to private Persons, strangers scattered through Pontus,
Galatia, Gappad^^ia, Asia, Bythinia, to a People scattered through the lesser
Asia, being there as Sojourners, and consequently not under any set Form of
Government by their own consent, nor indeed capable of it. But what does this
concern whole Kingdoms of freeborn People, who are governed by their own Laws,
of their own making, to which their Kings are as subject as themselves, and
that by their own consent and solemn Oaths? Make ye no difference between a few
dispersed People, and Kingdoms of Nobles, Senators, Dyets, Parliaments, Peers
of Kings that have a coordinate Power in the Legislative Authority, and
without which Kings cannot be, for its the governed that make Kings, not Kings
the governed, a King and no King.

But be it that it was written to a Senate, what are you the better? when no
Precept to which reason is adjoined, does bind beyond or besides that reason,
Lex est ordo. Be subject therefore for the Lord's sake. What is that? because
Kingly Government has a Divine stamp. What to do? To punish evil doers, and to
praise and reward them that do well, for this is the Will of God. When Kings so
govern, there will be no complaining in our Streets, no calling coram nobis. Of
our obligation to obey such Kings as are here described, there is no question;
so to obey others, who govern contrarily, here is no mention, no obligation: the
reason of this Precept appears, Ver. 16. As free, therefore not as slaves. Turn
the Tables. What if Kings should act quite contrary, punish and discountenance
the Good and Pious, and reward and countenance the Wicked, what then? He that
justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the righteous, even they both are
abomination to the Lord: He that says to the wicked, Thou art righteous, him
shall the People curse, Nations shall abhor him. If the Lord shall abominate
such, the People curse them, and Nations abhor them, shall not Kingdoms make
use of their own natural Power to right themselves, but live in perpetual
slavery under Axes and Harrows? Is it not called human Ordinance? Yea, shall
human Ordinance have Power only to make good Laws, and not have Power to punish
the transgressors?

O! but Nero a wicked Prince then reigned, and to him the Apostle commands all
to be subject. 1. It is questioned whether it were Nero or Claudius, that then
was Emperor of Rome; it matters not, for the Apostles writ to private,
dispersed strangers that had no share in the Government, not unto free States
and Kingdoms as before, not to the Praetors, nor Consuls, nor Senators of Rome.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power but of
God, the Powers that be are ordained of God, verse 1. Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation, ver. 2. For Rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? Do that
which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same, verse 3. For he is the
Minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid,
for he bears not the Sword in vain. For he is the Minister of God, a revenger
to execute wrath upon him that does evil, verse 4. Wherefore you must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, verse 5. For, for
this cause pay you tribute also; for they are God's Ministers, attending
continually on this very thing, verse 6. Render therefore to all their dues,
tribute to whom tribute, etc. verse 7. As Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft, so Obedience is an Holy thing, when it is yielded to just commands;
but when it is referred to tyrannical and abusive commands, then it is not
good, but it is void, and natural defense does succeed in its room: God has
given all Kingdoms liberty and power to make their own Laws by common consent,
and appoint their own Governors, and to oblige them to manage and see the
execution of them for their protection, and equal Justice to be indifferently
executed. To such commands obedience is due; but obedience to commands contrary
to established Laws, is obedience in name, but in truth extreme disobedience
toward God and the Commonwealth.

Paul writes here not as Peter did to strangers and to a dispersed People, but
to the Romans, yet to private Persons, Christians especially, and so writes as
declaring the whole reason, origin, and end of Government; and that Christian
Religion teaches that Christian Obedience may be yielded to Unchristian
Magistrates without servitude or slavery; and that it does not teach to destroy
Civil Polity and Government (as some had falsely accused the Christians there,
the occasion of Paul's just writing,) but to establish and regulate it
according to right Christian Principles, Laws of God and Nature, not by
constituting Nero's and Tyrants above all Laws, but by regulating all
Governments to the Standard of the Laws of Nature, God, and Christ; i. e.
Rulers are not to be a terror to good works but to the evil: to be Ministers of
God for the good of the governed: Revengers, to execute wrath on them that do
evil, not on them that do well: on such things they ought continually to
attend; if they walk contrary, they are not Ministers nor Vicegerents of God.

Certainly the Apostles never writ with intention to make null, and vacate the
Rights and Institutes of all Nations, nor yet so to center them in the Breast
of one Man, a Tyrant, above all Law and Punishment, and that his will and
pleasure should be the Law, to the ruin and misery of Mankind. Laws rightfully
constituted are the Supreme Regulators both of King and People. The best
Emperors always acknowledged the Authority of Laws and of the Senate to be
greater than theirs: and all Nations, not barbarous, have always held just Laws
most Sacred. Hence Pindarus apud Herodotum, that the Law was King of all. And
Orpheus in his Hymns esteemed Laws to be King not only of mortal Men, but even
of the Gods also: his reason given, is, because it holds the Reins of
Government. So Plato, in Legibus, that which ought to do most in Government is
the Law: And in his Epistles he commends that Government most where Law is Lord
and King of Men, not where Men are Tyrants over the Laws. So Aristotle in his
Politics, and Cicero de Legibus. Seeing therefore by the judgment of the
wisest Men, and by the Institutes of the most prudent Cities, Laws are held
most Supreme; and where the Doctrine of the Gospel does not contradict, but
comply therewith, there ought to be no doubt of the truth thereof; and that
both Kings and People are equally subject thereunto, and Laws according to
Cicero 12. Phillipic. are nothing but right reason, drawn from the God's
commanding things honest in the sight, and to the solace and benefit of all
Men, and forbiding all iniquity, transgression and sin. From God therefore is
the Institution of Magistrates, that by their prudent Administration the whole
Race of Mankind might live under Laws of their own making, and by their own
consent.

Arlstotle, Pindarus, Tu^^y, Plato, and alias.
And by the judgment of Heathens, Laws hold the Reins of Government, and are
above the Magistrates, as Magistrates are above the People, with which
Doctrine, and with sound Reason, and with Right of Kingdoms, the Doctrine of
the Gospel does not at all interfere, or clash, but comply, and agree. Let
every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, does subject Kings as well as the
People to the obedience thereof: for there is no Power but of God, i. e.
there is no Form of Government but has its stamp of allowance from God himself,
commanding things honest in the sight of all Men, and prohibiting the contrary.
From God therefore is the Institution of Magistracy, that by their reasonable
Service and just Administration, whole Nations may live under Laws and
Government; but whether under this or that Form of Government, or by these or
those Persons, is wholly* left to the free choice of the governed. If therefore
by the Judgment of the wise, and the Institutes of the most prudent Cities,
Dyets, Councils and Parliaments, Laws have the Supreme Authority; and the
Doctrine of the Gospel does not thwart right Reason, nor yet the natural Right
of Nations; then must Magistrates also subscribe and submit to the L^^^ of
their Government, to which they have not only consented and sworn, and be
accountable to the same Laws, and to them from whom they derive their Authority
and Power, for whose good and benefit, and by whom they were first and
primarily enacted and constituted.

Magistrates are created and appointed by Men. Hence Peter calls both Kings and
other Magistrates a human Creation, or human Ordinance. So H^sea 8. 4. They
have set Kings up, but not by me: th ^ have made Princes, but I knew it not. In
the Hebrew Commonwealth and Kingdoms only, where they had several ways of
resorting unto, and consulting God Almighty, they might and did refer the
Nomination of their Kings unto him: but concerning other Nations we have
received no such like Custom, or Mandate. The Precept that God himself gave to
the Children of Israel for the choice of their King, did more especially
respect the Qualifications of Kingship than the Nomination of the Person, viz.
When thou art come into the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee, and shall
possess it, and shall dwell therein, and shall say, Lex Regia. v. Dr. Sherrock,
c. 4. n. 9. p. 282, 283.
I will set a King over me, like as all the Nations round about me, thou shall
in any wise set him King over thee, (which is a manifest Allowance and
Commission to appoint their own Kings) whom the Lord thy God shall choose, (not
personally, not by his nomination, but according to such and such
qualifications, viz.) one from among thy Brethren shall thou set King over
thee: thou may not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy Brother. But he
shall not multiply Horses, neither shall he multiply Wives to himself, that his
heart turn not away; neither shall he greatly multiply to himself Silver and
Gold. And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he
shall write him a copy of this Law in a Book: and it shall be with him, and he
shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord
his God, to keep all the words of this Law and these Statutes to do them: that
his heart be not lifted up above his Brethren, and that he turn not aside from
that Commandment to the right hand or to the left, to the end that he may
prolong his days in his Kingdom, he and his Children in the midst of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 17. From hence it is evident under what Laws and Precepts Kings are and
ought to govern; and, if not so qualified and so chosen, they can have no just
Right to govern. Vid. Dr. Sherrock de Officiis, c. 4. No. 8. p. 289.

Sometimes the very Form of Government may be vicious and faulty, sometimes
they that obtain the Power may be so; which may proceed from Men and from the
Devil. And the Devil taking Jesus up into a high Mountain, showed unto him all
the Kingdoms of the World in a moment of time. And the Devil said unto him, All
this power will I give thee, and the glory of them; for that is delivered unto
me, and to whomsoever I will I give it. Hence is he called the Prince of this
World, John 12. 30. and 14. 31. Rev. 13. 2. The Dragon gave unto the Beast
Power, and his Throne, and great Authority; yea the God of the World, 2 Cor. 4.
4. Wherefore when it is written that there is no Power but of God, it is always
to be understood, not of all Powers whatsoever, but of all lawful Powers, such
as he there described; and of the Powers themselves, not always of the Persons
that have the Power. So St. Chrysostom, the Powers that are, are ordained of
God, who by his essential Wisdom and Goodness, and by the express Warrant of
his Ordinance never ordained any but what were good and behooful for the
governed; therefore the Apostle in this place will be understood of lawful
Powers: God may and does permit unlawful Powers for the punishment of wicked
doers, even by wicked Men, which are God's Sword, but never ordained such but
as his Rod, and Scourges. Wickedness, and Vice, and Sin, being things
inordinate, it is not possible that God should Ordain them, and yet be sinful
and vicious still: he that resists the Power, (viz. lawful Power) resists
the Ordinance of God; which Precept equally binds and obliges Kings as well as
Subjects that resist, or transgress, or obstruct the Laws, or endeavor to sham
them either by Force or coining Evasions. I appeal to Heaven, if they that
resist Powers not lawful, or abusers or overturners of lawful Powers, do resist
the Ordinance of God or not? I do think that no Man in his right senses will
say so. The Apostle yet makes it more plain, that he treats of lawful Powers,
when he says, that Rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil: And
he is the Minister of God to thee for good, for he bears not the Sword in
vain: a revenger to execute wrath on them that do evil. Who, unless Heathens,
or Persons of profligated Consciences will refuse to be subject to such Powers,
not only out of fear of punishment, but for Conscience sake? for without Civil
Government, not possible to live in Peace and Happiness. But what Power, what
Magistrates soever ordains or acts contrary can never properly be said to be
ordained, i. e. allowed and approved of God; and therefore this is no Precept,
no Command to yield Obedience to such; neither is it any Precept or Command to
forbid us prudently to resist, defend, and right our selves; for in such cases
we do not resist the Powers, but human Errors of Kings and Princes; nor the
Magistrates that are ordained of God, who ought to be such as the Apostles
decipher; but either Usurpers, or Tyrants, or betrayers of the Trust reposed in
them, who yet notwithstanding, if they must be termed Magistrates in that only
they have Power to vex, revenge, and ravage over God's People; by the very
self-same Logic, the Devil is our Magistrate. Of one thing only there can be
but one true definition; if therefore Paul does here rightly define Magistracy
and Magistrates, (as he does most accurately) then certainly by the same words
he cannot define Tyranny, Oppression, Male-Government, things Diametrically
opposite and contrary one to the other; then certainly to such Magistrates only
as the Apostles here describes do we owe Subjection, Tribute, Honor, etc. and
not to their contrary. Reasons assigned are; For this cause pay you Tribute
also, for they are God's Ministers, attending continually on this very thing:
render therefore, etc. The labourer is worthy of his hire: and they that hire
ought to have their service, and work well done: so that if Magistrates fail of
their Duty, Subjects may slacken their Tribute, which is given them only as a
recompense of their Watchfulness, Pains, and Care in well Governing: Therefore
simple and absolute subjection is not here required, but subjection with reason
subjoyned, which reasons are the Rule and Square of our subjection.

We are often told by our Priests that Prayers and Tears are the Weapons of
Christians: True, but not the only Weapons, lawful resistance of unlawful Force
is as true; which Divines both Popish and Protestants, Bellarmine,
Turrecremata, Cajetan, Dominicus Soto, Franciscus Victorius, Pareus, Calvin,
Eccolompadius, Beza, Martyr, Luther, Lavator, Zuinglius, Bucer, Padre Paolo,
eminent for his great Learning, Judgment and Faithfulness in all his Writings.
Bishop Bilson, famous for his incomparable works, especially for maintaining
Christian Subjection against Unchristian Rebellion: Willet, Dr. Sherrock,
Bishop Bedel, and other Modern Writers innumerable, who following one another
confirm the same.

But yet the said Mr. Clifford in the same Sermon, page 11, 12. is pleased with
great confidence to Pulpit it, That those that hold such Opinions, are but a
few deluded Creatures in the Church of Rome, and a handful of zealous Fools in
the reformed Churches: a very severe censure on so many great and learned Men.
I much wonder at his daring confidence thus to censure; and, which is worst, to
employ his Priesthood and his Pulpit to rail and to delude his Congregation and
the World with Paralogisms, and false glosses, and misapplications of plain
Texts of Scripture as he has done, contrary to the very duty of his
Priesthood, which is to feed us with Wisdom and Knowledge, and not to
prevaricate and juggle with plain Texts. To instance only in that golden
Sentence (as he calls it) of the Psalmist, viz. touch not my anointed, Psalm
105. 15. which very Text, though more particularly spoken of the Seed of
Abraham his Servant, and of Jacob his chosen, yet it is so clearly, and
undeniably applicable to God's People in general, in whom is all his delight,
and not of Kings in particular, that it cannot be denied; nay, it is a reproof
even to Kings themselves, viz. He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he
reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm, verse 14, 15. which also is reinforced, Psalm 149. For the
Lord takes pleasure in his People, and will put a two-edged Sword in their
Hands to bind their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron, to
execute upon them the judgment written, This honor have all his Saints. What
is this but to betray, and smother, and reproach Truth it self? very ill
becoming Priests of the most high God. He has done as much by other Texts, as
Psalm 51. 4. 1 Samuel 8. and Prove. 8. 15. And indeed most Texts he quotes he
dissembles, and puts false glosses upon them. But let these pass. I only wonder
how Priests dare be so saucy with the Word of God.

Neither is it true, as often objected, That infinite scandals would arise and
grow from such Doctrines on the Christian Religion: but it is true that they
would grow out of the contrary; for so should Tyranny be brought into
Commonwealths: which as a public fault is more pernicious. Even as no more is
it true, that by this Doctrine there would grow confusions in Families, Cities,
and Kingdoms, because every one might defend himself from the Sergeants, from
the Comito in Galleys, and from the Prince, who would force them to pay
Impositions and Taxes not granted by public consent.

For indifferences between Princes and Subjects, both cannot have right on
their sides, but of necessity, that if they who use force do it lawfully, the
defense must be unlawful; and where the force is unlawful, the defense of
necessity must be lawful: and therefore vim vi repellere licet, is always to be
understood of that force which is unjusty used. And these Doctrines are most
especially to be understood of public Kingdoms, Commonwealths, free States,
and Cities, and to preach Patience unto such under Tyran^^ and Oppression, is a
Medicine fitter for mad Dogs than for reasonable (...) especially Christians,
for whose sakes God rebukes even Kings, saying, Touch not (...) and do my
Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105. 15. To which sort of Remedy no Man ^bound, nay,
rather oftentimes a Man should sin in using it, as when the remedy were not
only prejudicial to themselves, but also to others. Another Remedy often urged
is, Obedience; be it so. This is a Remedy, but when unjust, and prejudicial,
and not only to the Liberty which God has given to the governed, but also to
their Lives, Goods, and Honors, they are not bound to use it; and by reason of
prejudicing another, they should sin if they should use it. Obedience is a
Divine Precept, and is to be yielded to a just and holy command; but when it is
referred to unjust and tyrannical commands, it is not good, but natural defense
does then succeed in its room. Submission to unjust commands is Obedience in
name, but indeed an extreme disobedience toward God and the governed. Gregory
II. Quest. 7. yields the reason: Admomendi sunt subditi ne plus quam expedit
sint subjecti, ne quum student plus quam necesse est hominibus subjici
compellantur etiam vitia eorum venerari. That Subjects must be admonished that
they make not themselves more subject than is convenient, lest they are
enforced to flatter them in their Vices, whose subjects they make themselves
more than they should. Besides, one abuse of Power and Authority gives a
greater scandal to the World, and is a cause of greater mischiefs than many
disobediences; and the Prince, as more eminent, is much more bound by his
greater Obligation to God to do his duty. Kings that have a serious intent to
live Christianly in good earnest, will be careful to observe the Commandments
of God, and that they be preferred before his own.

These Doctrines of Resistance and Passive Obedience, have of late been very
bitterly controverted by our Spiritual Guides, and Mr. Miles Barn tells us,
That it is the duty of private Men to submit their judgments in matters of
Religion to the determinations of those whom God has constituted to be their
Spiritual Guides and Governors, in his Sermon preached before his Majesty,
October 17. 1675. which undeniably is false Doctrine, (and makes us not their
Disciples but their Slaves,) and we are never the nearer the Truth if we do.
For Prester John may believe with Julian; and John of Jerusalem with Jovian,
both Spiritual Guides, and so the Position satisfied, and yet the Controversy
as indeterminable and as far undesided as before. And for certain private Men
are no more obliged to believe their Spiritual Guides because such, than
Spiritual Guides are obliged to believe private Men; but both the one and the
other are to be believed or disbelieved according to the Doctrines they do
deliver are true or false. But this is not the only false Doctrine he has
preached. Besides his faculty of preaching false Doctrine, he excels in the
faculty of Railing, and dares to Pulpit more against Julian, than Michael the
Archangel durst do against the Devil; for in his Sermon on Luke 19. he tells
us, That amongst Phanaticks and Atheists, transformed into malicious Fiends by
the Hellish Divinity of that Monster of a Priest the Author of Julian the
Apostate, whose whole Book is as great an Apostasy from the practice of
Primitive Christians, the Precepts of Obedience delivered by Christ and his
Apostles, and Christianity it self, as ever the Apostate Julian was guilty of,
page 19. In which he is not alone, being called by others impudent, unskilful,
profligate Wretch, and mercenary Scribler, which are stones only, not
confutations.

The practice of former Ages is much urged for justification of their Passive
Obedience, and amongst them the Thaebaean Legion is their great exemplar; who,
I doubt not, but had in prospect, that of Christ's Kingdom there was no end,
that they should reap if they fainted not, that their Combat was to be but
short, their Victory sure, their Crowns safe, their Triumph eternal, that God's
Grace was all sufficient here to support them, and his Glory all-sufficient
hereafter to reward them, and so cheerfully laid down their Lives at the
Emperors unjust commands, and died Martyrs. But not to derogate from their
dying according to the dictates of their Consciences, I humbly conceive, and am
of Opinion, that they had been more truly valiant for the Truth, and done more
right to Christian Religion, and less guilty of being Felones de se, that
having so much Power in their hands as they had, and such advantages of the
Emperor (he being then in straights,) if they had appealed unto the Lord of
Hoasts, by standing upon their Guard, and defended themselves. For as the
Emperor had no just Authority to command them to sacrifice to Idols, so they
had no Obligation to obey his unjust commands; and therefore the Force being
unlawful, the Defense must of necessity be just and lawful. Moreover, this very
History is by many learned Men accounted but a mere Fable, and so can do them
no courtesy, there being no Historian that mentions it in above Two hundred
years after it was said to have happened.

CHAP. XII.
Some Objections answered. God accounts the breach of Covenants as the
pollution of his name. Power of the People. St. Ambrose's behavior toward
Valentinian. They who accept of Power from others, to them they are
accountable. Public good preferrable before private. Delegated powers if
abused, naturally returns to them who gave them, and are subject to the Laws
which are supreme. Kings no more sacred than the People. By the law of nature
the right of the People is supreme and to be preferred.
THE contrary is often objected, for that Paul writ this to the Romans, Nero a
cruel Tyrant being then Emperor, which is not certain, for that very Learned
Men are of Opinion that this Epistle was writ when Claudius (a good and well
natured Prince) was Emperor, and his Government easy; besides, the first Five
Years of Nero's Government was very mild and moderate, from which uncertainties
no certain ground or argument can be drawn, wholly to submit to Tyrants be
their Governments never so uneasy. O, but God gave all Nations, viz. the
Edomites, Moabites, Amorites, Tyrians and Sydonians and their Kings to
Nebuchadnezzar to serve him and his Son, and his Sons Son, until etc. very
well, and good reason to, and he tells you why: I have made the Earth says he,
the Man and the Beasts that are upon the ground by my great power, and by my
outstretched Arm, and have given it unto whom it seems meet unto me. So
Daniel, this matter is by the decree of the most High, to the intent that the
living may know, that the most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it
to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of Men: And good
reason to, for his Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his dominion is from
generation to generation. If now the Kings of the Earth can show as good Titles
for their Crowns, Thrones and Scepters as Nebuchadnezzar had from God himself,
then may they also abuse their Power, and play Rex as he did; but if they do
not, then may they also expect the like Judgment as befell Nebuchadnezzar, and
be driven from men by men, and their dwelling to be with the Beasts of the
Field. But such Almighty appointment being now ceased, the Governed (who now
appoint Kings from among themselves,) may justly hold themselves disingaged
from any slavish submission. Methinks Kings even now adays should take warning
from this very Nebuchadnezzar, who when contrary to his duty he exalted himself
above his Brethren (who shall stand in an equal distance with himself before
the great Tribunal, where there shall be no respect of Persons) walking in the
Palace of his Kingdam, refusing the Council of Daniel to break off his Sins by
Righteousness, and his iniquities by showing mercy to the Poor, that it might
be a healing of his Errors, exalted himself above the height of the Clouds,
making himself equal to the most high; viz. is not this great Babylon that I
have built for the house of the Kingdom by the might of my Power, and for the
Honor of my Majesty? Lest they also when they keep no Promises, no Oaths, no
Protestations, but break or wrest, or sham them and the Laws which the People
has chosen, and by which both King and People ought to govern and be governed,
may come to some such fearful end. Must Tyrants, Usurpers or Lawful
Magistrates, Oppressors, draw or deduce their power of quod libet licet over
any People from God? and shall not the Governed deduce their power also of
freeing themselves from slavery, from God also, and from the Law of Nature it
self? If God send Judgments upon a Nation, by permitting Tyrants to rule over
them for their sins, or by sending Pestilence, Famine, Fire, Sword, or Wild
Beasts to punish them, and may they not seek and endeavor their freedom and
relief from all or any such Judgments, though sent of God? and may not that
Nation make use of any means that Providence shall furnish them withal to free
themselves; quis nisi mentis inops, will doubt it? When ever God pleases to
stir up the spirit of a Nation, or of a Cyrus, or of a Zerubbabel, Hag. 1. 14.
or of a Pull, or of a Tiglathpilnasar, 1 Chronicles. 5. 26. in which cases vox popul^
est v^x Dei, they may make use of what power God pleases to put into their
hands or hearts for their own relief. What more ordinary than for God to make
use of Kings and Nations as Rods to punish Sinners, and then throw them into
the Fire? to set up a Nebuchadnezzar as his Servant whom Kings and Nations
shall serve, and after the appointed time, then many Nations and great Kings to
serve themselves of him, which is a document to cautionate all Princes, how
they abuse their Power, or magnify or exalt themselves above their Brethren, or
have humane ordinances, (for so St. Peter calls them,) power only to constitute
that which is good, and not be of force and effort to remove or remedy or
redress any evil. Far be it, that any Nation should be so stupid as to admit
such pestilent Doctrines, as if submitted unto, would utterly destroy all civil
life and conversation, and turn Gods Image into the condition of Bruits, and by
being governed as Horses and as Mules which have no understanding, with Whip
and Spur, Bit and Bridle, whilst they exalting themselves above all Law sic
volo sic jubeo, must have its effort as well against man as Beast. Has God
declared that Fury is not in him, that the wicked and him that loves violence
his soul hates? Psalm. 11. 5. and that he will break in pieces the Oppressor,
Psalm. 72. 4. and that great Oppressors are Princes that want understanding,
Prove. 28. 16. And has he not promised relief to the Oppressed, and that they
shall take them Captives, whose Captives they were, and they shall rule over
their Oppressors, and that the Lord shall give them rest from their sorrow, and
from their fear, and from the hard bondage wherein they were made to serve; and
did he not break the staff of such Oppressors and the Scepters of such Rulers,
Isaiah 14. 2, 3, 4, 5. How does Holy Writ swell with examples of such his
Actions? How did he baffle Pharaoh that proud Hector and Oppressor with Frogs
and Locusts, Catterpillars, Flies, and such Vermin, the most contemptible of
his Creatures, to make him let the People of Israel go, and in the conclusion
made the self-same Sea both a Sanctuary unto Israel, and a Grave unto Egypt,
where he overthrew the Horse and his Rider, and all his Host.

If such documents, such fearful menaces, such wonderful examples of Gods
Judgments against oppressing Magistrates will not prevail with them to rule as
Moses, (who uncontrolably had as great and undisputable power and authority
even from God himself, as ever Prince could have,) did, who also, though he was
chief among the Seventy, yet did he not Lord it over them, nor over the People,
if such (I say) demonstrations of Gods anger against Oppressors will not
prevail with Kings now in our days under the Gospel, to be as faithful as Moses
was under the Law in their Government, I must leave them to the King of Terrors
to teach them more wisdom and more Piety. It can never enter into the thoughts
and hearts of good Christians, that ever God has subjected whole Nations to
the lusts, will and pleasure of one or more Tyrants, when one that is just is
better than a thousand, (Tyrant Kings,) Eccles. 16. 3. It has been, and still
is the custom and manner, (not a just Right) of most Eastern Princes, that as
soon as placed on their Thrones, and established by the strength of Armies, to
assume and appropriate to themselves as much power over their Subjects as they
please. So Step dame Julia most impudently to Bassianus the Emperor, her Son in
Law, as before; and so acted Justinian (the greatest Tyrant according to
Procopius that ever was,) and his Strumpet Theodora, taken from off the Stage
to be Empress, and acted more like Furies than Pious and Rational Creatures,
she influencing Justinian by her Magic and Intelligence with the Devil,
according to the same Procopius, unfit Patterns for Christian Emperors to
imitate, but very fit for Leviathan and his Priestly accomplices to justify and
live under. But if this had been the just Right of Kings in the sacred
government of the Israelites, Jezabel (another Theodora) needed not to have
offered Naboth a sum of Money, or another Vineyard, or proclaimed a Fast, or to
have set Naboth on high, and have suborned Witnesses for his Vineyard, 1 Kings
21. 9. 10. Kings are not usually so ignorant or careless of their Rights. But
if our Malmsbury Leviathan had lived in those days, he would have taught them
more wit, and how that Subjects are but Servants to Kings, and whatever they
get is for their Lord and King.

How severely did God punish Zedekiah King of Judah after he made a Covenant
with all the People which were at Jerusalem before God, to proclaim liberty
unto them, the breach of which Covenant, God accounted as the Pollution of his
name; therefore threatened to give Zedekiah and his Princes into the hands of
their Enemies, and into the hand of them that sought their Lives, and into the
hands of the King of Babylons Army; which afterward he brought to pass when
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon flew the Sons of Zedekiah before his Eyes, and
also all the Nobles of Judah, put out the Eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in
Chains to carry him to Babylon, Jer. 34. 39. a sad example for Kings breaking
Laws and Covenants made with their People. Hence Cicero pro Flacco, Illi nostri
Sapientissimi, etc. they are our wisest and best Princes, which command and
interdict those things which the People approve, or not approve of. So the
People unto Saul, shall Jonathan dye who has wrought this great Salvation in
Israel? God forbid, as the Lord lives, there shall not one hair of his head
fall to the ground, for he has wrote with God this day. So the People rescued
Jonathan that he died not, though Saul had determined it, 1 Samuel, 14. 15. So
Ahikam the Son of Shaphan defended Jeremiah the Prophet, destined to dye by
King Jehoiakim, Jer. 26. 24. and yet were not Rebels.

So the Princes and Centurions slew Athaliah the Tyranness, 2 Kings 11. So
Maccabeus secured himself and the Commonwealth against the Macedonian Tyrants.
So Trasybulus destroyed the Thirty Tyrants of Athens; so the Romans by public
consent expelled their Kings, wickedly tyrannizing over them, and translated
their Dominion Royal into Consular Government, and they often compelled their
Consuls to resign their Office for Mal-Government; Nero and Maximinus great
Tyrants, they judged and took away. So the Electors caused Wenseslaus a
Luxurious and Idle Prince, to quit his Empire, and put in his place Rupert,
Elector Palatine. So Dion much magnifies Trajan, for that when he delivered a
Sword to one whom he advanced to the Praetorian Cohorts, said hoc pro me utere
si justa Imperavero, contra me, si injusta. Use this in my defense, if I
command just things, if unjust; then to my ruin and destruction. So the French
deposed their King Childeric for his careless Government, shaved him and made
him a Monk, and chose Pepin (Master of his Palace,) King in his Room.

So Lucius Crassus, that excellent Orator, unto the People at a time when he
was Prince of the Senate; Nolite sinere nos cuiquam servire nisi vobis
universis quibus and possumus and debemus; Suffer us not to serve any body but
your selves all we can, which we ought to do. For though the Senate governed
the People, yet the People gave the Senate that power for their own good and
comfort. So Marcus Tullius proplancio, est enim conditio Liberorum populorum,
etc. It is the condition and privilege of Freeborn Subjects, especially of
this People, and indeed of all Nations, that by their Suffrages they may add or
substract from their Princes what they please; nostrum est far modice Populi
voluntates, etc. It is our duty modestly to submit to the good wills of the
People. So Tertullian in his Apolegetico to an Ethnic Emperor, boklly told
him, that an Emperor ought not to be called Lord; Augustus says he, Imperii
formator ne dominum quidem dici se volebat hoc enim Dei est Cognomen, etc.
Augustus was the Founder of the Empire, and yet would not be called Lord,
because it was the Sir name of God Almighty, and if he be Father of his
Country, how can he be Lord thereof? O, but Athanasius the Egyptian Bishop
says, that it is a most wicked nefarious thing to call Kings of the Earth
before Tribunals. What then, when the Authority of Men, though had in great
veneration, are trumpt up to justify any opinion, without producing the grounds
and reason of such their opinions, it is but magnificum nihil, makes a noise
and a pudder, but neither proves nor convinces. Here Is not a word out of
Scripture to prove it; and in this there is as little credit to be given to
Athanasius, as when at the end of his Creed he boldly affirms, that that Creed
to be the Catholic Faith, which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be
saved; A Creed which many doubt whether he understood it himself, or be yet
intelligible to any other; however to place the certainty of Salvation upon
such mysterious expressions, believe it quicunque vult, I am sure vulgar
capacities cannot reach it, and they are the greatest part of Christians.

So St. Ambrose of a Proconsul and Catechumen called to be Bishop of Milan, is
brought upon the Stage to serve the same turn, either unskilfully or
flatteringly interpreting, against thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51. 4. who
would have all People subject to the Emperor, and yet the Emperor be subject to
him. How did he treat Theodosius the Emperor, forbidding him to come into the
Church, thereby demonstrating himself to be a Novice, (i. e. newly come to the
faith, from being a Proconsul and a Catechumen) in the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and lifted up with pride, whom at last prostrate at the Bishops feet, having
obtained his pardon, and restored to the participation of holy duties, and
standing without the Rails, magisterially and sawcily told him, O Imperator
interiora loca tantum Sacerdotihus attributa, quae caeteris contingere non
licet. In this his demeanor, he showed himself rather a high Priest of Jewish
Rites and Customs, than a true Bishop of the Gospel, who ought to be blameless,
and not lifted up with Pride, lest he fall into the condemnation of the Devil.
I wonder in what Gospel the Bishop found such authority to be his right to
treat Emperors after such a rate. This Bishop attributed absolute dominion to
the Emperor over others, but it seems reserved Power over the Emperor to his
own Tribe of Prelates, and therefore repulsed Theodosius as subject to him,
saying, Coaequalium hominum es Imperator and conservorum, unus enim omnium
Dominus Rex and Creator. Very well, the Murder is now out, that mystery which
the subtilty and craft Ecclesiastic had long kept in the dark, the indiscreet
(to say no worse) Zeal of this otherwise Pious Learned Bishop has brought to
light. And this very St. Ambrose being commanded by Valentinian the Emperor to
depart the City of Milan, refused to obey, and being compassed with a company
of Armed People, he defended himself and House against the Emperors Commanders,
and so resisted the Supreme Powers against which he had taught. As to that
place of the Psalmist, Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee only have I sinned, (whereof
before) certainly every Individual has the same right to the same Plea; and
then I appeal unto and adjure all Ecclesiastics plainly to tell us, if Kings
should treat their Wives or Daughters after the same rate, whether they do
really and truly believe, that Kings so treating them as David did Vriah, did
sin only against God, and not offend them also. Surely they dare not be so
confident as to assert it no offense to them, and yet such there are.

If this be current Doctrine in this particular, it will as certainly hold in
all other Sins; such Priests as preach such Doctrines, do manifest themselves
to be Priests of Baal rather than Priests of the most High God. What mischiefs
such Preachments have done in the Christian world, let the world it self be
Judge; look upon allthe Courts, and lives of all Emperors, Kings and Princes
Christian, and tell me if we may not very probably judge by their Lives and
Governments, that they think their Authority an Immunity from all obedience to
the Laws of God and Man; and no wonder when such Parasites and Sycophants
Preach and Print such Doctrines.

That evil Kings are constituted by God; be it so, and so are all other evils;
shall there be Evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 6. and yet
the same Prophet bids us hate the evil, and love the good, and therefore for
that reason have they God only for their Judge. What, above all Laws written
and unwritten, natural and divine, and by no Laws to be called to Account by
their Subjects, and be found guilty though so? Wherefore? certainly no Law of
God forbids it, no Law excepts or exempts them, Reason, Right, Justice,
Religion, true Policy and Government, reprove all indifferently without
distinction or respect of Persons. I have not as yet read or known any Law
written or unwritten, natural or divine, brought to forbid the same: And why
should not reproofs and censures of sin and vices and wrongs be executed
against them, because forsooth, though wicked, yet are constituted of God:
wretched perverse reasonings! I have created the Waster to destroy, Isaiah 54.
16. Are Destroyers therefore above all Laws? Consider well with your selves if
the reasons and consequences be not the very same. How many Kings in Scripture
constituted by God himself, have we known punished, and that by Men? Are not
Popes (Tyrants in the Church,) after the same manner constitued by God, as
prima seeds anemine judicabitur 77? and yet how powerfully can the same men
plead for dethroning them, and yet plead impunity for Kings, Tyrants? How
ridiculous is it to plead thus against Baal, (whose Province is conscience
only,) to be removed out of the Church, and yet Tyrants over our Bodies, Lives
and Fortunes, Consciences and Liberties, must be continued without control. If
otherwise, then Kingdoms and States would be turned topsy turvy; be it so, if
for the better, why not? If Tyranny and abuse of Power must still continue
settled on its Dregs and Lees, then Actum est, A Dieu to all the happiness of
the Governed; if things once reduced quo jure quave injuria unto an il habit or
figure, must they for ever so continue without contradiction? God forbids it,
the same power (be it in free States or Kingdoms) being devolved on one or more
chosen from among the Governed if abused, naturally returns unto them again,
who by their good will, pleasure and suffrages conditionally conferred it on
them, and they cannot divest themselves of it. Power from them who injures
others by the most just law, must pass unto them who suffer the Injuries, for
all Men are equally tied by Laws, than which nothing can be more just; mortal
Gods to do what they list, without control, there are none among us. Without
all peradventure, they who have right to constitute Magistrates over
themselves, by devolving and deligating their own power on them, to manage and
govern them according to their own Laws, to see them executed according to the
simplicity and sincerity wherewith they were made, without shams or tricks, or
shaping or wresting them to wrong ends and purposes, which they are obliged by
Oaths (the most sacred tie among mortals) to observe. To them of necessity and
of just right, does belong the right of examining and censuring their Actions,
and of calling them to an Account, and to deal with them accordingly. Vide
Judicium Lutheri and Theologorum, and I. C. Wittiber-gentium de hac questione,
Tom. Jenens. Germ. ap. 384, ad p. 396. and Martyr. comm. in cap. 1. Jud. p. 37.
and cap. 3. p. 60, 61. No Law forbids it, no Law excepts them, Reason, Justice
and God himself command all Transgressors to be punished without respect or
difference of Persons.

CHAP. XIII.
Duty of Kings who have Authority from Men. The Right of Legislation. The Law
of Nature is the Law of God. Kings accountable. The Laws and Practices of
Ancient Kingdoms, Roman, Grecian, Lacedaemonian, Carthaginian; what severe Laws
they made against Arbitrary Power.
IF Kings did rightly consider as they ought to do, their own true interest
both in respect of this world and the next, they would con their High
Prerogative-assertors very little thanks for such their exaltations thereof,
but would rather esteem them as the very worst Friends they have; for whilst
they magnify Kingly Powers unto the Skies above the Laws, and are not
accountable for Mal-government, they thereby alarm their Subjects, to awaken
out of the supposed Dreams of their just Liberty and Interest, and to provide
for themselves, and to shake off the bondage of such unlooked for Servitude,
wherewith they would seem to surprise them by such Doctrines. And whilst they
teach such Infinite Power to be the Right of Kings, they thereby render that
power to be the more intolerable. Whilst they teach Kingly Power to be
Omnipotent, they excite the People to throw it off, rather than to submit to so
unjust domination to be the Right of Kings, whom they have set over themselves
for their good, and comfort, and not for their vexation.

As all Kingdoms and Republics have their Authority in these our days by the
Laws of Men to govern, so they are obliged by the strictest Bonds of divine and
humane Laws to manage their Government in the first place to the glory of God,
observing his Commandments in general, to fear him, to walk in all his ways,
and to love him; then to order the Government aright for the good of the
Governed, by well ordering of Laws according to their simple meaning and true
intent, without shamming or tricking, exemplary encouraging, and exhorting
their Subjects to Honesty, Piety and Justice, punishing all such as trangress
Gods Commandments, especially those of the Decalogue; for this Power is not*
Arbitrary, nor given them for their own use only, to manage as they please, but
for the good and benefit of the Governed, which they are obliged to do by the
Laws of God and Man. Preachments and apprehensions to the contrary, may cause
even Saints to be misguided and to act beside their Rule, and to deem
themselves Arbitrators of the Government wherewith they are entrusted by the
true Patrons thereof, and confirmed and ratified as necessary for the good of
the governed by God himself; for that over a multitude of People, consisting of
many and sundry Families (as every politic Society does) impossible it is,
that any should have complete lawful Authority but by consent of Men, or
immediate appointment of God, who has power over all, and who by the natural
Law has made all subject. The lawful Power of making Laws to command whole
Politic Societies of men, belongs so properly unto the same entire
Societies, that for any Emperor, Prince, Potentate, or Captain General of what
kind soever on earth, to exercise the same of himself, or to act contrary to
Laws made by public consent, and not either by express Commission immediately
and personally received from God (unto which it is now utterly impossible, that
any just pretense can be made) or else by authority derived from their consent,
upon whose Persons they impose Laws, it is not better than down right Tyranny.
Laws nor Powers there can be none lawful, which public approbation has not
made so; and the public power of all Societies is above every Individual
contained in the same Societies of what quality soever they be. I may
confidently divine, that no People ever were, or ever will be well pleased with
Governors that mind more their own benefit, pomp and pride of Life, than the
good and solace of the governed; it being the natural and fundamental right of
the Governed to deligate as much of their own power, without devesting
themselves thereof, as they think fit to Kings or Republics, subject
nevertheless to the trusts reposed in them to be always improved and employed
for the welfare of the Governed.

All People generally bear and are contented with a moderate Yoke, but from too
heavy a bondage all naturally endeavor to free themselves by all means, though
indirect. The History of Nodus Gordianus is applicable to all humane ties and
obligations of Governments, and sometime or other will have the same fate.
Therefore it is very indiscreet Zeal in any, and much more in Ministers of the
Gospel, to preach up such Prerogatives to be in the hands of Princes, which are
always prone to end in the dishonor of God, and in public confusion.

Lycurgus, a Spartan King, observing his Neighboring Princes struggling to get
all Power into their hands, and thereby ruining themselves and their Citizens,
he thought it his wisest course to take the Senate to be his Consort in
Government, and the Power of the Ephori, as a check upon himself; whereby he
established and transmitted a firm Kingdom to himself and his Successors for
many Generations. Likewise the moderation of Theopompus, King of the
Lacedaemonians, who lived more than One hundred years after Lycurgus, was such,
that he constituted the popular Government of the Ephori above his own Regal
Power, and gloried that he had left and established a more firm and durable
Kingdom to his Children and Posterity. No inconsiderable examples, if rightly
considered, nor unworthy to be imitated. No Law ever established one Man, King,
and Lord above all Laws, neither could they if they would. For that Law which
overthrows all Laws, (as such a Law would do) can be no Law. Can it reasonably
be imagined, that the Power, or rather the Impotency of one Man (be he King or
Emperor) can have more of Divine Right in him to a common Evil, than the Power
of whole Kingdoms have of the same Divine Right in them to a common Good? Far
be it from all civil Societies to have such brutal thoughts; for whilst Kings
are exalted above all Laws (as Pulpiteers would have them,) they thereby reduce
rational Men to the condition of Brutes, to be brought under Axes and Harrows
without hopes of redress.

It is evident, that Natures Law makes no Kings, nor gives any right of
Succession, or Inheritance when made, nor any right to govern Arbitrarily; nor
yet the Law of reason, which binds reasonable Creatures in this World, and
with which, by reason they may plainly perceive themselves bound to submit to
such Laws and Ordinances, as public reason does constitute for the good of the
whole, and to prefer the good of the whole before any private good whatsoever:
and therefore Kings from hence cannot have any right to wrong or oppress any
People, being themselves inferior to the whole. Now seeing Kings have no right
by the Law of God, of Nature, or of Reason, to injure or oppress any, it
remains therefore, that the People are by Natures Law Supreme; and that by the
same right by which Men first associated and took counsel together how to live
in Peace, Plenty, Liberty, and to Defend themselves from Oppression, before
ever Kings were or could be set over them; by which right also for common
Security, Peace, Liberty, Justice, etc. they constituted and preferred one or
more from among themselves, to preside over them for his or their singular
Prudence and Wisdom for management above others; by the same right they may
censure and renounce the same Men for Negligence, Wickedness, weakness of
Parts, or for any Male-Government. When a People by the Law of God, of Nature,
and of Reason, do contrive and establish a Governor over themselves, it must
necessarily follow, that the People are to be preferred before the Governor,
be he Monarch or other; and therefore there can be no right in him to injure or
oppress the People, and therefore the right of the People is by the Law of
Nature and of Reason most Supreme.

There are no Kings, nor any Right of Succession by any Law of Nature, but by
the Law of Nature and of Reason both, both may be established; by which very
Laws the most prudent and most deserving have the fairest pretense, the
discerning and discriminating of which lies wholly in the Breast and Power of
the People. Show me one Law of Nature, or any rule of natural Justice, whereby
the Inferior's guilty of punishable Crimes ought to be punished, and the like
guilty Potentates ought to go scot-free: the Law of God declares the contrary.
The mighty shall be mightily punished. Laws are not Cobwebs to catch little
Flies only, and let Bees, Wasps, and Hornets escape through impune. Kings by
Nature are no more Sacred than their Subjects, they are all God's anointed; and
if transgressors, are as punishable as they, by the self-same Laws of God and
Nature. No Law of God or Nature Authorizeth any one so to govern, as that all
the governed must be subject to punishment, but the Governor exempt and free
from censure. It Is true that the Papists have an Axiom, as before, viz. Prima
seeds a nemine judicabitur. A position as false as Hell. Where such Laws are in
force, the Laws of God and Nature are infringed and violated. If Kings break
their Oaths and their Trusts solemnly made to the People, and become Tyrants,
the People are by his Perjury and breach of Trust (without the help of Popish
Dispensations) discharged of their Oaths of Fealty and Allegiance, as also by
common Justice and the Law of Nature. Quem populus non vult, statim is non Rex
sed tyrannus est. Arist. Pol. lib. 3. cap. 10.

The Law of Nature is the Law of God; between which there is a most Divine
harmony. Consider well what Laws God has appointed for Kings; and how the
People of God, both Jews and Christians, have behaved themselves toward Kings,
and at the same time it must appear, that nothing is more agreeable to the Laws
of Nature, than to punish and remove Tyrants. The Law of Nature and Reason
seated in the minds of all Men, and respects the good of all Men indifferently,
that the strong may not oppress the weak, nor the rich the poor; which Laws
cannot be made binding but by common consent; nor any made Governor to see the
just and equal execution of them, but by like consent: and therefore both Kings
and Republics being so estated by the People for their own good, it
necessarily and unavoidably follows, that the People must be the more Worthy
and Superior; and consequently there can be no right in any Monarch or
Republic to afflict or oppress the People, and therefore by the Law of Nature
the Right of the People is Supreme; by which Right before any Kings were
erected, the People first associated and consulted for their own mutual
Defense, Liberty, Peace, and Happy living together; by which Right also in
process of time, they did prefer some one or other from among themselves, whom
they did esteem most worthy to preside; and by the same Right they did censure,
or remove upon breach of Trust; Nature not particularly respecting the good of
one, or of a few, but of all in general.

For this we have a more sure word of Prophecy, even the Testimony of God
himself in Caiphas the high Priest his Prophecy, That it is expedient that one
Man should die for the People, and that the Nation perish not, John 11. 49, 50.
Which words, though in their proper signification have respect to the
Crucifying of Christ, yet they are grounded on this natural and fundamental
Maxim, That the Good, Happiness, and Interest of a Nation is to be preferred
before the Interest, Welfare, Will, or Pleasure of any Man, King, or Prince.

No Men can by any Law of Nature lay any claim to Kingship or Succession, it
must come ab alio Jure; and that can now adays be from no other but by the
suffrages and free consent of the governed. They that otherwise sit on Thrones,
be it by Conquest, Faction, Craft, or any other Means or Artifices, are but
Usurpers at the best. Natural and Moral Right may seem to favor the most
prudent and just Persons to sit at the Helm of a State, but confer no absolute
nor indefeasible Right to a Throne or Succession: such Persons best qualified
have the fairest pretense to Government; but for the weak and simple, the
wicked and unjust to domineer over the righteous and just, and to rule with
rigor, is contrary to the Law of Nature: and to labor and endeavor to break
off the yoke of such Bondage and Impery, is likewise according to the Law of
Nature, and virtus vocatur. The People for certain were before there could be
any King; and consequently Kings must be made by the People, and therefore are
superior to them in some sense, according to quicquid efficit tale est magis
tale: a rule as true in Politics as in Naturals. Produce who can, any one Law
of God and Nature, or any one Rule of Natural Justice, by which Usurpers,
Tyrants, perverters of Law and Justice, are to be free of punishment, and yet
the Inferior People to be subject to punishments for Crimes of the same nature.
The Reason and Law of Government, be it Monarchical or Republic, is equally
natural. Kings by Nature are no more Sacred than those seated in the Government
of Republics, who nemine contradicente may and ought to be punished, and why
not Kings when transgressors, their Power being given them by the same Persons,
and for the very selfsame ends and purposes, the good of the governed?

To assert the Oaths and Pacts of Kings with their People to be obliging, and
yet to be unaccountable and unreprovable for any breach of them, is with the
Cow to give good Milk and then kick it down: at one and the same moment to make
good Laws, and yet to abolish and null them, which ought to have dominion over
both Kings and People.

Look into Ancient Histories, which strut with examples of Governors, Kings,
and others, brought to Judgment and condemned by the People, Lacedaemonians,
Grecians, Romans, etc. formal Governments.

Victima haud ulla Amplior,
Potest magisque opima mactari Jovi;
Quam Rex Iniquus. Senec. Frag.
Lex P. Vallerii. 2. Martii Fab. Maximi Scyllae. C. Gracchi plebiscitum. Lex
Annaria, etc.
See the Edict of Theodosius and Valens, Christian Emperors, Codex 1. tit. 14.
De Authoritate Juris, Imperatorum pendet Authoritas. The Majesty therefore of
Cesars must submit to the Laws on which they depend. Whoever consults and
considers the very severe Laws of the Romans, Grecians, Lacedaemonians,
Carthaginians, Athenians, against the Licentiousness, Oppressions, Tyranny,
Insolences, etc. of their Emperors, and other Magistrates, they will find that
they were made with all the Sincerity, Care, Caution, and Wisdom, that the
Understandings and Wisdoms of those several Countries and Ages could afford,
and that the breach of them were very severely punished. Valerius Publicola,
Colleague of Junius Brutus, after their Kings were banished, made a Law, That
when Tyrants by reason of their armed Soldiers could not be brought to
Judgment, it should be lawful for any Man to resist them by any means, and
afterward to give an account of their so doing. Such like Appeals and Examples
are common amongst most Nations.

Ambiorix, King of the Gauls, confessed, that the Multitude had no less Power
over him than he had over them. Tacitus writes of the Germans, Nec Germanorum
Regibus infinita aut libera potestas erat: de minoribus rebus Principes
consultant, de majoribus omnes Rex aut Princeps auditur Authoritate suadendi,
magis quam jubendi potestate; si displicuit sententia fremitu aspernatur. That
their Kings had no Infinite or Arbitrary Power, etc.

Vid. A. A. A. lib. 4. cap. 6. p. 181.
It is not unworthy our consideration to recount with how great severity and
strictest Discipline of Laws, and Ordiances both of the Senate and Common
Council, the Romans did provide against the exorbitant, and imperious,
licentious Government of their Kings beyond all bounds of reason. After the
expulsion of Tarquinius Superbus, the last Roman King, all the Citizens of Rome
assembled and concluded, that their Government under one, whom they called
King, should for the future be settled on two, whom at first they called
Praetores, afterward Judices, then Consules. P. Valerius, who was chosen
Consul with L. Brutus, made a Law, That it should be lawful for any Man to
Appeal from any Magistrate whomsoever to the People; esteeming such Appeals as
Bridles and Curbs to licentious Governors: And some do contend, that Appeals
during the Reigns of their Kings from them to the People were in use before,
and that it was so provided by their Pontifical Books; which Law was
reinforced again by Muraena the Consul, quo tempore Sora and Alba coliniae
deductae sunt. Afterward, when the Decemvirate Impery was annulled, the People
of Rome, the better to provide against Arbitrary Government, besides the
Tribunes of the People, who had the Protectorship of the Liberties and Goods of
the People, made a new Law, That if any should create a Magistrate without the
intercession of the People or their Tribunes, it should be lawful for to kill
him. Which Duellius the Consul soon after renewed by an other Constitution,
That whoever created a Magistrate without the benefit of Appeals, his Back and
Head should pay for it. Notwithstanding all these severities, yet the Nobles
did oppress the Commons; and therefore, as the only remedy thereof, M. Valerius
before the first Punick War made a Law, called Lex Valeria, which among other
things did provide, That whosoever appealed from another Magistrate, should not
be punished either Head or Back. But yet the Liberty and Goods of the People
not being sufficiently secured, but that the more mighty did oppress the less
powerful; the ^icher the poorer; M. Valerius the Consul did a third time
promulgate a Law, with grievous punishments to those who should prohibit
Appeals to the greater Tribunal, in so much that those who were violently
oppressed and condemned, he gave the right of Appeal to the People: And yet
after a few years Caligula on pretense that Suits should not be spun out, and
wier-drawn too long, did inhibite many Appeals. Although Appeals, the chief
protection of the People from Injuries, was ratified by so many Laws, and yet
proved insufficient thereunto; therefore Martius Censor made a Law in behalf of
the People, That no Man should be preferred twice to those higher places. And
then Fab. Maximus in favor of the People ordained, That no Man should in ten
years be admitted to the same Place and Authority.

Then L. Sylla by a Law forbade any Man under great punishments to be a Praetor
before he had been a Quaestor: or Consul before he had been a Praetor, and the
same Man not to be advanced again into the same place within ten years, deeming
the frequent exaltations into Powers would make the Powers not to be endured;
which Law was afterward extended unto twenty years. There were many Acts also
of the Common Council extant, by which it was provided, That no Man should bear
two Magistracies, especially that of the Curulis, in one year; neither the
Plebaeian, nor the Patritian. And all Magistrates were before admittance to be
sworn; and not to stay therein above five Days except they were sworn; and if
they carried themselves proudly and insolently in their Government they were to
be cast out; the first of such was Tarquinius Superbus: afterward (Kingship
being banished) Sergius and Virginius, Tribune Consuls, and Cn. Manlius and
Servilius Cepio, Pro-consuls, the Senate for their Male-Government caused them
to quit Magistracy, and to lay down their Ensigns thereof before the time
appointed: Which C. Gracchus by another Ordinance of Common Council confirmed,
and also provided, that if any one was discharged of his Magistracy for
unworthiness, was thereby rendered incapable of future preferment to the like,
neither were the greatest commands to continue if they transgressed on the
Liberty or Right of the People. Magistrates and Honors in the Government were
forbidden to be continued above one year by the Lex Annaria: But Julius Caesar
by a Law established, That the Praetorian Provinces should not continue above a
year, nor the Consul above two years. Tiberius did not easily take away Honors
from them, on whom he had conferred them, presuming that the fat Flies would
not pill and pole the People so much as the lean. And when their Magistracy was
ended they were not to expect a Successor till thirty days were expired by the
Lex Cornelia, and then they were to render an account of their Government by
the Lex Julia. And therefore we read of many Consuls and Praetors condemned
after their Government ended. Among the Grecians we find that he that could not
give a good account of his Stewardship, Alogii teneretur. Among the Athenians
it was so provided by a Law, That the Governors of their Commonwealth, yea, and
their very Priests were subject to render an account thereof to the People. The
Carthaginians forbade their Governors Wine during their Government, lest
thereby they should be deceived. Among the Thebans there was a Law, That no Man
should be a Governor of the public that had not given his Trade over ten
years. The Bythinians, that no Man under thirty years old should be admitted a
public Governor; which Augustus reduced to twenty two years old. And if at any
time, after their Magistracy was ended, they refused to resign their Empire to
the Successor, or would continue to have the Fasces carried before them beyond
the just time, it was a capital Crime against the People. The like was among
the Thebans. And yet it is recorded, That Epaminondas the Theban, studying the
good of his Country, did continue in his Praetorship, and refused to deliver up
his Army to his Successor, designed at a time when he had by force of Arms torn
the Lacedaemonians to pieces, and Civil Wars, lest if he had quitted his
Praetorship, his former Successes had been frustrated; for which being
condemned, the People notwithstanding by common consent absolved and quitted
him. So severe was the Discipline of the Carthaginians, That if the Emperor or
Captain General had followed ill Counsel, though the success proved happy, yet
was he to die the shameful death of the Cross for it. The Romans when their
Captains had through rashness or unskilfulness lost a Battle, they were fined,
and banished.

By the Law also first made by Valerius Publicola, it was provided, That
whoever received not their Impery or Magistracy from the People should lose
their Heads; which also was observed by the Athenians, who admitted no
Magistrates but who were chosen either by lot, or public or common suffrages.
So great was the Care, Industry, and Endeavors of the Ancients to prevent the
Insolency and Oppression of Magistrates, as to bind them up by strictest Laws
and Oaths. A. A. A. lib. 4. c. 6. p. 181, 182.

It may be true what some Authors have asserted, That at the beginning of the
Roman State there were no Laws made by the common Prescript of the People, but
what their Kings or Generals of their Armies did prescribe, that was to be
taken and observed for Law. The cause might be reasonable, for that they having
the Power of the Army they might force obedience as they pleased, having by
that means the command of punishing, and rewarding; and also of hearing and
determining the Causes, Complaints, Criminations, etc. of the Citizens. In
process of time this Imperial and Tyrannical Government found some redress from
Romulus and other Kings by the Leges Curiatae; but more especially by Servius
Tullius, in which, though the People were not consulted, yet the Senate was:
and thence they were called Leges Sacratae; by which their Kings also were
bound. Which at first being made without any due or regular order, they were
collected and reduced into order by Papyrius, and then that Collection was
called Jus Papyrianum. But when Kings would not be bound by those Laws, and
therefore were banished, then the Right and Power of Legislation was conferred
on the Consuls and Annual Magistrates; and whilst it lasted, by the advice of
the Senate, the Laws were brought to the People for their stamp; which being
obtained, they remained firm and uncorrupted. Et quodcunque postremum Populus
jussit id jus ratumque 12 Tabb. lege sancitum est, v. Calv. Dict. 993. Neither
the Consuls only, but the Dictators, the Praetors, the Aediles, the Censors
might make Laws for the People, which being proclaimed by the command of the
People, were established; and therefore all from the highest to the lowest were
bound to the observance of them: But if the People did not approve of them, or
the Senate did not receive them, they were then of no force. The Crier by the
Authority and Command of the Dictators, Consuls, or Praetors, brought the Laws
to the People, the Scribe also going before, and subjecting the same to the
People, it was then confirmed; and that which by that Law was provided for, the
People were made the Author of, and being made and Proclaimed and Engraven in
Brass, and laid up in the Treasury of the Rolls or Records, it bound all, High
and Low, Rich and Poor, so firmly, that if any one did any thing contrary
thereunto, it might appear on Record, that it was done contrary to right, and
the transgressors might justly be mulct or fined. But if any thing were to be
added or subtracted to the same Law before it was proposed in the
Marketplace, and before it was engraven in Brass, it might easily be done,
afterward not. But if any one otherwise well deserving Person of the Public,
were to be indulged for the breach of some Law, the Senate desiring, and the
People commanding, he might be absolved after the manner of the Lacedaemonians.

But Alexander Severus the Emperor would make no law sacred without the Council
of Twenty of the ablest Civil Lawyers, and Fifty of the other most Prudent
Persons first had, which Ordinance the Ancients distinguished into jus and fas:
the jus had respect to things humane and temporal, fas unto things divine. But
it is observable, that not only the Laws published by the consent of the People
were sacred, but also the Orders made by Common Council, and by the Senate,
Edicts of Magistrates, the Authorities and Responses of the Lawyers, and the
Decrees of Princes, and Cases already adjudged to have the force of Laws in
which all civil Right consists. There were also Plebiscita, Laws of the Common
People, which upon the demand of the Tribunes of the People, had the force of
Laws; for Quintus Hortensius, when the Commons of Rome had withdrawn themselves
into Janiculum (a Town beyond Tyber,) made a Law, that those things which the
Common People had commanded, all the Quirites, the Roman Citizens should be
obliged by, and observe; which Law L. Valerius and M. Horatius had granted
Centuriatis Comitiis, i. e. to the general Assembly of the People of Rome,
assembled to treat of common affairs. There was great difference between
Plebiscita, Orders made by the common People, and the Laws: for the Plebiscita,
the Tribunes demanded those things which did belong to the People; but the Laws
either Consul or Praetor or other Magistrate advising rogabantur, were demanded
whether they should be ratified or not. They made also a difference between
Populus, the Citizens of Rome, and Plebs the common Rout; for that among the
People were Patricians, Senators, and the Nobility, but among the Rout there
were no Patricians. Notwithstanding, whatever the People commanded, was not
always to be ratified, because whatever was not just, the People might not
command. The Counsels of the Senate, though they were not brought, yet if the
Tribunes approved thereof, and would have them ratified, they obtained the
force of Laws. The Edicts and Interdicts of Praetors also sometimes, and under
some qualifications, had the force of Laws, which were entitled Jus
Honorarium, which were taken away by the Lex Cornelia. Also the Responses of
Wisemen went sometimes for current. Likewise the ablest and wisest Lawyers
were esteemed and used as the best Interpreters and Judges of the Laws, which
some say was granted to them by Augustus; others as confidently affirm they had
it not from Augustus and other Princes, but of ancient custom and right long
before.

But Caligula (that Monster and Enemy of Mankind,) caused all the Decrees of
the Lawyers to be forbidden, and no body but himself to be the Interpreter and
Judge of them. At least, the Decrees and Constitutions of Princes went for
current Law: For when Caesar and the following Emperors had obtained the chief
Empire, and they only gave Laws, and all the Right and Power of Legislation was
rent from the People, Lege Hortensia, and was given to the Caesar's, so that
their Wills and their Decrees (without the counsel or consent of the People as
formerly,) had the force of Laws, contrary to the Laws of God, Nature and
Reason: Caracalla being fully possessed of this exorbitant power, used it
accordingly, who first killed his own Brother Geta (who had equal share with
him in the Government by the appointment of Severus their Father,) and then
caused the great Lawyer Papinianus to be put to death, because he would not
defend that barbarous Act of his before the Senate, alleging for his
justification, that it was easier to commit Parricide, than defend it; but
afterward this Caracalla was contented more Majorum, to have him Canonized.
Divus, modo non sit vivus, to deify him (being dead) in another world, rather
than to have him a living Co-partner with him in the Empire.

On the contrary, Trajan (that most excellent Emperor,) being possessed of the
same power, and having published some private and special Laws, or Indults for
great merits; and understanding that some relying thereon, made ill use
thereof, by drawing them into Example; and fearing lest contrary to the Laws
and Customs of the Ancients, they should be drawn by application unto wrong
Causes, and being brought into Judgment and Courts of Justice, or Pleadings as
Precedents, they should pass for Laws, he refused afterward to answer
Plaintiffs or Defendants, by any writing or Libel of Record, lest thereby
pernicious examples, and as it were Seminaries of ill might spring from thence.

Antiochus had so great veneration for the Laws, that by his public Edicts he
did declare, that if he had at any time decreed contrary to Law and Right, it
should not be obeyed, but should be freely opposed; by whose example Agesilaus
would be obliged by no Promises that he should make, but on condition, that
they were just. At what time the Common People did choose their Magistrates
(whom they always accounted as sacred) in the sacred Mount, it was provided by
a Law, that it should not be lawful for any Patrician to apprehend or disturb
any of them: and not without cause; for when against the Power and Insolences
of the Patricians, the common People did assemble to choose Tribunes as
Champions and Defenders of their Laws and Liberties, to hear complaints against
the Patricians, it would be very unjust, that in that, in which the People did
choose their Defenders to the height and pitch of Honor, they should admit
those who were most adverse and shagreen to their Liberties and Franchises.
They esteemed their Tribunes as the Ephori among the Lacedaemonians, advanced
and delegated to that office, to curb the Insolences of the Spartan Kings,
lest they should abuse their power to the prejudice of the People. Theopompus a
Spartan King, instated Five of his Friends to be Ephori, as his Auxiliary
Ministers in his Government at home, when he went abroad in Person with his
Armies; though it was provided by the Laws of Sparta, that their Kings should
not go out in Person with their Armies: which Ephori in process of time, came
to have so great a power over their Kings, that they directed them what they
were to do, and also were Censors of all they did, insomuch that they called
Archidamus to account, imprisoned him, laid a great mulct upon him, and at last
took his life away. The like they did to Pausanias and Agis, Lacedaemonian
Kings, and were so terrible, that they erected Timoris Sacellum, a Chapel of
Terror; which Ephori, together with their Kings, did take Oaths every Month
that they would observe the Laws of Lycurgus, and preserve the Kingdom in
peace. In tract of time they grew so insolent, that Cleomenes broke their
Empire, and restored the Kingly Power. It was not lawful for any Patrician to
accept of being a Plebeian Magistrate; and Volero, Tribune of the People,
ordained by a Law, proclaimed with the consent of the Plebeians that the
Plebeian Magistrate should be made without the Patricians, and only the
Plebeians admitted to the Tribunitian Councils. And though formerly to be
Dictator, Consul, Praetor, or Censor, none but Patricians were to be admitted;
yet afterward the Patrician Magistrates were to share and communicate with the
Plebeians. So Sextius Primus, of a Plebeian was made a Consul, which then was
ratified, Lege Licinia, which C. Licinius and L. Sextius, Tribunes of the
People, proclaimed, that the Consulship should be common with the Plebeians. Q.
also, P. Philo, and Cl. Licinius Stolo, Plebeians, the one did bear the office
of Pretorship, the other the Master of the Horse, with the Patricians. Moreover
the Dictatorship (in which was placed the greatest glory) and Censorship, we
find to be in common with the Plebeians. For both M. Rutilius the first
Dictator and Censor, then Q. Pompeius, and Q. Metellus were both made Censors
from the Plebeians; which Law Philo the Dictator is said to have made. All the
Patrician Magistrates, even those also of the Pontisicates and Priests, were
made, the Plebeians being first consulted. In sum, so great was the honor of
Tribunitian Power, that the People of Rome gave it to Octavius Augustus, and
then to the Caesar's, as a special remark of Favor. Yet it must not be omitted,
that though the Consuls and Praetors might be called to account by the Tribunes
of the People, yet Caesar by the right of his sacred Power, was free from all
Power of the Magistrates. But notwithstanding, if he did abuse the Power so
conferred upon him, or should diminish, or infringe the rights of the People,
or if he did intercede or forbid, or compel when or where he ought not; or if
he did enterprise or endeavor any thing against the good of the People, he
might be summoned by the Consul or Tribunes of the People; and if found guilty,
he might by their Suffrages be degraded and punished; and then he was no more
accounted Sacred, but Profane. When nine Tribunes of the People, with Sp.
Crassus, lest Magistrates (more majorum) should be substituted, did conspire
and confederate against the liberty of the People of Rome, Pub. Mutius, a
Tribune of the People, did not only put them out of their Tribuneship, but by
right and law did Punish them. And Tiberius Gracchus (the major part of the
Tribunes approving,) deprived Octavius (his Colleague in the Tribuneship) of
his Power, for that contrary to the good of the Public, he had interceded or
opposed himself. The words of the Law by which the Tribunes of the People are
made sacred, are Tribunum invitum, tanquam unum e multis, nemo cogito agere,
neque verberato, neque alteri ut verberet imperato, neque occidito, neque
occidi jubeto: si quis autem prohibitorum horum quid fecerit, impius
execrabilisque esto, bonaque ejus publicato ad sacra Cereris, and qui aliquem
haec agentium occiderit, caedis expiatus esto, 3. 66.

Lycurgus a Spartan King, and of ancient Kingly Race, (famous and celebrated
for good Government, and for making wise and good Laws,) designing to establish
Kingly Power upon a more sure foundation, he thought no way so good and so
proper (as Plato has observed,) as to constitute a Senate or Ephori, i. e. the
Power of the People, greater than that of Kings. So thought Theseus Euripideus,
King of Athens, who having vindicated the liberty of the People of Athens to
his great glory, did estate the Popular Power above the Kingly, yet
nevertheless, left his Kingdom to his Posterity. All wise and civilized People
have ever esteemed the Laws to be King, which it cannot be except it has Power
over Kings. Ann. Dom. 429, in the time of Theodosius 2d, and Valentinian 3d,
Florentio, Dianysio and Coss, upon complaints made concerning Appeals, it was
answered, that saving the reverence of our Majesty, we do not disdain to have
equal Law or Justice with private Persons. L. ult. de appell. and consult. Cod.
Th. Abest a. Cod. Just. And suitable to this was the Answer given to the
Messengers of Africa, by a Law directed to Volusianus the Prefect; viz. It is
a resolution worthy the Majesty of a Prince, to own himself bound up by the
Laws; so much does his Authority depend upon that of the Law; and indeed it is
a thing greater than Empire, to submit the Princes Power unto Laws, and by the
Oracle of this present Edict, (so it concludes,) that which we do not permit to
be lawful to our selves, we declare to others. L. 4. de leg. Cod. Just. lib. 1.
tit. 14. So just and temperate was the Government of the Romans under
Theodosius and Valentinian the Third.

Kingly Power so tempered, may very well consist with the Liberty of the
People. It was so tempered and used with the Spartans, Thebans, Athenians,
Sicilians, and others. When all power is given by the People to Kings, whereby
they obtain that Title, yet it is given in trust for them, for the safeguard
and welfare, and not for the Destruction or Prejudice of the People, to have
the benefit and freedom of their Laws, and not be Slaves. O, but after this
rate, Kings reign not by God's, but by the Peoples appointment? Very true, for
no Kings now Reign by Gods Personal appointment, but by his approbation and
allowance only, as all other Governors do; And as if God did not so govern the
People, that the People conferred Kingdoms according to the good will and
pleasure of God Almighty. Though the People of Rome by the lex Regia, gave
their power to Romulus their first King, yet did they not thereby give up
themselves to be Slaves; for among the same Laws, they had their Laws also in
favor of themselves. And the Emperor Justinian in the very Institutes
acknowledges, that the Caesar's Reign according to the lex Regia, by the choice
and suffrages of the People, Populi suffragia sunto: Magistratus creanto: Leges
sciscunto: Pacem bellumque jubento. And among the fragments, the first Law is,
Jus Populi and fuffragia sunto, quodcunque postremum Populus jussit, id jus
ratumque, 12 Tabul. lege sancitum est. v. Calv. 983. 986. When Proud Tarquin
bestroad the Throne, and violated all the wholesome Laws of Servius, and
contemned all the Laws of his Predecessors, reducing all to Lust, Will and
Pleasure, they soon expelled him, and changed their Kingly Government unto
Consular, and chose Brutus and Valerius for their Consuls, who restored the
Laws, and others restoring the People to their ancient and just Rights; such
were Leges Valeriae, Sacrariae, Iciliae and others; all which did respect the
public good, one whereof made by Valeria, (Brutus being dead,) was, that there
should be an Appeal to the People against all Magistrates administering
wrongfully, and that none should command in Rome, but they on whom the People
should confer Power so to do, who with their Goods were to be accounted Sacred;
and if any did usurp such Power without their consent it should be capital,
Calv. p. 1009. Such a Kingdom is by Aristotle called most properly a Kingdom,
which was among the Spartans; where notwithstanding the Popular Power was above
the Kingly, which cannot be denied, where the People paid all Homage, Duty,
Honor, and Respect to their Kings, though the Power remained with them, which
they did not ordinarily exercise, yet on just occasions resumed and obtained it.

It is objected that the People having once delegated their Power to Kings,
forfeit it, neither can the People resume it; yet these that thus object, do
confess, that the People may resume their delegated Powers from any other kind
or form of Government. But what makes the difference, is past my understanding,
when Kingly and all other Governments receive their* Power from the People on
conditions, and which they are sworn to observe and keep; and why that Power
which is only Fiduciary, and become forfeited for Mal-government, should not
return unto them who delegated it, as well from Kings as from Consuls, Senates,
Tribunes, Duumvirates, Triumvirates, Decemvirates, Ephori, or any other form of
Government, is past all understanding. It is also scornfully objected, this is
to be a Duke of Genoa, a Duke of Venice, not a King. They who have so mean
conceits of such Governments, (which in reality are as much approved and
allowed by God as Kingly, even by the same Scripture,) are not worthy to
preside in any Government.

If the Opinion of the Millenaries be true, and Christ shall come and reign
upon the earth 1000 Years, will he not do all things for the good of the
Governed? Will not his eyes be on the faithful of the Land, and on them that
excel in virtue? will he not hate the works of them that turn aside? will he
know a wicked Person, except to condemn him? will he suffer them that have High
Looks or Proud Hearts? will not his eyes be on the faithful of the Land, that
they may dwell with him? shall not they that walk in a Perfect way serve him?
shall they that work Deceit dwell in his House, or they that tell Lies tarry in
his sight? and will he not destroy all the Wicked of the Land, and cut off all
wicked doers from the City of the Lord? And cannot Kings do the same, whether
their power be absolute from God, or delegated from the People? Has not Christ
been among us already as him that serves, and shall his Vicegerents think it
below them to be like their Master? Were it not the most desirable condition in
the World, for Kings Christian to be so seated on Thrones, as it could not
possibly be in their power to do the least injury to the meanest of their
Subjects, and yet do good to all? Would not this be a condition acceptable in
the sight of God and Man? would not they thereby become Deliciae humani
Generis, as once Titus was? Will nothing please but quod libet licet, their
Wills and Pleasures to be their Laws? that Justinian-like, when instigated by
an Imperious, Whorish, Comedian Theodora, they may securely commit Outrages and
Cruelties sans nombre; or when tickled with a Dancing Herodias, shall take off
any Head, though of a John Baptist; or when in the midst of Adulterous
Embraces, shall betray the strength of a Nation to a Dalilah at pleasure, and
all these uncontrollably?

When the Romans had cashiered Proud Traquin their King, and in him Kingship,
they delegated their Power on Two Consuls, to be check one upon the other, that
if one exceeded or abused his Power, he might be curbed by the other; and
though both should agree to usurp or extend the power given to the prejudice of
the People, yet both Consuls and all other Magistrates were to be obedient to
the Senate, whenever the Patricians and People thought fit, which was always
had in esteem as the Peoples Champion and Defender of their Rights and Laws,
Tull. orat. pro Sestio. The like subject were the Decemviri, and all other the
Magistrates, to the Senate, insomuch that sometimes the Counsuls were esteemed
Enemies before they quitted their Consulship, and the Senate took Arms against
them. So War was raised by the Authority of the Senate against Anthony the
Consul for his misdemeanors during his Consulship. On the contrary, Trajan that
Excellent Emperor, (believing him to have been sent from Heaven to redeem them
from the slavery of former Tyrants, and to restore unto them their ancient
Liberties,) when he gave the Sword (the Ensign and Badge of Majesty and Power)
unto Saburanus, Prefect of the Praetorian Cohorts, saying, Accipe hunc
Gladium, pro me si recie agam, sin aliter, in me magis, quod moderatorem omnium
vel errare minus fas est. Use this Sword for my Defense, whilst I govern as I
ought; if otherwise, to my Destruction. Comite Cestriae Gladium Sancti Edvardi,
(qui Curtein dicitur) ante regem bajulante, in signum quod comes est Palatii,
and Regem, si oberret, habeat de Jure Potestatem cohibendi, suo sibi, scilicet
Cestrensi Constabulario ministrante, and virg^ Populum, cum se incrdinate
ingereret, sub^rahente, Matthew. Paris. lib. 3. p. 563. N. 10.

At the Marriage of Henry III. King of England, with Elianor, Daughter of
Raymund Earl of Provence, the Earl of Chester carried the Sword of St. Edward
(called Curtein) before him, in token that he was Master of the Palace, and
that he had public Authority to curb the King if he erred. The same Ensign of
public Authority is continued to this very day before the Kings of England.
King Charles II. at his Coronation being set in a rich Chair under a glorious
Cloth of State, Sir Gilbert Talbot Knight, Master of the Jewel-House, presented
the Sword of State, also the Sword called Curtana, and two other Swords, to the
Lord High Constable, who took and delivered them to the Lord High Chamberlain,
and laid them on the Table before the King. The like Powers had the Masters of
the Palace in France and other Countries. It is plain, that though that great
and just Emperor Traj an had so great Power conferred on him, yet was so just
as to appoint a Judge, (though inferior to him) over his Actions: How much more
just therefore was he, when he, superior in Power (having all the Armies and
Conquests at his beck,) and consequently could not be forced to obey the Senate
or People, yet would do it in respect of his Office and Duty to his Delegators,
and thereby acknowledge them to be his superior: of whom Pliny in his
Panegyric says, That senatus ut susciperet quartum Consulatum and rogavit and
jussit. Which are words of Command, and they that might Command, might Judge
and Censure. So Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, when Cassius the Prefect of Syria
endeavored to deprive him of his Kingdom, offered himself to the judgment of
the Senate and the People of Rome, as it should seem best unto them. Now, who
could better judge of Kingly Power than such just and upright Kings, and in
their own Cause? Certainly, by the Law of Nature, all good Kings have the
Senate or the People both for their Peers, and Superiors, in some Kingdoms,
though Tyrants (hated both of God and Man) will neither have Superior, nor Peer.

As of old, Laws (the Law of Nature guiding) by force were devised, so when
Laws came to be despised and slighted, by the same Law of Nature there must
recourse be had unto force again: so to think is just, and prudent: so to do,
is true courage; so to think and do, is the height of a prudent virtue. This
remains indelible in Nature, That the Senate, or People are always Superior in
some Countries to Kings good or bad: the reason is natural, for that the People
do transfer their own Power; or, (to speak yet more properly) the use and
exercise of some of their own Power unto Kings; the Power it self still
virtually remaining in themselves; of which they cannot so totally divest
themselves, but the Spring and Fountain thereof will still remain in them;
which is demonstrable, for that in making Laws their consent is still required
as absolutely necessary. The nearer we approach and imitate Natures Laws, the
more demonstrable is the Power of the People above the Power of Kings; their
Power being only derived from the same People, as a Stream from the Fountain.

It is as evident that the People if free do not simply, but hypothetically
transfer their Power unto Kings, neither undeed can they by the Law of Nature,
but only conditionally, and for the sake of Order, of common Justice, Peace,
and Liberty; from which if Kings do deviate, it is always to be understood,
that the People have transferred no such Power; and indeed transferred nothing,
because they transferred it only for certain good ends and purposes, Nature so
guiding; which ends if frustrated or perverted, the very Pacts and Delegations
themselves are ipso facto voidable; nay, void at the pleasure of the Senate or
People: and therefore the People must consequently be superior to Kings, who
though singulis Majores, yet in true construction of Law and Equity are
universis Minores.

In a popular State, it is generally acknowledged that Magistrates placed by
the People may be censured by the People: and in an Aristocracy by the
Optimacy: and yet it is held monstrous that Kings should be called to account in
some Countries; which, if true, concludes thus much certainly true, That they
are more than brutishly foolish ever to admit of any such Government, which
most certainly renders them slaves at the will of Kings. How comes it to pass
that Kings only of all other Governors must Reign unquestionable, uncensured,
uncontrolable? Do Men born under such a Regiment naturally become so
desperately sottish and brutish as to love slavery better than freedom? Why do
they then prescribe them Laws, and conditions of Governing, and Oaths for the
more certain performance of them at their first admittance? That they might
with the better grace jeer, and scorn, and enslave them? Or, that they only of
all the Sons and Daughters of Men, might have liberty to break Laws, and
perjure themselves impune? Or be left only to the Judgment of the great day?

Where Is the great difference and distance between Kings and popular
Magistrates, Title only excepted? Which Title the very People gave them for the
better Grace, Adornment and Majesty of their own Government. The same Power and
Authority is transferred unto Kings, and unto popular Magistrates by the
People; both one and the other sworn alike to observance of the Laws; and the
obliged to obey not one nor the other any longer than quamdiu id been gesserit?
Who makes the difference? If any, God has already decided it on behalf of the
popular Magistracy by his own example, who of his own infinite Wisdom,
Authority, and Goodness toward Mankind, instituted Judges as the best Form of
Government; but appointed Kings in Wrath, and Anger, and Indignation, and at
the foolish instance of a froward and rebellious People, and as a punishment on
them who had rejected him and his Government, and rebelled against him; whereby
it is manifest, that Kingship was first ordained as a punishment, not as the
best Government.

To assert absolute Dominion to be in Kings from the example of Fathers and of
Masters of Families, has no ground in Nature, Scripture, Reason. Aristotle in
the beginning of his Politics condemns that Opinion, of there being but little
difference in the similitude between a Kingdom and a Family. Regnum a familia
non numero solum, sed specie differt. For Fathers beget their Children. And the
People beget or create their Kings, and not Kings the People. And Fathers
provide for their Children, but the People provide for Kings, not only for
their Necessaries but for Superfluities, for their Magnificence, and for their
Grandeur: And according to Diodorus 11o. Kingdoms of old were wont to be given
not necessarily to the Sons of Kings, but to them in whom did appear most
apparent signs and tokens of Love and Kindness toward the People, and of
common good. So Justin, Principio rerum, gentium, nationumque imperium penes
reges erat, quos ad fastigium hujus majestatis, non ambitio Popularis, sed
spectata inter bonos moderatio provehebat: Whereby it plainly appears, that
Paternal and Hereditary Impery subscribes and is subservient to Virtue and to
the Right of Nations. Which Original of Kingly Dominion, both Reason and Cause,
are most especially natural; for which very cause and reason Men did first
assemble and agree on a Government, not that one should insult and domineer
over all the rest, but whosoever did injure another, there should be a Law and
a Judge amongst them for the defense and recompencing the injured.

Primus Rex Agis ab Ephoris est morte mulctatus, 192. Ob. Rex non est, nisi
unus sit and unicus. If so, then many that were Kings of England, were not. To
let pass many of the Saxons, who had many Peers in their Government either Sons
or Brothers. It Is manifest that Hen. II. of the Norman Race, reigned with his
Son. Consentire vultis de habendo ipsum regem? 193. Quod opus non foret si
regnum jure esset haereditarium, apud Reges usurpatio pro Jure saepissime
obtinet. In the Creation of our Kings, the Archbishop asks the People four
times, Consentire vultis de habendo ipsum regem? After the Roman Custom,
vultis, jubetis hunc regnare? Of which there was no need, if the King had an
absolute independent Right of Inheritance. Therefore as William the Conqueror
took an Oath of Allegiance from the People after the Battle of Hastings; so the
People took his Oath that he would keep Faith with them, etc. After which when
he broke his Faith with the People, they took Arms again; then he most solemnly
swore again, That he would observe and keep the Ancient Laws of England: if he
tyrannized over them, it was not jure belli, but jure perjurii. And when he
died, he declared, Neminem Anglici regni eonstituo haeredem. lib. Cadomens.
inde jus belli, and jus haereditarium cum ipso mortuo Gulielmo sepultum est.
Rex non potest facere injuriam, quod scelerate interpretantur, Non est injuria
quod facit Rex, quia in eo non punitur. If it be demanded by what Authority
Kings may be indicted and censured? It Is answered, by the same Authority, by
the same Men, and the same Laws that delegated their Power to create them King;
and that by the selfsame reason. Kings have no Power but what they have
received from the People, and therefore they must have Power over Kings: and by
the Law of St. Edward, Kings not governing righteously lose the very name of
King, and it denies him to be a King.

It is never to be forgotten, that in the beginning all Power did flow from the
People, and still does; which Tully excellently demonstrates, De lege Agraria.
Cum omnes potestates, Imperia, curationes ab universo Populo proficisci
convenit, tum eas profecto maxim, quae constituuntur ad populi fructum
aliquem, and commodum, in quo and universi delegant quem populo maxim
consulturum, and unusquisque' studio and suffragio suo viam sibi ad beneficium
impetrandum munire possit. Seeing all Powers, Commands, Curations (i. e.
potestas seu munus administrandi bona) do proceed and flow from the People,
then those more especially which are constituted and do respect the good and
benefit of the People, in which the universality do choose them whom they judge
will most especially study and procure their good; and every one by their study
and suffrage may have easy access to obtain Justice, and Favors. And all
Lawyers do agree and hold, That all Laws repugnant to the Laws of God, of
Nature, or of Reason, are not to be accounted as Laws. And whereas the Power of
judging was Originally in the People, and the English by no Lex Regia, have at
any time transferred it out of themselves, no King of England has been wont,
or has Power, to judge any Man, unless by the known and approved Laws, Fleta
lib. 1. c. 17. What Power Kings have are given to them by the People, that they
may know by the Authority to them committed, that they may do nothing contrary
to the Law, and keep our Laws, but not impose their own Laws on us; and the
Kings Power is really and truly in the Courts of Law, wherein the People by
their Juries have their share also. And their chief Power is in their Senates,
and Parliaments, who have a Right and Authority over all Courts and Powers; in
all which Courts Kings may both sue and be sued, and the reciprocal Causes to
be indifferently tried according to established Laws. If at any time Kings act
any thing contrary to Laws, they act then as private Men, or as Tyrants, and
not by any Authority transferred on them by God or Man, so to do. Hence Bract.
l. 1. c. 8. Non est Rex ubi dominatur voluntas, and non Lex, etc. 1. 3. c. 9.
Rex est dum been regit: tyrannus dum populum sibi creditum violenta opprimit
dominatione, etc. ibid. Exercere debet Rex potestatem Juris, ut vicarius and
minister Dei; potestas autem injuriae Diaboli est, non Dei. Cum declinat ad
injuriam Rex, Diaboli minister est. As nothing contrary to the Laws of God and
Reason can be accounted a Law, so neither can a Tyrant be a King, nor a
Minister of the Devil be a Minister of God; seeing therefore Law is but the
product of right Reason, and Obedience is due to Kings as the Ministers of God;
so by the same Reason and Law, Tyrants and Ministers of the Devil may be
censured and resisted.

Either the People to be governed have a Right and Power to choose their own
Governor, or they have not. If they have not, then Kings chosen by them are not
Kings, but Usurpers and Oppressors. If they have Power to choose, then they have
Power to oblige him to what Conditions they please, and to keep them; and, if
they fail of performing, then they are free of the Covenant, as it was between
Rahab and the Spies.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 18. dele it. ibid. l. 50. for Iliad r. Myriad. p. 9. l. 11. f.
does only r. not only. ib. l. 38. f. the way r. the right way. p. 11. l. 15. f.
our r. your. ib. f. Black-guard r. Peasants. p. 13. l. 3. dele and. p. 14. l.
28. f. this, r. those. p. 17. l. 23. f. Zalencus, r. Zaleucus. p. 16. l. 43. r.
St. Edward. p. 22. l. 20. r elegerit and alibi. ib. l. 58. r. Martyrs. p. 24.
l. pen. f. the, r. thy. p. 25. l. pen. dele to. p. 28. l. 25. dele in the
Posterity of. ibid. l. 31. f. did, r. should. p. 30. l. 22. f. taking r. taken.
ibid. l. 58. dele hundred. p. 31. l. 17. f. Timens, r Fabius. ib. l. 32. r.
Fabius. p. 33. l. 24. f. or, r. and. ib. l. 46. f. never, r. ever. p. 42. l.
12, r. Commonwealth. p. 43. l. 38. dele Obj. p. 44. l. 46. f. necesset, r
recesset. p. 46. l. 10. r. elegerit. p. 47. l. 16. r. perfectiora. p. 48. l.
35. r. differemus cui quam. p. 51. l, 43. dele we. p. 56. l. 41. f. magis, r.
majes. ib. l. 46. r. says. p. 57. l. 57. f, him, r. them. ib. l. 33. r.
proscribed. p. 60. l. 38. dele the second no. p. 61. l. pen. f. bears, r.
bear. p. 62. l. 47. after yet, r. God. p. 63. l. 19. r. prepossessed. p. 69. l.
27. f. ye, r. yea. p. 75. l. 18. f. his. r. their. p. 76. l. 5. in the
Contents, f. returns, r. return. ib. 5. in the Chapter, f. was, r. were. ibid.
l. 33. f. lawful, r. unlawful. p. 78. l. 19. f. Proplancio, r. pro Plancio. p.
82. l. 7. r. is seated. p. 87. l. 23. f. Florentio Dianysio and Coss. r.
Florentio and Dianysio Coss. ibid. l. 35. f. Valerius, r. Valeria.


