THE Case of Samuel White Humbly Presented, To the Honorable, the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, in Parliament Assembled.
I Went to India, Anno 75. as Mate on board the Ship Loyal Subject, Captain
William Goodlad Commander, for the East India Company; and did with the
knowledge and consent of the Governor of Fort St. George, and by leave of the
foresaid Commander remain in India, giving security to indempnifie the said
Commander, from the penalty of one Hundred Pounds, he was liable to pay for any
Person so left behind him, which being accordingly exacted by the Company at
the Ships return, was duly discharged by my Correspondent here.

Mr. George White my Brother, did at this time reside in the Kingdom of Syam,
whither at his Invitation I removed, and voyaging soon after to Metchlepatam,
it happened in time of my being there, that the King of Syam's Agent applied
himself to the Chief of the Companies Factory, for a Person well qualified, to
navigate a Ship of the Kings, betwixt that place, and the Port of Mergen: To
which employ he was pleased to recommend me, and I continued therein about four
years, being so happy to have my services well accepted by the said Kings
Ministers, and by them so favorably represented to his Majesty that he was
graciously pleased, to let me in a large measure partake of his Royal Bounty
and favor.

In this Interim, Mr. Constant Phaulkon, who sometime had his dependence on my
Brothers friendship, was become very considerable in the Court of Syam; as he
has since by his great merit, raised himself to be the Prime Minister, having
all Important Affairs of the Kingdom entirely under his Charge and Conduct: and
by his kind assistance, I was advanced to another employment, much more
advantageous; being made Shawbander of Tenassary and Mergen, whereby I was
entrusted with the Collecting and managing all the Kings revenues in that
Province, and was likewise Chief Commissioner for his Maritime Affairs, of
which my preferment I delayed not to give notice to my friends in the Companies
service at Fort St. George, Metchlepatam and Bengall, humbly tendering my best
services to their Commands, in whatever I might be useful to the Public or
their private Concerns, and they were pleased to return me their kind
Congratulations, and give me several occasions of serving them. Nor was it long
after my being raised to this Capacity, that there did present a suitable
opportunity to testify my Zeal to the Companies Service; for their Ship the
Golden Fleece, in her return from Bengall to England, sprung a desperate Leake,
in which distress the only near and commodious Port that presented for their
relief was Mergen, whither in confidence of my friendly assistance they came,
and found me as ready to grant, as they could be to request, all that my
interest and influence there could afford them, in my giving them the use of my
own Slaves for the more expeditious unlading their Ship, securing their Goods
in Warehouses ashore, and assisting the relading thereof without the least
Charge, when the Ship was refitted to proceed on her Voyage, for which I also
supplied them with whatever they wanted at the very same rates the King himself
paid, and wholly excused them from all the duties of the Port. But I need not
particularize how fully I answered or rather exceeded their expectations in all
things, or call any other Testimony for proof thereof, than the report made
here at home by Captain James Cook the Commander, who was so sensible of my
good deservings on this occasion, that he very earnestly solicited the
Committee for some signification of their kind accepting those my considerable
Services. But an overruling power amongst them, rendered this grateful motion
ineffectual; however I am not the less pleased, that I had the good fortune to
be Instrumental in securing and forwarding so great a Concern as that was,
which I understand did here produce no less than 190000. l.

It was now the beginning of the Year 84. when I received orders from the Court
of Syam, to sit out several Ships for prosecuting the War against the Kings of
Golcondah and Pegu, as by the same Command I also did the succeeding year, in
which expeditions I must own, we were very much befriended by the President and
Council of Fort St. George, who supplied us with Ammunition and Naval Stores,
and accommodated us with some English men for those occasions, nor were they
wanting to congratulate our successes, and make large proffers of their
readiness, to give us further assistance, as appears by their general Letters,
both to my Lord Phaulkon, and my self: while on the other side, there was all
possible care taken by the King's special Command, that not the least injury or
offense should be done to the Company, or any under their protection, as was
strictly enjoined in the Commission to every Commander; and accordingly amongst
many smaller Vessels, two Considerable Ships that were taken at Pegu, and
brought into Mergen, tho they appeared to belong to the Inhabitants of
Mechlepatam, yet upon producing English Pasports were without further trouble
discharged.

In this good accord stood the Correspondence betwixt the King of Syam and our
Company to all appearance, when in April 87. we were surprised with the strange
News that Captain Nicholson, Admiral of the Companies Fleet in Bengall, had
there seized on a Ship of the King of Syams, called the Revenge, Commanded by
Captain Edward English, who then came from Fort St. George, where he had been
kindly received and supplied with Ammunition and Men for the Kings service, and
these ill tidings were soon followed, by the like Intelligence, concerning a
Sloop, of the Kings called the Mary, taken by Captain Battin, in the Rebecca,
at the Port of Pudicherry, about which time, I also received Letters from my
friends at Fort St. George, acquainting me that the Company had sent out
positive orders, for making War upon the King of Syam: Of all which, I did (as
my duty obliged me) immediately dispatch advices to my Lord Phaulkon, and the
Privy Council, humbly Offering it as my opinion, that since we well knew this
undeserved rupture must be occasioned by the malicious misreports of some, who
were in that regard no less Enemies to their own Countries Honor, and welfare,
than the Affairs of Syam; and that against all the Rules of Justice, and Law of
Nations, these acts of Hostility were committed, before any Cause assigned, by
making complaint, and demanding satisfaction. It would therefore be convenient,
that his Majesty of Syam employed some fitting Person to the King of England,
to give him a true account of these unkind usages, and endeavor to renew and
corroborate that Correspondence, which his Majesty of Syam had in so many
instances manifested his intention, and desire to conserve with the English
Nation. My Lord Phaulkon and the Council, made their applications to the King,
concerning this motion of mine, who was pleased not only to approve thereof,
but also to do me the Honor of nominating me, to serve him in that occasion:
and because there was then no Ship of the Kings in Port, so proper for the
Voyage, as this of my own, whereon I afterward escaped with my Life; I had
orders to fit her, and my self, with all expedition, and be in readiness to
proceed upon receipt of Letters from Court; with considerable Presents to the
King, and his Royal Consort, which were dispatching toward me, and had
certainly come to hand in twenty days time, had not the sudden fatal change of
things, after the arrival of Captain Weltden in the Curtana, not only prevented
that design, but occasioned the Massacre of about sixty of my Country Men on
that Place: I only by a Miracle of Mercy, being left to bring the sad account
of that bloody Tragedy, which I am ready to represent when this Honorable
House shall be pleased to command it.

And now I am come to that unhappy Period when those heavy Calamities began to
fall upon me, which have brought me to ruin, and desolation. For at the time I
fled aboard my Ship to save my Life, I left behind me 21877. l. which I had at
that Place in sundry effects, as I can prove by an exact account of the
particulars upon my Oath, having also the Testimony of other credible Persons,
for the greater part thereof, and under the present circumstances of the War
our Company has been pleased to make with the King of Syam, I have too much
reason to despair of retrieving any thing of it: but this was yet but a part of
the severe persecution I have suffered; for while I was under these disasters
at the place of my Residence, my other considerable Concerns that were abroad
in Trade, were made a Prey, by the Companies Servants, which is more
particularly my present complaint, and I subjoyn a true account thereof as
follows.

In the foresaid Sloop Mary taken by Captain Battin, I Shipped sixty Chests of
Copper, for my proper account, consigned to Monsr. Delandres, second of the
French Factory at Pudicherry, which the Gentlemen at Fort St. George were
pleased to condemn in their Court, and confiscate to the Companies use; wherein
I first accuse them of the grossest injustice, for they might if they had
pleased, have been satisfied of my Property, in those Goods by the bill of
Lading, which was produced in their Court in my behalf, and not only at the
time when I Shipped that Concern, but also when the Vessel was taken, there was
no War declared with Syam, and therefore with what legal pretense, they could
lay claim to those Goods of mine, I leave to the judgment of all impartial
Persons in the World. But I am further also to accuse them, of the basest
Ingratitude to me, who had in the like case deserved much more friendly dealing
from them; for in the preceding year, when one of the King of Syam's Men of
War, brought a Prize into Mergen, belonging to the Subjects of Golcondah, and
in the examination of the Cargo, I found sundry Goods to a considerable amount
that appeared to belong to Mr. Robert Freeman the Companies Chief at
Metchlepatam, I secured them for him, and remitted them to the President, and
Council at Fort St. George, as I can prove by their own acknowledgment, and
this my kindness they were pleased so soon after to gratify in seizing my
aforesaid Copper to the amount of 400 l.

The next thing I complain of is, concerning an Adventure I had on board the
Derreah Dowlett, a Ship of the King of Syam's, which by order from Court, I
laded with sundry Merchandises and dispatched for Acheen, having also liberty
to lade on her a considerable quantity of Rice, and Liquors for my own account,
which I consigned to William Mallett, my Servant; whom I sent on the same
bottom, and they were no sooner arrived at Port, and began to dispose of the
Cargo in April, 87. but Captain Consett came thither in the Berkly Castle,
wearing his Majesty's Colors, and took the said Ship, and tho my Factor did
then manifest unto him my aforesaid Concern by Invoice and Orders, and made
demand accordingly; yet would he not be prevailed with, to restore the least
part thereof, but violently seized on all, whereby I am damnified, the amount
of 1838 l. as besides my own Oath, I can prove by the Testimony of others; At
the same time and place, the said Captain Consett took also a Ship of mine,
then riding in that Road, under the Ensign of our Nation called the Success of
about 100 Tuns burden, and tho the Master Caleb Tracy, did make appear by my
Commission to him that she belonged to me, yet was he not pleased to take the
least notice thereof, but Seized and carried her with him to Bengall, which
Ship cost me set to Sea 450 l.

My next, and greatest Article of this kind, is concerning my Ship
Satisfaction, burden about 350 Tuns, which in January 87. I dispatched with a
Cargo, to Mocah in the Red Seas, the Prime Cost of stock and block amounting to
7800 l. which I solemnly affirm did entirely belong to my self; She arrived in
safety at her Port, the 20. of April, where having delivered her Cargo ashore
to my Factor, Mr. William How, the Ship was according to my Order, sent to a
place about five Leagues distant to take in a quantity of Salt, while my Factor
was making sale of my Goods; but on the 25. of May, Captain Andrews, in the
Ship Charles the Second, arrived there in the equipage of an Admiral of his
Majesty's Fleet, wearing the union Flagg at the Main Topmast head, and first he
sent his Barge ashore with several armed Men, to seize Mr. How, and the Purser
Mr. Wortly, as they did, and carried them Prisoners aboard his Ship, where at
first sight of Captain Andrews, Mr. How delivered him a Letter from me directd
to the Commanders of any of the Companies Ships he should happen to meet with,
in which I signified my Property in the aforesaid Ship and Cargo, and humbly
requested their assistance and friendship, as occasion might require. But
instead of exercising any such humanity toward them or me, he not only
detained them his Prisoners, but went himself ashore, to take possession of my
Estate, entering the House wherein my Goods were lodged in a sort of Triumph.
For he did himself the Honor to have the King's Flagg carried before him,
which he afterward fixed upon the House, and having thus made himself Lord and
Master of my Goods, he sent two Boats with armed Men, in search of my Ship,
which they soon found out, and tho there was not the least resistance made, by
the use of any Weapons, nor any other defense, save the Men's shutting
themselves into their close quarters, yet at the first entering of my Ship, they
fired thirty or forty Pistols, and therewith mortally wounded the Master Mr.
William Rand, whom with the rest they carried Prisoner on board the Charles the
Second, where after Nine days languishing he dyed, and was used by Captain
Andrews with that barbarous cruelty, that his earnest request of but having a
friend admitted to speak with him, a few hours before he expired, was denied
him. The Commander being thus Murdered, and the Ship taken, Captain Andrews
goes on to do what he thought fit with my Goods, converting some to his own
use, selling some at Mocah, and carrying the rest to Bombay, where at his
arrival he first paies his Hommage to the General Sr. John Child, by making a
present to his Lady out of his spoils being several of my large China Jars, And
some time after he had thus begun to do Execution, they go on to the trial and
condemnation of my Ship and Goods in their Court of Admiralty, where (his
Excellency the General having turned out Dr. St John, who was Commissioned by
the late King Charles) Sr. John Weyborn the Deputy Governor of the Island, did
by the Generals Commission sit in the place of Judge, and had for his Mates
Patrick Simpson the Minister, and Henry Thrustcross a Factor, which I must by
the way observe, was an open violation and contempt of the very Charter,
whereon they ground their pretended Authority, for erecting that Court; For the
said Charter which by their great interest with some of the Ministers of State,
they obtained in the year 83. does expressly require that it consists of a
Person learned in the Civil Law, and two Merchants, whereas Sr. John Weyborn
was bred a Sailor, Patrick Simpson is a Scotch Parson, and Henry Thrustcross a
Native of India, all of them wholly Ignorant in the Civil Laws, but they proved
themselves nevertheless sufficient to serve this turn. For when they were set
up, Captain Andrews first exhibited a Libel to them, alleging the Ship to
belong to the King of Syam, and it was very industriously endeavored both by
the General and him, that they should find it so, in hopes that by its passing
for the Concern of a Prince whom they called their Enemy, it would both help to
stifle the loud outcrys of the Commander's Blood, and also give them a surer
Title to their Prize, but the Men of my Ship continued all steadfast in
affirming that I was the sole Proprietor, to the best of their knowledge,
(although I am able to prove that one of them was tempted by a considerable Bribe
to have declared the contrary) by which this stratagem fell to the Ground, tho
his Excellency expressed his displeasure against his Ministers of his Admiralty
for disappointing him therein; But however they were resolved by some means or
other to compass their ends; for upon this disappointment, Captain Andrews
caused the first Libel to be withdrawn, and contrary to the common style of all
such Courts was suffered to prefer another, declaring the Ship and Goods to
belong to me; but must nevertheless be made a Prize in regard she had not a
Pass from some of the Companies Servants: For the General who declares he has
Despotick Power and Sovereign Authority in his breast would have it so, and his
Judges obeyed his Voice; tho it seems their Consciences gave them a Check
whilst they were passing that cruel and unjust Condemnation, by raising some
doubts among them of the Validity of that Reason to confiscate my Estate, which
caused them to subjoin a Clause to their illegal and errroneous Sentence,
declaring that tho the Ship and Goods were now condemned as mine, yet if any
part thereof should afterward appear to belong to the King of Syam or his
Subjects it should be condemned accordingly; And thus by the depredation begun
by Captain Andrews at Mocah, and finished by the General's Despotick Power and
Sovereign Authority at Bombay, I have had the amount of 7800 l. principal Money
most unjustly and violently taken from me; And I am sure I do my self wrong in
charging them with no greater Sum than 8000 l. more for the Advance which that
Adventure would have rendered me. Nor must I here forget that the Poor Men
belonging to my Ship had no better quarter given them for their small matters,
for when in most humble manner they petitioned his Excellency the General, that
he would be so gracious to Consider 'em for their Wages, and permit 'em to have
those few things that belonged to 'em, all they got by it was to hear his
Excellency bolt out his Indignation against them in calling them Rebels, and
commanding them from his Presence. --

I have thus most faithfully and as briefly as I could given a true Account of
my present sad Condition, whereby it appears I went to India in a Ship of the
Companies, and staid there with leave for which I paid 100 l. and as to my
accepting an Employment in the King of Syam's Service, I was not only
introduced to it by the Companies Chief and Council at Metchlepatam, but during
all the time of my Continuance in that station I held a friendly Correspondence
with the President and some of the Chief of their Servants at Fort St. George
yearly trading to that Port with my own Shipping which were always kindly
received, and dispatched tho they never had any other Passes than my
Commissions to the Commanders and Supra Cargo's: and moreover, I was still
further confirmed in my belief that my residence at Mergen was no way
displeasing, by perusal of a kind Letter which the late King was pleased to
honor my Lord Phaulkon with, wherein he does graciously condescend to
acknowledge the great kindness my Lord had shown his Subjects in that Kingdom,
and desires the continuance thereof on assurance of his Royal favor to him in
all Occasions. -- And after all this when his Command for my leaving that Place
and Service, was made known to me by the Proclamation published by Captain
Weltden, I obeyed it with all dutiful submission. I never showed the least
disrespect nor did the least prejudice to the Company, but contrarily was ready
on any Occasion to do them the best Services that lay in my Power: yet what by
their means I have lost at Mergen and has since been taken from me by their
Servants, is of no less value than 40000 l. escaping with my Life in an empty
Vessel, wherein I am come to throw my self at the Feet of Justice, and implore
relief against the Authors of these Oppressions.

Samuel White.


