THE CASE OF Sir EDWARD HALES, Baronet. Being an EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE TRIAL
UPON AN ACTION Of 500 Pound brought against him, with his Plea thereto, UPON
THE KING'S Dispensing with the Stat. 25. Car. II. and the Opinion of the Judges
thereupon.

LONDON, Printed for J. Watts, MDCLXXXIX.

ARGUMENTS UPON Sir Edward Hale's CASE, BARONET. On an Action of 500 Pound
brought against him, with his Plea thereto, upon the King's Dispensing with the
Stat. 25. Car. II. and the Opinion of the Judges thereupon.
Ter. Trinity. 2o. Jacob. Secundi Regis.
Godwin versus Sir EDWARD HALES, Baronet.
THE Plaintiff brought an Action of Debt against the Defendant for 500 Pound,
and declares the Defendant was admitted such a day to be Lieutenant of a Foot
Company; which Office the Plaintiff avers to be an Office of Trust, within the
25 Caro. II. and that the Defendant held the same Office for above 3 Months,
and he did neither in the next Term, nor 3 Months after the grant of the said
Office, take the several Oaths, nor Subscribe the Declaration, according to the
said Statute, and yet he did continue in the said Office; and that the
Defendant, at the Assizes held at Rochester, was Indicted for neglecting to
take the said Oaths, and there was Legitimo Modo Convictus, as by record of his
Commission may more fully appear; and the Plaintiff entitles himself to the Sum
of Five hundred pound forfeiture, given by the Statute to any that will Sue for
the same.

To this the Defendant Pleads, that the King after his admission into the said
Office, and before three Months were ended, did by his Letters Patents Dispense
with, Pardon, and Discharge the Defendant from taking the Oaths, and
Subscribing the Declaration, according to the Statute, and off and from all
Crimes and Convictions incurred, or to be incurred, by the virtue of the said
Statute, and that the King did grant to the Defendant, that he should hold the
said Office, as though the Statute had never been made.

To this Plea in Bar the Plaintiff Demurred, and the Defendant joined in the
Demur.

The Questions are two, 1. Whether the Defendant ought to have pleaded this
Pardon and Dispensation to the Indictment, or whether he may not plead it in
Bar to the Action?

2. Admitting he may plead it to the Action, whether it be a good Bar, and
whether the King by his Prerogative may dispense with the Statute?

Mr. Northey, who argued for the Plaintiff, 1. Point.
held that the Defendant may not be permitted to plead this Matter in Bar of
the Action, because he ought to have pleaded it to the Indictment, and he
having not pleaded it then, the Law will construe it to be waving of it, as the
Case in Brooks Abridgment, Charter of Pardon, 15o. That in Case of an
Indictment for Murder, one that has pleaded not Guilty, cannot plead the
pardon after, unless dated since this Plea of not Guilty. So 3o. Crook, and
4o. in a Fire Facias, if the Defendant appears, and has a Release, and does not
plead it, he has lost the benefit of it, and shall not be released, by Audita
Quieta; now the Defendant shall not be permitted to plead it against the
Plaintiff, no more than he could have pleaded it against the King; for this
Action is in the nature of an Execution upon a Judgment, and may be likened to
this Case; an Administrator de foins non, by 17o. Car. Secundi 2. is enabled to
sue forth Execution upon a Judgment, recovered by an Executor of the first
Testator, and the Statute does put the Administrator in the same Case as the
Executor was; and the Defendant in that Case can allege no other matter
against the Administrator, than he could have done against the Executor,
neither can he avoid this Execution by any Plea that he might have pleaded to
the First Action: And if this Defendant shall be received to plead this Plea
now, he will falsify the Indictment, that was found against him; for if the
offense be pardoned, he ought not to have been Indicted: but admit this
Defendant may well plead this Plea, yet I hold it no Bar to the Plaintiff's
Action.

I do allow that the King may Dispense with several Penal Laws in some Cases,
2. Point.
but that Prerogative of the King is bounded, so that with some Statutes he
cannot Dispense, as wherein the Subject is interessed, as in 4o. Instit. (135)
So the King cannot License a Man to make a Nuisance or Commit a Murder, as
11o. Henry 7th. 11. 12. And that this is an Act wherein all the Subjects have
an Interest, I humbly submit to the Judgment of the Court.

The King cannot Dispense with the Statute 31 of Eliz. Cha. 6. against Simony,
nor with the Statute 17 Edw. 6. 1. against Buying and Selling of Offices, as
appears by the 1o. Instit. 12o. a. 30. Instit. 154. 20. Crook 385. Hobart 75.
1o. Institu. 234. a. A Man that is Disabled by Law to take such an Office, the
King cannot Capacitate him; as if the King should grant to one to sell an
Office, within the Statute Ed. 6o. and to another to buy that Office, these
Grants would be void, as in Vaughan 534, in the Case of Thomas and Sorrel,
there are several Cases put, wherein the King cannot Dispense with a Statute.

Now by this Statute that we are upon, it is Enacted, that every Officer shall
take the Oaths, that every Person that does neglect it, shall be disabled to
hold the said Office, now this Act does not work upon the Taking, but upon the
Holding, and if such Conditions be not performed, he is thereby rendered
incapable to hold his Office, and the King can never Enable a Man whom the Law
has Disabled, 3o Inst. 154. But I foresee the Case in 12 Cook 18. will be
objected against me, where it is said, that no Act of Parliament can bind the
King from any Prerogative which is solely and inseparably annexed to his
Person, but that he may Dispense with it by a Non Obstante, and the Book does
instance in the Case of Sheriffs upon the Statute 23 Henry 6. which does Enact,
that all Patents made or to be made of any Office of a Sheriff, etc. for term
of years etc. within any County of England, etc. and shall forfeit 200 Pound,
yet says that Book, the King may Dispense with that Statute, and Cites 2 Henry
7. 66. to be there so adjudged by all the Judges of England, and that this is
the only Authority that seems to countenance this Case, but this is the Opinion
only of my Lord Cook, for the Book which he Cites and depends upon, was never
adjudged, as appears by Brook 5. pt. 45. 109. and what was said in that Case,
was only said by one Judge, and never judicially determined, nor so much as
spoken to by any other Judge, therefore the foundation that my Lord Cook has
laid failing, the Superstructure must needs fall, and so with Submission, that
single Opinion in 12 Cook, folio 18. is not Law; but admitting the Case to be
Law, that can be no rule to guide this Case by, for that Statute was made,
rather to deprive the King of his Power of making Sheriffs, and so
consequently commanding his Sheriffs not to serve him, than to Disable the
Subject, and thereby restraining the King's Prerogative, which is so inherent
in him; but by the Statute 25 Car. 2. 2. the Prerogative of the King is not
touched, for the King may grant the Office to any of his Subjects, and it is
only a direction to the Subject to qualify himself for the King's Service, and
if he be incapable to serve the King, it is through his own fault and neglect,
and may be punishable for the same, as in Case of Sir John Read in 27 and 28.
Car. 2. in the Exchequer, he was made and Sworn Sheriff of Hartfordshire, and
neglected to take the Oaths according to this Statute, by reason of which the
Office became void, and afterward there was an Information Exhibited against
him upon this Statute we are now upon, for neglecting to take the said Oaths,
and executing his Office, and upon this Convicted and Fined, and the Court was
of Opinion that no Subject could put himself out of a Capacity to serve the
King, but for so doing he is punishable, and in the Law of the Sheriffs the
Dispensation is in the Patents, but in our Case the Dispensation is after the
Patent, and so a difference between the two Cases: And for these Reasons, I
pray your Lordships Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Arguments for the Defendant.
Sir Tho. Powis the King's Solicitor, Argued for the Defendant.
And as to the first Point, 1. Point.
that supposing the Defendant ought to have pleaded the Dispensation to the
Indictment, it does not appear by this Record, but that he did; for the
Declaration is that he was Legitime Modo Convictus, and does not say whether he
Pleaded not Guilty, or how he Pleaded, and for any thing that appears, he did
plead it against the King, yet he may be admitted to plead it against the
Plaintiff who is a Stranger.

If they stand upon this as an Estople, 2ly.
they ought to have relied upon it, and replied, that he had the Dispensation
at the time of the Indictment, and refused to plead it, for he that pleads an
Estople must upon it, as the Authorities are which treat of Estoples, and
therefore as to the first point I think, with a submission, we have very well
pleaded the Pardon and Dispensation in Bar of the Action.

As to the second point, 2. Point.
whether the King can Dispense with the Statute or no? I humbly conceive, with
Submission, the King may very well dispense with the Statute; it is admitted
that the King may in many Cases dispense with an Act of Parliament, and let us
consider why not this? It Is well observed in 2o. Insti. 496. that the Kings
Prerogative is as much the Law of England as any other Law whatsoever; and the
King may upon any Cause moving him in respect of time, place, or person, by a
Non Obstante dispense with any particular Person, and that he shall not incurr
the penalty of the Statute. 7. Cook 36, 37. Vaughan 347. 333. 1o. Rushworth,
472. 473. there Glanvell in his Argument does admit a power in the King to
Dispense with Penal Laws, and yet he was no friend to the Prerogative. Though
the Consent of the Lords and Commons be requisite to the making of the Act of
Parliament, yet it is the King that gives the Sanctions to the said Laws, and
most of the Ancient Statutes began in form of Charters, as it appears in 8.
Cook 19. and the Intents and meanings of Acts of Parliament are every day by
the Judges extended and changed, according to a better Rule of Reason and
Justice than the words will bear, Hobart 229. and the Judges have an authority
over the Statute-Laws, to mold them according to the truest and best Sense.
Hobart 346. and Statutes which have been made against common Right, have been
construed void. 8o. Cook 118.

There is a Distinction taken in our Books between Malum in se, and Malum
prohibitum.

The former the King cannot Dispense with, the latter he may; as where the
Statute generally prohibits any thing upon a penalty, which was Lawful before,
(the Subject receiving no injury by such a Dispensation) the King there may
Dispense with such an Act. Vaughan 343. Dyer 5. 2. The King granted a License
to carry Bell metal out of the Realm, notwithstanding the Statute, Dyer 54. It
was Enacted by Statute 4. Hobart 9. that none should convey Wine into England
out of Gascoign, but in English Ship; and the King granted a License to a Man,
that he, his Deputies, and Factors might convey, etc. in any Ship,
notwithstanding the Statute, 28. Cook 32. Vaughan 352, 353. 354. Now to apply
the Cases to the Case in question, this is Malum Prohibiter, whether is the
Dispensation any Damage to the Subject, if it were any wrong, it were to the
King himself, and sure the King may very well Dispense with that which only
relates to himself.

I must distinguish between those Acts of Parliament which concern Property,
and those which concern Government; Acts of Parliament which concern Property,
the King cannot Dispense with; but those which concern Government he may; and
this for the great Inconveniences which may happen, or Urgencies of State
which may force him to it, and those un-foreseen at the time of making the Law;
for it may happen by a vicissitude of times those Laws that were made for the
preservation of Government, should turn to the destruction of it, if the King
could not Dispense with them.

The Common Law in some Cases does very much respect the Prerogative, That it
leaves the private Interest of the Subject unregarded, and the King may Dig in
any of his Subjects Land for Saltpeter to make Gunpowder; now this Statute 25
Car. 2o. was made to diminish the Kings Prerogative, but to secure him from his
Enemies, and for the preservation of the Government; and the King is best Judge
what will be most for his own security, and the Governments preservation. No
Act of Parliament can discharge the Subject from his Allegiance which he owes
to the King, every one is bound by his Allegiance to serve his Prince when he
shall be required. Therefore no Act of Parliament can disable any man to serve
the King. But they object, that this Act does make no one incapable, but at his
own Election.

If this were so, it would be in the Election of some or all the Subjects to
incapacitate themselves to serve the King, and the King would be unserved, for
if it were not in the power of the King to force the Subject, he would not (it
may be not) be served at all; as in the Case of Sir John Read, Cited by the
other side; he neglected to take the Oaths, and thereby the Office became void;
so that the next Elected might refuse, and the next; in the mean time the
King's Service lies neglected, and no business of the County can proceed for
want of a Sheriff. To pardon Murder, is a Prerogative solely and inseparably
incident to the King, and may Dispense with Statutes restraining it, 12o, Cook
18. He may Dispense with non residente, Hobart 146. 3o. Institute. 339. In 3.
Insti. the Lord Cook speaking of Acts of Parliament that were made to restrain
the King's power of pardoning Murder, says, that such Acts are good for Kings
to follow, but not binding. Cook 18, 19. There are several Statutes cited, with
which the King by his Prerogative may Dispense, as the Statute 36. Hen. 6.
which does Enact, that no Man shall be Sheriff of one County two years
together. Yet it was adjudged by all the Judges of England, says that Book,
that the King may dispense with it; the Statute of 4o. of Hen. 4o. 31. that no
Welshman shall be Justice, or other Officer whatsoever in any part of Wales;
and yet the King may Dispense with it; the Statute 8o. Rich. 22. and 33. Henry
8. 24. do Enact, that none shall be Justice of the Assize in the County where
he was born, and yet the King with a Special non Obstante may Dispense with
that Statute; and in Plowden, 502. 13. the King may grant to a Man to be an
Escheater for Life notwithstanding that Statute.

To answer the Statutes which have been Cited, which the King cannot Dispense
with I say as to the Statutes of Simony and Usury, the King cannot Dispense
with them, but what is that to this matter in hand? for there is no restriction
of the Subjects service, but the King may have the benefit notwithstanding.
Then as to the Statute 5. Ed. 6. 16. against Buying and Selling of Judicial
Offices, of which Statute there is a Clause in the 1st. Institu. 134. That the
King may not Dispense with that Statute. There is a difference between that
Statute and this, for that does Enact, that if any person shall bargain and
sell any Office, etc. shall lose the Office, etc. and all such Bargains and
Contracts shall be void, and that he that shall give any Sum of Money, etc. for
any such Office etc. shall be a disabled person in Law, to Have, Occupy, or
Enjoy the said Office, etc.

Now the Statute does disable the party upon doing such an Act, to take the
Office, for the making the bargain is prior to taking the Office, and thereby
he is disabled to take it, so that he can never have the Office legally vested
on him, if the King cannot Dispense with a Conditional Subsequent, and so that
does not come near this. And for this Reason I humbly pray Judgment for the
Defendant.

Then the Lord Chief Justice spoke to this Effect.
Chapter Justice. This is a Case of great Consequence, but of as little Difficulty
as ever any Case was, that raised so great an Expectation, for if the King
cannot Dispense with this Statute, he cannot Dispense with any Penal Law
whatsoever.

As to the first point, 1. Point.
whether he shall be admitted to plead this Dispensation, and Pardon to this
Action of Debt (having not pleaded it to the Indictment) and I think he may,
for this Court shall not be bound by the finding of the Jury below, for he (for
any thing that does appear) did plead it there, and the Jury might have gone
against the direction of the Court, yet that shall not Conclude us; but if the
party has good Matter to discharge himself, we may show it; as if a man be
Convicted of an Assault and Battery against the Defendant, the Plaintiff may
give the former Conviction in Evidence, but yet he must also prove the Battery,
or else he shall not recover.

And this being an Estople, it shall not bind, because the Plaintiff was not
Party to the first Suit.

As to the second Point, 2. Point.
whether the King can Dispense with the Act or no, I think it a question of
little difficulty; there is no Law whatsoever but may be Dispensed with by the
Supreme Lawgiver; as the Laws of God may be Dispensed with by God himself; as
it appears by God's Command to Abraham, to offer up his Son Isaac; so likewise
the Law of Man may be dispensed by the Legislator, for a Law may either be too
wide or too narrow, and there may be many Cases which may be out of the
conveniences which did endure the Law to be made, for it is impossible for the
wisest Lawmakers to foresee all the Cases that may be or are to be Remedied,
and thefore there must be a Power somewhere able to Dispense with these Laws.
But as to the Case of Simony that is objected by the other side, that is
against the Law of God, and a special Offense, and therefore Malum in se, which
I do agree the King cannot Dispense with the Act. And as to the Cases of Usury
and Non-Residence, those Cases do come in under that Rule, that the King cannot
Dispense with them, because the Subject has a benefit by them; for in case of
Usury the Bond is made void by the Statute, and therefore if the King should
Dispense with it, the Subject would lose the Benefit of the avoiding the Bond.
And as to the Cases of buying and selling of Offices, which are objected, there
is no need of resolving, whether the King could Dispense with that Statute or
no, because the Party was disabled to take any such Office by the Contract, and
the Disability was attacqued by force before the Office was vested, so that the
King could not remove the Disability: and so I do agree it would have been in
this Case, if the Defendant had by his neglect or refusal to take the Oaths,
rendered himself incapable before he had taken the King's Dispensation, for the
King's Dispensation coming before the Disability attacked, it does prevent it.

The Case of the Sheriff is much a stranger Case than this, and comes up to it
in every particular, for that Statute does disable the Party to Take, and the
King to Grant, and there is also a clause in that Statute which says, that the
Patent shall be void, notwithstanding any Non Obstante to the contrary, and
there is a penalty of 200 pound like to our case, and yet by the Opinion of all
the Judges of England, the King has a power of Dispensing with that Statute,
yet that Statute does expressly say, the King shall not Dispense with it by a
Non Obstante; so if an Act of Parliament had a clause in it that it should
never be repealed, yet without question, the same power that made it, may
repeal it. Besides that Statute makes the Patents void at the time of granting
them, but by this Statute, the Patents are good at the time of granting them,
and continue so till the neglect to take the Oaths, for doing of which the
Patentee has three Months time; and if the case of the Sheriff be Law, as it
has been taken ever since Hen. 7th's time, and is cited for good Law in many
of our Books; and never till now questioned, for the common course and
experience have been according to it, then I defy all the World to show me any
material difference between that and this, only that this is the stranger case
of the two in many particulars. But because the case has been denied by the
Plaintiff's Counsel, it does concern us to take the Opinion of our Brethren, it
being a matter of so great consequence in the Circuits; for if it be not Law,
then there are some Sheriffs that be not lawful, and so have not power to
return the Juries, and then we have no power to try and give Judgment upon any
Offenders; and it also concerns us who go into our Countries to take Advice of
it, for if that case is not Law, our Patents which are Non Obstante's to 23
Henry 8. 24. may not be good, and so we have no Authorities to go the Circuits,
and therefore I will ask the Opinion of all the Judges as well in that case as
this.

On Monday the 21 of June, after having consulted with all the Judges, his
Lordship delivered their Opinions in open Court, to this effect:

Upon the Arguments of this Case it did appear to us to be very plain, but yet
for the better Satisfaction of all People, both this Case, and that of the
Sheriffs, were put by me to all the rest of the Judges, and after some
conference, ten of us did agree, that the Case of the Sheriff was good Law: But
they all declared there was no difference between that and this; my Brother
Powel at first doubted, but after concurred with us in Opinion: But my Brother
Street yet continues his Opinion, that the King cannot Dispense with that
Statute, but there being the Opinion of eleven Judges against one single Judge,
We may very well declare the King may lawfully Dispense with that Statute.

And we go upon these grounds,

I. That the Kings of England are Sovereign Princes.

II. That the Laws of England are the King's Laws.

III. That it is an inseparable Prerogative in the King, to Dispense with Penal
Laws upon necessity and urgent occasions.

IV. That the King is Sole Judge in that necessity.

V. That this is not in trust given to the King, but it is the Ancient Remains
of the Crown, which never was nor can be taken away from him.

Querens nihil capiat per Billam.
FINIS.

