THE CASE OF Sir JOHN LENTHALL Knight, Marshall of the Vpper-Bench prison.
Humbly Presented to those in AUTHORITY, AND To all Rational and indifferent men.

London, Printed in the year 1653.

THE CASE OF Sir JOHN LENTHAL Knight, Marshal of the Upper-Bench Prison.
IF that malice which has brought this affliction upon me could have been
contented with ordinary and legal prosecution; and if my estate and livelihood
were the things only in question, and my good name not sullied with infamous
and filthy slanders, I should in all probability rather patiently have sat
down under my sufferings, then have been induced to lay open my condition unto
the World. But since I cannot but be of opinion that many Persons both of worth
and conscience, content to rest in the first Representations, may by this means
be brought to a true and just knowledge of the whole matter, and consequently
be reduced to the moderation of doing what is but just, and that my good Name,
(which to an honest man ought to be dearer then life) may be in some measure
retrived, I could not but put down as well the true circumstances of my
condition, as the violent and passionate proceedings of my prosecutors against
me.

I have been these twenty two years together Marshall of the (Kings Bench, now
the) upper Bench Prison by Letters Patents under the great seal of England,
wherein as I am inwardly satisfied to have behaved my self uprightly and
legally, so till this storm overtook me, I hope it was without infamy or
reproach. But it is the misfortune of such employments as mine, that we must
necessarily in doing our offices raise up to our selves enemies. For it is so
difficult, if not impossible, to carry our selves even between Creditor and
Debtor, that there is no avoiding of it, but one of them will be dissatisfied.
For if the Debtour be either unruly, or enable to put in security for his true
imprisonment, and so kept safe, he straight cries out of Restraint, and harsh
us^ge; if he put in security, and lie in the Rules, or legally go abroad about
his occasions with a Keeper, then does the Creditour cry out of too much
Liber^y, and it may be files for a Bill for an escape. So that let a man carry
himself with all the care and circumspection which is possible, he shall be
sure to meet with clamours and enemies, and these so much the more, in regard
that being persons either in low condition or decayed fortunes, they account it
somewhat either of ease or pleasure to reville or vex those whom they look upon
as the instruments of their misfortunes.

Yet upon the dissolution of the late Parliament there was an Oder obtained
from the new Counsel of Sat, bearing the date the of April 1653. empowring
(...) to enquire into all matters concerning Prisons and Keepers of Prisons; by
virtue whereof, I was summoned to appear before them; which I obeyed. But it
was a wonder to me (who had been a faithful Servant to the Parliament in their
most doubtful and difficult times, and who had been constantly in all their
commissions, and stuck to them throughout, when others declined them) to see
Mr. Fountain in the Chair, one of the most active for the late King, and one
by whose power and interest at Oxford, my place was given away for disobeying a
Warrant of the late Kings, dated the 23 of November 1653. for the discharge of
William Cobb. Yet humbly submitting (as it was my duty) to the Authority set
over me, and withal weighing with my self the right that all Governors have
to call whom they please to their assistance; besides, hoping that Mr.
Fountain had manifested unto them his hatred to his former Principles and
courses, I, with all the submission I could, prepared my self to give the best
satisfaction that lay in my power unto that Committee.

The General things they fell upon, were, first, about the List of my
Prisoners, a perfect and full copy whereof I delivered in. Next, about the
extent and liberty of the Rules of the Prison; by which means (as was alleged)
there are many escapes occasioned, and Creditours extremely delayed, if not
absolutely defrauded. In answer to this, I shall only say, That the
Prisonhouse being so little, as that it is not able to contain a fourth part
of the Prisoners, my Predecessors in their several times, and that always by
permission and appointment of the Judges, used to lodge them (having first
taken security for their true imprsonment) in the houses about, and that they
call the Rules: Which, as it avoids a grand inconvenience (for otherwise every
particular man must have a particular keeper, which were a charge to him
insupportable, or else the Marshal of the Prison were to maintain them, and so
he should be a loser by his office) so it brings this great advantage and
security to the Creditour, that the security being double the debt, it is
thereby strengthened, and the Creditor in better probability to recover his
own. For if any escape be made, I am liable to pay the debt, and upon recovery
had against me at Law, I either resort to the security, or turn it over to the
Creditour; by which means many have recovered their debts, which probably
otherwise they had not done* But these Bonds being of late doubted to be within
the Stat. 33 H. 6. (though ever before held good, and so often adjudged) many
have under this pretense, esc^ped or violently broke Prison, and thereby both
defrauded the Creditors, and occasioned great damages to be given against the
Marshall.

And although I have done nothing but what by Law was formerly accustomed and
justifiable, yet I desire a difference may be made between voluntary and
involuntary escapes, that is to say, escapes happening either by my granting
too much liberty, or by negligence or connivence; and those which in despite
of the strength of the Prison, the care and diligence of the watchmen, are
oftentimes made by desperate persons, groaning under their wants, and impatient
of restraint: And therefore I apeal to all the Nation, whether there was yet
ever any debt recovered against me for an escape, which I have not satisfied.
And as I cannot be denied the liberty of a true Englishman, to make my best
defense when I am impleaded at Law; so if it can be proved that any escape has
been wilful in me, or that I ever took a penny of money for granting any illegal
Liberty, I shall be content to suffer all that which the malice of my
adversaries would inflict upon me.

Nor it is enough to say, that the best and most considerable Prisoners should
be put into the house, for so the more insolvent should be set at random, and
their debts by this means become desperate. For the security of the others
(besides their own reputation) renders them as safe in the Rules, as if they
were close; and there is many a man, that will rather be bound in a bond of
1000 l. for a man's true imprisonment, then he bound with him in a bond of 100
l. debt.

But when they came to descend into particular matters, it was very strange to
me to see Mr. Fountain (I will not say more like a feed Lawyer, or an enraged
enemy, then a sober judge) afford so much countenance to all Petitions and
complaints that came in against me, to stretch matter further then by Law they
would endure. And when I desired but Copies of Petitions, that I might be the
better enabled to make my defense, utterly to refuse me, and put me to answer
upon the place: which when I endeavored to do, as well as the smalness of the
time, and my own surprisal would permit me, I was sundry times reviled, many
opprobrious speeches, both against my self and my nearest relations, were
publicly uttered, without the least control or check. The Witnesses which I
brought in order to my justification, were discountenanced; Mr. Fountain in the
mean time privately commenting and glossing his own conceptions, as I have
reason to conceive, and writing them down, so that things seemed to be carried
on (I will not say it was by design, or injustly) merely in a manner to compass
my ruin.

The Petitions and charges that came in, to look on the number, were a great
many, on the weight of them, a very few. Some of them are either so false or
inconsiderable, that they are not worth mentioning here, as I have done
otherwhere; some the very stating of my case imediately detects the malice and
impertinency. But since that there is one particularly insisted upon as a
matter very horrid and ugly, I shall not forbear to set it down, that by the
estimate of this grand business an account may be taken of the rest.

And the business stands thus: One John Guyet was committed to the upper Bench
Prison, Feb. 10. 1650. upon an action of Trespass, at the suit of Edmund Child,
but not upon Judgment or Execution. This Guyet broke the Prisonhouse, (he
being kept in close Prison, together with four others) in the night time,
having burned down the window with hot irons, poisoned a fierce Mastisse, and
given some Opiate Medicine to the watchman, wherewith he laid him in a dead
sleep all night; and by that means the said Guyet went away in the night time
by ladders of ropes provided for that purpose, as is proved by many witnesses.

Thereupon Child brings his Action of the case against Sir John Lenthal for 579
l. for the escape; and at a trial at Guidhal had given him by the Jury (who
fa^l'd not to be his friends at a dead lift) the whole money and damages, 584
l. 13 s. 4 d. For relief of this verdict, I preferred a Bill in Chancery, to
which he put in an unperfect answer, and sat in contempt. Hereupon I moved at
the Rolls for an Injunction, to stop proceedings a^ Common Law; which the
Master of the Rolls (being satisfied that Child in equity ought to have no more
of me, then he could have recovered of Guyet at Common Law; and for that a man
may lay an action of 10000 l. and yet possibly not recover 100 l. and for that
this was the only course I had left to make Child confess what his debt really
was; he having already in his answer confessed 100 l. given by the Verdict more
then was due to him) granted; as well for these reasons, as that it had been
the constant practice and rule of that Court, to grant injunctions upon the
like occasions. And whether I had not reason to seek for relief in Chancery or
no, let any man judge: For though there were abundance of equitable
circumstances, which I could not make out at my Trial; yet by that (among other
things) which I said before the Equity was very evident.

Nay this Case among others was referred by the Parliaments Order of the
ninteenth of Ian. 1653. to the Justices of the Upper Bench; who upon hearing of
the whole matter, declared me not in fault for the escape, and the business
therefore only proper for the Chancery: wherein, being a Court of Equity, I
was only relievable: For certainly the Verdict was a strange one; and the
oppression that lies upon me by the means of it, as heavy, and of as ill
example, as can be possible.

This is the great business as to the Execution of my Office; but because the
rage of my enemies was not content to stay here, but would strike at my life as
well as my livelihood, they have set abroach an old business voted scandalous
by the Parliament many years ago, and threatened to try me for my life about it.
The business stands thus.

George Smithson was committed to the upper Bench Prison, June 13. 1637. where
he carried himself with such extreme disorder, that in the year 1640. he was
put into the common goal, where he was not only so troublesome, but also so
dangerous to the Prisoners, that they petitioned for his removal. Hereupon I
ordered him every night to be put into the house which is set apart for unruly
Prisoners. There continuing his old manners, he was kept for some time, all
which space he was fed with victuals sent from my own Table; and the Stewards
of the house had express order to take care that he should be constantly
relieved. He died the 5 of Sept. 1640. A Coroner sat upon him, a Jury was
sworn, six Prisoners, and six neighbors, who found that Smithson dyed by the
visitation of God, and not otherwise or by any other means, as appears by the
Record.

I thank God I have this comfort yet left me, that I can say, I find not in my
heart to thirst after blood. And certainly these people, had they not been
blinded by their own malice, and carried on by an extreme desire of my ruin,
might have found our somewhat more probable to have employed their perjuries
about, then for to say that I should hazard my Salvation, my Reputation, my
Life, the well-being of my Wife and Children, and all this for the blood of a
poor Lunatic in Prison, whom till that time I had never known, and from whose
death I could draw no advantage.

The very same men that have revived this complaint against me before this
Committee, brought the same complaint to the Parliament seven or eight years
since, at which time it was examined with all industry, scrutiny, earnestness,
and integrity possible: all their own examinations, and those of what witness
they could produce, a were taken; and several persons were admitted by that
Committee, in the name and behalf of the City, to take notice of all
proceedings. The Committee after a full hearing, made the report to the
Parliament, that they found the Accusations false, and prosecuted without
cause; whereupon, the 5 of Sept. 1645. they voted, That the complaints were
raised and prosecuted without any ground at all, falsely, maliciously, and
scandalously, and that William Pendred, Edward Jenks, Hannah his wife, James
Freez, and Stephen Pratt were principal instigators and prosecutors of these
proccedings, and do deserve severe and exemplary punishment; and accordingly
referred it to a Committee to consider what exemplary punishment were fit to be
inflicted upon them.

Nor indeed did they vote it malicious without ground, for Freeze and Jenks,
with one Magic (who is a great stickler in the business, though not so openly
as the other) having been formerly Prisoner in the Upper Bench, and there very
unruly and mischievous, the Judges did remove them to Newgate, which first
kindled in them that malice, that has several times since attempted my life.

Notwithstanding all this, their wickedness was so restless, that though they
saw how little they were able to satisfy any just men of the ground of their
complaints, they had the impudence to renew the business again at the Committee
for the Army; who also upon examination, voted, Aug. 24. 1649. to the same
purpose as the Parliament had formerly done; yet after all these repulses they
have again brought it to this Committee, where it seems it receives fresh
entertainment.

These are the two principal things, out of which, with some other helps (I
will not say additions of his own) Mr. Fountain has stuffed his papers, and
at last hatched a Report. But however it is, though it be not fitting for me to
say, that he carried himself there rather like an Adversary, then a Judge; so
it should seem he has a mind, by the carriage of this business, that men
should find him turn from a Judge to a Solicitor. For this report of his, he
very assiduously promotes to the Committee of Parliament; who upon the report,
ordered July 25. 1653. that I should appear before the same Committee the next
day, which was Tuesday following, at 3 in the afternoon, and bring with me a
perfect List of the names, sir-names, places of last abode of all the prisoners
in custody, since the last list in print; together with all Bonds, Statutes,
Judgments, Warrants of Attorney to acknowlede judgments to Creditors, or
others in their behalf.

Hereupon I petitioned the Commit, Tuesday July 26. 1653. in regard I had not
received their Order till late, and that I was threatened to be arrested for
several sums of money, as I gave my attendance, That I might either be exempted
from personal attendance, or else be protected from arrests; that I might have
copies of reports and Petitions, and be admitted to put in my defense in
writing, or by my Counsel. But being expressly commanded to attend the Thursday
after, I accordingly did so, and carried in the List; but showed them that I
could not deliver in the Bonds, by reason they were the only security which
enabled me to perform several trusts settled out of the Office, and the only
defense I had against all escapes, sued and to be sued. But the Committee
pressed me for a positive answer, whether I would deliver them or no; and
though I Petitioned for it, would grant me no longer time then the next morning
for my positive answer; which I was to deliver to the Chairman by 10 of the
clock. According to the appointment, next morning, being Friday, I delivered a
letter to the Chairman, with a paper of Reasons enclosed, why I could not in
discretion and safety deliver in the Bonds: both which, since I am so much
concerned in them, for better satisfaction follow thus.

THE HUMBLE ANSWER OF Sir JOHN LENTHAL Knight, Marshal of the Upper-Bench
Prison.
IN obedience to the commands of this Honorable Committee, whose persons and
power in all humility I ever shall have in high esteem, I humbly offer, That
the possibility that the Marshall of the Upper Bench has for the preservation
of such Prisoners as shall be thereunto Committed, (by reason of the smalness
and unsafeness of the Prison,) are only such Collateral securities as by his
own industry and endeavors he can obtain from persons that shall engage for
the true imprisonment of the Prisoners; which securities (howsoever good in
Law, as he humbly concieves) are only particularly belonging to himself, and
to his own private Estate, and to such others as have likewise interest in
those securities as well as himself, and no way concerning the public
interest; And by the Law of this Land are disposable by him, and such other
particular persons to whom they in right and equity do belong, as any other
personal securities to any other particular person: That this present
Parliament by their most pious and religious Declaration lately set forth, to
the contentment of many thousands of this Nation, encourages him (with all
thankfall acknowledgement) to assure himself, That as the Parliament, the
highest and supreme power of the Nation, has declared, that they will be as
tender of Lives, Estates, Liberties, just Rights and Properties of all others,
as they are of themselves and their Posterities; so this Honorable Committee,
who are a part of that honorable Body, will not be offended, if he the said Sir
John Lenthall shall on his and the others behalf, presume upon that Honorable
favor and grace, which the said Parliament has with such abundant care
offered to the People; and therefore cannot in justice or equity deliver up
such securities, which cannot be useful or advantageous unto him by the Law
(as appears by his former Reasons humbly offered to the Committee, and other
grounds) if taken from him, without a particular Act of Parliament therein to
relieve him. This being thus humbly offered, without the least disregard to the
power of this Committee, or disrespect to any of their persons, whom, as
becomes him, in the place wherein God has placed you, he shall ever honor.
This, in all humility assuring himself of justice and equity according to the
known right of Law and Property.

July 29. 1653. John Lenthall.

Reasons humbly offered and presented to the honorable Committee for Prisons
and Prisoners, wherefore the Bonds and Securities taken for the true
imprisonment of Prisoners by Sir JOHN LENTHAL Knight, Marshal of the Upper
Bench Prison, cannot safely be delivered out of Sir JOHN LENTHALS hands.
1. FOr that many of the said Bonds and securities, upon escapes made, are
already delivered to Creditors, thereby to recover their debts due from the
Prisoners; And Sir John stands engaged by his promise to deliver diverse more.
2. For that as soon as the Prisoners shall take notice their securities are out
of Sir John Lenthals power, they will and may take Escapes; and Sir John having
no other way to restrain them, or to secure himself, other then by his bonds
and securities, shall be left without remedy. 3. For that there now being
several Actions of escape depending against Sir John Lenthal, amounting to
10000. l. and several recoveries had; Sir John has no other means to secure
his person and estate from the said Actions, and recoveries, but by the said
bonds and securities, many of which he has delivered to his Attorneys to put
in suit, to be indemnified from the said Actions and recoveries. 4. For that
the said Bonds and securities are made to him in his name, for his indemnity,
and suable only by him, and in his name; and can only be released by him. 5.
For that the said Bonds, etc. are not forfeited or to be sued until after
escapes brought against Sir John Lenthall; so that if the same should be
delivered out of his hands, the Priseners, Creditors, Sureties, and Sir John
Lenthall, may be much damnified. 6. For that upon the discharge of Prisoners,
(which is daily) the said bonds and securities are to be delivered up,
otherwise the sureties may be endangered, and the Prisoner damnified upon his
counter security given by him to his sureties. 7. For that every defendant has
liberty to crave Oyer of the condition of the bond upon which he is sued,
before he plead; which Sir John not having in his hands to produce, will be
delayed in his suit, or lose the benefit of his Actions. 8. For that the Bonds
and securities taken for true imprisonment, are Sir John Lenthals undoubted
right and property, which he hops this Honorable Committee will inviolably
defend. 9. For that the sureties, who are most of them Tradesmen in this City,
and live by their Credits, and will be bound for a Prisoners true imprisonment,
when they will not be bound with him for any money, when they shall perceive
their names are published, and their bonds put to other uses then they intended
them, will presently call in their bonds; and that will be a means to deter all
others from being bound: which will prove a very great prejudice to the
Creditor. 10. For that such bonds and Securities as are in Sir John's hands
were given to him by the Prisoner and his fureties, by way of trust, and upon
condition that no use shall be made thereof but in case of Escape; And
therefore the Prisoner having made no escape, Sir John cannot without breach of
trust part with their securities.
The morrow after, which was Saturday the 30 of July, the House was made
acquainted with this my Answer, who thereupon made an Order for my commitment
to the Sergeant at Arms, and another Order that Sergeant Dendy should take the
care and custody of the Prisoners, which he accordingly did, my self being
apprehended with a warrant from Sergeant Birkhead, under which durance I now
continue; though I could heartily beseech them, in regard of the multiplicity
of the troublesome and entangled businesses that lie upon me, and for that I
know not what may be brought out against me, having had so many years to do in
a troublesome Office, to be pleased for to take off this restraint from me:
which certainly as I cannot see what prejudice could arise from it, all my
estate and livelihood lying at the stake, and it concerning me so nearly to
make out my interest; so were it to me a deed of very great mercy and
compassion. For as it would be a means to save me from a great charge, which,
in the miserable condition I am in, lies heavy upon me; so would it enable me
to go about to make such defense against what may be brought against me in
behalf of the Commonwealth, as that I may thereby enjoy the benefit of the Law,
and the freedom of a native Englishman.

For my offenses, as they are alleged, falling under the two heads of
Misdemeanour and Felony, I shall humbly submit my self to any fair and legal
way of Trial. If they be merely Misdemeanors, (in case there be any) they are
pardoned by the Act of Oblivion, as I conceive. And I could heartily wish they
in their wisdoms were satisfied that this restraint upon me were not needful.
For they having the Prison, which is both my livelihood and purchased
inheritance, in their hands, it is not to be conceived that I should flinch for
it, but endeavor by asserting of my innocence to them, to recover my own
right. Resides, if these were so many summed up together, as might render me in
their Judgments unfit for the exercise of that Trust, they should sequester
the Office at last, and then I hope I might obtain that mercy from them, which
was never denied to their actual Enemies, it being my inheritance by Letters
Patents under the great Seal of England, and purchased by me at a great rate.
But I am more unfortunate; for upon Mr Fountains bare Report and prosecution,
I am deprived of the execution of my Office, and the securities are demanded of
me; which if I give up, I should be left naked of my defense, and I cannot tell
how many Bills may be filed against me before the next Term, and that there may
be so much recovered against me, as may ruin me and my posterity, forty times
worse then I am already. But I shall say only this by the way, that if it be my
mis-hap to be the miserable President in this case, in what doubt it will leave
all other Officers, who have acted according to the old Laws, and what
security they can imagine to themselves, if upon every alteration, or rather,
intention of alteration, they shall be called in question for Actions done by
virtue of Laws in force. For my part, what I did in the execution of my
Office, was nothing but what the Rules of the Court, (to which I was a servant)
permitted, what my Predessors had constantly practiced, and what was not
against the Laws that then stood. If Accident, or Negligence of Servants ever
occasioned any miscarriage, I appeal to any man who has evicted me by Law,
whether I have not satisfied him. Now if the Parliament in their wisdom think
fit, that for the future that Prison be kept by other Rules, and that the
present Liberties be retrenched, for my part I shall with all readiness
endeavor an Obedience, when I shall know what to do. For as it is not just to
punish a man for trespassing against a Law not made; so it is but common
prudence to be directed by those Laws that are already in force.

If I am to be tried as a Felon, I shall beg that according to custom, I
should rather be committed to the public Goal, then left in a Messengers
hands, and the informers bound over to prosecute; and for my part, I am so
secured of my innocence, that I shall always make it my business to desire the
hastening of a fair and a legal Trial; only this I hope I may say, that it will
be somewhat hard for any man to know when he is secure from any slanderous or
malicious accusation, when the same things, and that by the same men, may be
set afoot again, after they had been quashed by the votes of the Parliament,
the Council of Officers, and two several Committees.

Yet under this restraint have I patiently endured ever since my commitment,
with a resolution quietly to wait, till it please God to move the hearts of the
Parliament to consider my innocence. In the mean time, I shall cheerfully obey,
however they shall dispose of me, and I shall receive all their commands with
the due obedience I ought: and truly for my part I should not delay the
delivering of the Bonds two hours, if it were not clear unto me that my ruin
would immediately follow upon it. And though I am very willing, as I have often
said, for to conform my self to all their commandments; yet I could wish that
Sergeant Dendy, whom they have employed in taking care of the Prison, did not
seem to be of opinion that I am also committed to his tuition; for methinkes
his Letter of Aug. 6. 1653. speaks somewhat to that purpose.

These for Sir John Lenthal Knight, at Lambeth Marsh.
Sir,
I acquainted the Committee the other day, with your answer, with which they
were so much dissatisfied, as that they resolved to report your contempt to the
Parliament; yesterday they sat not, but adjourned till this afternoon, till
when I desired they would forbear acquainting the House, for that you promised
you would do your endeaveavour; of which if you give not a real proof, by a
return of the Books wherein all the names of your Prisoners, with their
securities and places of abode are, it will be in vain for you to think of
securing your self by a refusal. Sir, The complaints of several Creditours
undone by you, are very great; and our Law you know has condemned many a man,
who thereupon has suffered death, though but for the value of a Sheep.
Therefore all things considered, it concerns you not to contemn any longer the
Authority of the Parliament, who if incensed, as you give them just cause to
be, neither you nor yours know what evil to them a day may bring forth --. Sir,
The Committee being to meet this afternoon, between 2 and 3 a clock, I have
sent the Bearer on purpose to receive your answer, which is expected from you by

6 Aug. 1653. Sir, Your humble Servant, E. Dendy.


And now since I have thrown open my condition so nakedly, I leave it to any
man to judge whether or no it deserve not pity, my self and family being by
this means at the very brink of ruin, and that with such variety of
circumstances, as a man cannot sit down to number them. Yet am I prepared with
all submission to the Parliament, and hope God will so carryon the inclinations
of Justice, as that in his good time they will take into consideration my
Innocence, and withal the number of innocent persons that will be involved in
my ruin; and therefore so mix their Iust^ce with Mercy, as to restore me to my
Liberty and just inheritance.


