SOME REMARKS Recommended unto Ecclesiastics OF ALL PERSUASIONS.
NOT to trouble you with Prefaces or Apologies, it is certain, That as in the
Church of the Jews, they were not all Israel that were of Israel, Romans 9.6. so
in our Church they have not all been, nor yet are, all true Church of
England-men who boast and pride themselves in monopolizing that Character to
themselves: And yet I hope I may with great Truth affirm, That the Independent
Protestant Church of England, is the best constituted Church, both for Doctrine
and Discipline, in the World; and that there are both in our Hierarchy and in
our Inferior Clergy, many seven shining Stars, many true Nathaniels indeed, in
whom is no guile, John 1.47. and yet I fear in the same Church, that as there
has been, so there are still many seven deadly Sinners, Linsey-wolsey Divines,
not much unlike those of Samaria, who feared God, yet served Idols: or like
those of Israel who swore by the Lord and Melcom. Whoever will seriously and
impartially consider and examine the Prints of Dr. Leighton, Pryn, Bastwick and
Burton, and compare them with the Prints of Harsenet, Parker, (late Bishop of
Oxon) Montague, Sybthorp, Manwaring, and others, must conclude the Doctrines
and Positions of these Men to be far more pernicious and destructive to whole
Kingdoms than the other; and better deserved their punishment than to be
rewarded with Preferments as they were. And then if we consider how
Instrumental some Prelates of those times were in Punishing the one, and
Preferring the other, contrary to all true Religion, and to the genius and
sense of the most Pious of the Nation; thereby manifestly espousing their Cause
to be their own, whereby they became participes criminis; by which misbehaviour
of theirs they brought upon themselves contempt, and the Nation abhorred them,
and would not be satisfied until they had disenabled them by Act of
Parliament, 17 Car. And if we consider the Opinions that the late Bishop of
Oxon. (otherwise a pious worthy Prelate) sacrificed to the Flames in July 1683,
and the purport of the Address of the other University to his Majesty in
September 1681. And also the Contents of very many Sermons preached on the
Ninth of September 1683. Besides very many others, rank of one and the same
poisonous Leaven, all squinting toward Arbitrary Power, and, as much as in
them lies, alluring and encouraging Kings to attempt the same, by rendering them
absolutely Absolute, and unaccountable until Doomsday in the Afternoon;
whereby they become only Nominal (I had almost said Mungril)
Church-of-England-men, but not true Israelites, not true Nathaniels indeed:
These things considered, how can I expect less than a whole host of Chemarims
about my Ears? But when I consider that (according to the Doctrine of the
Church of England) the Word of God is the only Rule of Faith and Obedience, and
disapproves all implicit Faith, blind Obedience, and Infallibility, and that
we are not to imbibe Doctrines on trust, and expect Salvation by a deputy Faith
and Obedience. And that St. Paul exhorts us, that we be no more henceforth
children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by
the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. And the Scripture it self counts it nobleness of mind to
examine the doctrines of our Teachers, whether those things are so, Act 17.11.
And the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, highly commended for that, he had tried
them which said they were Apostles and were not, and found them liars, Revel.
2.2. And St. Paul bids us prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Sure then after such Apostolical Precepts, it is no crime to
inquire whether they that boast of being Church-of-England-men are so in truth
or no. I appeal to your selves, Is it Fair, nay, is it Just? nay, Is it not
Pride and Folly to assert Truth by arrogating to your selves the only freedom
of Speech, and stopping of Mouths, and Pens, and Press, and burning Opinions of
others, equally gifted and furnished with the same means of knowledge with your
selves, and have like precious Souls to save as your selves; and yet can let
Popish Books, and other vile Tenets, be published and read as common as your
own without Control, Fire, or Faggot; and connive at them, but storm against
Protestant Conventicles, and can let Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremungers, and
Adulterers, march openly and confidently in our Streets, without so much as the
Summons of an Apparitor, or Excommunication.

Tacitus, intending to write the Life of Agricola, Incursurus tam saeva and
infest a virtutibus tempora, did beg Pardon, which otherwise he would not have
done, considering that Aurelius Rusticus for praising Paetus Thrasea, calling
him virum sanctum, was put to Death by Nero, virtutem ipsam exscindere
concupiscens. And also Herennius Senecio, because he had written the Life of
Helvidius Priscus another Cato or Brutus, a Person of most free Speech in
behalf of the Commonwealth, for calling them most Holy and Upright Persons.
Besides, severity was used against the Writers of Books, charge being given to
the Aediles and Triumviri capitales, that the Works of those Noble Wits should
solemnly be burnt in the Marketplace, supposing that with that Fire they could
stop the Mouths of the People of Rome, abolish the Liberty of the Senate, and
suppress the Knowledge of all Mankind: Expelling withal, the Professors of
Wisdom, and all good Learning and Arts, lest any sparks of Honesty should
remain. Hence Sulpitia, a Poetess of that time, Nunc igitur qui res Romanas
imperat inter,
Et studia and sapiens hominum nomenque genusque,
Omnia abice for as atque urbe excedere jussit.


A very noble and pious Example taken from Heathenish Princes for Christians to
imitate. We naturally love, nay long for forbidden Fruit, and are most
inquisitive after Books forbidden, as being always jealous that some Truths lie
dormant in such, ready to fly in the Faces of those that forbid them, and make
wise Men conclude, That Reason cannot stand on their side, who will not suffer
the Reasons of both Parties to be read and published. Gospel Truths need no
such Artifices; Souls purely divine without mixtures and allay of little
pitiful ends and interests do scorn the motion, lest happily some Divine
Truths may by such sinister devices be suppressed and stifled. And others being
of the contrary Opinion, diametrically opposite one to the other, and each
differing no farther from the one than the other from them, and neither
Infallible, what would you have us poor Laics do? death and damnation being
pulpited against us by both Persuasions, as one Opinion or the other happens
to possess the Pulpit.

1. I say, That the differences among us are occasioned not as Christians, but
as Men. The Gospel is the Gospel of Peace; Peace was the last Legacy that
Christ left to his Church: My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you,
John 14.27. And his command was to have peace one with another, Mark 9.50. and
the unity of the spirit is preserved by the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. But the
little self ends of Earth and Interest, of the Preferments, Ambition, and
Domination, is the cause of Controversies, Animosities, and Contentions, to
which Priests are as subject as others.

2. I say, There were false Prophets among the Jews, and was foretold, that as
there were false Prophets among them, so there should be false teachers among
us, 2 Pet. 2.1. And St. Paul forewarned the Bishop of Ephesus, That out of your
own selves, should arise men speaking perverse things, Acts 20.30. and Christ
himself, when he cautioneth us to beware of false Prophets by calling, which
shall be found false by their teaching. St. Paul also grants many to be
ministers of Christ by profession, and yet in words and deeds the ministers of
Satan, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. such false Apostles, says he, are deceitful
workers, and transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ: and for certain
these Priests of such different Persuasions, Principles, and Doctrines, cannot
both be in the right, and therefore good Reason that if poor Laics are to live
and die Eternally, according to the Doctrines our Pastors pulpit to us, it is
but just, and right, that we should try the Spirits, as commanded, John 1.41.
and judge of Doctrine as directed, Cor. 10.15. for certainly we are not to live
by the deputy Faith of our Officers, but by our own Faith, and must stand and
fall accordingly: Now seeing our Teachers cannot agree Doctrines (as in point
of Resistance and Passive Obedience, taking and refusing new Oaths, Ceremonies,
Conformity, as well as in many others they do not) and both cannot be in the
right, then are their Flocks in a very sad condition, Pulpit-rebels both to the
one and to the other, as the one or the other prevails, for neither are
Infallible, so that we are clearly left to be our own Judges, and both Priest
and People have no other Divine Rule or Authority without them (warrantable to
one another, as a common Ground or Rule, either for Holy living or decision of
Controversies in Matters of Religion, unto which all ought to submit,) but the
Scriptures, nor any other within either Priest or People. But the Illumination
of the Spirit so interpreting the same Scriptures as warrantable both to
Priests and People; and to such whose Consciences they can so persuade can have
no other ground in matters of Religion, but only from the same Scriptures; and
these not being possible to be understood without Divine Illumination, which no
man can know at all times to be in himself, much less to be at any time for
certain in another: and therefore the Scriptures being the only infallible Rule
of life, and of judging Controversies, and the Light within us no farther
Light, than wherein it agrees with this Word; if it do not, it is Darkness not
Light.

Now these things considered, will justify our taking up the Cudgels for our
own Defense and Justification in these great and dangerous Disputes, having
Souls, Lives, Fortunes, Liberties to save and enjoy, as well as Ecclesiastics.

Though the Church of England be the best constituted Church in the World,
wherein the lively Oracles of God are purely Preached, and full fraught with
many, very worthy pious and learned Priests and Prelates, yet there are amongst
them many false Prophets, (and no wonder, was not there a Judas among the
Twelve?) and false Teachers; nay, very many time-servers that pimp for
Domination, Honors, Preferments, and other vile and base ends, and, like
Micha's Levite, for a little better reward swallow any thing, stick at nothing,
by School-quirks and false Reasonings, perverting Scriptures to rob whole
Kingdoms of their Laws, Liberties, and Religion, that daub with untempered
Mortar, flatter Profaneness, court and allure Royalties to Perjury and Robbery,
whilst they Preach Quod libet licet, and Sovereignty absolutely Absolute to be
in Kings, and their unaccountableness, betray Truths, smothering and
dissembling the Strictness and Purity of holy Ways; I contend not here against
the lazy Drones that suck the Honey from the Bees by their Non-residency, nor
against the Dammees Euphoniae gratia: these are personal Sins, and hurt others
only by Example, and such there are; but my contest is against those
Ecclesiastics who living, and had interest at the upper end of the World, not
only usurped more Powers than they had right unto, but abused those Powers and
that Interest they had at Court; from which abuse of Power pulpiting Divine
Prerogatives of Kings beyond measure, their unaccountableness, misconstruing
and extending Passive Obedience beyond its just Bounds: Which have been the
Harrangues of Prints and Pulpits, till their own Copiholds came to be
concerned, come all the disturbances of Government in Church and State to whole
Kingdoms. No wonder then if contempt be poured on such of the Clergy (and on
such of them only) as Preach such destructive Doctrines as deserve the severe
Reprimand of whole Kingdoms; for thereby all Laws, Liberty, Property, Religion,
and Honesty would be trampled under foot.

Therefore it is no Crime in the Laity to stand up in the defense of their own
Rights and Concerns. As it is the duty of Priests, Ministers of the Gospel, to
teach us with Wisdom and Knowledge, so it is our duty to esteem them highly in
love (if they do so) for their Works sake; and they that labor in the Word and
Doctrine are worthy of double Honor and double Revenue; they cannot have too
much: but they that do not Teach us with Knowledge and Understanding are worthy
of neither; but when they abuse and usurp Powers, they have no right unto, and
claim them as their due by the most Potent Claim in the World (Jure Divino)
monstrum horrendum! Witness Excommunication, because there has (as of old, so
of more late Days) so much ill use made thereof, of which I shall only say with
Erastus de Excommunicatione, that there is no such thing (as it is now used) in
all the Scripture; in Sanctis Scriptur^s nullum extat mandatum, sed commentum
est pure humanum, p. 67. Which renders the Execution thereof abominable. To
wrest Scripture to maintain such unlawful Powers does very ill become the
Priests of the most High God. As it is their Duty to Teach, so it is our
Privilege and Right to judge of their Doctrines, yea, and to put them in mind
and admonish them also of their duty, Coloss. 4.17. Mistake me not, as if this
were bent against the Bishops only; no, no, Papist, Presbyter, Independent are
all to blame in this Point: and it is no excuse to us if we are deceived by the
cunning Crastiness of our Ghostly Fathers, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

Let us look a little back, no farther than our own Times and Memories, and let
them stand or fall in the good Graces of the Kingdom, according to their Merits
or Demerits. Rushworth, 644, 1628.
In the time of King James, the Parliament sitting, Dr. Harsenet Bishop of
Chichester Preached a Sermon at Whitehall upon Mark 12.17. Give unto Caesar,
etc. wherein he insisted, that Goods and Money were Caesar's, and therefore they
were not to be denied unto him; at which the whole Parliament stormed and took
great Offense, which that wise and peaceable Prince endeavored to calm and
qualify by moderate Exposition thereof, to the Lords and Commons for that
purpose Assembled in the Banqueting House, viz. That the Doctor meant it
according to the Laws and Customs of the Country wherein they did live. This
did mollify, but not satisfy, and therefore the Sermon was burnt to satisfy
their Indignation against such vile and destructive Doctrines; for which he was
well rewarded by being translated to Norwich, Rush. 177.
then to York, a shrewd sign that such Doctrines did please the Court, though not
the Parliament. Likewise Mr. Ric. Montague, who 21 Jac. printed an Answer to
the late Gag of Protestants: and about 22 Jac. printed another Book, Entitled,
A Treatise of the Invocation of Saints. 1 Car. 1. he printed another,
Entitled, An Appeal to Caesar; which Books contained so many Erroneous and
false Doctrines, contrary to the very Articles agreed on in the Convocation
held at London 1562. that they disobliged the whole Nation so much that the
Commons House exhibited Articles against him 1 Car. and prayed that he might be
punished. This Cause began 21 Jac. when he had published a former Book, called
A new Gag for an old Goose, and was then questioned in Parliament, and
committed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and ended in an Admonition only
given to Montague by the Archbishop, who disliked that Book, and thought to
suppress it but could not: It was printed and dedicated to the King; and his
Cause was recommended to the Duke of Buckingham by the Bishops of Oxford,
Rochester, and St. David's; all mighty Church of England Men, (not Puritans)
whereby they espoused it as their common Cause and Concern; and Montague is
made his Majesty's Chaplain, yet his Majesty was so just and prudent as to
leave him to the Parliament; which did not please the Bishops; and the Commons
House did exhibit Articles against him, and prayed his Book might be burnt and
himself punished, but the Bishops prevailed so much with the King on their own
behalf, that he was made first Bishop of Chichester, and then Bishop of
Norwich, and his Book only called in by Proclamation, yet so as all Answers
thereunto by Preaching or Writing were forbidden. For the several Answers made
by Dr. Featly, Dr. G^ad, in their Parallels by Mr. Burton, Ward, Yates, Wetton,
Rouse, in a Book called King James's Religion, were all suppressed, and some of
the Printers questioned in the High Commission; and Montague had a Royal
Pardon, which was inquired into 4 Car. by the Commons House.

In the same Parliament a Petition was exhibited from some Booksellers and
Printers in London, complaining of the restraint of Books written against
Popery; and the contrary allowed of by the only means of Dr. Land Bishop of
London, and diverse of the Printers and Booksellers were sent for by Pursevants,
for Printing Books against Popery, and the Licensing is only restrained to the
Bishop of London and his Chaplains.

Ph. de Comines complained, That though the King of France had a wise Council,
yet they rid all upon one Horse. And must we be Priest-ridden by a Bishop and
his Chaplains? Upon which Mr. Seldom declared, That there was no Law to prevent
Printing of any Books, only a Decree in Star Chamber, and he advised that a Law
might be made concerning Printing, else one may be Fined, Imprisoned prisoned,
and his Goods taken from him by virtue of such Decrees, which is a great
invasion upon the Liberty of the Subject.

About the same time also came out Cosins his Book of Seven Sacraments,
containing strange things; against whom the Commons House exhibit 21 Articles,
whereof one was for calling some Gentlewomen Whores, and Jades, and Pagans, and
for tearing some of their Clothes when they were in their Seats in the Church,
because they would not bow to the Altar, nor at the Name of Jesus, etc. Nalson
789.

About this time the Clergy had wrought themselves with great Power and
Interest at Court, which encouraged the Inferior Clergy to great boldness, and
to pulpit any thing that might please, as the very Road of Preferment, Teach
for Hire, and Divine for Money.

Another that did appear bare faced, and without any Vizard, was one Sybthorp,
Vicar of Brackley, scarce Batchellor of Art, who preached Feb. 22. 1626. at
Lent Assizes at Northampton, on Romans 13.7. Which Sermon, called Apostolical
Obedience, though full fraught with many Theses destructive to all human Society:
yet had such countenance from the Court-Clergy, that they procured his Majesty
to send to the Archbishop of Canterbury to License it for the Press, for the
better grace of the business, which his Majesty did feveral times by Mr.
William Murrey; but the Archbishop, like a true Nathaniel, refused to give it
an Imprimatur; but not without great Reasons humbly submitted to his Majesty
for his so doing. It was afterward carried to Dr. Worrall, Chaplain to the
then Bishop of London; who having hand over head Licensed it, afterward took
advice of Council; who told him, That if all in that Sermon were true, there
was no meum and tuum left to Subjects, and that he might be called to an
Account for it and hanged: Whereupon he blotted out his Name again; and the
Book was afterward Licensed by Laud, then Bishop of London, who gave it a great
and stately Allowance, and caused it to be dedicated to the King, and published
upon his Majesty's Commission for the Raising of Money by the way of Loan;
which was by such Royal Authority, to give greater countenance thereto: It
taught that the King's Duty is to direct and make Laws, that nothing may excuse
from Active Obedience, but what is against the Law of God, or Nature, or
Impossible: That all Antiquity was absolutely for Absolute Obedience in all
Civil and Temporal Things. Laud also allowed the Book called, The Seven
Sacraments, with all its Errors, which were afterward expunged.

Another bold faced Priest, that did appear about the same time, was Dr.
Manwaring, who promoted the same Design in two Sermons, preached before the
King and Court at Wintehall, called Religion and Allegiance; in which he
declared, That the King was not bound to observe the Laws of the Realm
concerning the Subjects Rights and Liberty, but that his Royal Will and Command
in imposing Loans and Taxes without common consent in Parliament, does oblige
the Subjects Conscience upon pain of Eternal Domnation; that they who refused
to pay this Loan, offended against the Law of God and the Kings Supreme
Authority, and became guilty of Impiety, Disloyalty and Rebellion; and that the
Authority of Parliament is not necessary for Raising the of Aids, and
Subsidies, etc. for which he was impeached in Parliament, 4 Car. for that they
tended to alter and subvert the whole Frame and Fabric of this State and
Commonwealth, that they tended to infuse into the Conscience of his Majesty,
the persuasion of a Power not bounding it self with Laws; which King James, in
his Speech March 21. 1609. to the Parliament, calls Tyranny with Perjury: he
endeavors to persuade the Conscience of the Subjects, that they are bound to
obey commands illegal; yea, he damns them for not obeying them; he robs the
Subject of the Property of their Goods, and seeks like Faux and his fellows, to
blow up Parliaments, and Parliamentary Power, etc. That they hold it a great
presumption for a private Divine to debate the Right and Power of the King,
which is a matter of such high Consequence, as to be handled only in
Parliament, and that with moderation: therefore upon the whole matter he was
censured to be Imprisoned during the pleasure of the House, Fined 1000 l. to
make his submission at both Bars, suspended three Years from the exercise of
his Ministry, disabled to have any Ecclesiastical Government, or Secular
Office, for ever disabled to Preach at Court, his Book to be burnt in London,
and in both Universities, and the re-printing thereof to be inhibited by his
Majesty's Proclamation.

Notwithstanding all these Censures, Reprimands, and Judgment of Parliament,
yet such Juglers were the mighty Church of England Priests and Prelates, and
such was the Prevalency, Potency, and Impudency of the then Court Clergy, (no
Nathaniels) that they procured their Royal Pardons of all Errors heretofore
committed by them, either in Speaking, Writing, or Printing, and Manwaring was
immediately presented to the Rectory of Stampford Rivers in Essex, and had a
Dispensation to hold it, together with the Rectory of St. Giles's in the
Fields. Rushwerth's Collect. when as the justness of the Nation required their
severe Reprimands, nay, their Punishments, nay, the Muzling of their Mouths.

These and their Abettors, (no Nathaniels) Bishops of London, Durham,
Rochester, Oxford, and others, being of the same Quire and Chorus, sung the
same Tune, and boasted themselves to be the true Church of England Men; but the
Archbishop-Abbot (though Primate and Metropolitan of all England,) and
multitudes of others, both Bishops, Priests, and Lay, much more Loyal and more
True Church of England Men than themselves, were branded for not being right
Church of England Men, and reviled as Puritanical, Factious; what not? Under
which Notion, the Archbishop Abbot suffered being disgraced at Court, commanded
to withdraw into the Country, Sequestered, etc.

Whoever will seriously consider how Industriously, Active, and Instrumental,
the Bishops then in Vogue (who were the Bishops of London, and his Accomplices,
viz. Durham, Rochester, Oxon. St. David's, and others) were to procure Dr.
Alexander Leighton, a learned Scotch-man, Mr. Burton, B. D. Mr. Pryn,
Barrister, and Dr. Bastwick, to be so inhumanly censured in the Star Chamber,
and High Commission, viz. Imprisoned, Fined, Whipped, Pillored, Ears cut off,
Cheeks branded, with other Severities fitter for Infidels, nay, for Brutes
rather than Christians; and for what? not truly for Crimes, scarce Peccadilloes
(but rather for Rebukes of Sin,) as their Works do testify, in respect of what
abominable Doctrines their own Priests preached, countenancing and preferring
those that Preached them, espousing their Cause as their own, and so became
participes criminis, though against the Interest and Sense of the whole Kingdom
assembled in Parliament: whereby, and by their being a constant dead wait for
the Court against the Kingdom, they brought so great a Disdain and Contempt on
their Hierarchy, and those Courts, that the Nation was not able to bear them,
and was forced to take away both these Courts, and their Privilege of Sitting
in the House of Lords.

On which I shall only Remark thus much, viz. That those Ecclesiastics that
preached Prerogative highest, though to the ruin of the Nation, and though
condemned by the whole Kingdom in Parliament, and that severely, and with high
Resentments, yet when the Parliament was up, Bishop Laud and his Accomplices (no
true, but Mungril Church of England Men) so improved their Interest at Court,
that they were preferred; and others that did but Write and Preach against
their violent and unconscionable Proceedings were barbarously censured and
used; which the Parliament so laid to Heart, that they took away both these
Courts: And when those Three, viz. Prin, Bastwick, and Burton, returned from
their designed perpetual Imprisonment, they were met and caressed all along the
Road, and received by the City with great Joy and Acclamations. And some while
after Bishop Laud came to his unhappy Doom; how deservedly I judge not.

If so to countenance and prefer those that Preach Doctrines so destructive to
whole Nations, and to Persecute learned and pious Men, by the Character of a
right Church of England Man, I must confess that I cannot distinguish between
Nathaniels and those that can swear by the Lord and Melcom. I Appeal to the
whole World, whether of those two Contemporaries, Archbishop Abbot or Bishop
Laud, were the Nathaniel, the truest Church of England Man? Abbot refusing, and
Laud granting an Imprimatur to Sibthorp's Sermon, which was condemned to be
burnt, and yet Abbot Discountenanced, Sequestered, sent into the Country, etc.
and Laud advanced.

Besides, I verily believe, that it cannot be proved by any plain place of
Scripture, that there is any Power under Heaven, Ecclesiastic or Civil, that
has lawful Authority to forbid any Man (lawfully qualified) to Preach the
Gospel, or to Prosecute any Man for denying submission to the use of Ceremonies
no ways Essential to the Salvation of Souls. If so, what are we modestly to
think of those Ecclesiastics and their Adherents, that ever since the
Reformation Persecuted our Dissenters for Nonconforming to such commands?

What made so many of our Learned, Pious, Conscientious Clergy and Laiety,
Orthodox both in Life and Doctrine, cry Migremus hinc, and plant themselves in
Foreign Barbarous Countries, but Persecutions for their Consciences, and for
Rebukes of Sin rather than for any Crimes or Sins? And yet their Persecutors
had the Impudency of Abab the son of Omri, (who did evil in the sight of the
Lord above all that went before him,) to tax them for Troublers of Israel, when
themselves, Abab-like troubled it, for they meddled not with the Conformist, but
the Conformist with them; not considering that Christ came to take away the
heavy Yoke of Jewish Ceremonies, and he and his Apostles never used nor
prescribed any other; and why any other Authority should impose any other
Ceremonies, and compel Obedience to them, whereby they require other Conditions
of Gospel-Communion than ever Christ himself did, or his Apostles after him, is
past all Understanding. They would oblige us, to show us by any one plain place
of Scripture, that Christ has given any Charter to his Church, or to any
Officers thereof, to require more Ceremonies to be admitted into his Fellowship
and Worship than he himself has done; or, to deny their Communinn, that are as
capable of Heaven without the use of them, as themselves with the use of them.

To the Council met at Jerusalem, Acts 15. consisting of Apostles, and all the
faithful in the Church, and to the Holy Ghost, it seemed good to lay upon them
no greater burden than things necessary, yet some of our Mungril Church of
England Men, taking themselves to be wiser than either the Apostles or the Holy
Ghost, have dared to impose Ceremonies and Observances, no way necessary nor
conducing to the Saving of Souls, or Edification; yea, and more strictly
requiring Conformity unto them, punishing more severely the breach of them,
than the breach of Gods Precepts.

Though to err manifestly against the Scriptures, be the most dangerous and
greatest blindness that can possibly befall any Christian; and the greatest
Chastisement that God can impose in punishment of them, whoever shall make use
of the Divine Authority to serve their own turns in any worldly Interests; yet
so active is the Zeal of Priests of enlarging their own Phylacteries, their
Greatness and Impery, that they make no Bones of wresting and perverting any
Scripture, Old or New, to make it serve their turns; which in plain English is
to make Godliness wait upon Gain, Pride, and Ambition.

Let us now also add and consider the grand Pique these Priestly Court
Parasites (pure Church of England Men) have had against Puritans, (the sober
and thinking part of the Nation,) and Puritanism of old, and the same under the
names of Whigs and Phanaticks, the Arts and Tricks they have used to suppress
the Purity and Power of Religion, by reviling their Persons, decrying and
suppressing Lectures on the Weekdays, Sermons on Sundays in the Afternoon, and
Conventicles, and giving encouragement to Idleness, Looseness, and Profaneness
in the People. Witness the Book allowing Sports on the Lord's Day; Printed 1633.
and the Countenance given thereto by the then Court Prelates and Prelatical
Priests, who procured a Royal Proclamation to justify the same: And Archbishop
Laud sequestered Mr. Wilson four Years for not Reading that Book; and prosecuted
him in the High Commission Court, for not Reading the Prayers of the last
Edition, commanded by the Archbishop. Nalson 571. Who yet Countenanced Public
Sports on the Lord's Day by the Examples of the Reformed Churches beyond Sea,
and for the Public Dances of our Youth upon Country Greens on Sundays after
the Duties of the Day; so Bishop Bramhall (otherwise a pious Person, and stout
assertor of the Protestant Religion against Popery,) who sees nothing in them
but innocent and agreeable to that under sort of People, who likewise takes the
promiscuous License to unqualified Persons to read the Scripture to be far more
prejudicial, nay, more pernicious than the over rigorous restraint of the
Romanists, p. 641, 642, 643.

This may be the Court Dialect, and Prelatical Gospel, but certainly not
Apostolical: for the same Equity for keeping the Sabbath strictly, yea, very
strictly (not Jewishly Ceremonious) is as incumbent and obliging unto us under
the Gospel at this Day as to the Jews under the Law, I cannot understand such
Liberty to be keeping of the Sabbath, but rather a polluting of it, Isai. 56.2,
6. Keeping of the Sabbath is not to rest only from bodily Labor, but to
abstain from doing our own pleasures, and our own ways, and not speaking our
own words, Isai. 58.13, 14. and abstaining from the delights of Sin, as well as
from the Works of our ordinary Callings. What! weary of strict keeping the
Sabbaths here, and yet presume on the expectation of an Eternity, which shall
be nothing else but Sabbaths? Certainly our Sabbaths here are but an Earnest
and a Pledge of that Eternal Sabbath which we desire to Celebrate with Saints
and Angels in Heavenly Places. I wonder how so Pious a Prince, and of such
mighty Insight and Understanding, could be so imposed upon by his Prelates, and
to Countenance such a Book by his Proclamation. I wonder also how Bishop
Bramball could show such dislike of unqualified Persons Reading the Scriptures,
(when to search them is a Precept Universal, and to judge of Doctrines also,
and) whereas there is nothing in them of absolute necessity to Salvation to be
believed, but what is very obvious and intelligible to every indifferent
capacity.

Bold Church of England Men, that dare to be wiser than Almighty God, by taking
upon them to foresee Dangers that God never did foresee, and to prevent them by
such Methods as thwart God's own Appointments. Beyond all peradventure such
Doctrines, such Practices, such Methods, can never conduce to the Benefit and
Service of God's Holy Church and Chosen, or to the Putity or Propagation of the
Gospel, but are rather a muzling of their Mouths, who should tread out their
Corn, which should bring forth the food of Life Everlasting unto the People.
However, though there have been such Priests and Prelates that have so acted, yet
I am not of their Opinion who therefore deemed them Papists in Heart. No, no,
some of them have given abundant Testimony to the contrary, by their worthy
Works, as of Archbishop Laud, Bramball, and others. But it is too plain that
they improved what Interest they had at the upper end of the World, toward tho
Setting up and Advancing the Power, Impery, and Grandeur of the Church Men, and
to keep the Laiety under; and did not improve their Interest toward advancing
the Purity and Simplicity of the Gospel, or toward the making of a high way of
Holiness through out the Land, that way-fairing men, though fools, might not
err therein, Isai. 35.8. that being certainly their greater Duty, to have
bestowed themselves and their Interest on the benefit and Service of the
Church, rather than of the Pride and Ambition of Church Men.

Thus much by way of Caution, to prevent the like for the future, being of
Opinion, that the Persecuting Dissenters and Conventicles is as National a Sin
as Drinking, Drabbing, and Swearing, and ought to be as nationally to be
lamented both by Clergy and Laiety: For I must confess my self absolutely
ignorant of any one thing, or signal Constitution, from the very beginning of
the Reformation to this very day, to which the Dissenters were required to
conform and submit, that was essentially necessary, either to the Salvation of
Souls, or to the more pure and sincere Preaching of the Gospel, unto which they
deenid their Conformity or Submission. They would yet very much oblige us, if
they would make known unto us such Constitutions, if any such there be: for if
in truth they have not been such, then the Imposers, not the Dissenters, are
the Separatists and Schismatics, for tho very self same Reasons that the
Papists are Schismatics, not Protestants. And I am afraid that it is not
Conscience, but finister ends, that makes Prelates contend so out of measure
for things no way Essential to Salvation. According to St. Cyprian, In sinu
sacerdorum ambitio dormit, ibi sub umbra recubat, in Secreto Tholami and
fraudulenter occultar and nihil intentatum praetermittit. 442.

About the Year 1558, there being a Custom among the People of Paris, in the
Summer Evenings, to go out of the Suburbs of St. German in great Multitudes to
take the Fresco, and to Solace themselves with diverse kinds of Sports; those of
the new Religion, instead of doing so, began to sing the Psalms of David in
French Verses; the Multitude first laughed at the Novelty, then leaving the
Sports, joined themselves unto the Singers. And the number of those who came to
that place began to increase more than usually, whereupon the Pope's Nuntio
told the King of this Novelty, as of a thing pernicious and dangerous; because
the Ministeries of Religion, usually Celebrated in the Church in the Latin
Tongue by Religious Men only, were put into the Mouths of the common People in
the Vulgar Language, which was an invention of the Lutherans; telling him, that
if he did not resist the beginnings, in a short time, all Paris would be
Lutherans: the King gave order that the principal Authors should be proceeded
against; wherein they went not very far, having found Anthony, King of Navar,
and his Wife in that Number: but for hereafter it was forbid upon pain of
Death. Trent. 410.

Thus you see how both the Hugonots and Papists behaved themselves beyond Sea,
and that the King and Queen of Navar were not ashamed to Conventicle openly,
nor of Christ, nor of his Words, lest Christ should be ashamed of them when he
shall come in his own Glory, and in his Fathers, and of the Holy Angels, Luke
9.26. not ashamed to search the Scriptures in their own Language, because
commanded, and because in them is eternal life, John 5.39.

This Nation and Government did presume at least, that such solemn Rebukes,
such severe Reprimands as the Preachers of such Doctrines received from the
whole Kingdom, represented in Parliament by King, Lords, and Commons, Clergy
and Layety should have forewarned and discouraged all the succeeding Clergy for
ever Preaching such destructive Doctrines again; of which we now see and feel
the smart and sad effects, which our prudent Predecessors did foresee, and
would have prevented by their timely Rebukes and Precautions: but they have not
prevailed. In the Church of Ephesus there were those that boasted themselves to
be Apostles, but being tried by the Angel of that Church were found Liars. Is
it not so with us? Have we not many that boast themselves to be the only true
Church of England Men, that if tried by our Angels would be found but Mungrils?
nay, Liars, making Kings glad with their Wickedness, and Princes with their
Lies, Hos. 7.3. But the Works, and Labor, and Patience, of our true Church of
England Men, true Nathaniels indeed, cannot bear such Church of England Men as
are so evil, as to dare to Preach and Print such enslaving Doctrines. Nay, now
at this very Day its a shame to tell how such false Prophets use the Church of
the Great God, by making Her a very Tool and Slave to serve their own turns,
and to bring their own ends about, not caring what havoc they make of the
Purity and Simplicity of the Gospel.

Mr. Clifford on Psalm 51.4. pulpits, That Kings, as such are above the Law,
have Power to Dispense with the Law at their Pleasure, and alter Religion at
Pleasure, page 7.

Mr. J.T -- in his Sermon on Eccles. 10.20. declares, That Resistance in all
Cases, and in all its Degrees and Circumstances, absolutely unlawful, because
it supposes an Appeal of the People from the King to themselves, and makes them
Judges of their own Causes: for to place Sovereignty, and the last Appeal, in
all the People together, is perfect nonsense, because all the People will never
be of one mind while the World stands, page 8.9. (and I will add, nor all the
Clergy.) And yet he is so ingenious as to confess, That the Interest of a
Nation is to be preferred before the Interest or Welfare of one Man: according
to John 11.49, 50, 51. It is expedient for us, that one man dye for the People,
and that the whole Nation perish not. So that we have a sure word of Prophecy,
that it is the Testimony of God himself, That a greater Interest of Mankind is
to be preferred before a lesser, page 20, 21.

As perfect nonsense as this Priest is pleased to make Appeals unto the People
to be, yet so wise were the Roman State, above Fifty Years before Christ's
time, and so careful of their own Happiness, Rights, and Interests, that they
thought it, even then, a most prudent Law: And therefore Publius Valerius
caused it to be an Established Law, That Appeals should be allowed from any
Magistrate to the People. Livy lib. 3. n. 8. And that no Man should offer to
make any Magistrate without liberty of Appeal: and if he did, it should be
lawful to kill him. Ibid. lib. 3. n. 34. For which prudent Law they honored
him, by adding Publicola to his other name.

What the Power of the First Kings were, appears, for that Ephron, Chief Prince
of the Children of Heth, would not grant Abraham the possession of a Sepulcher
in the Land of the Children of Heth, but in the presence, and with the
approbation of the Children of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of his
City, Genesis 23.

Nor would Hamor, Prince of the Country, make a League with Jacob, but by the
consent of all that went out of the gate of his City, Genesis 34. because all the
great Concerns of the Governed was referred unto the Common Council and consent
of the People, which in those Empires was easily done, which commonly was
circumscribed within one or few Cities. But when Kings began to enlarge their
Territorios, so that all the People could not Assemble in one Place without
danger of confusion; there were ordinarily instituted Tribunes of the People,
or Officers of the Kingdom, or of the Governed, to assist and defend the Rights
and Privileges of the People, granted to them by the Law of God and Nature;
and upon great Exigences great Assemblies of the Sages of the Governed were
assembled, as an Epitome of the Universal People, were extraordinarily
congregated to consider and consult thereof.

In the Israelitish Kingdom (which, by consent and judgment of all Politic
Writers, was the best constituted Government of the World) was the same order
observed; the King had his particular Officers, and the Kingdom theirs; Seventy
one Elders, their Captains chosen out of every Tribe, which both in War and
Peace should take care of the whole; Magistrates also in singulis Municipiis:
that as they were to take care of the whole, so the several Officers were to
take care of their particular Cities and Charges over which they were set. For
David called all the Congregation when he desired to Invest Solomon in his
Kingdom: when he had restored the Policy of that Nation to have it examined and
approved, 1 Chronicles. 19. So when David was to fetch back the Ark, etc. 1 Chronicles.
13. which Officers, because they represented the People, it is said, the People
came together; so the People rescued Jonathan, whom Saul had appointed to die,
1 Samuel 14.45. by which it appears, that an Appeal did lie from the King to the
People. So the Kingdom of Israel was rent from Rehoboam by the People; by which
it appears, that the Synedrium of Seventy one at Jerusalem, had the Authority,
that as Kings did judge particular Persons, so these had the Power to judge
Kings.

The Hogen-Mogen words of Sovereign and Supreme, are but verba solennia, words
of Course and Complemental, but confer no Power: what Great and Sovereign
Powers Kings by Right have, are given and limited by Laws of common Consent,
and not Absolute: what other Laws of Sovereignty there are of Right that belong
to them is past all Understanding, absolute Sovereignty in Kings has no
warrant beyond any Divine Law, that belongs only to God, who is Lord of all the
Kingdoms of the Earth. And though Appeals to all the People may be Nonsense,
yet it is very good Sense to Appeal to their Epitomy, their Representatives,
their Ephori, and Tribunes to the Laws, and to the Legislators which are the
Supreme and Sovereign Power of the Nation, and have an equal share in making
our Laws.

The Commons House, 4. Car. 1628, having prepared a Petition to present to his
Majesty, sent it to the Lords for their concurrence; who returned it, adding
these words, viz. [With due regard to leave entire the Sovereign Power,
wherewith your Majesty is entrusted for the Protection, Safety, and Happiness
of the People.] Which terms of Sovereign Power were so distasteful to the
Commons, as looking, being free from any condition, and that they were no part
of the Law, no Parliamentary words, that they weakened Magna Charta, and all our
Statutes, that by intendment and implication they might give a Sovereign Power
above all those Laws, etc. and therefore would by no means admit thereof, though
strongly contested for by the Lords. Rush. 568.

These, and such like were the things that made the Parliament in 1641
Remonstrate to his Majesty, That the most Public and Solemn Sermons before his
Majesty, were either to advance Prerogative above Law, or decry the Property of
the Subject, and thereby lay a foundation of difference between the King and
his People, or else Invectives to make those odious who sought to maintain the
Religion and Laws of the Kingdom, and to have them weeded out of all
Commissions, or other Employments of Power in the Government, that the Bishops
and others of the Clergy did, by their Suspensions, Excommunications,
Deprivations, and Degradations, of diverse painful, learned, and pious
Ministers, oppress his Majesty's Subjects; that the High Commission Court, and
the Courts of the Bishops did exceed in sharpness and severity little less than
the Romish Inquisition, that those were fittest for Ecclesiastical Preferments,
and soonest obtained them, who were most virulent against Godliness and
Honesty, and used means to suppress the Purity and Power of Religion, and to
increase and maintain, ignorance, looseness and profaneness in the People: that
the Archbishops and other Bishops and Clergy continued the Convocation by a new
Commission, and turned it to a Provincial Synod, in which by an unheard of
Presumption; they made Canons that contained in them many matters contrary to
the Kings Prerogative, to the fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Realm, to
the Right of Parliaments, to the Property and Liberty of the Subject, and
matters tending to Sedition, and of dangerous Consequence; thereby establishing
their own Usurpations, justifying their Altar-worship, and those other
Superstitions and Innovations, which they formerly introduced without warrant
of Law. They imposed a new Oath upon diverse of his Majesty's Subjects, both
Ecclesiastical and Lay, for maintaining their own Tyranny, and laid a great Tax
upon the Clergy, for supply of his Majesty; and generally they showed
themselves very affectionate to the War with Scotland, (which was the beginning
of all our future mischief,) and by themselves styled Bellum Episcopale, all
their pretended Canons and Constitutions were armed with several censures of
Suspension, Excommunication, Deprivation, by which they would have thrust out
all the good Ministers, and most of the well affected People of the Kingdom,
and left an easy passage to their own design of Reconciliation with Rome.
Remonstr. December. 15. 1641.

This is no new way of Remonstrating against such ill Church of England Men,
designing to enslave a free Kingdom by their Doctrines. For in the Parliament
1625, the House of Commons did Article against Mr. Ric. Montague, that he might
be punished, and his Book burnt, for his impious and profane scoffing at
Preaching, Meditations, and Conferrences, (which in plain English is
Conventickling,) Pulpits, Lectures, Bible, and all show of Religion, and for
casting the odious name of Puritans on Orthodox Men. Rushworth 215. And in the
Parliament 1628, the Commons did Remonstrate against Dr. Neal, Bishop of
Winton, and Laud Bishop of Bath and Wells, that there has been no small
laboring to remove that which is the most powerful means to strengthen and
increase our own Religion, and to oppose both those, which is the diligent
Teaching and Instructing in the true Knowledge and Worship of God; and
therefore means have been sought out to depress and discountenance Pious,
Painful, and Orthodox Preachers, how conformable soever, and Peaceable in their
Disposition and Carriage they be; yet the preferment of such is opposed, and
instead of being encouraged they are molested with vexatious Courses and
Punishments, and hardly permitted to Lecture. Rushworth 215, 633, 634.

What were they also in their Opinion, but high and mighty Church of England
Men, against whom the Parliament, 4 Car. 1628. did Declare and Remonstrate,
That with a wicked and malicious intention, to seduce and misguide the
Conscience of the Kings most Excellent Majesty, touching the observation of the
Laws and Customs of this Kingdom, and of the Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects, to incense his Royal Displeasure against his good Subjects, so
refusing to scandalize, subvert, and impeach the good Laws and Government of
this Realm, and the Authority of the High Court of Parliament, to Alienate his
Royal Heart from his People, and to cause Jealousies, Sedition, and Division in
the Kingdom, who did Teach that his Majesty is not bound to keep and observe
the good Laws and Customs of this Realm, concerning the Rights and Liberties of
the Subjects. And that his Royal Will and Command in imposing Loans and Taxes,
and other Aids upon the People without common consent in Parliament, does so
far bind the Consciences of Subjects, that they cannot refuse the same without
peril of Eternal Damnation; that those who refused the Loan did therein offend
against the Law of God, against his Majesty's Supreme Authority, and by so
doing became guilty of Impiety, Disloyalty, Rebellion, and Disobedience, and
liable to many other Taxes and Censures; that Authority of Parliament is not
necessary for the Raising of Aids and Subsidies. Rush. 602. An. 1628.

That there was a general fear of secret Working and Combination, to introduce
into this Kingdom Innovation and change of our pure Religion, by Persons much
favored and advanced, not wanting Friends even of the Clergy, near to your
Majesty, namely, Dr. Neal, Bishop of Winchester, and Dr. Laud, Bishop of Bath
and Wells, who are justly suspected to be unsound in their Opinions that way;
It being generally held to be the Highway to Preferment and Promotion in the
Church; many Scholars do bend the course of their Studies to maintain those
Errors, that their Books and Opinions are suffered to be printed and published,
and others written against them and in defense of the Orthodox Church are
hindered and prohibited: And we find that there has been no small laboring to
remove that which is the most powerful means to strengthen and increase our own
Religion, and to oppress Popery, which is the diligent Teaching and Instruction
of the People in the true Knowledge and Worship of God, and therefore means have
been sought out to depress and discountenance Pious, Painful, and Orthodox
Preachers, peaceable in their Disposition and Carriage, and yet their
Preferment of such is opposed, and instead of being encouraged they are
molested with vexatious courses and pursuits, hardly permitted to Lecture, 602,
632, 634. 1628.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum
Quae peperit saepe scelerata atque impia facta. 195.
And our high and mighty Church of England Men did in our memories so
superciliously manage their own haughty Resolutions, that they necessitated the
Parliament to take away their High Commission and their Parliamentary
Privilege, forbidding them to meddle with any Temporal Affairs: And I do not
find that they are grown much more prudent yet, for that they manage themselves
in this intricate juncture of time at such a rate that all Men's Mouths are
ready, and stand half cockt against them, and I fear may in time provoke the
Parliament to do the like or more again, they monopolizing all Government over
others of themselves, which is far from being Apostolical; for in the Apostles
times, and diverse Ages after, all the People being under the inspection of one
Bishop (vulgarly the the Pastor of a Parish) were wont to meet together, not
only for Worship, but other Church Administrations; all public Acts passed at
the Assemblies of the whole People, they were consulted with, their concurrence
was thought necessary, and their presence required, that nothing might pass
without their Cognizance, Satisfaction, and Consent.

This was observed not only in Election of Bishops, Priests, and Officers, but
in Ordination and Censures, in Admission of Members, and Reconciling of
Penitents, and in Debates and Consultations about other Emergencies: but not
one plain word in Scripture that one Apostle was subject to another, nor one
gathered Church subject to another, or that any Man had lawful Authority to
forbid Assembling of the Brethren together, whether with or without a Priest.

In sum, when Priestcraft had enlarged their Territories beyond their ancient
Bounds, (which was but one Parish, or a select Number, scarce exceeding 150 or
200,) unto many, whereby they became Cardinals and Diocesans, etc. They thereby
cajoled the People of their undoubted Rights and Privileges, and necessarily
introduced an essential change of the True and Primitive Government of the
Church set up by Christ, and set up one to fit their own turn and ends. In the
very next Ages succeeding the Apostles, (and so for 400 Years and more) one
Parish or single Congregation was thought sufficient for one Bishop or Pastor,
so that as Christians multiplied, so separate Congregations, Bishops, or
Pastors; so that there were as many Pastors or Bishops as there were several
Congregations, or Churches in a Province, and not one Church or Congregation
subject to the Laws, Usages, or Ordinances of any other. No Churches gathered
by St. Paul were subject to those gathered by St. Peter, nor e contra of them,
or of any other of the Apostles, or of any Churches gathered by their
Successors. Hence came several and diversity of Rites and Usages in the Ancient
Churches, without being accounted Schismatics, Separatists, Non-cons, or
Phanaticks, and with perfect Love, Unity, and Uniformity, because they held the
same Faith and Doctrine. And 150, or 200 Souls, was thought as many as one
Bishop or one Pastor could take charge and give a good account of. So that a
single Congregation, or gathered Church, was esteemed a competent Charge for an
Episcopal Pastor; for the Episcopal Churches were daily multiplied, and each
Church had Power to govern and order it self, and so followed such orders as
every Church or gathered Congregation thought fit without being obliged to
conform to those of any other Church or Congregation: they had no Rule or Order
in things of this nature requiring observance, or did they regard such
Uniformity as later Ages have been fond of, to the prejudice of the Unity and
Peace of the Church, even to the persecuting of Righteous Men in our Kingdoms,
none of those Churches used the same Prayers, all of them had not the same
Creeds, they had not the same Rites in Baptism, or the Lord's Supper, nor the
same way in Confirming, Marrying, or Burying: they used not the same mode
either in reading the Scriptures, or Singing; they observed not the same
methods in admitting Members, or preparing them for the Communion, neither
proceeding to Censures or reconciling Penitents: they differed also in their
Habits and Postures, they varied in their Fasts, both for time and manner, and
observed not the same Festivals: This was the Uniformity of the more Pure and
Primitive times, and no Persecution ensued; no Appeals allowed from one Bishop,
or one Congregation to another: So that the Uniformity the latter Ages have
been so fond of, is a downright Novelty and Innovation, which has broken the
Bond of Charity and Unity, and instead thereof has brought in Animosities,
Divisions, and Separations, nay, Persecutions on God's Holy People, very
unworthy and unbeseeming Christian Pastors, to make such actings more their
business than the suppressings of Sin, and promoting of real and strict
Holiness.

All this, and much more, is so plain in ancient Writers, that none but Novices
and Chits in Story can be ignorant hereof. If you will believe one of the
greatest Prelates of the West, and at no less than 600 Years distance from
Christ: In una fide nibil officit Sanctae Ecclesiae diversa consuetudo, says
Gregory the first; where there is one Faith its no harm to the Church if there
be diversity of usages, i. e. the Church has no harm for want of Uniformity.

And before him Innocent the first, who lived about the Second Century, in his
Epist. ad Decen. writes, that diverse in diversis locis vel Ecclesiis obtineri
aut celebrari videntur.

To the Justification whereof, and to the constant Practice thereof, even from
the Days of the Apostles unto this very Day, gives abundant Testimony the
Churches of the Vaudois (called Waldenses, Albigenses, poor Men of Lions,
Chaignard, Tramontani, Lollards, Siccari, Fraticelli, Gazares, Turlepini, etc.
and for their Simplicity; Purity, and Sincerity termed Evangelical, having been
for many Hundreds of Years injured, reproached, despised, banished,
excommunicated, anathematized, Goods confiscated, tortured, wearing Miters in
derision, reviled, spit upon, Ears cropped, their Flesh pincht off with Princers,
drawn with Horses, dragged up and down, broiled, roasted, stoned to death,
burnt, drowned, dismembered, smothered in Caves by hellish Papists, etc.) who
have preserved themselves from the infection of External Ministries of other
Churches, defiled with infinite human invention. It being the Tenth Article of
their Belief, viz. That the inventions of Men are an unspeakable abomination
before God. And their custom is, That if any of their Barbes, their Pastors,
shall fall into any foul or unclean Sin, he is cast out of their company, and
forbidden the Charge of Preaching. They Teach also, Article 15. That because
the differences of Ceremonies, Customs, and Rites, which are used in several
Churches, and are not prejudicial or hurtful to Piety, they ought not to be
offended one with another, or contemn, hate, and persecute one another. And Ph.
Melancthon is of the same mind in his Epistle to Mr. Benedict and the rest of
the Waldenses, viz. that no difference and variety of Rites and Ceremonies
ought to disunite our Minds.

Now, if the Churches of the Valleys have been Celebrated through all Ages of
the Church, as they have been and are yet even to this day, as the Worshippers
of God in the greatest Purity and Simplicity, and nearest the Purity and
Simplicity of Christ and his Apostles, and the least tainted with Romish
Superstitions and human Inventions, with what Face can Protestants Persecute
Protestants for things indifferent, desiring to Worship God in the same
Simplicity, Purity and Sincerity?

If the true Church of England be to be known by her Faith, Doctrine, Articles,
and Sacraments, then beyond all contradiction the Non-con Presbyters and
Independants are more truly right Church of England Men, (maugre all the
Obloquies and ungrounded Prejudices against them) than those that so
imperiously appropriate and usurp that Name to themselves; and happily a more
sincere Homogeneal part of the Church Catholic, without infringing Unity of
Faith or true Doctrine. But if Ceremonies or Usages not prescribed nor used by
Christ or his Apostles in the purest Times must make the distinction, then
certainly their Nonconformity is more agreeable to the Practice of Christ and
his Apostles, and the Primitive Times, than the Ceremonial Usages and Practices
of these later Ages: for it must appear upon due examination, that there was
not one Ceremony either used or commanded in their times, and yet Converts as
many, and then it will certainly and undeniably follow, that all those
Ceremonies introduced since, are Innovations; and consequently, those that
impose them on Severities and Censures are the Innovators and Separatists, I
had almost said Schismatics; though some with Brows of Brass have cast those
odious Names on the Presbyters and Independants. For those that impose Rites
and Ceremonies, no ways Essential to the saving of Souls, on Penalties and
Severities, especially unto Silencing and Suspension, to which conscientious
Persons cannot submit, must be the Schismatics, or else our Separation from
Rome can hardly be justified.

If such Tenets and Practices must be the Test and Character of true Church of
England Men, I must confess my self not as yet so well qualified; and I believe
few others yet are more true Church of England Men: for, indeed, I have no mind
to make Religion lackey and hunt after earthly ends and purposes, lest by
pertaking with other Men's Sins I should receive of their Plagues also: but by
such Practices it is plain, that they are not all Israel which are of Israel.
The true Church of England Men are Men of better Principles, and more Honesty,
both Bishops and others, who do comply conscientiously with the Innocent
Ceremonies of our Church without Reviling, Slandering, Persecuting, or
Disturbing those who do as conscientiously Preach the same Gospel in Sincerity,
though in Conventicles, without any Ceremonies, as Christ and his Apostles did.

That the Churches of Christ are miserably rent and torn cannot be denied; and
that the breaches thereof has proceeded from the Pride, Ambition, Laziness,
Uncharitableness, and Contentions of the Clergy, have been the chief cause
thereof is as true. The renting of Christ's seamless Coat began even in the
days of the Apostles, who rebuked them who said, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo,
and I of Cephas, and I of Christ; as if Christ had been divided, 1 Cor. 1.22.
And therefore Paul besought them by the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, That
they would all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions amongst
them: but that they be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the
same judgment, ver. 10. For whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and
division, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? Who then is Paul? and who is
Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye believed, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4, 5. And it is well
known, that the wisest and most peaceable Men, (though of different Persuasions,
as protestants, Papists, and others,) are of Opinion, that Constantine and
other Pious Emperors endowing the Clergy with great Powers, Privileges,
Honors, Offices, Dignities, and Preferments, has been the occasion of the
Pride, Luxury, Tyranny, Uncharitableness, and Laziness of the Clergy; and
consequently, the bane and destruction of true Holiness, Purity and Simplicity,
that ought to be in the Clergy, they being as Baits, Snares, Allurements, and
Temptations, to seek and hunt after them, and so to neglect to seek the Kingdom
of God in the first place as they ought to do. I may also say with many other
wise and peaceable minded Men, as a very great truth, That as through pride
comes contention, Prove. 13.10. so through the Pride and Haughtiness of the
Clergy, more havoc has been made of Love, Charity, Purity, Sincerity, and
Simplicity of the Gospel, than all the bloody Persecutions that have been in
the World.

It is the Opinion of learned and judicious Mr. Jo. Hales in his Tract of
Schism, That were Liturgies and public Forms of Service so framed as that they
admitted not of particular and private Fancies, but contained only such things
as in which all Christians do agree on: And the event shall be, that the
Public Service and Honor of God shall no ways suffer. Whereas to load our
Public Forms with the private Fancies upon which we differ, is the most
sovereign way to perpetuate Schism unto the Worlds end. Prayer, Confession,
Thanksgiving, Reading, and Exposition of Scriptures, Administration of
Sacraments in the plainest and simplest manner, were matter enough to furnish
out a sufficient Liturgy, though nothing either of private or Church Pomp, of
Garments, of prescribed Gestures, of Imagery, of Music, of matter concerning
the Dead, of many Superfluities, which creep into the Churches under the name
of Order and Decency did interpose it self. For to charge Churches and
Liturgies with things unnecessary, was the beginning of all Superstition; and
when scruples of Conscience began to be made, or pretended, then Schisms began
to break in. If the Spiritual Guides and Fathers of the Church would be a
little sparing, of incumbring Churches with superfluities, and not over-rigid
in either reviving obsolete Customs, or imposing new, there were far less
danger of Schism or Superstition, and all the inconveniences likely to ensue
would be but this, they should in so doing yield a little to the Imbecility of
Inferiors; a thing which St. Paul would never have refused to do. Mean while
wheresoever false and suspected Opinions are made a piece of the Church
Liturgy, he that separates is not the Schismatic, for that is a like unlawful,
to make Profession of known or suspected Falsehoods, as to put in practice
unlawful or suspect Actions.

Much of the same Opinion is Bishop Usher, If at this day we should take a
Survey of the several Professions of Christianity that have any large spread in
any part of the World, (as of the Religion of the Romans, and the Reformed
Churches in our Quarters; of the Egyptians and Ethiopians in the South; of the
Graecians, and other Christians in the East,) and should put by the Points
wherein they differ one from another, and gather from one Body the rest of the
Articles wherein they all did generally agree, we should find, that in those
Propositions, which without Controversy are Universally received in the whole
Christian World; so much Truth is contained, that being joined with Holy
Obedience, may be sufficient to bring Men into everlasting Salvation. His
Sermon on Ephesians. 4.13. preached before his Majesty. 1624.

If our Ecclesiastical Grandees in the last Reformation of our Liturgy had been
of St. Paul's mind, (as they ought to have been) and not abuse their Power in
the Gospel; who, though he was free from all Men, yet made himself Servant unto
all, that he might gain the more; to the Jew, a Jew; to them that are under the
Law, as under the Law, to them that are without the Law, as without the Law,
[being not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ.] To the weak as
weak: and was made all things to all men, that by any means he might save some.
And this he did for the Gospel sake, 1 Cor. 9.18, 23. And by his so doing, he
gave no offense neither to the Jews, nor the Gentiles, nor to the Church of
God: but he pleased all men in all things, not seeking his own profit, but the
profit of many, that they might be saved, chap. 10. ver. 32, 33. There had been
no complaining of our Prelates, nor any matter left to pick quarrels withal,
and the Kingdom much happier than now it is; which Doctrine of Compliance is to
be understood only of things indifferent. And our Non-cons desire but the like
in things indifferent. Sure if St. Paul, so much a more excellent Person than
our Pontiffs, held it his Duty thus to comply, it would be no disparagement to
our Prelates to do the same.

Certainly none will dare to aver, That our Conventicles, quatenus
Conventicles, are unlawful, but unlawful only upon Presumptions, and ungrounded
Prejudices, and Surmizes that their Nonconformist Teachers (mostly
Presbyterians or Independants) do teach or foment Rebellion, Schism, Faction.
Now if in truth they are not guilty of such Crimes, but their good Conversation
is falsely abused by them, 1 Pet. 3.16. What have such Conformist Church of
England Men to answer for themselves, that so slander them by laying such
Crimes to their charge as they are no ways guilty of, and in their Pulpits, out
of which nothing should be Preached, but what is as true as Gospel?

One Mr. J.T. in his Sermon on Eccl. 10.20. page 29, 31. has so hard thoughts
of them, as to believe, That we shall never be free of a Plot, if not against
the Lafe of the King, yet against the Peace, and Honor of his Government, so
long as there is one Conventicle in England left. And that as it is Death by
the Laws of this Nation, for a Popish Priest to be seen upon English Ground; so
it would be very well, if it were so for a Non conforming one too. Very Ghostly
Council to come from a Ministor of the Gospel of Peace! I could wish that he,
and those of the like Junto, did understand their Priesthood as it ought to be
understood, then they would Preach things that now were Holy, Pure, Peaceable,
and of good Report, without such Trash.

This Gentleman is not alone in these stabbing Censures, there are more of his
Quire that sing to the like Tune, a temper very ill becoming Preachers of the
Gospel of Peace.

One other, Mr. M. B. (commonly known in the University by the Character of his
Majesty's D -- ee Chaplain was turned out (for what it is a shame to tell) though
since crept in again,) in his Sermon on Luke 19.14. tells us, That among
Phanaticks (a new Nickname for old Puritans,) their Loyalty is Rebellion, and
their Religion is Treason; and whose very Gospel is the Mystery of Iniquity:
and that amongst Phanaticks and Atheists, transformed into malicious Fiends, by
the Hellish divinity of that Monster of a Priest, the Author of Julian the
Apostate, whose whole Book it as great an Apostasy from the Practice of the
Primitive Christians, the Precepts of Obedience delivered by Christ and his
Apostles, and Christianity it self, as ever Julian was guilty of, page 19. As
false a Scandal as a Priest of Baal could pulpit. These are your Boanarges,
pure Church of England Men in their right Colors and Pontificalibus. Nay, the
unclean Spirits, like the Frogs that came out of the mouth of the Dragon, and
out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet; which
are the Spirits of Devils, which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, etc.
Rev. 26.13, 14. who are not content falsely to Calumniate the Non-cons only, but
to Stigmatize also true Nathaniels. Witness M. B. charging, as a profligate
Wretch, and mercenary Scribler, the late Writer of Julian the Apostate; of
which Charge, the generality, and best, and wisest, both of Clergy and Laiety,
do now acquit, and justify him to be the more Orthodox, by their Pulpits,
Prints, and Practices. Sure, sure, Pulpits were never designed to spit Venom,
nor fulsly to Calumniate any, especially for Printing and Publishing Gospel
truths, as that of lawful Resistance and Passive Obedience: which Doctrines the
generality of the Nation, Lords, Commons, Bishops, Priests, Clergy, and Laiety,
now own and practice; and which was ever the Doctrine of the Church of England,
and of all sound Divines, though metamorphosised and misrepresented by some
Mungril Church of England Men, as thwarting their sublunary designs of Pride,
Ambition, Covetousness, Honors, and Preferments, very ill becoming that most
excellent Spirit that ought to be in true Gospel Preachers. For in the end such
Pulpiteers do but foam out their own Shame, daring in that Sacred Place to do
more than Michael the Archangel, who contending with the Devil himself, durst
not bring a railing accusation against him. But I hope their Eyes are now
enlightened by seeing that destructive Doctrine bafled by a Miriad of Priests
and Pulpits, which the former Government would not bear, and yet the true
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, with its just Limits and Qualifications, remains
as true and as firm in the Church of England as ever.

These Priests are not alone in vilely Characterizing our Conventicles; for if
you consult our Sermons of late Years, especially those Preached on certain
Solemn Days, as those on the 30th of January, on the 9th of Sept. 1683, and the
like, you will find them generally be-spattering our Conventicles, either in
broad glances, or plain terms, as though it were the business of Christianity to
revile and persecute Men for their Consciences differing from them in small
things; and those indeterminate by plain places of Scriptures. Whether the
Characters that these Men, and those of the same quorum, or the Character that
I have given of them be the truest, I appeal to God and the whole Nation:
however I have this for my Justification, or at least for Extenuation, viz. the
several Addresses of several Parliaments to the King on their behalf and
against their Persecutors. And if I am in an Error, it is an Error on the
Right Hand, to judge them Pious that seem so, though in truth they were not so: I
am no discerner of Hearts, God only knows them; but Charity believes all
things, hops all things, and covers a multitude of faults. This good
Opinion of mine of them is not without the Testimony of many of their grave,
sober, pious, peaceable, learned, and understanding Auditors averring the same;
and that they constantly pray as fervently and heartily for the King, Church,
and State, as any Conformist Church of England Priests. And which is yet more
demonstrable, their Sermons and Works in Print manifest the same to all the
World, as the Works of Dr. Bates, Dr. Owen, Tho. Godwin, R. Baxter, R. Allen,
and a hundred more, which declare to all the World their Sentiments, their
Learning, and their Piety, wherein they are as Orthodox as other true Church of
England Men are, though neither one nor the other are Infallible. And must we
after such Testimonies and Demonstration of their Abilities, their Soundness of
Doctrine, their Labors and Endeavors for Holy Living and Conversation, esteem
them as Monsters of Priests, revile them, take up evil Reports against them,
and load them with the guilt of all the late horrid Rebellious Plots, the
Assosiation, Fire at New Market, the Rye, and that of the late Duke of
Monmouth, without infallible Proof and Demonstration? Sure, sure, this ought
not to be. What if some few of many hundreds have been so phanatick, so mad, to
engage in some or all of these Rebellions, must all the rest be esteemed guilty
therefore? Sure this can be no Righteous Judgment. Were all the Eleven Apostles
Traitors because Judas was? Happily, if a fair computation could be made, there
would be found guilty of some or of all these Rebellions, many more Atheistical
Debauchees, and ill-lived Persons, than Conventiclers or Non-conformists.

Mr. J. T. himself, for all his hard Speeches against them, is not so
uncharitable as to believe, but that most of the Dissenters knew nothing of the
Duke of Monmouth 's Design; yet he is certain, that if it had taken effect,
they would all have sided with the Conspirators against the Laws, the Monarchy,
and the Church of England, page 29. Though the Hearts of Men are deceitful
above all things, yet it seems this Church of England Priest knows them all. I
know the Opinion that the high Church of England Men have of the
Non-conformists in general, is, that of Villainies, the well-meaning Zealots
(it is well known whom they mean thereby) are the most dangerous. So the
Ecclesiastical Politician.

If we reflect on the severe Reprimands and Censures laid upon Sibthorp and
Manwaring for their destructive Principles and Doctrines of Government, and the
Remonstrances of a Kingdom reprefented in a Parliament against those, that
discountenanced good and Pious Ministers of the Gospel, and their Assembling,
one would think should for ever have deterred all future Ages from entertaining
any such like Principles again, and from discouraging and discountenancing
Assemblies meeting only to serve God, and to save their own Souls. But I see
Hogen-Mogen Church of England Men will be so still, maugre all the Judgments,
Censures, and Punishments, that a whole Kingdom can inflict upon them.

If our Conventicles are such as are represented, Factious, Rebellious,
Schismatical, why do not our Tory Priests assemble themselves, and teach and
practice better things? But to be like Dogs in the Manger, neither eat Hay, nor
let the Horses eat: neither assemble themselves, nor suffer others that would,
is no Character of a good Shepherd. As it cannot be denied, that God requires
his Worship to be Public, and Celebrated in great Congregations in the beauty
of Holiness, as in Temples, Altars, Forms of Service, Set times, etc. so it
cannot be denied, that God requires the inward and private Devotions, both in
Heart, Closet, and Houses; and that all Assemblings of Christians for Mutual
and Reciprecal help of Piety and Devotion wheresoever, and by whomsoever
Celebrated, ought to be permitted without exception or stint.

It is a shame to publish it, but it is a sad truth, that the Pride, and
Haughtiness of the Clergy in all Ages, and the Villainous Doctrines they teach
concerning Kingly Powers and their own, have abused, and seduced, and misguided
Kings into all Misgovernments, viz. That Kings have an Arbitrary Power from
above, to direct what Laws, and to take what Tribute they please; that they
have Power to bind the Consciences of their Subjects to the Religion they think
best; that they are unaccountable to any on Earth, and that all private
Consciences must be subject to the public Conscience; without which they are
no better than Statues, and Images of Authority: These, and worse, if worse may
be, are the frequent Documents of our high Church of England Men's Pulpits, and
Prints, which are destructive to all Governments and human Societies: So that
upon the whole matter, it is no matter what Religion, or what Government God
has established, but what Kings and Princes command.

These Tory Church of England Men have no consideration how easily
uncontrolable Authority degenerates into Tyranny, till the Poor have scarce a
hole to hide their Heads in, or a rag to cloth their naked Backs, or a morsel
of Bread to fill their hungry Bowels. Masterless Power on Earth is apt to make
even Kings to forget their King and Judge in Heaven; as if Providence slept
because Judgment is not speedily executed. Consider it all yet that forget God,
and remember that the Redeemer of the oppressed is mighty, and never more ready
to avenge the Cause of the innocent and oppressed, than when it is most
neglected by his Vicegerents. Ahab and Jezabel exercised in Israel Authority
without control. Who should punish the oppression of Naboth? the Lord takes
the Cause into his own Hand, and causes Dogs to lick hhis Blood in the very
place where they licked the innocent Blood of Naboth; and the Dogs did eat the
Flesh of Jezabel, that cursed Woman, by the wall of Jezreel: so there is Blood
for Blood, and an utter extinction of Ahab's posterity, 1 Kings 21. lege
Taleonis.

M. B. in his Sermon before his Majesty on the 2 Pet. 3.16. lays down for a
sure Rule, That it is the Duty of private men to submit their Judgments, in
matters of Religion, to the Determinations of those whom God has constituted
to be their Spiritual Guides and Governors, unless it manifestly appears that
such Determinations are contrary to God's Word, page 6. And so we are if any
Apollos Minister of Caesarea and of Iconia, was an Eloquent Man, mighty in the
Scripture, instructed in the way of the Lord, servent in the Spirit, why spoke
and taught diligently the things of the Lord; and spoke boldly in the
Synagogue: and yet Aquila and Priscilla his Wife, Tent-makers, when they heard
him, took him home, and expounded to him the way of God more perfectly, Acts
18.24, 25, 26.
private Man teach another any Truths, and to believe the private Man before
any Spiritual Guides or Governors that preach and teach Untruths, and every
Man for himself is the proper Judge of what is taught. The Apostles themselves,
though infallible, submitted their Doctrines to the Judgment of their Disciples.
Judge ye, Acts 4.19. 1 Cor. 10.15. and so must our Guides and Governors; which
he would insinuate here to be the Clergy, i. e. Bishops and Priests; if so, he
will be mistaken: they are only Officers in the Church to Teach, Baptize, etc.
but the Church, in the truest sense, ( i. e. the whole Congregation of the
Faithful) is to govern its own Body, and the Officers thereof, not the Officers
the Church; which will not please.

The Ecclesiastical Politician declares, That it is absolutely necessary to the
Peace and Government of the World; that the Supreme Magistrate of every
Commonwealth should be vested with a Power to Govern and Conduct the
Consciences of Subjects in Affairs of Religion, page 10. How is it possible,
that the Supreme Magistrate, and our Spiritual Guides and Governors, should
both have the guide of our Consciences? And that Peace and Tranquillity of
Commonwealth, being the prime and most important end of Government, can never
be sufficiently secured, unless Religion be subject to the Authority of the
Supreme Power, page 11. And unless Princes have Power to bind their Subjects to
that Religion that they apprehend most advantageous to public Peace and
Tranquillity, and restrain those Religious mistakes that tend to its
subversion, they are no better than Statues and Images of Authority, page 12.
For it is clear (if this Ecclesiastical Politician may be believed) that a
Prince is endued with a Power to conduct Religion, and that must be subject to
his Dominion as well as other Affairs of State, page 13. The consequence of
which Doctrines are, That if Nebuchadnezzar erect his prodigious Idol, and upon
pain of a fiery Furnace require all to Worship it; all People, Nations, and
Languages, must presently be upon their Faces: and for their warrant for so
doing, he assures them, That in Cases and Disputes of public concernment,
private Men are not properly sui Juris, they have no Power over their own
Actions, they are not to be directed by their own Judgments, or determined by
their own Wills; but by the Commands and Determinations of the public
Conscience. And if there be any sin in the command, he that imposed it shall
answer for it, and not I whose Duty is to obey: the commands of Authority will
warrant my Obedience, my Obedience will hallow, or at least excuse my Action,
and so secure me from Sin, if not from Error: because I follow the best Guide,
and most probable Direction I am capable of: and though I may mistake, my
Integrity shall perserve my Innocence. In all doubtful and disputable Cases, it
is better to err with Authority, than to be in the right against it; and
therefore in all such matters their Commands are the Supreme Rule of
Conscience: not only because the danger of a little Error (and so it is if it
be disputable,) is over-weighed by the importance of the great Duty of
Obedience, but because they are the fittest Judges, page 308, 309.

What is this but downright asserting the abominable Papal Doctrines of
Probability and of blind Obedience? brave Doctrines for a Tory Church of
England Man to Preach and Print impune. Good God! whether are we posting? I
thank God I have been taught better things, viz. Every one of us shall give
account of himself to God, Romans 14.12. The soul that sins, it shall die,
Ezekiel. 28.20. The soul of the public conscience shall not be put to death for
the sins of the private; nor the souls of private consciences be put to death
for the sins of the public: but every man shall be put to death for his own
sin, Deuteronomy. 24.16.

Daw-Divines! to Print that the public Conscience shall stand between the
private Conscience (sinning by his Command) and the Judgment of the great Day,
and excuse from Sin. I thank God that I have been taught by true Church of
England Men indeed, that God never created Men, nor ever endued them with
Conscisciences, or gave them Talents of Reason or Judgment, subject and
enslaved to the Judgment, Conscience, or Reason of others; but has endued and
trusted every Man with his own proper Talent of Conscience, Reason, and
Judgment to choose for himself; according to which only he shall be judged, and
stand or fall at the Day of Judgment: and not according to any public
Conscience. There would be very little need of Priests, if blind Obedience
ought to prevail, and not our own free choice.

He proceeds and tells us, That God has appointed the Magistrates to be his
Trustees and Officials here upon Earth, to act and determine in moral Virtues
and pious Devotions, according to all accidents and emergencies of Affairs, to
assign new particulars of the Divine Law, to declare new bounds of right and
wrong, which the Law of God neither does nor can limit, page 18. That its
absolutely necessary to the Peace and Happiness of Kingdoms, that there be set
up a more severe Government over Men's Consciences, and Religions, and
Persuasions, than over their Vices and Immoralities. Preface to his Eccl. Pol.
p. 53. And that Princes may with less bazard give liberty to Men's Vices and
Debaucheries than to their Consciences, page 55. I have heard it also preached
before the King, That it is better to offend in Doctrine than in Discipline.
Sure much Learning, or Haughty Pride, and Ambition, Self Ends, and Interest,
has made these Men mad. And so fulfilled the Prophecy of Hosea 9.7. The
Prophet is a fool, and the Spiritual man mad. Sure God has turned these wise
Ecclesiastical Politicians backwards, and made their knowledge foollish, Isai.
44.25.

However I will say thus much to them, That Liberty of Conscience is undeniably
the right of every true Believer, viz. to judge of such things as belong
chiefly to the knowledge and service of God, whether they are above the reach
and light of Nature, (and therefore liable to be variously understood by human
Reason,) or enjoined or forbidden by Divine Precept, and to follow that full
persuasion whereby every one is assured, that his Belief and Practice, as far
as he is able to apprehend, is according to the Will of God, and his Holy
Spirit within him; which undoubtedly we ought to follow, much rather than any
public Conscience or Law of Man, Magistrate, or not Magistrate, as both the
Word of God bids us, and the very dictate of Reason tells us, Acts 4.19.
Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you, more than unto
God, judge ye. And we have no other outward Divine Rule to judge by than the
Scriptures, nor no other within us but the illumination of the Spirit, so
interpreting that Scripture as warrantably only unto our selves, which commands
us to search the Scriptures daily, whether those things are so, Acts 17.11. and
gives us Reason also, let every man prove his own (not his Magistrates) work,
and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another, (though
public Conscience,) for every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6.4, 5. Is
it not false Doctrine in the Papists, to teach that Believers only, as the
Church believes, are discharged in God's Account? Is it not the general consent
of sound Protestants, that neither Traditions, Councils, nor Canons of any
visible Church, much less any Edicts of any Magistrate or Civil Session, but
the Scripture only can be the final Judge or Rule in matrers of Religion? and
that only in the Conscience of every Christian to himself. For if the Church be
not sufficient to be implicitly and blindly believed, (as certain it is not)
what can there else be named of more Authority than the Church, but the
Conscience, than which God only is greater? 1 John 3.20. But if any shall
pretend that the Scripture judges to his Conscience for other Men, (as this
proud and saucy Politician does,) he makes himself greater than the Church,
Scripture, or Consciences of other Men: a presumption too high for any mortal,
since every true Christian, able to give a reason of his Faith, has the word
of God before him, the promised holy Spirit, and the mind of Christ within him,
1 Cor. 2.16. A much better and safer guide of Conscience, than this Politician
in public Conscience, who in this is no less a Pope than the Pope at Rome. The
Spiritual man judges all things, but himself is judged of no man, 1 Cor. 2.15.
And is not the Pope deservedly esteemed Antichristian, for appropriating to
himself such Infallibity over both Conscience and Scripture? Whether tends all
this? but to make themselves to have Dominion over our Faith, and Lords over
God's Heritage; which the Aposties utterly disclaimed, and accounted themselves
only helpers of cur joy, and to be feeders of the flock not by constraint, but
willingly, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. 2 Cor. 1.24.

If Bishop Saunderson can judge, The Word of God does expressly forbid us to
subject our Consciences to the Judgment of any other, or to usurp Dominion over
the Consciences of any other. Saunderson's 10 Lectures 1660. v. 3. Lect. 30..
p. 103.

None but God alone has Power to impose a Law upon the Conscience of any Man,
to which it ought to be subjected as obliging by it self. For there is but one
Lawgiver, who can both save and destroy, James 4.12. not one picked out
amongst many, not one above many, but one exclusively, i. e. one, and but one
only; who art thou that do judge another? It does not belong to thee to
thrust thy saucy Sickle into the Harvest of another Man, much less to fling thy
self into the Throne of Almighty God: to him it belongs alone to judge of the
Consciences of Men, to whom alone it does belong to impose Laws on the
Consciences of men; which none can do but God alone. Conscientiis Dominari
velle est Arcem Coeli invadere, said Maximilian the first; To exercise a
Domination over Consciences, is to invade the Power of Heaven. He is a
plunderer of the Glory of God, and an usurper of that Tower that is due unto
him, that claims a right to the Consciences of Men, or practice an usurpation
over them. v. Lect. 4.. 9, 10, 11.

He tells us moreover, That if Princes will be Resolute, (and if they will
Govern, so they must be) they may easily make the most stubborn Consciences to
bend to their Resolutions, page 271. Princes must be sure to bind on at first
their Ecclesiastical Laws with the straitest knot, and afterward keep them in
force by the severity of their execution, page 221. So easy is it for Men to
deserve to be punished for their Consciences, that there is no Nation in the
World in which (were Government rightly understood, and duly managed,) mistakes
and abuses of Religion would not supply the Galleys with vastly greater Numbers
than Villainies, page 223. Brave Doctrines for a Tory Church of England Man to
Preach impune.

Sure this Anonimus Ecclesiastical Politician would make a brave Mufty, or
Inquisitor General, or a Compito, with a Dog-whip in his Hand, which would
affright worse than the Inquisition, and make many much honester Men than
himself know sorrow in abundance.

These and many more Positions of the same complexion are the Farci of that
Pestilent Book, which well becomes a thorough-paced Church of England Priest:
such Positions and Doctrines brings contempt on such of the Clergy, as being a
reproach to any Church, and which the Church of England does not Teach, and
which are so vile, that they much more deserve Fire and Faggot than those burnt
in Oxford, July 1683. but instead thereof he was made a Bishop. Whether tends
all this treacherous dealings with the People of God? Whilst, like the
Ministers of Jeroboam, ye lay such Snares in Mispah, and spread such Nets upon
Tabor, teaching and persuading Kings to use Laws, Menaces, and Subtilties, to
force and confine the People to Regal and State Religion, be it true or false?
or, at least to force them to dissemble, or to walk in a neutrality, or
indifferency between God and Baal; or else to make the Souls of Men and God's
Glory subordinate to the Lusts and Risings of Kings and Priests, who
Balaam-like for the hope of Honor or Preferments, or like Micha's Levite for a
little better reward, crouch and cringe, and become more senseless of God's
Glory, Wrath, and Indignation, and the eternal Welfare of the precious Souls of
God's own People than was Balaam's dumb Ass.

The fatal mischief of such base Flattery, and of such Pulpit Laws and
Doctrines, as it was foreseen, punished, and declared to tend to the ruin of
this or any other Nation, by the Wisdom of our Sage Predecessors; so we did see
it was fairly fulfilling in our late Days and times. Such was the Imprudence,
nay Impudence of the then Court Clergy, favorites and sycophants in those
Days, that though Sibthorp and Mainwaring were by King and Parliament so severely
doomed to be punished, yet no sooner was the Parliament up, but by the Interest
of those fawning time-servers, the said Mainwaring and Sibthorp were preferred,
and Archbishop Abbot frowned upon, because he would not License such pulpit
destructive Doctrines. And it is such only of the Clergy, and other lewd
Priests, that are in contempt and vile esteem with the Nation, whilst others,
true Church of England Men indeed, are as highly in their Esteem and
Veneration. Thus to discover Crimes of some Priests is not to Calumniate the
Church of England, but that she may be purged of such Vermin.

The Reverend Dean of Rippon in his Sermon on 1 Kings 8.66. is of like Mind and
Principles, who therein declares, That be the Kings Heart inclinable to any
Religion or none, yet it leaves him no Rival, none to contradict him; for he is
made our King by God's Law, of which the Law of the Land is only declarative.
Kings must not be upbraided with their Promises; which Promises are Donatives,
and it is reason the Donor should have the explaining of his own Mind: that the
King is major universis, as well as singulis; that the sole Legislative Power
is lodged in the King, and to him belongs the Interpretation of all Laws, and
Dispensing with them: and that he may make a grant with a non obstante to them,
etc. Pure Doctrine for a Reverend Dean to Preach, and yet this pure Mungril
Church of England Man preferred to be Bishop of Chester for these abominable
Doctrines.

Whoever will seriously consider and compare those dismal Preachments and
Prints, destructive to all human Societies, which our high Church of England
Men pulpitted and printed heretofore, and how highly they were disgusted by
several Parliaments, (the greatest Wisdom of our Nation,) and dissatisfied
therewith, and how they stigmatized those very Doctrines, and condemning the
Authors of them to mulcts and punishments, and yet when those Parliaments were
up, those very false Teachers were carressed with Pardons and Preferments;
whoever I say will compare those Doctrines with those Mr. Samuel Johnson
printed and maintained, even to the undergoing of Inquisition Torments, and
which the present Parliament and generality of the Nation now own, justify,
and practice with their Lives and Fortunes, must confess that both the Reward
and Punishment of the one and the other were mightily misplaced.

It is yet fresh in our own Memories when our Clergy were much more modest,
when but one Temporizing Sibthorp, and another Court-Parasite Mainwaring durst
Pulpit or Print such Doctrines under the Sacred Title of Apostolic Obedience,
Licensed by the then Bishop of London, and for which they received the just
Censures of the King and the whole Kingdom in Parliament; which in the truest
sense, is the Church, or rather the Representative Governing part both of
Church and State, the Bishops and Priests being but Officers thereof; (which
they do not love to hear of,) but now Confidence, nay the Brow of Brass, is the
Temper and Complexion of very many Pulpits, which Thunder every where with such
Documents and Outcries, as the Highways to Preferments, always having their
Mouths half-cockt to let fly at all their gainsayers, not only in the Pulpits
and Prints, but also in all public places and Meetings, as Coffee-Houses,
Westminster Hall, Court of Request, Lobbies in Parliament-time can witness;
whereby they have obtained a new name of Tory Church of England Men. They scorn
to consider the black Characters they were then stigmatized and branded with by
former Parliaments, as serpens qui devorat serpentem fit Draco, that they
tended to the alteration and subversion of the whole Frame and Fabric of the
State and Commonwealth: That they tended to the seducing of the Conscience of
the King, to increase his Royal displeasure against his Subjects, to
scandalize, impeach, and subvert the good Laws and Government of the Kingdom,
and Authority of Parliaments; to avert his Majesty's Mind from calling of
Parliaments, to alienate his Royal Heart from his People, to cause Jealousies,
Sedition, and Divisions in the Kingdom; etc. Besides these Characters, they
held it a great presumption for a private Divine to debate the Right and Power
of the King; which is a matter of such a nature as to be handled only in
Parliament, and that with moderation: and therefore the said two Sermons,
called Religion and Allegiance, were adjudged to be called in, and burnt by the
King's Proclamation; the Author to make his submission and acknowledgment of
his Crime, to the imprisoned during the pleasure of the House, to be fined 1000
l. suspended for three Years from the Exercise of the Ministry, disabled to
have any Ecclesiastical Dignity, or Secular Office, and for ever disabled to
Preach at Court. A better Example to imitate and follow, than either Fire and
Faggot, or the Address of the Universities, or the Pulpit Doctrines of the 9th
of September 1683, wherein both King, Nobles, Prelates, and People were
interessed in that Judgment. Were such Tenets of such ill consequence by the
Judgment of the whole Nation in those Days, and are they not the same now?
where is the difference? The violation offered to plain Texts of Scripture, by
perverting the true and natural sense and meaning of them, by such of the
Clergy, (a Generation of Men that under the umbrage of that Sacred Canopy of
Religion, as being appointed Teachers and Ministers of the Gospel, endued with
the Power of Ordination, set up for themselves in an opposite and distinct
Interest, separated from the rest, or Body of the Church, whereby they erect
regnum in regno against the Purity and Sincerity of Religion and Interest of
Mankind: and this they have been upon the catch to compass by little and little
almost ever since the Apostles Days, and that by sinister means) has been the
occasion of all Misgovernments, by ascribing Divine Power to Kings, and that
they are accountable to none but God for any male-regiment.

False Prophets! not considering if Rulers hearken to Lies; (and such are all
false glossers on Texts of Scripture,) all his servants will be wicked, Prove.
9.12. suchlike of the Clergy are the Time-servers and Court-Parasites, that
draw odium and contempt upon that Sacred Profession that ought to be had in
Reverence by all the Sons and Daughters of Men. I could wish that they would
first pull out the Beams that are in their own Eyes, before they go about to
remove the Motes that are in their Brothers Eyes. Should I rake (as some naked
Truths have done) into the Bosom of their Regiment of their Church Discipline,
I doubt it would be found so foul as not to be swept, cleansed, and purified,
but by the Beesom of destruction, by reducing it to what it was in the Apostles
days, and purest times, which might easily be done if Priests were more
Heavenly than Earthly minded, and would first seek the Kingdom of Heaven; under
which easy Government the Gospel flourished, (though all Nations and Kingdoms
were accursed Enemies thereunto,) and would flourish now again with greater
Purity than now it does, did not our Tory Ecclesiastics disdain, and think it
too mean and below them to live the life of the Apostles, and as Christ himself
did; who, though being in the Form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, yet made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and to Minister, and not be administered unto. Remember the Reprimand
and Counsels that Christ himself gave to James and John, who sought high
things; but it shall not be so among you: but whoever will be great among you,
let him be the Minister, Math. 20. Mark 10. Luke 22.

However let us consider what Government Christ left to his Church, and trace
that as far as we can, that we may see how well it has been observed, or how
far degenerated.

The Church, the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the most glorious State
in the World, formed in the Council of God before the Creation of the Heavens,
founded on the Cross of his Son in the fullness of time, governed by his Eternal
Self, quickened by his Spirit, the most valued of all his Jewels, the last End
of all his Works, and the only Scope of all his Marvels; a State not mortal,
but endures for ever, against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail: It is
the House of Almighty God, the Temple of his Holiness, the Pillar of his Truth,
the Dewlling Place of his Grace and Glory. This Church, this Kingdom, though it
is not of this World, yet it is first chosen, gathered, erected and established
in this World, not by the Wisdom of the mighty Potentates of this World, viz.
Kings, Emperors, and Armies, but by the Preaching of the Gospel, by Fishermen,
and other illiterate and mean Persons, and would have its Administrations
without Temporal or Secular mixtures of human Power or Policy, as so much as of
enticing words, lest his People should thereby be beguiled, Col. 2.4. but chose
rather by the foolishness of Preaching to propagate his Gospel, and to confound
the wise and the mighty things of the World. So Paul, 1 Cor. 2. my speech, and
my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration
of the Spirit, and of power, v. 4. That your Faith should not stand in the
wisdom of Men, but in the power of God, ver. 5. However, we speak wisdom among
them that are perfect; yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of
the world, ver. 6. but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the
hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world, unto our glory, verse 7.
Which none of the Princes of the world knew, etc.

The way and manner of propagating the Gospel, and gathering of Churches from
the beginning was after this sort and manner, viz. Christ after his Ascension
having given them their Commission, Matthew. 28.19, 20. and having filled all the
Apostles with the Holy Ghost, according to his promise, Acts 1.8. and endued
them with tongues; they departed, and separated, and gathered several
Congregations or Churches, so that the sound thereof went into all the Earth,
and their words unto the ends of the World, Romans 10.18. which was after this
manner, viz. Christ after his Glorious Resurrection, having led Captivity
Captive be gave gifts unto men, and called some to be his Apostles, some
Prophets, some Teachers and Pastors, etc. who, after they had chosen Matthias
in the room of Judas the Traitor, and cloven Tongues like as Fire having sat
upon each of them, and all filled with the Holy Ghost, and having preached the
Gospel at Jerusalem and thereabouts, the Word of God and Number of Disciples
daily increasing, from 120. to 3000. and more; for which they being persecuted
by the Chief Priests and Sadduces, because they taught the People, and preached
through Jesus the Resurrection of the Dead, (which seems to be the same Year
that Christ was Crucified, viz. An. Aet. suae 33. and 18. Tiberius) scourging
some, and killing others: Which Persecution occasioned diverse of the Brethren
to withdraw themselves into Neighboring Places and Countries, which gave
occasion to the Gospel to be more universally spread throughout Palestine, (the
Apostles yet remaining in Jerusalem,) Acts 8. who afterward dispersing
themselves, also spread the Gospel into all Nations after this sort and manner,
viz. when a certain Number of Brethren, being Converted and well Instructed in
the true Faith, agreed among themselves to build or hire a Temple, Tabernacle,
or House, for their joint meetings and exercising their Religion, hired a
Priest, and constituted a Church; and as the Number increased, so that the
Church and Priest being not sufficient for them all, those who were most remote
did build another, and fit themselves with more conveniences.

About the end of the First Century, or beginning of the Second, for good order
and concord, and for civility and respect they did bear to their Bishop or
Priest, custom began to include his consent also; which in process of time soon
degenerated into Luciferian Usurpation, by the oblique Artifices of the Priests
or Bishops; of which Rome in process of time taking hold, made great use to the
abusing of the Power of the Brethren, and to incroach upon the Privileges of
the Body of the Church.

It is not unworthy of our further observation, That all his while the Apostles
and their Successors were Independent one of the other, and so were their
several and select gathered Congregations. And though there were Thousands of
Churches gathered by the Apostles and their Successors, yet there are no foot
steps remaining that the Churches gathered by any one Apostle, or Bishop, or
Presbyter, were subject or did depend on any one or more Churches, gathered by
any other or more Apostles.

The like is as true, after the death of the Apostles, That no one Church by
what Apostle soever gathered, was left subject to any other Church gathered by
any other Apostle, no nor yet subject to any other Church of their own
converting and gathering, but every Church was to be governed by its own
peculiar Body, observing Gospel Precepts, viz. to love one another, to do all
things decently and in order, etc. Though the Pope has usurped a monstrous
Supremacy over all Churches, yet how, and when, and by what Artifices and
Tricks the Popes have usurped and monopolized it to themselves, Histories are
full and plain.

It is no less worthy of our observation, That the Diocesses or the Provinces
of the Pastors and Teachers, (whether Bishops or Presbyters) of the several
congregated Churches, did not extend beyond one Church, one Altar, or one
Parish, i. e. such a Number of Christians as might all assemble and meet to
Confer, Hear, and Communicate one with another for mutual Edification, so that
every Bishop or Presbyter might take Cognizance of every Man's Life and
Conversation, and of the Spiritual state of every individual Soul, of such
congregated Churches. And One hundied and fifty Souls were thought by St.
Chrysostom and others, as many as one Pastor could well, and more than he could
without great labor, discharge. v. his Homil. in Ignat.

Paulinus, Bishop of Tire in Constantine's time, had but so many under his
Episcopal charge, as the Panegerist in Eusebius informs us, as he could take a
Personal notice of their Souls, and accurately examine the inward state of
every one, acquainting himself thoroughly with the condition of all those Souls
that were committed to him.

As Christ's Church and Kingdom excels and differs from all the Kingdoms
of the World, so does its Government, (because it was to be gathered and
established in all other Kingdoms, accursed Enemies thereunto,) therefore
Heavenly Wisdom it self appointed and ordained such a Government for his
Church, as it might exercise in any Nation by its own Spiritual Laws without
the help of human Mixtures, Superstructions, or Politics, and without
interfering with their Government or with their Laws, or prejudicing their
Civil Rights. What alterations or additions have been made to this Government
in any Nation, that Nation has thereby as much as in them lies reproached that
Wisdom which is from above, and pure, and out of the proud conceits of their
own Wisdom and Politics, and out of their own covetous and ambitious Projects,
and out of the mean conceits of the Purity and Simplicity of the Gospel have
scorned to subscribe and submit to Gods own Appointment, not contenting
themselves to be Servants and Ministers of the Church, as Christ himself, and
as the Apostles were, but will be Masters, Lords, Dukes, Marquisses, Earls,
Princes, Judges, Cardinals, Pontiffs, what not? over their Flocks, and over all
the Kingdoms of the World, whereby they demonstrated their own Wisdom and
Politics to be Earthly, Sensual, Divellish.

As if Christ (in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge,) did
not know what Government was fittest and best for his Church and Kingdom, who
chose to establish it not by high and mighty Powers, Princes, Potentates, and
Pontiffs, but by mean and inconsiderate Persons (Fishermen, Tent-makers, and
the like) to magnify the Power of his Grace, and thereby to confound the
Wisdom of the Worldly Wise. But so it shall not be among you: but whoever shall
be great among you, shall be your minister: And whoever shall be chiefest,
shall be servant of all For even the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto,
but to minister, Mark 10.43, 44, 45.

To this Government Christ inseparably and indispensably annexed this great
Prerogative and Privilege, viz. Liberty of Preaching and Propagating his
Gospel to all Nations, when he said, Go teach all nations, etc. and that beyond
all contradiction of any Person or Power whatsoever, King, or Pontiff: with a
command that Kings should be their Nursing Fathers.

What were they but the Chief Priests, Scribes, and Elders, that questioned
Christ ( Prince of all the Kindoms of the earth, Rev. 1.5. and to whom God had
given the Heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for
his possession, Psalm. 2.8.) when he Taught in the Temple, and Preached the
Gospel, by what Authority he did those things? and who it was that gave him
that authority? Luke 20.1, 2. And did not Christ disdain to give them a
satisfactory Answer, as Persons meddling with that they had nothing to do with
all? And are not those in our Days as saucy and insolent as those proud Priests
of old were, who endeavor to muzzle the Mouths of those that should tread out
their Corn, and bring forth the food of Life unto the People, and that for
things only indifferent, no ways Essential to Salvation? And not only so, but
Persecuting them by Suspensions, depriving them of their Liberty, Maintenance,
and Benefit, by Mulcts, Imprisonment, etc. Plagues little inferior to those of
the Hellish Inquisition, a Sin as National as Drinking, Drabbing, Swearing, or
the like; and requires as National, Public, and Solemn Humiliation for it as
for those other Crimes.

In the Days of Edward the VI. and Queen Elizabeth, the Dissenters of those
times insisted mainly, That no Reformation of Church Discipline and Government
could be perfect unless reduced to that state it was in, in the Apostles Days.
This, the Wisdom of those times thought neither possible, nor certain, nor
absolutely convenient, because what was used in those Times the Scripture fully
declares not; so that making their Times the Rule and Canon of Church-Polity,
is to make a Rule, which being not possible to be fully known, is as impossible
to be fully observed. So Judicious Hooker. However let us trace those Times as
far as we can.

Without all peradventure, and beyond all contradiction, Christ knowing that
his Messengers which he sent to gather a People to himself out of Jews and
Gentiles, Heathens, Publicans, and Sinners, by persuasive means only, were to
build up his Church within the Bosoms of Kingdoms, (avowed and accursed Enemies
to his Gospel,) he therefore gave them such Doctrines, and such Commissions,
for Doctrine and Discipline, as they might any where Publish and Exercise in a
quiet and peaceable manner; the Subjects of no Commonwealth or Kingdom being
any where therein concerned in Goods, or Persons by virtue of that Spiritual
Regiment whereunto Christian Religion once embraced did make them liable.

The Documents, Powers, and Directions, are recorded sparsim in the Gospel, but
more particularly in the 18th of Matthew. viz. If thy Brother transgress against
thee, what then? go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: If he
hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother; but if he will not hear thee, what
then? then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word may be established: and if he shall neglect to hear them,
what then? tell it to the Church, ( i. e. to that whole congregated Church or
Assembly, whereof thou and he are Members,) what then? if he neglect to hear
them, let him be to thee as an Heathen or Publican, i. e. pursue him in the
Courts of Civil Judicature, as thou would any other that is not a Christian,
i. e. as a Publican or Heathen, or any other wrong doer, not to own them as
Brethren, nor to keep company with them, with such no not to eat with them, as
not being worthy the Name and Profession of Christians which they had put on,
they not living to the adorning but to the shame of the Gospel.

This is the Sum of the Discipline and Government that Christ left to his
Church for ought appears by any plain Scripture. And what need of more or
other? For if the Ministers of the Everlasting Gospel have free liberty to
Instruct, break Bread, exhibit the Sacraments, and Pray, the Civil Magistrate
has sufficient Power by God's own Ordinance to order all the rest. And their
Commission extends no farther, viz. Go ye, and teach all Nations, baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, Matthew. 28.19, 20.

Cura Animarum (Salvation and Damnation of Souls being of Everlasting
consequence, and of the highest concern in the World to every individual,) is,
beyond all peradventure and contradiction, the main Duty and Glory both of
Priest and Prelate, and to be apt to teach, to be instant in season, out of
season, to reprove, rebuke, and exhort with all long suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. for hereunto most especially, and if not only, they are called as
was Aaron; and if not called unto this Duty, they are called unto none by any
Patent or Commission from Heaven.

This was the Government the Apostles used, and left no other; and the Gospel
prospered under it then; and why it should not prosper under it still, no
reason can be asscribed: however, let us trace the steps thereof, and see by
what vile arts and means it became degenerated into mere worldly Forms, set up
for mere worldly Ends and Interests.

In the Days of our Savior, whilst on Earth, there was a common Purse which
Judas carried, which was always filled and supplied with the free will
Offerings of pious devout Princes, and of private Persons, who plentifully
contributed their Temporal Riches to the Churches; which was first instituted,
kept, and distributed for two Ends only, viz. First, For the Necessities of
Christ, and his Apostles, Preachers of the Gospel. Secondly, For Alms for the
Poor, which was distributed (as the Lord commanded) by Judas, who was a Thief,
and usurped to himself the said Goods, common to the Apostolical College; and
was so Covetous, that he sold to the Jews the very Person of Christ.

When Christ was ascended into Heaven, the Holy Apostles in the Church of
Jerusalem kept on foot the same Holy institution, and for the self-same Ends,
viz. for the Necessities of the Ministers of the Gospel, and for Alms for the
Poor; the Faithful in those Days making all their Goods common, sold their
Possessions for the same Purse, or Stock, and Uses. So that the Community of
the Church was not distinct from the particular of each faithful Man. Yet this
Custom of having all things in common went not out of Jerusalem. And in other
Churches planted also by the Holy Apostles, this Custom was not observed,
neither did it last long in Jerusalem.

Whereupon, 26 Years after Christ, it is read, That the public was distinct
from the private, every one knowing his own; but the Money being common in that
Church, as in others founded in Oblations, which placed in common, served only
for the Ministers and for the Poor.

The first Day of the Week, (which for that cause was called the Lord's Day)
the Faithful met together, and each one offered that which he had set apart of
the foregoing Week for the Necessities of the common; which was administered and
distributed by the Apostles themselves for a short time after the Ascension,
whence arose murmurings, and discontents, and many dissatisfactions, some
thinking they were neglected, and had too little, and that others had too much,
which gave great trouble and distractions to the Apostles; which they
considering, and finding that they could not attend this perfectly together
with Preaching the Word of God, they resolved to stick close to the Ministry
of Preaching, and Teaching, and Praying continually, and therefore appointed
for this Office (of having care of Temporal things) another) sort of Ministers,
(Deacons) quite disserent from that we see done in these Days; wherein the Pope
and Chief Prelates of the Church attend the Government of Temporal things, and
the Office of Preaching and Teaching, and the Doctrine of the Gospel neglected,
and left unto Friars or Brethren, and inferior Priests in the Church. Wherefore
they directed the Brethren to look out among themselves, from the body of the
Faithful, Seven Men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom, whom
they appointed for that Ministry, that they might give themselves continually
to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word: And wheresoever they founded a
Church, they also appointed Deacons in the same manner, and to the same
Ministry.

As also they ordained Bishops and Priests and other Ecclesiastical Ministers
(Fasting and Praying preceding.) And the common Election of the Faithful
following after; observing inviolably this order, never deputing any Man to any
Ecclesiastical Charge, who was not first Elected by the Universality of the
Church; which is of all the Faithful together.

This Custom was observed not only during the life-times of the Apostles, but
even about two hundred Years, maintaining the Ecclesiastical Ministers, and the
Poor also with the public Stock raised by such Oblations. And the fervent Zeal
and Charity of those Times was so great, that the Oblations amounted to very
great Sums.

In the Church of Rome, that rich City Marcion, about the Year 170, gave a
freewill Offering at one time of Five thousand Crowns of Gold in the Church of
Rome; who afterward holding Erroneous Opinions in matters of Faith, he was
expelled from the Congregation, and all his Money restored to him.

This rich City grew so rich by those Oblations, that after Two hundred and
twenty Years the Roman Emperors coveted them. Whereupon Decius the Prince
arrested St. Lawrence, a Roman Deacon, to take the Ecclesiastical Treasures
from him; but, he being aware thereof, distributed them all suddenly, and so
disappointed the Tyrant.

The Church thus abounding in Riches, the Clergy began then to degenerate and
to live at ease, not being content with the daily Food of the Church, but would
have their separate shares every Day, or Month, or longer, and live where they
pleased; which, though it declined from the Primitive Perfection, was yet winked
at by the Fathers: but it rested not here, for the Bishops began to fail the
Poor of their due, and kept more for themselves; and so growing Rich with the
Goods of the Church, dealt also in Usury to increase in Riches; and withal
leaving off the Care of Teaching the Doctrines of Christ, and busied themselves
in getting Pelf: of which St. Cyprian complains in his time.

Though the Church possessed so much Wealth, yet it had no settled or stable
Goods at the first. Yet in France, and in Italy, some left or gave stable Goods
to Churches, which in the Year 302 were all confiscated by Dioclesian and
Maniminian; though in France the Emperors Decrees were not executed, by the
bounty of Constance Cloro Caesar, who governed it. But a while after
Constantine and Licinius granted freedom of Religion to the Christians,
approved of the Ecclesiastical Colleges called Churches, granted generally
throughout the Empire, that they might gain and acquire stable Goods as well by
Gift as Testament, exempting also the Clergy from personal public services,
that they might attend the Duties of Religion more constantly.

But the Clergy made so ill use of these Favors, that Princes were forced to
regulate them by Laws, in the Year 370: Which St. Jerome confesses to have been
a Remedy against the Corruptions entered amongst the Clergy, which was of
getting Temporal Estates.

But that Law not being sufficient to suppress their greediness of getting
Temporal Estates, another Law was made Anno 390 to the same end and purpose:
this excess of getting was so unpleasant to St. Austin, who lived in those
Days, that he openly declared against them, saying, The Ecclesiastical Ministry
consisted not in getting and distributing much, but in getting and distributing
well. Likewise he abhorred the new indirect ways they had found out of
increasing their Stock, and would never permit them in his Church; and often
declared in his Sermons, That he had rather live on the Primitive Oblation,
than to have a care of Possessions, which hindered from attending entirely upon
the Principal Charge of a Bishop, i. e. Spiritual things.

Notwithstanding all Laws, Reprimands, and Checks, yet the Ecclesiastical Goods
increased excessively above what it ought; but the ancient manner of Governing
and Distributing lasted till the Year 420. both the Oblation and the
Ecclesiastical incoms from real Estates were in common, and governed by
Deacons, Subdeacons, and by other. Assistants, and distributed for the
maintenance of Ecclesiastical Ministers, and of the Poor. The College of
Priests, and the Bishops, were the Superintendants; so that the Bishops
disposed of every thing, and the Deacons executed it.

But after France, Spain, and Africa, were divided from the Empire, the
Churches were differently governed. The Eastern Church retained the common
Government, but in the Western the Bishops by Administrators and
Superintendants made themselves Masters, and to govern the Goods of the Church
Arbitrarily; from whence arose Confusions in the distribution of them, and the
Buildings fell to ruin, and the Poor neglected and forsaken. For which cause,
about the Year 470 in the Western Church, it was ordained, that the
Ecclesiastical Goods should be divided into Four parts; which alteration was
also soon abused. And also other changes made in the Government, which in and
through all things proved contrary to the Ancient; as also the manner of
choosing Ministers was instituted by the Apostles, That Bishops, Priests, and
other Ministers of God's Word, and the Deacons, Ministers of Temporal things
should be elected by the Universality of the Faithful, and should be ordained
by the Bishops, with laying of Hands on the Head; a thing which lasts without
alteration to this Day. Which Custom continued about 200 Years. The Bishops
were chosen by the People, and ordained by the Metropolitan in the presence of
all the Com-provincial Bishops or else by their Consents, etc. And afterward
many Provinces, for a better Form of Government, were subject to one Primate,
whose Consent was also required for Ordaining. Then the Priests, Deacons, and
other Clergy Men, were presented by the People, and ordained by the Bishop, or
else nominated by the Bishops, and with the Consent of the People ordained by
him. An unknown Man was never received, neither did the Bishop ever Ordain one
who was not approved of and commended; or rather, presented by the People; and
the Consent of the People was judged so necessary, that Pope Leo the First
treated amply, that the Ordination of a Bishop could not be valid, nor lawful,
which was not required by the People, and by them approved of; which was the
Opinion of all the Saints of those times. A thing worthy to be noted now a
Days, when that Election is declared to be illegitimate and null, where the
People have any share. Thus is seen how things in the Government of the Church
are degenerated from what they were in purer times, even quite contrary, that
now accounted lawful, which was then accounted wicked, and that now unjust
which then was reputed holy.

The Clergy finding the sweet and great Advantages of the Favors granted by
Princes, did improve them to the uttermost, but by such means as were not
pleasing to the Faithful, of which St. Austin and St. Chrisostom greatly
complained in their times. For they increased the common Stock by undue
practices, and distributed over much to themselves, and neglecting the Poor.
And their Wealth so vastly and unjustly increasing, they instituted new kinds
of Government, which they changed at pleasure, until at last it came to that we
see at this Day.

Not content with the old ways of getting, about the 500 Year another sort of
Religious Colleges, called Monasteries, were erected. Monkery began in Egypt
about the Year 300, and from thence past into Greece, whereby St. Basil at the
Year 370, it was formed in the manner which yet continues. But in Italy about
the Year 350, it was brought to Rome by Athanasius, but had little
encouragement till about the Year 500, when St. Equitius and St. Benedict gave
it a settled Form. The Institution of Equitius increased but little, but that
of Benedict spread it self all over Italy, and beyond the Mountains. The Monks
in those Days were not Ecclesiastics but Seculars; and in the Monasteries
without the Cities they lived on their own Labor, Arts, and Husbandry,
together with some addition out of the public Oblations, and were governed by
the Abbot.

The Abbot Tritemius makes Account that Monasteries of the Benedictine Monks
were 15000, besides Prepositures and lesser Convents. The Monks themselves
chose their own Abbots; by this time the Bishops by tricks and cunning
Artifices became absolute Dispensators of the Fourth part of the Churches
Goods, which made the haughty Clergy mind Temporal Goods more than Spiritual,
and to make themselves Eminent and Popular; whence arose Discords, Seditions,
Tumults, and Blows, to the great Disturbance of Civil States, especially about
the Election of Clergy Dignitaries, which Primarily at the first Institution
was in the People, beyond contradiction; but afterward by the cunning
craftiness of those that lay in wait to deceive, it was sometimes in the
Clergy, sometimes in the Prince, sometimes in a mixture, one choosing and
another confirming, as the Interest and Power of the one or the other could
prevail: Elections being then used not as the end of Divine Service, but for
secular Interests, and worldly Ends.

Antiquity knew of no distinction between Ordination and Benefice, and
Ordaining was then the same thing as to give an Office, and the right of having
ones livelihood from the common Goods of the Church. But afterward through Wars
and Confusions, the Clergy being driven from their Ministries, had recourse and
retired to other Churches, where they were received as their own Clergy, and
sometimes when some Minister of their own died, a stranger, if eminently
worthy, succeeded in his Ministry, and was then said to be Incardinated,
whereas he that was first exalted to an Office was said to be Ordinated or
Ordained, but he who was disposessed of his own, and provided with another, was
called Incardinated. This began in Italy. Hence in process of time came
Cardinals, from Parish Priests, to be now equal to Kings, and had their
maintenance out of the common Stock accordingly: of which there were Episcopi
Cardinales, and Presbyteri Cardinales. Rome and Ravenna being then the richest
Churchs, received most of the eminent strangers, and therefore they had most
Cardinals, and they chose the most eminent Men, strangers, and were called
Cardinals. In Rome the name remains to this Day; in Ravenna it lasted until
1543, and then was taken away by Paul the Thid. It is wonderful to see how from
such a low beginning they have grown to such an excessive height, even from
that which had neither Degree nor Order in the Church, but brought in by
chance, or rather by Clergy-craft and subtilty, is raised to be so Supreme in
the Church as we see it now a days: Aequiparantur Regibus was the common saying
of the Court. Innocent the Fourth, Anno 1244, gave them the red Hat; and Paul
the Second gave them the red Cap, the Regulars excepted; which was also granted
to them by Gregory the Fourteenth.

Though at first none were Ordained without a Title, which continued until a
little before the Year 500, yet afterward the Bishops Ordained without a Title
or any Office, and therefore without Benefice; which sort of Clergy in progress
of time grew so excessively numerous, that thence arose a Multitude of
Indecencies, Irregularities, and Scandals, which did more especially arise from
the desire of many to become Clergy men for increase of their Livelihood, and
to enjoy the Exemptions granted by Princes; the other from ambitious Prelates,
desiring to have a multitude of Subjects, whom they might command; which
disorder yet remains, and makes the People loose their great Respect for
Religion and their Charity. Before the Council of Trent such Bishops swarmed,
but now much lessened.

Though so great Inconveniences and Irregularities arose by Ordaining without a
Title, yet the Jesuits will have it, that the Pope may Ordain without any
Title, either true or feigned, whereby the Reverence to that Order has abated,
in respect to that it had when Ecclesiastical Orders were only Ordained to
Offices; for which reason all them resided and dwelt upon their Charges, which
could not be left vacant, there being none to supply them, all being occupied
in their own. Likewise the distinctions of Benefices Compatibile and
Incompatabile (found out only to cheat the World) was then unknown, whether
fatter or leaner, the Possessor was obliged to serve it personally without
Unions, Reserves, Commenda's, and Devices, found out only by Clergy Craft to
avoid the old and best Canons, and to bring all into the Popes Power.

There were many Provisions made by diverse Princes to prevent the many Abuses
occasioned by the Ambitious and Covetous Clergy but all in vain, Clergy-craft
quickly found out Distinctions and Subtilties, and coined Evasions to avoid
both Canons and Laws made for Redress of such and other Abuses which were
before the Year 800.

About which time Charlemagn having reduced under his Obedience Italy, France,
and Germany, reformed in some measure the Abuses in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
reducing them to an Uniformity; which in diverse places have been variously
used, renewing many of the old Canons and Councels worn out of use by Clergy
Craft, and making of Ecclesiastical Laws for the distribution of Benefices as
they ought, and partly restored unto the Parishes the Possessions which the
Bishops had usurped unto themselves, Ordaining that every Priest should have a
sufficient Benefice, according to that saying, Beneficium datur propter
officium. He restored also to the Monks that Power of choosing their own Abbot.
He Established also, That the Bishops ought to Ordain those Priests who were
presented by the People of the Parishes. He Established also the Pope of Rome
in like manner as he had been instituted when the Emperors of the East had the
Dominion over Rome, viz. That the Pope should be Elected by the Clergy and the
People, and the Decree of the Election should be sent to the Emperor; upon
whose Approbation the elected was consecrated: but to the Honor of the Clergy
be it remembered, there was never any Law made to remedy any of their Abuses,
but they soon found out a way to evade them.

About this time the Custom of giving Tithes unto Parish-Churches passed out of
France over into Italy, which soon were abused as well as other Provisions made
by the free will Offerings of the Faithful, and so are to this Day. But what
should I say more of their Abuses in other things, (as of Abbeys and Abbots,
Monkery and Monasteries, Annates, universally reputed grievous and condemned,
yet justified by some, their Arms Spiritual, Expectancies, or Reversions,
Benefices, Pluralities, Comenda's, Unions, Reservations, Cardinals,
Coajutorship, Decretals, Donations, Elelection of Popes, Priests, Bishops, and
Deacons, Exemptions, Mendicants, Regresses, Indulgences, Quindeniums,
Investitures, Reserves, Pensions, plentitude of Power, Non-obstante's,
Devolution, Canons, Dominion of Goods Ecclesiastical, Resignations,
Renuntiations, Alienations, Reservations, Symony, Vacancies, Titles of Dukes,
Marquisses, and Earls given to Bishops, etc.) but that the Clergy in those
times did abuse that Power they had in the Gospel, endeavoring rather to
acquire Empire, Grandeur, and Temporal Estates, by any indirect means, than
with Paul to have made the Gospel of Christ without charges, by preaching the
Gospel willingly: A woe always attending the neglect thereof, though they which
minister about holy things, ought to live of the things of the Temple: and that
they which wait at the Altar, ought to be partakers of the Altar, 1 Cor. 9.13,
16, 17, 18.

It is an Observation of godly Men, That in those times the Court would never
be induced, that a gainful Abuse should be abolished or corrected, until it had
prepared a greater and more profitable one.

So great Authority tends to no good, because it appears thereby that almost
all the Abuses have been introduced. From hence proceeded the Commendums,
Pensions, Regresses, Unions, Resignations, Expectancies, Reservations, yearly
Payments, Quindeniums, and other kinds which no Man defends.

The Government of the Church was first Democratical, all the Faithful being
present in the chiefest Councels and Deliberations: Thus we see that all were
present at the Election of Matthias unto the Apostleship, and in the Election
of the Six Deacons, and when St. Peter received Cornelius, a Heathen Centurion,
unto the Faith, he gave an account of it to all the Church. Likewise in the
Council celebrated in Jerusalem the Apostles, the Priests and the Faithful
Brethren were present, and the Letters were written in the name of all the
Three Orders. When Paul writ his Advice about the incestuous Person, he
directed his Epistle unto the Church of God which is at Corinth; to them that
are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in every
place call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and
ours.

They perverted the Spiritual Arms of Excommunication, (which was used only for
the Correction of Sinners,) into the defense of their Temporal Possessions. The
Law of Tithes is indeed Mosaically Divine, but not a Law naturally Divine, nor
Christian; and it obliged only that People at that time, now it obliges none.
In the many Troubles and Uproars, occasioned by the Bishops confederating with
the Popes against the Emperor, the Bishops obtained the Public Incomes, and
the Regal Rights or Duties; and when the Differences were composed, they had
taken so firm Possession, that the Princes were necessitated to grant them in
feudo that which de facto they had usurped to themselves; by which they
acquired also the Titles of Dukes, and Marquisses, and Earls. Many of them are
still in Germany, remaining such both in Name and Fact; but in Italy in Name
only.

The Canonists say, That the Poor are obliged to pay Tithes, for that which is
given them by Alms in Begging at Doors: and the Harlots are bound to pay Tithes
of their gain by Whoredom. The greatest and most frequent Legacies and Gifts
are from Harlots.

Prohibitions for Alienating, which were made against Clergymen in favor of
the Laiety, are turned about against the Laiety in favor of the Clergy.

The Popes never failed to get any Abuse whatever to be justified by Doctrines
Though the Popes ought to feed and not share the Sheep, yet they make themselves
fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of Gods holy Church and People, 1 Samuel 2.29.

Having thus briefly declared the Government of the Church in general, which is
more at large set forth by Padre Paolo, that incomparable Servite, in his
Treatise of Beneficiary matters, let us consider how the Government of the
Church of England now stands.

In brief thus: First, In the British times, before the Conversion of the
Saxons, the particular modes of Administration, as all things else concerning
the British Church, are very obscure. But this is clear enough, That the Popes
Tyranny and Usurpation being then unborn, and Princes enjoying their whole
Power both in Ecclesiastics and Civils, nothing was ordained without their
Authority and Permission, who yet gave large Powers to their Clergy, both for
Debating and Judging in their own Consistories, things proper to their Care and
Inspection, as at large appears in the Imperial Constitutions of Theodosius,
Justinian, and others.

Seconldy, The English Saxons Church, being planted by Augustine the Monk,
through the care and direction of Gregory the Great, did bear a respect to the
Roman See, but owned none of its Authority and Dominion in Ecclesiastical
matters. The Bishops and others of the Clergy assembled often, and made
Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions, but not without the License and
Allowance of the Kings, who by their own Authority, (indeed by Ecclesiastical
Usurpation and Tyranny) enacted also many things of Religious and
Ecclesiastical Practice; as appears largely in the Saxon Laws collected by
Lambert and others, and Sir Henry Spillman's Councels.

Thirdly, For about 1000 Years after Christ, the English Church refused thus
the Roman Yoke, till that proud Priest Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury
first was so bold as to shake off the King's Rule and Authority in matters
Ecclesiastical, denying him Obedience without the Condition of Salvo Ordine
suo, and so as much as in him lay destroyed the Liberty of the English Church
and the King's Prerogative: This appears from Anselm's 36 Epist. to
Paschalis, Matthew Paris, and others. Peter Pence indeed were formerly paid out
of respect to the Bishops of Rome; but the Pope never obtained the Investiture
of Bishops, and the right of receiving Appeals, and consequently that
Sovereignty and Headship over the Church, till such time as Becket being
killed, Henry the Second, to get Absolution, subjected himself and his Kingdom
to the Roman Jurisdiction about An. 1172.

Fourthly, This Foreign Authority was after 200 Years restrained by the Statute
of Praemunire, and other Acts of Parliament; yet the Pope still kept his Foot
here (though not his Body,) or rather his Hand, which scraped up a World of
Treasure. The Canon Law was the Law of the Church; Archbishops without the
King's leave assembled their Provincial Synods; the Decrees of which bound all
Men by no other Authority than that merely Ecclesiastical, and provided that
they were not contrary to the Jus commune (as it is called of the Pope, rather
than that) of the King. Great were the Privileges and Exemptions of the Clergy
from Secular Courts and Jurisdictions, as is to be seen in Articuli Cleri, and
other old Laws, and the History of those times abundantly testisie.

Fifthly, This Exorbitant and Foreign Power was in part banished by Act of
Parliament in Henry VIII his time. Now its provided that the King should be
ordained Supreme Head, or Chief, and Supreme in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as the
Jewish Kings of old and the Ancient Christian Princes were; and it is made High
Treason to deny it. Now consideration being had of the old Canon Law, it was
considered how to reform and reduce it to such a temper as would suit with this
new Alteration; and it was then thought fit that it should rather be quite
Abolished, and a new entire Body collected for the Government of the Church.

Sixthly, To this purpose it was Enacted, that Thirty or more Persons should be
deputed by the King to make this Collection. But it being better to live where
nothing, than where every thing is lawful, they were not so rash to run down
Root and Branch, and take away the old Building before a new one was modelled;
and therefore till this Model should be prepared and confirmed in Parliament,
it was Enacted, That the Canon or Ecclesiastical Laws should stand in the same
force as formerly they did at that time, except in such Cases wherein they
thwarted the Laws of the Land.

Seventhly, This new body of Ecclesiastical Laws was by Edward the Sixth
attempted, and an Essay made by Dr. Haddon, since printed by the name of
Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum; but never was perfected nor confirmed by Act
of Parliament, and therefore the Canon Law is still in force as formerly, but
where it contradicts the Law of the Land.

Thus is the Crown with much ado plucked out of the Paws of the Ecclesiastical
Man of Sin, and restored in Parliament to its Ancient Rights in matters
Ecclesiastical; It being by Act of Parliament Established, That the Clergy
should not Assemble without the King's License and Authority. By all which it
appears, That the Kingdom, the Church of England, now has a Supreme
independent Right and Power within it self, to make Coerceive Laws for the
Welfare of it self, without running to Rome or to any Foreign State or Power.

Upon this Popish Foundation (which has not the least ground in Scripture)
stands our Darling Ecclesiastical or Church Discipline and Regiment, (a mere
Popish Relick and Hierarchy, set up only not to minister unto, but to domineer,
contrary to Christ's Precepts and Examples.) And our Ecclesiastics have not as
yet made it their concern or business to endeavor a farther Reformation
thereof, (though designed even from the beginning of the Reformation in Henry the
Eighth's Days,) but are very well pleased to eat the Fat and drink the Sweet
thereof: And though they know that their Encroachments and Usurpations have been
all got by Popish Priestcraft, and by which they have for above 1000 Years
cajoled and fooled both Crowns and People out of their just Rights, and
subjected Caesar's and great Princes and Principalities to their own Empire; And
instead of a pure Gospel Government have Established to themselves a mighty
Throne of Iniquity and Abominations, fitted for Pride, Domination, self ends,
and Interest, etc. Which Priestcraft, togegether with Antichrist, began to
work in the Days of the Apostles, even from Judas's Purse, and continues to
this very Day; which is demonstrably made out, as by many Histories, so more
punctually and particularly by Father Paul s Treatise of Beneficiary matters,
showing how, and when, and by what Priestcraft all their Acquisitions, (Friars
Annals, Arms Spiritual, Benefices, Unions and Vacancies of Benefices, Canons,
Cardinals, Coajutors, Commendam's, Election of Bishops and Priests, Exemptions,
Goods Ecclesiastical, Appeals, Monks, Monasteries, Indulgencies, Investitures,
Pluralities, Non-residence, Excommunication, Episcopal Audience, Absolutions,
Dispensations, Prebends, etc.) were acquired, used, and abused. A foul Mistake
and Crime, to think to Establish the Church with good Government, taken from
human Reason, as if twere a Temporal State.

The Church and Kingdom of Christ, as it is more Excellent than any other
Kingdom in the World, ( the Scepter of Righteousness being the Scepter of his
Kingdom, and to which Kingdom all other Kings and Princes ought to bow down and
be subservient,) so it and the Government thereof differs from all other
Governments and Kingdoms. First, It has but one Head, and that not by Election
or Succession, but by everlasting Continuation. Secondly, This Head chose his
Church or Kingdom, and not the Church him, John 15.16. Luke 32.23. Thirdly, The
Laws of this Kingdom are more excellent and more unchangeable than the Laws of
any other Commonwealth or Kingdom, as being the Dictates and Precepts of
Christ, the only and Eternal Head, and are the unchangeable Copies and
Expressions of his Immutable and most Holy Will. Fourthly, The Obligements and
Conformity of every Member thereof unto these Laws are far more strickt and
severe than in any other Commonwealth or Kingdom, viz. That every one should
love his Lord and King above all, and his Neighbor and fellow Citizens as
himself, should abstain from all appearance of Evil, and resist unto Blood,
striving against Sin, etc. Fifthly, In the visible Government of his Church and
Kingdom, he has appointed a Priesthood by irrevocable Ordination, (in which it
is dissimular to all Temporal Governments,) as Officers of his Church and
Kingdom to continue after his Ascension, viz. Priests and Bishops; and soon
after his Ascension the Apostles added Deacons also by Ordination. What Powers
Christ gave them, what Duties be obliged them unto, are visible by their
Commission written in great and indelible Characters; viz. Go teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you: and so, I am with you to the end of the world, Matthew. 28.19, 20. and they
were to Preach not themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and themselves the
servants of his Church for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5.

This is the Sum of their Commission and Authorities that Christ left them;
Christ well knowing that his Apostles, and Ministers, and their Successors,
were to gather him a Church from among both Jews and Gentiles, all bitter
Enemies to him and his Gospel, and to Establish it in the Bosom of their
Kingdoms, did prescribe them such a Government and Laws as they might any where
execute peaceably, without prejudice to the Subjects of any Commonwealth or
Kingdom, either in their Lives or Fortunes, no other Subjects being subject
unto that Spiritual Regiment but only such as embraced the Christian Religion.
In this Christian Church Christ ordained Officers to Teach, Baptize, Ordain,
and Administer his Sacraments: but for what concerned Honesty and Dishonesty,
doing Good, and working Wiekedness, and breaking the Laws of Morality, Christ
gave many general Rules and Precepts to the whole Church, (who were to Govern
its own Body and the Officers thereof, and not the Officers the Church or
Body,) viz. to love one another, even our Neighbors as our selves, etc. And if
any did trangress the Laws, not peculiar to them as Men, but as Christians, if
the Offense were private, then they were privately to be admonished; If
public, then they that transgressed openly were to be rebuked openly; but if
after Friendly Admonitions and Reprimands, private and public, they still
continued incorrigible, then not to own them as Brethren, nor keep company with
them, with such, no not to cat: and in sine pursue and proecute them as
Publicans and Heathens, i. e. Sue them in the Civil Courts: And this is the
Sum of the whole Government and Discipline which Christ left to his Church;
and any other there is not extant in Scripture: nor is there need of any more
or other, as is hinted before.

Let the Pope, Prelate, or Paesbyter, demonstrate any other Form of Church
Government, if they can. they know they cannot: but they will pelt us with
Stories of another Government, and of its Antiquity, and general Use thereof
for many Ages. Be it so, let them derive it as high as they can, from that very
Day and Date, the very beginning of Popish Priestcraft will appear, which by
good management heaping Pelian upon Ossa, now one thing, and then another, it
early arrived at that monstrous heap of Irregularities, nay, Impieties it is
now at in the Irregular use of the same in both Churches. Take it as it is with
the best Construction can be made of it. What Concord? what Agreement had it
with the Government set forth in the Gospel? even the same that Light has with
Darkness, and Christ with Belial.

To Day to burn Books and Tenets of Men as pious, and learned, and having as
precious Souls to save as themselves, and to morrow suspend, and extravagantly
punish Ministers and others for writing Rebukes of Sin, or not reading a Book
of Sports, or for Lecturing; Excommunicate others for not paying Fees, or not
observing the Orders of their Courts, and of their Officers, Chancellors,
Surrogates, Archdeacons, Officials, Sumners, etc. And if an Excommunicate
Person come into the Church in the time of Divine Service, the Celebration
thereof is to cease: and a World of suchlike Fopperies. A special Gospel
Government, that Ecclesiastics need be so fond of! Can this be a
Gospel-Government, that conduces to no good end but to bring Grists to their
Mills, and an odium upon themselves, and render them in some sense worse than
the Furies of Hell, who only torment the guilty, but these vex the very Souls
of Men as Righteous as themselves? Which Government was partly obtained by
Antichristian Popish Priestcraft, partly by the supineness and negligence of
the Brethren of former Ages of their own Rights and Privileges, partly by the
Crast and Subtilty of proud, covetous, and ambitious Popish Clergy, and partly
by the carelessness of Princes, who not willing to trouble themselves with the
Care of Religion, devolved it upon the Bishops and Priests, by whom they were
easily outwitted, and seduced, and so set up for themselves.

I wonder what plain Text of Scripture ever gave the Priesthood Authority to
make Canons, curse and suspend, to impose and regulate, to bind and punish the
Body of the Church, (which in plain English is putting the Cart before the
Horses,) the Church being to Regulate its own Concerns, and Body, and the
Officers thereof, and not the Officers the Body: for by the Judgment of St.
Cyprian, The Praclice of the purest Times, which were freest from corruption,
even when Holy Martyrs were Bishops, was, that Pastors were subject to the
Censure of the Church. If this business were seriously inquired into, it would
appear that there would be no need at all of this Ecclesiastical Government by
Priests, as distinct from the Civil Christian Government; and if there be, yet
the Body is to govern and regulate it self, and not the Clergy and Officers
thereof the Body. Either this their Government is to be found in the New
Testament, or it is not; if it had been there, it would have appeared long ago
in the Contests between the Bishops and the Presbyterians. But by both their
Writings it manifestly appears, That neither the one Government nor the other
(as it is now practiced) is to be found therein, nor any other Government than
what I have succinctly deseribed. What strange Priests are these thus to usurp
wrong Powers, and make so very ill use of them, and yet expect to be had in
Reverence of them over whom they so Tyrannize, by continuing the Usurpation of
such wrong Powers, got by Priestcraft in Evil and Popish times? How can they
expect that we should hearken to, and believe them, Preaching Self denial and
Reformation to us, when they hateo to be reformed themselves? They are called
to be Priests and Bishops, and make their boasts of God, that they know his
Will, and approve the things that are more excellent; and considently brag,
that they are Guides to the Blind, Lights to them that are in Darkness,
Instructers of the Foolish; and therefore you who teach others, why teach you
not your selves? You that make your boasts of the Law, through breaking of the
Law, dishonorest thou God? Romans 2.17, 32. is not this, with ^emas, to love the
present World, and with Diotrephes to love Pre-eminence and Domination? All
Histories, both Sacred and Profane, swell with Outcries and Exclamations
against them, as the Disturbers of the common Peace of all Europe, as the
Authors and Instruments of all Uproars, Seditions, Confusions, and Wars. Our
own Church of England Men, and Bishops, boasted and signalized our first War
1639, (which was the Spawn of all that has followed,) by the name of Bellum
Episcopale; and not undeservedly. Which Royal Army, though in its march they
injured no Body, but rather enriched all places, yet so averse was that War to
the Genius of both Nations, that none of them could bid us God speed, as if God
had stirred up the Spirit of these Nations, as he did the Spirits of Pull and
Tilgah Pilnesar, Kings of Assyria, whereby vex Popult became vox Dei; and it
thrived accordingly.

If this their Government now in use be not to be sound in Scripture, (as for
certain it is not,) what is it else, than for the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy to
make the Souls of Men subordinate to their Pride and Impery, and to entitle God
himself to be the Author of all their Usurpations, and to cast upon him the
Shame and Dishonor of all their Oppressions and Violencies, by gilding over
all their Impieties with the Varnish of Religion, and by assuming the Coverture
and Canepy of Pretty for a Cloak for their Impieties. The Pagans were more
modest toward their Gods, accounting Dissimulation mere Imposture.

Have they made it their Business, or improved their Interest, since his
Majesty's Restoration, to restore that Tuesdays Sermon at Court, which the
Holy Martyr most Religiously observed? Have they countenanced Lectures on the
Weekdays, and Sermons in the Afternoon on the Sabbath Days? Run through all the
Counties of the Nation, and matter of fact will clear the point. I appeal to
God and their own Consciences, and to vox Populi for the truth hereof. What
violent suppression has there been of Conventicles, and Persecution of the
Conventiclers, (happily as great, if not greater than the Inquisition abroad,)
though used in purest times by Christ and his Apostles, and recommended by them
to all the faithful in general, by as true Jure Divino Precepts as Priests and
Bishops have for their teaching all Nations by Matthew. 28.19. and other plain
Scriptures. To this Divine Prerogative and liberty of assembling of the
faithful in general, for mutual and reciprocal Prophesying, Edification,
Consolation, Conferring, and Communicating their several and diversities of
Gists and Graces, their own mutual progres, growth, and failings of their
designs for Heaven, and to participate of each others Advisoes and Prayers, and
how to behave themselves therein. As this is a Divine Prerogative given to all
the Faithful by the Gospel, so they may make use thereof in any Nation without
asking leave of any body, and no Power ought to hinder them, nor can they
hinder it without Sin. to this signal Privilege St. Paul gives abundant
testimony, 1 Cor. 14. This Epistle was written not to Priests in particular,
but to the Church of God in general, to them that are sanctified in life,
called to be Saints, with all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus
Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours, 1 Cor. 1.1. wherein all the faithful,
whether Prtests or not Priests, are commanded to follow after Charity, and
desire spiritual Gifts, but rather that they may Prophecy. By Prophets in this
place are meant all Believers in general, those within the Pale of the Church,
excluding those only without, as unfit to judge such matters; and by
Propherying here is not meant the Gifts of Prediction, or foretelling events,
or things to come, but speaking unto Edification, Exhortation, and Comfort: If
therefore the whole Church (not Priests only) come together in one place, and
all speak, etc. ver. 23. and all prophecy, ver. 24. and every one of you has
a Psalm, has a Dodrine, ver. 26. If any Man speak, ver. 27. let the Prophets
speak two or three, and let the other judge, ver. 29. If any thing be revealed
to another that sits by, let the first bold his peace, ver. 30. for ye may
all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all be comforted, v. 31. and
the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, v. 32. let the women
keep silence, ver. 31. wherefore brethren covet to prophecy, ver. 39. Now if
the words or terms of the whole Church, all, every one, any Man, the other,
another, Brethren, be words and terms of universality and differencing, then
certainly the Words, Prophets, and Prophesying in this Chapter are most
especially applicable to the Brethren, to the Auditors.

In this Chapter also are Instructions given, that Women in these Conventicles
do hold their peace, ver. 31. let all prophecy, one by one, that all may learn
and be comforted, and all things be done decently and in order; all which are
Commandments of the Lord, ver. 37. If these be no Divine Oracles and Precepts
to all the Faithful to congregate for the ends and purposes aforesaid, then I
understand neither plain Scripture nor plain English. But if any Men will
understand God otherwise than he will be understood, and distinguish
Scriptures, and model them to their own humor, and accept or reject his truth,
as will best consist with their own resolutions, and by oblique Arts think to
trick us out of our just Rights, I leave them to the just Judgment of God, who
will judge Righteously. The Primitive and puest Churches were so gathered and
so propagated.

Moreover the same Apostle re-inforceth the same Doctrine in his Epistle to the
Hebrews, chapter 10. ver. 23, 24, 25. to hold fast the profession of Faith without
wavering, to consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works, not
forsaking the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is,
Heb. 10.23, 24, 25. who (fearing the Breath of Fools, and that thereby their
designs of Honors and Preferments, and other wretched Ends would be defeated,)
dare not assemble to husband the precious moments of their lives to the
advantage of their Master; what is this else but to bespatter, and to have
scornful and mean conceits of the humility of the ways of Christ, and of the
simplicity of his Gospel? Do they not rather betray much luke-warmness and
indifferency, and walk in a Neutrality and Adiaphorism, between God and Baal?
nay, much hellishness and devilish Antipathy, to Christ and his strictest
service. For in truth it is unbeseeming, nor Priest, nor Prelate, but a duty
incumbent upon them, to counenance and encourage Conventicles, or Assemblies,
guilty of nothing, (maugre all the false Aspersions and Calumnies laid upon
them by Men carried away with the stream of this wicked World, and the common
prejudices and presumptions of foolish Men,) but of great Zeal to worship God,
and save their own Souls, by besieging and besetting the Throne of heaven with
more ardent and retired Prayers and Conferences. Why do they thus mock God, as
one mocketh another? Job. 13.9. Certainly it would better become them to be
zealous son Piety and good Lives, because vicious Habits are worse than false
Opinions. And it is not only a duty incumbent on Prelate, Priest, and People,
but their glory also, to countenance every thing that is done to gain Souls to
Christ, whether in pretense or in truth, Phil. 1.15, 16, 17, 18. and nothing is
unseemly but vice. Christians indeed ought to abstain from those things which
are repugnant to Christian Profession, which are Sins, but whatsoever may be
done without sin is lawful for every man to do, and therefore may assemble.
Besides nothing ought to be condemned or spoken ill of, that is capable of a
good construction, (of which nature are our Conventicles, and yet are reviled
and evil spoken of by some, who have the poison of Asps under their Lips, and
whose Throats are as open Sepulchers,) because it is not only humanity, but a
Gospel Principle to make the most favorable and charitable construction of all
Actions capable of a good and bad interpretation; for charity thinks no evil,
and we are commanded above all things to have fervent Charity, for that shall
cover a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8. and envieth not, is kind, does not
behave it self unseemly, (as they do that decry Conventicles, thereby giving
great jealousy, that in good earnest they esteem that Ordinance foolishness of
Preaching, desperately contemning the Purity and Simplicity of the Gospel,)
thinks no evil, believes all things, hops all things, 1 Cor. 13. and I
fear that they that have not this Charity toward such Conventicles, their
Charity is but as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal; and you know that
Revilers are in the black Catalogue of the damned Crew, mentioned 1 Cor. 6.9,
10. and by so judging they prescribe for themselves, and prejudge themselves.
Judge not, that ye be not judged, for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged. Why beholdest thou the moat that is in thy Brether's eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Matthew. 7.1, 2, 3. Who art
thou that judge another man's servant? to his own Master he stands or
falls. Yea he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand, Romans
14.4. and God alone is Judge of erring Persons. Besides, I know no Power on
Earth that has lawful Authority to forbid any Man to Preach the Gospel; or
that they that are called to Preach are obliged to ask leave of any other to
Preach the Gospel either publicly or privately. Christ and his Apostles,
notwithstanding all Threatenings and Imprisonments, Prohibitings, Scourgings,
what not? yet preached the Gospel oath openly in their Synagogues and in the
Temple; and also privately by stealth, even at midnight, breaking Bread from
House to House, till they lost their lives for so doing; which they would not
have done had it been unlawful so to have done. For my part I am of Opinion,
That our love to the Brethren, is the best and most manifest evidence of our
love to God, and the best Rule whereby to measure our love to him; and I hope I
shall never eminently see the Image of Christ in any Man ( Conventicler or not
Conventicler) but shall love him more dearly for it, and abhor my self for
being so much unlike him. Why do thou judge thy Brother? or why do thou set
at naught by Brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment seat of
Christ, Romans 14.10. And God will measure us by his own Line, and by his own
Plummet. Deus bone! unto what then does all this Gall of Asps, these I breats
as wide as open Sepulchers, decrying Conventicles and persecuting of them,
tend? out of Zeal to the more strict and pure ways of serving God? not
possible, it rather gives more occasions of greater Fears and Jealousies of
more rancourous constitution of Hearts, against submitting to the narrow and
more strict Rules of the Apostles, of abstaining from all appearance of Evil,
of resisting unto Blood, siriving against sin, of endeavoring to be holy as
our Heavenly Father is Holy; and perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect.

And certainly, it is much more agreeable tot he Mind of Christ to Conventicle
with Assemblies of the Faithful, than to be blind watch men, ignerant, dumb
Dogs, that cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber: yea, greedy
Dogs that cannot have enough: shopherds that cannot understand, that look to
their own way, every one for his gain, (...). 56.10, 11. that feed themselves,
but not the flock, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4. Such as these are they that teach for
hire, and divine for money; that soist their own Straw and Stubble upon the
foundation laid by Christ our Lord; that will understand God other wise than he
will be understood, and will not account that sense of Scripture truest, that
most restrains their corrupt humors, that thwarteth and crosses their high
imaginations and designs. We have with us, and amongst us, thousands that ask
Counsel at their Stocks, and whose Staff declares unto them; for the spirit of
whoredoms has caused them to err, and they have gone a whoring from under
their God, Hos. 4.12. and yet not excommunicated, nor so severely persecuted as
those that Conventicle and Assemble with the Brotherhood. We have also with us
thousands of worthy, very worthy, pious and learned Prelates, Priests and
People, that labor in the Word and Doctrine, and mourn in secret for the
violences done to such Assemblies, in whom the Light of the Glorious Gospel
most eminently and gloriously shines, and who preach and practice God's pure
and sincere Ordinances; so that no Nation under Heaven has them more purely
taught and exalted in Mercies than our own.

It is the rotten part of the Clergy only, whose Popish and other Books,
publishing Doctrines destructive to whole Kingdoms, only herein meant, that
occasions such contempt of the Clergy; the very tail of Priests, Isai. 9.15.
that teach Lies, and Doctrines that subject the whole Race of Mankind unto
slavery and vassallage, whose Hearts, the love of the Wrold, of Riches, Honors
and Preferments, has debauched and prevailed with to hearken to the Flesh,
when she pleads her secular contentments: no need of this zeal, this
accurateness, this pressing, this violence for Heaven; and upon presumptuous
and false prejudices, to account such strictness unnecessary, presuming on the
easiness of a future Reformation, not considering that the least sin does
desile the Soul, and that the smallest omission qualify for Hell; but can
delight in sinful and desperate fellowships, blessing themselves in their own
wickedness, and yet revile, and malign our Conventicles, (much better employed
than themselves,) being bewitched to door on present Contentments, to dispense
with much unjust Liberty, using lawful things unlawfully, to steal even from
God's own Day, to gratify their own corrupt humors and fleshly desires, Romans
8.5, 6, 7, and 13, 14. by promoting and countenancing a Book of Sports, but
discountenancing and prohibiting Sermons on Sundays in the Afternoon, and
Lectures on the Weekdays. Pulpit-preaching is the least part of a Ministers
work: Paul taught from house to house day and night with tears, Acts 20.20.
Most certainly St. Paul was more Heavenly minded, who accounted all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge (not notional only, but experimental
also,) of Christ Jesus our Lord; for whom he suffered the loss of all things,
and accounted them but dung, that he might win Christ, Phil 3.9. If these
sticklers against Conventicles did but live now as they will wish they had done
when they come to die, (a time speedily approaching,) they would be of another
mind, and would not be of the Bedlam opinion of the World, who like not such
zeal, such strictness, such violence for Heaven. Assembling together for
edification and comfort, is a Command from Heaven, and no human Law ought to
contradict it; nor has any Government more Power to forbid private than
public preaching of the Gospel. Human Laws and Ordinances, or Customs against
the Law of God, or Nature, are corruption, and derogate from the Authority of
the Almighty, and are ipso facto void and null.

Pope Paul the Fourth usually cursed Colloquies, Councils, Dyets, for that they
were always upon his Back. I lay no such charge to our Clergy, that do not
favor of fancy such Conventicles. But I vehemently suspect that they look upon
them as reproaches to themselves, as being the more diligent, and the more
laborious, and the more zealous in the word and Doctrine than themselves. These
differences would not be, if they would be governed according to the
Scriptures, (which ought to be the rule of Resolutions, without respect to
private Ends and worldly Interests.) and manifest vices corrected according to
the Wrod of God. For which Reasons I conceive it a Spiritual Tyranny to forbid
the Assembling of Brethren together for the glory of God, the increase of
Godliness, and of Brotherly Love among the Faithful: And therefore conclude,
that suppressing such Conventicles cannot proceed from the Wisdom which is from
above; which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full
of mercy and good sruits, without partiality, and without bypecrisie, James
3.17. but from that wisdom which is earthly, sensual, devilish. For why should
not that Liberty be granted to this Age, which other Ages have enjoyed with
Spiritual Fruit, even in the infancy and purest Ages of the Church, and when
all Nations were bitter and accursed Enemies to christ and his Gospel.
Certainly, to forbid the Faithful to assemble, to improve, and make use of
their proper Gifts and Graces in public or in private, to bring Souls to
Heaven, cannot proceed from any good intent: For the Holy Ghost is nto the
Clergy Petultar, but variety of Spiritual Gifts and Graces belongs so
essentially to the perfection of the Church, that it is the very glory thereof,
and of every individual. We are all so addicted to Sin, and so prone to
Impieties, that all the allurements and inticements to holy living, ought to be
encouraged, not discountenanced nor prohibited, lest the care of strict Piety,
and eact walking in the ways of Holiness be abandoned. And those Solemn
Assemblies are but to husband are precious moments of lie, (for one Hour
whereof, tormented Souls in Hell would give all the World (if they had the
disposal thereof) to be but in the same possibilities of Salvation to make
their Peace and Reconciliation with their provoked God.) to the advantage of
the Lord of the Harvest, that when he comes he may find them so doing.

It seems very strange to thinking Men, and to right Reason it self, to deprive
Men of their true Spiritual Liberty, and their just Right, and then persuade
them to be content, and speak evil of them, accounting them Seditious,
Schismatical, and Phanatical, if they do not acquiesce. And they are not only
against the liberty of Prophecy, but of the Press also. A shrewd sign that
they disguise the truth, and are afraid to be discovered, and that they do
distrust the Judgment of the World upon such their Actions. For it is a
derogation to Faith to dread the publishing of Truths.

All the World has ever complained of the Vices, Encroachments, and
Malegovernment of the Clergy, attributing the cause of all State Distempers to
be, that the Clergy did creep into, and busy themselves in the Courts of
Princes, and in the Affairs of the World, being Judges, Chancellors,
Secretaries, Treasurers; What not? there being but few Officers of State into
which some Ecclesiastics have not insinuated themselves and crept in, which is
to ridicule Religion, and shamefully to confound Spiritual and Temporal things
together; which is altogether Unapostolical. This I am sure is forbidden by St.
Paul, and the whole tenor of the Scripture, who thought it necessary, that a
Soldier of the Church should abstain from Secular employments, 2 Timothy 2.4. for
Christianity is a continual Warfare, they would take it very ill, if one should
say that Priesthood were not Jure Divino; and happily well they may: and I
doubt they will take it as ill, if we say, that because it is Jure Divino,
therefore no Priest, from the Presbyter to the Pope, ought to busy themselves,
or take any Secular Employment, that may any way impede their daily
Ministrations, distract or avert their Thoughts, or necessarily enforce their
absence. Vid. Canon. Apost. 7.80. And in the Ecclesiastical Laws there is a
whole Title, Ne Clerci vel Monachi secularibus negotiis innisceant.

Pope Clement the Seventh, to serve a turn, made all demonstration, that he had
laid aside all thoughts of Temporal things. I could wish our Priests would do
it in good earnest.

And St. Chrysostom has a long discourse complaining of Clergymen leaving the
care of Souls and become Proctors, Economists, etc. Preaching things
unbeseeming the Ministry: And it is not only against Precept Divine, but
against Moral and Natural right, as appears Luke 10.7. and Matthew. 10.10. 1 Timothy 5.18. It is the labourer, the workman, (not the lasie drone and loyterer,)
that is worthy of his hire, his meat, and his reward. It is they who minister
(not they who do not minister) about holy things, that have right to live of
the things of the Temple; and they that wait (not they that do not wait) at the
Altar, (not at the Court, or on secular Employments) that have right to be
partakers of the Altar; for the Lord has so ordained, that they which preach
(not they who preach not) the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 13,
14. For Priesthood was at first instituted not for Honors, nor for Dignities,
nor for Rewards, (as now used, and have been so used many hundreds of Years,)
but for Ministeries and Charges, called by St. Paul, Works; and those that
excrcise them, called by Christ, Workmen; tho Priestcraft has turned them
into Benefices. For Priests are most properly God's Workmen. And St. Paul's
practice was anserable to his Doctrine; and the charge is given, Romans 12.7, 8.
to wait on that office whereunto we are called, whether to prophecy, let us
prophecy; according to the proportion of faith, or ministry, let us wait on
our ministry; or be that teaches, on teaching, etc. Where there is a
Commandment, there lies a Bond upon the Conscience to do. To Preach the Gospel
there is a Duty ever binding a Minister, with a woe annexed if he Preach not.

Moreover, the work of Preaching is so much more excellent above all other Acts
of the Ministry, that for my part I cannot imagine what that great and
important business of the Ministry can be, to which it can become preaching to
submit, I am sure not Sacraments; (and if not Sacraments, I am sure nothing
more excellent.) Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1
Cor. 1.17. he might as well have said, not to domineer, not to do any thing in
this sense comparatively, as he desires to be understood. Besides, is there any
thing more honorable? Hear the same Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17. the Elders that rule
well are worthy of double honor. Call it Reverence or Maintenance, or both;
however, a specialty in it belongs to them that labor in the Word and
Doctrine. And it is most certain, that more sound honor is to be gained in the
Hearts of the People by Preaching, than by all outward helps whatsoever. What
say I? honor amongst Men? yea, more comfort to their Consciences, and glory in
God's Kingdom. Hear Solomon, Prove. 11.30. he that wins Souls is wise: and
Daniel 12.3. they that turn others to righteousness shall shine as the Stars in
the firmament: And Paul 1 Thessalonians. 2.19. What is our hope, our joy, our crown of
rejoicing? are ou not it in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming? What comfort like this? when a Minister comes before the Lord, the
great Shepherd of the Sheep, with the word of Isaiah applied to our Savior?
Lo, me and the Children thou have given me, Isai. 8.18. the Sons and Daughters
which by thy blessing I have begotten unto thee in the Gospel. One of the
Apostles, on whose Shoulders lay the care of all the Churches, yet denounces
woe to himself, if he preach not the Gospel. And Timothy has that charge laid
on him, with an heavy adjuration to preach the Word, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.

Besides, their very Priesthood obliges them to be Watchmen, and therefore to
watch continually on their Ministry; and if any of their Flock miscarry through
their unwatchfulness, their blood will be required at their hands; and they
cannot be ignorant that Satan, with millions of sins and stratagems, are ever
besieging, enticing, clamoring, haling, rebelling, intruding with Love, with
Strength, with Law, with Arguments, with Importunities, always importuning and
diverting their Flocks from the right way, and therefore they ought always to
stand Sentinel to forewarn and help.

Certainly if the Apostles were so Puritanical, so Phanatical, so Whiggish, and
so scrupulous of entertaining any Employment, though never so Pious, and
Charitable, that might any way in the least hinder the main end of their Duty;
viz. to preach the Gospel: I humbly conceive that our Bishops and Priests
(accounting themselves successors of the Apostles, and sent as they were sent,)
ought also to follow their Doctrine and Examples as well in this particular as
in any other. And since the Lords provision for Levites was so made, that they
might attend the Altar, and wait continually on the Sanctuary, without the
distraction and cumber of any civil Employments; I cannot see how plunging,
conflicting earthly Employments can consist with the duty and charge of a
Minister, and execution of his Commission, seeing to preach the Gospel being a
duty ever binding Ministers, with a Woe annxed if they preach not: Woe to the
idle shepherds if they preach not, Ezekiel. 34.2. as heavy, as to those that are
at ease in Sion. They cannot be ignorant that Christ has service much more
than enough (without Secular Employments) to take up all the Might, Strengths,
Studies, Abilities, Times, Callings of all his servants, (especially those of
the Ministry) whose peculiar Duty it is to teach others, and watch over them,
and must give an account of them, that they may be always worshipping,
communing of him, and conversant with him, and Enoch-like walk all the day long
with him, not minding their own things only, but the things of others also,
that as Instruments and fellow Members, by taking the hint of every fit
opportunity they shall be put upon by the way of Providence, and may be always
Exhorting, Reproving, Directing, Instructing, Restoring, Relieving and Helping
others, always Mourning, Rejoicing, Praying with their flocks, and serving them
in all ways of Love, always doing that which may bring in most Spiritual good
to themselves and their Flocks, most true comfort to their own Souls and their
Flocks, and most glory to their Maker and Redeemer, (which is the true end and
design of Conventicling) and which the absurd love and attendance of the World
is too prevalent to steal from us and to cheat us of, though things of most
precious spiritual and everlasting consequence. They cannot be ignorant, that
if the seed be sown among thorns, that the cares of this World, and the
deceitfulness of Riches, and the lusts of other things, (fears of
disappointment and miscarriage of earthly Ends and Interests) entering in, choke
the word, and it becomes unfruitful, Mark 4.18, 19.

Erasmus was wont to say of Luther, That he meddled with two precious but
dangerous concerns, when he touched the Popes Crowns and the Monks Bellies, who
are apt enough, even whilst their Meat is jet in their Mouths, whilst distenti
and crepantes to cry out, Heu quanta patimur? But if Socrates say true,
Monachus qui non laborat manibus similis est praedoni; Those Priests that feed
themselves, and do not feed the Flock, whether through Laziness, or multitude
of Secular Employments, are at best but Pillagers and Robbers, even Locusts
that eat up the best of the Fruit of the Church and Ecclesiastical preferments:
for which severe Character I have Ezekiel. 34. for my undoubted warrant.

Certainly it is no very wild conjecture of him who has printed, that nothing
offended Julian the Apostate so much, or was so great an occasion of his
Apostatizing, as were the Vices and vile Hypocrisy of the then Christian
Clergy; who, besides their coining of contrary Creeds in the Reigns of
Constantine and Constantius, and modelling Religion by Court Intrigues, which
seemed almost wholly to dispense even with Morality, placing Sanctimony not so
much in a Holy Life as in the shict observance of their Rituals, and the
Symbolical Representations of Christian Religion, such as Baptism, the
Eucharist, Chrism; but above all, in submitting to the formalities of
Confession, Penance, Indulgences, Absolutions, Holy Water, etc. upon which the
greatest Sins were so easily remitted. What Flesh could endure to hear the
Murderers of ones Father, Uncle, two Brothers, six Cousin Germans, harangue to
Heaven in Pulpits as Saints, because (forsooth) absolved by their own Friends
the Priests, who happily set them on work? The ground of this his conjecture is,
because Julian is not so Satirical on any occasion as upon this. In his
Caesar's, we find this flouting outcry; viz. (...). Ho! whoever is either
Sodomite, Murderer, Rogue, or Villain, let him dread nothing but repair hither,
with this Water I Will make him clean in a trice; and if he shall happen (as
human Nature is frail) to reiterate the same Crimes, if he will but thump his
Breast, and box his Noddle, I Will warrant him as innocent as the Child unborn.

Though this Julian (a Man of excellent Parts and Learning) became an accursed
Apostate, yet he was against those that discountenanced and persecuted Men of
honest Principles, and against those that paid devout Visits to the Bones of
dead Friars, calling them Holy Relics, and the like. This fully appears by
his Epistle to the Citizens of Bostra, wherein he complains of his Predecessor,
for Persecuting, Imprisoning and Banishing many of them; nay whole Corporations
of them they term Heretics, were put to the Sword, insomuch that at Samosata,
Cizicum, Paphlagonia, Bythinia, Galatia, and many other Countries, and whole
Towns were laid level with the Earth; whereas Julian himself practiced the
clean contrary, recalling the exiled home, and restoring such as were
proscribed, their own entire; and vehemently complaining of the Clergy acting
as Tyrants, not as Men, as above the control of Laws, and that upon one
another; and he laid the cause of all Tumults, Insurrections, and Tyranny, to
the seduction of those they call Clergy: and all because they are restrained
from their former excesses; and because they may not be Judges, nor make
Peoples Wills, and possess themselves of other Men's Patrimonies, and so get all
into their own Clutches; quo jure quave injuria: and therefore advised the
Laity, not to tumultuate with the Clergy, but to live in Peace one with
another: and commanded, that in no wise any Injury, Affront, or Abuse should be
offered to the Galilaean Laity, for that Men ought to be brought over by Reason
and Persuasion, and not by ill Usage, Blows, and Stripes. I wish all our most
Christian Kings had imitated him in this particular.

I know I am harping upon an unpleasing String, but it matters not, I am at a
point for that, it may crush Arts and designs of Wealth, Honor, Preferments,
and Plausibility; but God can recompense, maugre all black Mouths that may
either bark or bite. Magna est veritas and prevalebit. These are not my
sentiments alone, but they have been the complaints of many Generations, both
of Lay and Ecclesiastics. Witness Guicciardine, Sleydan, Thuanus, Padre Paolo,
and others. Even in the Council of Trent some were so honest as to make the
same complaints, and desire Reformation of them, averring, that all the evil
did arise from the large Donations of the Church, especially that of
Jurisdiction; a thing inconvenient, that they who ought to give themselves to
Prayer and Preaching, should exercise Power which is no ways essential to their
Calling, nor was ever received immediately from Christ, nor any Authority ever
given by Christ, but what was merely and purely Spiritual: but that packt
Conventicle was not so honest as to redress them.

Dr. Jeremy Tailor, Lord Bishop of Down and Cannaught, has written a very
learned Discourse, justifying the liberty of Prophesying, etc. and Naked Truth,
(supposed to have been written by another worthy Prelate,) makes the like
complaints, and laments them. Of all which more largely in Jus Caesaris and
Ecclesiae vere dictae.

As to the Reformation of them, Religion was certainly then most pure and
sincere when there ws not one Ceremony used, nor one Bishop nor Priest engaged
in Secular Employments. And no Reformation can be so good, so pure, as that
which does reduce things to their first innocent Beginnings and Institutions;
against which no Objection can reasonably be made. The Primitive Church did
continue very many Years in perfection, with increase of Saints, and
propagation of the Gospel, without the use of any ceremonies, or suppressing
any holy Assemblies, (Conventicles,) or Excommunicating, as now used, or any
Priest employed in Secular Affairs in Princes Courts, and the purity thereof
can by this means only be restored; they knew full well that the Kingdom of God
did not consist in Cringings, Ceremonies, Vestments, or Colors, but in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. and may be so
governed again, if the Clergy would give it countenance and encouragement, and
be as active in good earnest to divest themselves of all Temporal Dominion, and
be content to live the life and practice of the Apostles, (yet with plentiful
Revenues,) as they are to persecute their fellow Members in Christ for acting
as the Apostles taught and did.

Be wise now therefore, O ye Prelates, be instructed yet Priests of the most
High, do not offend little onesS that believe in their and your god, and that
assemble in secret to employ and improve precious time, and holy Talents; its
better a Millstone were banged about your necks, and you drowned in the depth of
the Sea, Mat. 18. than that you should be found guilty of such offense:
remember that he that touches such, touches the Apple of his Eye, Zach. 2.8.
If they are weak in Faith, yet receive them, but not to doubtful disputations,
Romans 14.12. and 15.1. for he that eats, and he that eats not, and he that
conformeth, and he that conformeth not, may both meet in Heaven and see the
Face of God with comfort. It is hard kicking against the pricks: if briars and
thorns will set themselves in battle against the Lord, he will go through them,
and burn them with unquenchable fire, Isai. 27.4.

To me it seems mavelous, nay monstrous, that Ministers of the Gospel should
preach pure Doctrine, Holiness, and Strictness of Life and Conversation, and
that most zealously, and yet at the same time, in the same Pulpit, revile and
speak evil of Ministers of the same Gospel, preaching the same Doctrines as
fervently as themselves, in private Assemblies or Conventicles, and out of
their Pulpits to rail, persecute, and trouble those that practice the same
Doctrines that they themselves teach them, differing from them only about
things indifferent. Does a fountain send forth sweet water and bitter? James
3.11, 12. Are these Pastors according to God's own Heart? Is this to feed us
with Knowledge and Understanding? Jer. 3.15. Is it not rather to be brutish in
Knowledge? Jer. 10.15. Falsest Priests! that teach one thing, and yet revile and
persecute them that practice it; to me it seems impossible, that there should
be sincerity in such Pulpits: is not this to prevaricate with God and Man, to
speak lies in hypocrisy? and by slight and cunning craftiness lie in wait to
deceive? Will you talk deceitfully for God? or as one man mocketh another, will
you so mock him? Job. 13.7, 9.

Though I thus argue, yet am of Opinion, that the Ceremonies of the Church of
England are so innocent, that they may be, and are used with very good
Conscience by some, and may be enjoined. But I know no Power under Heaven that
has lawful Authority rigorously to command submission to them upon Penalties
and Severities, that if any through either indiscreet Zeal, or truly
conscientious Scrupulosities cannot use them, they must not therefore preach
the Gospel either publicly or privately, or partake of Church Offices and
Benefices. O! they are things indifferent, and may be commanded: be it so. And
therefore they ought so to continue, and not be made necessary by any commands
of Men. Let them so continue, and Unity will necessarily ensue. Rites and
Ceremonies, though by nature indifferent, do then become bad, and of ill
consequence, when imposed under Penalties, and when they that do impose them
have an Opinion, that they are good or necessary. Preaching, and Praying, and
Assembling are of absolute necessity; use of Ceremonies not so. And the Holy
Ghost would have no greater burden imposed, than things necessary, Acts 15.28.
To press these things so severely, is with the Ministers of Jeroboam, to lay
snares in Mispah, and spread nets upon Tabor, Hos. 5.1. And to sham, and use
Laws, Menaces, and Subtleties, to keep the People from God's Temple and
Sanctuary, and to smother and dissemble the strictness and purity of God's Holy
Ways; but the righteous Lord will how the snares of the ungodly in pieces,
Psalm 129.4. Preaching of the Gospel, and Administration of the Sacraments, are
things commanded by God, and therefore ought not to be forbidden by Men, and
are so far exempt from human Laws, that the prohibition of them is of no force;
it being in such cases better to obey God than Man, Acts 5.22. and for that no
Man's right ought to be denied him either in things Civil, or Spiritual, for
fear they should abuse it, for tha then no Man's Right shall be preserved safe
and entire unto him. And for certain God has given no Power at all, either to
Princes or Prelates, but what is accompanied with Divine Wisdom and sincerity;
and therefore to forbid any to preach the Gospel, because they refuse to submit
and conform to commands of things indifferent, and no way Essential to the
saving of Souls, or to the Sincerity or Purity of the Gospel, is utterly
unlawful and sinful, and as arrant persecution as was that of the Jews toward
the Apostles, and no ways to be countenanced in a Christian State: but such
Abuse of Power is a plain demonstration that they hate them that rebuke in the
Gate, and abhor them that speak uprightly, Amos 5.10.

Besides, the matters in Difference between Conformist and Nonconformist are
confessed by both to be but about things indifferent, and therefore ought not
to be imposed necessarily, because their imposition cannot be justified
infallibly, and because indeterminate by plain Scripture, and therefore can
have no warrant from them. What are we then to conceive of those our
Ecclesiastics, who have been so far from promoting such a Reformation, that
they have always opposed it with strong opposition? Witness of late Days their
earnest and importunate solicitations of the Members of both Houses of
Parliament, to Repeal that Act of Parliament made 17 Car. disenabling all
Persons in Holy Orders to exercise any Temporal Jurisdiction or Authority;
which by good management they have effected by another Act made 13 Car. 2. by
which they are now re-instated on the old rotten Papal Foundation, and are at
such ease therein, that if any do but mutter or peep against it, they are
ready, with the two Men in the Gospel possessed with Devils coming out of the
Tombs, exceeding fierce, and to cry out, Why are you come to torment us before
the time? Matthew. 8.28, 29. Are not such Priests those that teach for hire, and
Prophets that divine for money, and pimp for domination? Mich. 3.11. and
Demas-like forsake the fellowship of Saints, and embrace this present World? So
that unless the Apostles return from Heaven, or that Christ himself come again
in Person and lasn them, (as he did the Buyers and Sellers) out of the Temple,
I see small hopes of Establishing the Government of the Church on a right
Basis: If they would be active in good earnest to divest themselves of all
Temporal Domination and Jurisdiction, and content to be reduced to the life and
practice of the Apostles, as they are to persecute their fellow Members for
Conventicling, we might be happy.

Yet I must do the right Reverend Author of Naked Truth that right, That if the
Ecclesiastics were all of his mind, and first seek the Kingdom of God, it
would easily be done: and I do with him humbly conceive, That the Bishops with
the rest of the Clergy are bound in Conscience to implore the Assistance of
both Houses of Parliament to Petition his Majesty for the Redress of the Abuses
by Pious Laws, settling the Church Government in the Primitive Purity, and
Authority; which most evidently was very great, and as greatly reverenced,
Bishops and Priests being the Persons to whom Christ and his Apostles committed
the Souls of Men bought with his most precious Blood.

Therefore I think they do such Clergymen (not Priesthood, not Episcopacy, not
true Church of England Men,) no wrong, who esteem them (as they manage their
matters) the very worst Interest that Protestant Kings and Kingdoms have, but
that of the Papists. These Animosities and Differences have been ever since the
beginning of the Reformation, between the Conforming and Nonconforming Clergy,
and (I may truly prophecy) ever will be, so long as Conscience shall be on the
Earth, and as long as Ministers will not be Servants but Lords over Gods
heritage, and will not condescend to let things made by God Almighty
indifferent, so to be and remain. the Reasons are pregnant, for that Conscience
will be Conscience while the World stands; and therefore there ever will be
Scrupulonties and Obligations upon Conscience, which are greater than all other
Obligations in the World: And therefore King James the First would say, (and
that truly) That the Puritans were never to be obliged, and for that Reason.
Whereas if things indifferent might so remain, and the Conventiclers permitted
to preach in public, (to take away all Fears, Jealousies, and Suspicion,) we
should be all at quiet, for then there would not be left so much as the
pretense of Religion to occasion Dislentions or Quarrels.

Besides, it is the time-serving Clergy only, the Drones, that vilifies and
abaseth, that caluminates and disturbs the Dissenters, and not the Dissenters
them. EXtremities used against them at their Instigation, Silencing,
Imprisoning, Excommunicating, making use of Laws against them, that in their
primary, 35 Eliz.
simple and sincere Institution were intended and enacted against Papists only,
and they not proceeded against so violently, according to those very Laws in
full force against them, as against the Non conformists, who have been Indicted
under the Notion of Popish Recusants, and Penalties levied upon them, and the
Papists either totally connived at, or remissly prosecuted; many Crimes,
through ungrounded prejudices, laid to their charge, (as disturbing of the
Government,) which they abhor and teach not, of which they are no otherways
guilty, than by that Logic, that the Fox his Earon his Head were Horns, mere
Surmizes, Calumnies, and Libels, and nothing proved, but that contrary to a
human Law, they (following the Command and Example of Christ and his Apostles)
meet and assemble together to keep a more intimate, near, and dear Communion
with their and our God, and with one another, and to make Peace and
Reconciliation with God, whilst they are yet in the way, yet in the possibility
of Salvation; whcih Law in it self is null and void, because it contradicts the
Law of God, which Commands all Men every where to call on the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and all Priests to teach all Nations, Baptizing, etc. and to preach in
every Church in season, out of season, etc. to reprove, exhort, rebuke, with
all long-suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy Is not this with the Priests of old,
and the Captain of the Temple, to be grieved at the heart that they teach the
People? and therefore laid hands on them, and put them in hold: and like Elymas
the sorcerer, being full of all subtlety and all mischief, children of the
Devil, enomies of all righteousness, never ceasing to pervert the right ways of
the Lord, Act. 4.2. and 13.10. But lying lips shall be put to silence: which
speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous, Psalm
31.18. It was St. Paul's Glory that Christ was preached any way, though through
strife or vain glory: and I fear it is the glory of the more violent and
haughty Tory Church of England Party, (as the road to Preferment,) to decry
Conventicling and Preaching contrary to such a Law, and to stop the Mouths of
them that would Preach; whereby they entitle themselves to the Character of the
Shepherds described and deciphered, Isai. 56.10, 11.

Consider, that in Preaching contrary to such a Law, they do no more than what
Christ and his Apostles did in their Days. The Rulers of the Jews, offended
with Peter 's Sermon, imprisoned him and John; and having strictly examined
them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in the Name of Jesus.
Did they therefore forbear Preaching? or were they obedient to such Commands of
the Rulers? I tell you nay; but answered and said unto them, Whether it be
right in the sight of God to bearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye; and
continued speaking the Wrod of God with great boldness, Acts 4. The like did
the rest of the Apostles, even from house to house; though accused of turning
the World up-side down, and of doing contrary to the decrees of Caesar, yet
preaching the Word of God boldly, Act. 17.26. Either the Author to the Hebrews
Preached false Doctrine, when he exhorts us to consider one another, to
provoke unto Love, and to good Works, not forsaking the assembling of our
selves together, as the manner of some is. And so did St. Paul when he wrote
his Chap. 14. to the Corinthians, wherein he advises all to desire Spiritual
gifts; but rather that they may prophecy, that they may speak unto men to
edification, and exhortation, and comfort, when the Church is come together in
one place; with particular Directions how all should behave themselves in such
Assemblies, that all may profit; with a general Rule, that all things be done
decently, and in order. Either, I say, these Apostles taught false Doctrines in
so Teaching; or else they that preach and prate against such Assembling, (as
the manner of some is,) are false teachers. I know no medium, take it as you
please.

Can it it be imagined that if St. Paul (who rejoiced that Christ was preached
in season, and out of season, though out of envy and strife; though not
sincerely, though but in pretense, and not in truth,) were living now, and
here, would condemn our Conventicles, or would not rather be in the midst of
them himself? I appeal to God and your own Consciences, if you your selves
ought not to continue steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in
breaking of Bread from House to House, and Prayers.

If Conventicles in our Days do endeavor to come as near as they can to
continue steadfast in the Doctrine and Fellowship of the Apostles, why should
they be interrupted? Were not Spiritual Men mad, doting upon mediocrities of
Grace, they would never burlesque the purity and simplicity of the Gospel, nor
the most strict ways of Piety, and by ungrounded prejudices mis-judge them, as
Shagreen to good Government. According to my Divinity, Preaching in season, out
of season, though not sincerely, though but in pretense, though not in truth,
(Crimes of which I hope our Conventicles are no ways guilty,) and to become all
things to all men, that by all means they may save some, is but to do the Will
of their Master: but more especially when their assembling and associating in
such Conventicles is only to redeem and improve precious time, by endeavoring
to make all moments of their life comfortable and beneficial to themselves and
others, sparing sufficient time to humble themselves, and to keep a constant
communion with their and our God.

Pope Pius the Fourth could say, That he would humble himself to Heresy, in
regard what ever was done to gain Souls to Christ, did become that See: And
shall Protestants, Clergy, and not Clergy, be like the Saduces, and be grieved
at heart that the People be taught the right ways of the Lord? Absit! I hope
the Church of England (though there have been and still are scab'd Sheep among
them) is not yet so corrupted as to have that laid to her charge which Christ
told the Scribes and Pharisees, That in vain they worshipped God, teaching for
Doctrines Men's Commandments: and of which St. Austin complained in the Church
wherein he lived, which was so corrupted, that the Commandments of God are laid
aside, teaching for Doctrines Men's Commandments; and those exacted with such
Severity, nay with Tyranny, that they were more severely censured who
transgressed them, than those who transgressed the Laws of God: It is certainly
so in Rome; I will I could say it had never been so in England.

It is absurd to cry, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, boasting
of the Privileges that the Gospel does afford us, and at the same time to
prevaricate with God and the Redeemed of his own Blood, to give them stones
instead of bread, and serpents instead of fish, by such their destructive
Doctrines, and punish more for Nonconforming than for not Preaching; and as by
Excommunication to deny and abridge the excommunicate the participation of
Sermons, Sacraments, Sabbaths, etc. all outward means of Grace and Repentance.
Did St. Paul and the Corinthians forbid him whom they had delivered to Satan to
come to their Assemblies, or partake of the Sacraments? Did Christ ever forbid
Publicans and Sinners to come unto him? Did he not eat the Passover with Judas
the greatest of Sinners? When the Pharisees objected his eating and drinking
with Sinners as a crime, did not he tell him, That they that are whole need not
a Physician, but they that are sick? Matthew. 9.11, 12. Did he not converse daily
with them? Did he not cast out unclean Spirits, nay Devils out of them? And yet
our excommunicates (though but for Niff-Naffs) must not approach the Temple of
the Lord, nor assemble in the Holy Congregations: This has been the practice
of some Centuries of Years both of the Popish and Protestant Churches, when in
truth there is no such thing in Holy Writ, as it has been and still is used in
both Churches: And that Excommunication that is mentioned in Scripture (if any
at all) is in the body of the Church, and not in the Officers thereof; and
which the Laity have as much Authority to exercise against the Clergy, as the
Clergy against the Laity; it cannot be denied. Is it recorded in any Scripture,
Old or New, that the Church doors were to be shut against the vilest Sinners,
or Sacraments, or Communion denied unto them? and yet the use of
Excommunication has been and still is such in both Churches.

I should account it a mavelous happiness if any thing that I have written
might so far prevail with our Clergy, as seriously to take into their
consideration their interessing and intermedling with Civil Affairs and
Employments, and also Excommunication, (which bring so much odium and contempt
upon them,) and lay to Heart how many hundreds of Years the Church has been
imposed upon and abused by them. The abuse of which, by the Roman Pontiffs,
has been abominable, even against Emperors, Kings, Princes, and States, that
all Histories swell therewith, and stinks in the Nostrils of God and Man. But
not so much abused by any Protestant Churches. By Excommunication, as now used,
they have done as much as in them lay to frustrate the whole design of the
Gospel, by debaring the Excommunicates the use and enjoyment of the outward
means of Grace and Repentance. What strange kind of Sacrilege is this? that
when Christ has appointed Sabbaths, Sermons, Sacraments, etc. for the
conversion of Sinners to him, and for establishing and confirming them when
converted, our Priests out of Self Ends and Interests preach up another
Doctrine; viz. Excommunication, which debars the benefit of them all; and so by
a new Gospel of their own, do, as much as in them lies, send People to the
Devil, instead of allowing them the means of Salvation? How contrary, how
unlike were the Gospel-censures of old to this now in vogue? they were for
Edification, not for Destruction, as this knack or spell of Excommunication is.

Besides the Spiritual prejudices to the Salvation of Souls by Priests-craft,
it is extended also unto Temporals, as that the Excommunicate cannot sue at Law
for any Debts, Land, or for redress of injuries done unto him, nor at his Death
dispose of his Goods or Estate. If this be Gospel, I understand not
Gospel Truths.

It Is a shame that Religion should be thus made use of, and used so dirtily as
to make it serve turns, and Godliness to wait upon Gain, Pride, and Domination
of Priests.

It would be a mavelous happiness to these Nations, if the Church of England
Men would yet be so wise and considerate in these evil and confounding times,
as to fettle among themselves the distracting Doubts of taking our New Oaths,
of Passive Obedience, of Non-resistance, of Allegiance, of Praying for our
KING: For whilst they are of such different Opinions among themselves, what
would they have us sid Mortals the Laics to do? A separation, if not worse,
must ensue, and that of the highest nature, and of most dismal consequence,
infinitely beyond that of the Non-Cons, and which undeniably tends to the
Persecution, do I say, nay even to the Destruction of the Protestant Religion
throughout Europe, which now lies at stake gasping and a bleeding in this
critical juncture of Affairs; and which is wonderful in the Eyes of most
considerate Men, that all the Papists of Europe are at Defiance with our mighty
Neighbor, but those of our own Nations; which argues them to have but Irish
Understandings, and perhaps Religion also: And if he should prevail, Acium est
de Religione Protestantium; and must be Slaves to boot.

I shall now draw toward a conclusion: first intimating an Axiom of that
great Divine Dr. Thomas Jackson, viz. such are the Reciprocal Embracements and
Interweavings of Truth and Goodness, that we cannot rightly judge any thing for
Good which is not True; nor deny any known Truth to be in its own nature Good:
yet it often comes to pass, that our desires are so eager and passionate on
several Objects, (as Riches, Honors, Impery, etc.) that they get the start of
Deliberation, and our Minds and Inclinations so forcibly prepossessed thereof,
that they cannot be dissuaded from a mistaken Good, and that it is a true and
real Evil, and only a seeming Good. And desires to have it abetted and
countenanced with the Authority of Truth, are unlawful, and indeed
prevaricating with God. And whilst our Trains, our counter-lustings, and
opposite inclinations stand in equal Balance, there can be no settled
Resolution, or actual Choice. And the Affections after such debatements will
hardly sway the Soul, unless the Understanding do wave and decline the Point
whereat it stood, and either yield to the suggestions and illusions of our
fleshly Reasons for the time being as True and Good, or at least not expressly
condemn them for False, nor with Christian Courage stoutly withstand them.

Truths or Precepts Divine, considered in general, or without incumberances
annexed to their practice, many there be, which affect more vehemently than
their more honestly and more humbly minded Brethren, who more willingly
subscribe to the narrow Rules of the Apostles, and so walk more exactly and
more blameless in all God's Commandments. But a servent and precipitato
imbracement arising not from a clear intellectual apprehension of the abstract
Truth, or zealous Sense of their Goodness, but rather from general innate
temper of desiring eagerly and fiercely, whatsoever they desire at all becomes
the Mint or Forge of metamorphosing and misrepresenting God's revealed Will in
his Word, whilst they descend to actual choice of particulars preferred in
their course of life.

That Christ's Advice is to be followed before any contrary Counsel, is not to
be denied by any Christian: yet such is the corruption of our nature, that
almost every Man in matters of practice prejudicial to their private earthly
Interests, will traverse the meaning, whether of his clearest Maxims, or most
peremptory Mandates, and supersede them. Christ his reply to Martha,
complaining of her Sister for not helping her to etertain him, Martha, Martha,
thou art careful, and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful, and
Mary has chosen the better part, which shall not be taken away from her, Luke
10.41, 42. includes and warrants a Maxim of most Holy use; viz. [That a life
privileged and vacant from Secular Employments, for better Meditation and
Solacing their Souls on Heaven and Heavenly things, is the most compendious and
comfortable Course to that endless Life, which every good Christian proposes
as the sole end of this wearisome Pilgrimage, that at the end of his Days he
may obtain the end of his Hopes, and be brought to the presence of God; where
is fullness of joy; and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore.]
Were their Hearts true and constant to God, to the true Interest of their
Souls, it were impossible but that their inclinations and assent should be
swaied to the subordinate practices. But as the Heart is deceitful above all
things, so it will quickly find Justifications, or Apologies, Tricks, or Shams,
for the most sinister choices: the proud and haughty Spirit thus fobs and
shames his own judgment; viz. practical Employments for Preserments, (my
opportunities and qualifications considered) are the best course I can take
either for my own or others good: wherefore our Savior's Advice to Martha,
rightly limited and interpreted, is no way contrary to my choice.

And if he can light of other Sacred Passages which mention the advancements of
God's Saints to Civil Dignities, (as Daniel's wearing a Purple Robe,) and
furtherance of the Churches Cause by his High Place in the Court, these he
takes as sealed Warrants to Authorize his ambitious Desires or self-exalting
Projects; and so in a trimming way, walking between God and Baal, making the
Souls of Men, and the Glory of God, subordinate to their ambitious Projections;
who, Balaam like, for the hope of Honor and Preferment, rise early, sit up
late, run and ride, and become more senseless of God's displeasure than was his
dumb Ass. How many have we known pulpit Damnation against Pluralities of
Benefices, and afterward having tasted the sweet of one, have been content to
swallow more, preach against three Parsonages as the most ready way to get two?
How many have owned N^^ Episcopari, and yet accept thereof? For Prelates and
Priests to entangle and engage themselves in Civil Concerns is unapostolical,
and to incumber themselves with Pluralities, with two contra-distinct Offices,
and to be accounted as those that having put their hands to the plough and yet
look back, are not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 9.62. And according to
St. Paul, 2 Timothy 2.34. no man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs
of this life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier; and a
Christian-life is a continual Warfare.

Is it not a sad and lamentable condition when the violence of our Passions
shall endeavor by wrestings of places of Scripture, and by false Reasonings,
to bring the strait and inflexible Rule of Truth to bend to their Bow, the
better to serve their base ends of Pride, Pelf, and Ambition? For without some
show of agreement with God's Word, no Dogmatical Assertion can be maintained as
true by any Christian.

But I have done, leaving them only to consider, That the manifest and
notorious abuse of Power, (be it Civil or Ecclesiastical) discharges the
Faithful from the sin of Contempt and Disobedience: the very word [Abuse]
undeniably insers as much in its own plain and proper signification. And though
this be an undeniable Truth, yet the subtle Ecclesiastics will coin
Distinctions and false Reasonings to enervate or evade the force thereof. So
Bellarmine against Gerson in the point of Excommunication grants the
consideration to be true hypothetically only; viz. if it be meant of the Abuse
of the Keys in points Essential; as if the Prelate should exceed his
Commission: in which case he agrees with St. Peter, Obiendum est magis Deo quam
heminibus, Acts 5. What is this but to dally and to play fast and loose with
Scripture, by creating subtilties and distinctions where there needs none, (it
being always to be understood of unjust Powers and Commands,) and to fight
against Shadows, to wrangle with their own Conjectures? Consider also that when
a Prelate (so a Magigistrate in his Sphere) abuses the Power of the Keys, he
does more disparage and injure the Keys, and offends God more grievously, than
does any Man subject to his Jurisdiction, when he obeys not his Prelate.

And hence it follows, that in suchlike cases it is best to resist the Prelate
to his Face, as St. Paul did Peter. The Reason is demonstrable, for that a
human Praecept, subject to Errors, ought not to come in Competition, nor be
laid in the Balance with an express Precept from God. Besides, it is a greater
sin to abuse Power than to disobey, for that one abuse of Power and Authority
gives a greater scandal to the World, and is a cause of greater mischief than
many disobediences: and the Person of the Superior, as more eminent, is much
more bound by his greater Obligation to God to do his Duty. St. Paul'sgrave
Rebuke to St. Peter, instructs Inferiors how they ought to behave themselves
toward their Superiors, and no scandal can arise from such behavior, but what
is taken, not given. Therefore Cajetan, in his Tract, De Authoritate Papae and
Concilii, affirms, That he ought to resist the Pope to his face, when he
abuses his Authority; and says, Abusui potestatis, qui destruit, obviam eant
congruis remediis, non obediendo in malis, non adulando, non tacendo, sed
arguendo, Advocando illustres ad increpandaum exemplo Pauli, etc. The
conclusion is certain, That as they that obey not their Superiors, commanding
according to his Precepts that gave them their Authority, are to be condemned,
so the Superiors that abuse the same Authority.

Notwithstanding such convincing Reasons, yet it is wonderful to consider with
what confidence the mighty Potentates of the Earth, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, do assume and appropriate to themselves Authority to lay that blame on
others, which, indeed, and in truth, does belong to, and proceed from
themselves;and from their own haughty and false Opinions, of I know not what
Divine Authority, to be appropriate to themselves, that when they command what
they have no Authority to do, or command unlawful things, if disobeyed, yet
have the impudent confidence to lay the fault on the disobedient, and account
and persecute them as Factious, Schismatical, Rebellious, what not? Whereas it
is manifest to the whole World, and Histories swell with examples of
Commotions, Tumults, Rebellions, (as they are pleased to call them,) that have
their primary Origin and Spring from the abuse of Power in the Governors.

Look but a little back to the very beginning of the Separation that fell out
some hundred Years since in Germany, which took not its Original from any
disobedience of the Subjects, but out of an abuse of Power, and greatness in
the Prelates, backed and countenanced by the Civil Power. It is very well known
that it grew out of indiscreet and exorbitant Extortions, and extravigant
Fashions of granting Indulgences, etc.

Whence began those great Differences betwixt Pope Paul the Fifth and the State
of Venice, but from the Abuse of Power, Pride, Insolence, and Avarice of the
Papacy, and so adjudged by the Papists themselves? Most strange! that the Pope
should claim Authority to innovate and change the course of Judicature, and
Laws of another Nation, that had been used and established more than Twelve
hundred Years past, and the Laws that had their Original Three hundred years
before; wherein if he had prevailed, what would the end have been? even to have
stripped all the Laity of their Laws, Liberties, Honor, and their Goods, as
they have done already of their true Religion. And in fine, some few, who (have
nothing else but the bare name of Churchmen) might, without fear of Justice,
or control, offend other Men both in their Lives, Honor, and Estate.

As in the Ecclesiastical, so in the Civil Government, run to and fro, far and
near, through the Christian World, conslt all Histories, consider with your
exactest Minds, and Judgments, and you will certainly find all the Seditions,
Confusions, and those called Rebellions, have most especially been occasioned
and proceeded from the abuse of Power; and that the best and truest Historians
assert the same.

What made the United Provinces (quiet under the easy Government of Queen Mary
their Governess) to shake off the Spanish Yoke, but the abuse of Power by the
Duke of Alva, raging against them with great insolence, violently oppressing
them by illegal Taxations? etc.

What made Hungary revolt against the Emperor, but his abuse of Power,
abridging their Liberties, and not keep Covenants and Agreements most solemnly
made with them?

What made the Subjects of the Duke of Savoy, about the Year 1559, to take up
Arms in their own Defense against him, but his abuse of Power, forbidding them
(by the instigation of the Pope) upon pain of Death to exercise their Religion?
How faithfully the many Solemn Treaties, and Conditions, and Edicts of Peace,
for the Liberties and Religion of the Hugonots have been kept, is so notorious,
that it is enough only to name them. v. Mars Gallicus.

I have now done, most heartily wishing that Divines would not be so saucy with
the Word of God, as to put corrupt and false glosses upon plain places of
Scripture; since to fall into open Errors, repugnant to the Scriptures, is a
crime so great, that whosoever falls into it, has few sparks either of
Godliness or true Knowledge. For to err manifestly against plain places of
Scripture, is the greatest blindness that can happen to Christians, and the
greatest chastisement that God can impose in punishment of him, whosoever shall
make use of Divine Authority to serve his own turn in sinister ends, for
sublunary and worldly Interests.

I shall conclude with Judicious Hooker; viz. That impossible it is, that any
should have complete lawful Power over-Commonwealths, but by consent of Men, or
immediate appointment of God; because not having the natural Superiority of
Fathers, their Power must either be usurped, and then unlawful; or, if lawful,
then either granted, or consented unto, by them over whom they exercise the
same; or else given extraordinarily from God, unto whom all the World is
subject.

That naturalDefence requires no Jurisdiction at all, and does not appertain to
Magistrates only, but to private Man also, and that it is impossible that
lawful Defense can be the Sin of Rebellion.

And therefore to conclude, That they are to be condemned that obey not their
lawful Superiors, commanding lawful things lawfully; and those Superiors to be
condemned that abuse the Laws, Powers, Privileges, and Prerogatives of those
who gave them such Authorities.

Opus exegi, and Liberavi animam meam.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 22. for Paetus Thrasea, read Thraseas Paetus. l. 35. r. abire. p.
4. l. 2. been ( as of old, so. p. 5. l. 43. r. for the raising of. p. 8. l. 32.
dele to be. l. 37. r. denied. l. 44. r. fraudulenter se occultat. p. 9. l. 30.
is absol. l. 55. r. commonly were refared. ult. dele were. p. 14. l. 8. r.
proceeding, for has proceeded. p. 15. l. 5. r. abused. l. 24. r. accused, for
abused. l. 37. dele now. p. 16. l. 2. r. metamorphosed. l. 53. r. villains.
antep. r. think it should. p. 17. l. 37. r. Talionis. l. 43. dele and. p. 22.
l. 1. r. during for ever. l. 8. r. or so much as of. p. 23. l. 14. r.
Panagyrist. p. 25. l. 21. dele Pauntheses. l. 41. r. that rich City, Marcion.
p. 27. l. 1. dele the first And. p. 28. l. 32. r. it for them. p. 31. l. 4.
dele 32. p. 32. l. 39. dele 32. p. 35. l. 60. r. Clergies.


