THE CASE OF John Coombes, Valentine Houseman, and Edward Pearce.
THE Duke of Buckingham having settled his Estate on Doctor Thomas Spratt; now
Lord Bishop of Rochester, Sir Robert Clayton, and John Wildman Esquire. In
Trust for payment of 5000 l. per Annum to the Duke himself, and for payment of
his Debts in a Schedule to the Deeds of trust annexed, and such other Debts as
the Duke should appoint; And the surplus for the said Duke. And the said Duke
being minded to build a House at Clifden, and that the Workmen should be paid
out of his said Trusted Estate, by a Deed poll, dated the 24th of August 1676.
declared and appointed, That the Trustees out of Money to be raised out of the
said Trusted Estate, by Sale or otherwise, should be saved harmless, and
reimburse themselves such Moneys as they should pay or be engaged to pay for
the said Duke, though the same should cross the former Trusts, or upon what
Account soever it should be. And the said Duke by the said John Wildman, his
Trustee and Agent, proposed to the said Workmen, That if they would do the
Plaisterers, Joyners and Carvers Works in the said Building, they should be
paid out of the said Trusted Estate. And accordingly the 17th of March 1676.
the said Duke in the said Work-mens presence wrote and signed a Paper Writing,
directed to the said John Wildman one of his Trustees, whereby he appointed him
to pay the said Workmen, which was done to the intent that the said John
Wildman should be authorized to pay the said Workmen out of the said Trusted
Estate. And the said Duke declared, That his whole Trusted Estate should be
liable to make Satisfaction for what the said Mr. Wildman should pay, or be
engaged to pay to the said Workmen. Without which the said Workmen would not
have done the said Works. And the said Duke appointed Surveyors to survey and
value the said Works, and appointed the said John Wildman to pay such Bills as
should be Signed by his said Surveyors. And the said John Wildman in Pursuance
of the said Duke's said Declaration and Appointment, employed the said Workmen
to do the said Works, and promised to pay them for the same. And the several
Works done by the said Workmen, were viewed, surveyed and approved, and the
Prizes thereof ascertained by the said Duke's Surveyors, who signed the said
Workmens Bills, and the same were from time to time entered in a Book, kept by
the said John Wildman, by the said Duke's direction for that purpose, and the
Book signed by the said Duke's Surveyors, to the intent, That the said John
Wildman might with more safety and certainty pay the said Moneys. And the said
Duke's Agents, in pursuance of the said Duke's said Declaration and Order, met
the said Workmen at the said John Wildman's House in his presence, and proposed
and promised to the said Workmen several Manors and Lands to be sold for
payment of the Moneys due to the said Workmen, or to be conveyed to them for
their satisfaction. And the said Workmen not being able to obtain their Moneys,
and being much straightned for want thereof, exhibited their Bill in Chancery
against the said Duke and his Trustees, to recover their Moneys out of the said
Trusted Estate. And at the hearing of the Cause in Chancery, the several
Matters aforesaid appearing to the Court by the Proofs in the Cause, the Court
of Chancery was fully satisfied, That by the Matters aforesaid, the said
Trusted Estate was liable in Equity to the payment of the Moneys due to the
said Workmen, and Decreed, That the said Trustees out of the said Trusted
Estate, should pay the same, and the Interest thereof, from the time of the
filing the Bill in Chancery, and should sell part of the said Trusted Estate
for that purpose; There being due to -- Coombes 969 l. -- 16 s. -- 8 d. for
Plaisterers Work, and to --. Houseman 1534 l. -- 12 s. -- 3 d. for Joyners
Work, and to -- Pearce 587 l. -- 5 s. -- 9 d. for Carvers Work.

The said Duke has appealed from the said Decree to the Lords in Parliament to
have the said Decree reversed, and thereby to obstruct the said Workmen in
receiving their said Moneys, which have been due to them above six Years.


