THE CASE Of Several of His Majesty's Subjects in Ireland, Commonly called
Protectees, Most humbly Offered to the Consideration of BOTH Houses of
Parliament.
I Have, for several Sessions late past, observed, That when the Parliament had
taken into Consideration the Affairs of Ireland; there have been great Numbers
of Petitions given in, by the Roman Catholics of that Kingdom, setting forth
their respective Cases in Reference to the Matter then under Debate: And I have
as often wondered to find no Application made on the behalf of those of that
Kingdom commonly called Protectees, I have had the Opportunity to hear much of
the Various Complaints of their several Classes there; and upon the whole it
appeared to me, that those called Protectees, as well, in Relation to their
Behavior during the War, as to the Extent and Method of their Suffering since
then; have had much the severest Treatment of any concerned in that Kingdom.

Having this Notion of the Measure, these poor People have met with; and being
of Judgment, that it is the Duty of the meanest Member of a Society, as far as
he may with due Deference toward the public, and a convenient Regard to
Himself, to remove, in Ease of his Neighbor, the Oppressors Hand; I had long
since adventured thus to have laid their Case before this most Honorable
Assembly, but that I was still in hopes some One more fully possessed of the
Matter, and more qualified for the Undertaking, would, before now, have taken
this Office upon Him.

These Considerations had still witheld me, but that now, that the Parliament
Commissioners are upon the Point of making a general Report of all the Irish
Forfeitures; it seems more than probable, that this may lead to an immediate
and final Settlement of that Kingdom; and that once done, a Reprieve after
Execution is over, may be as useful as any Remonstrance on the Behalf of these
People.

Having thus set forth the Reason, or rather the Necessity that has induced me
so far to forget my own Insufficiency, as to become an Advocate before so Great
an Assembly, I crave leave, as an Apology for Addressing this Case to both
Houses of Parliament, to observe, That the Justice of a Nation is often
Arraigned, as well for Wrongs done through want of Information, as for those
done, or suffered through Passion, Interest or Prejudice; and that therefore as
Amicus Curiae, as a true Honourer of this Supreme Court, and as One who wishes,
as is ever Intended, all its Determinations founded in the strickest Justice; I
thought it my Duty at this Juncture to lay this Case before both Houses.

I shall now proceed to a General, and plain Account of the Condition and
Behavior of these Persons during the War; and of the Prosecutions, and
Seizures since then against them.

They consist partly of such as were meet Country Gentlemen; some, living upon
their own Estates; some, upon their Farms, or other Ways of Industry; some of
them, being Professors of the Law, were, during the Reign of King James in
England, advanced to the Bench, and the rest of that Profession practiced in
the Courts there, and continued in their said Stations and Practice, during
King James his Abode in Ireland: Some likewise, whilst King James was in
England, were made Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, Collectors and
other Officers of Revenue; and continued in the said Posts and Stations, or
other the like Civil Employments whilst King James was in Ireland; some of
them, being chosen by their Country, did, in hopes of being able, in some
Measure, to quell, or mitigate the Heats, and Violences of others, as evidently
appeared by their Behavior when there, serve in the Parliament held there; and
all, and every of them, excepting about four or five, are such as were in no
Millitary Station or Service, or ever struck stroke in the Cause.

These persons thus Qualified, as to their Behavior, and taking Encouragment
from his Majesty's several Gracious Declarations, and Proclamations, graciously
tendering his Royal Clemency and Protection to such, as should be the more
early in their Obedience, Resolved not to embark themselves in the Cause; and
as a clear Evidence of these their Intentions, thy continued in their
Respective Places of Residence, or as near it, as they could contrive to be in
any security with their Families, till such time as his Majesty's Troops
approached so near as to be in a condition to preserve them. And so, in the
course of his Majesty's March, they sued for his Royal Protection; and, having
obtained the same, continued, during the two Sieges of Lymerick, and ever
since, in the most dutiful Behavior and Obedience toward his Majesty's
Government; and such of them as lived within the Reach and Power of such
Carrisons as held out, and consequently could not be so early in their
Obedience, did in like manner, upon the first approach of his Majesty's Troops
into that Country, sue for Protection; and ever since lived Peaceably and
Dutyfully under his Majesty's Government.

This, upon the best Information I could have, and as I am persuaded, will upon
a fair Enquiry appear, is a true general Account of the Behavior of those
called Protectees in that Kingdom.

Their Condition standing thus, they found themselves secure and happy under
his Majesty's Royal Protection, whilst he continued in Person there; but upon
his Majesty's Return into England, the Scene was soon shifted, and their Days
of Trial came on a pace; for as soon as the Forms of Judicature were restored,
a manner of proceeding altogether New, Quick, and Comprehensive was set on
foot; Lists were brought in from every Parish of all the Catholics, without
any Distinction who had resided there, during K. James, his stay in that
Country. Indictments of High Treason of course, and by the lump, exhibited
against them; and of course, as in many Cases may appear, found too.

This furious Inquisition having thus far gone on, without Rub, or Obstacle;
the like Spirit of Diligence and Dispatch appeared in what was to follow. Writs
were issued out to the Sheriffs, and care taken, that one, and the same Return
should be made throughout the Kingdom; for although all these Persons, who had thus
taken Sanctuary under the Wings of the Government, were then notoriously known
to be, and daily seen, at their respective usual places of Residence, except a
few who, to prevent any further Jealousy of their Behavior, had obtained the
Lords Justice's Passes to come for England; having first given two or three
thousand Pounds sufficient Bail to be forth coming, when required; yet Non est
inventus in Balliva, etc. was the certain Return upon every Writ: And this even
in Cases where the persons under Prosecution were then actually upon some Civil
Process, or other Cause in custody of the Sheriff, who made the Return.

This was an expedient Thought necessary to dispatch the Process, and the
sooner to bring these Persons to the Condition of being altogether at mercy;
and consequently, it came soon to this Issue: For in a very few Months, after
they had been thus taken into his Majesty's Royal Protection, they were all, in
this manner, to the number of some thousands, attainted of High Treason; their
Estates, whether Leasehold, or Freehold, seized; and all this at a time, when
they had late abided the utmost Ravage of a licencious Soldiery; and had
nothing, that stood above ground, left them.

In this distressed Condition, without House or Home, have they ever since
struggled with their Wants; and such of them only happy, as are gone to their
long Rest with their Fathers: Nor can they, or their Posterity ever Intertain
any hope of Relief, if their Expectations, upon this Juncture, from so Gracious
a King, and so Wise, and so Just a Parliament, shall be entirely disappointed.

It may be a necessary mark of that Duty owing to the King here to observe, who
are they, who promoted and set on foot these extraordinary Ways of Violence;
for it is as evident, that the King did not give order for such proceedings, as
it is, that they were not carried on for his Honor or Service. It will
perhaps, upon a full Enquiry appear, there were several Setts and Forms of Men
principally concerned in the upholding these Prosecutions; Some animated by
passion and prejudice of long standing, grounded on some struggle about
Interest, and difference in matter of Religion: Some sick of their Condition at
home, and desirous from an English broken Fortune, to become Wealthy Rulers,
and Lords in Ireland; some who hoped to have for asking, and others, who
designed to buy of them for next to nothing: Some pushed on by a Resentment of
late Injuries; and all in fine united to pursue the Chase, and to divide the
Spoil amongst 'em. And as a clear Evidence, that no part of this Reproach is
levelled at his Majesty's Person: It is further to be observed, that some sew
of these thus attainted Gentlemen, who had the Means left of laying their Case
before his Majesty, were rescued from the common Plunder, and admitted to
reverse their Outlawrys: And, without all peradventure, his Royal Clemency had
extended to as many more as were equally Innocent, if He had been in like
manner apprized of their Case and Condition; and how far they are answerable to
the King, and to this great Tribunal, whose province it was to lay the
Condition of his People in a full light before Him; and who, on the contrary,
have employed their Interest and Authority to block up all the Avenues to his
Grace and Favor; and have made use of his Name, and the Trust sometimes
reposed in them to carry on their Oppression and Avarice, is not for me to
Judge.

It now occurs to me, that I have often heard some well Meaning, and Worthy
Gentlemen Object, why such as were only in the civil Magistracy, etc. which,
considering the force that was upon them, could not be avoided; and
consequently could be no Crime, why such, when they found themselves indicted,
did not appear and take their Trial? To which may be Answered:

In the First place, that some of them (as before hinted) were come for
England; and being under very high Bail, to appear when called for, and having
a Pass from the Government, upon such Bail given, to go into England, were in
no Apprehension of being charged with such Capital Crime without some previous
and public Notice given; and these were outlawed some Years before they had
heard of any Prosecution against them, and an Act of Parliament passed there in
Confirmation of all Outlawrys, whereby his Majesty was deprived of the Power of
giving Order for Reversal of such Outlawrys.

Secondly, it was so contrived, that very few of those, who continued in
Ireland, could (probably speaking) have any Notice of their being prosecuted,
till they were actually outlawed; for that the Indictment and Process was, for
the most part, set on foot; and carried on, in some Country remote from the
place of Residence of the Person prosecuted; and they being then, by Order of
the Government, under pain of Imprisonment, and other Penalties required not to
stir above Five Miles from Home, they were deprived of the Opportunity of
discovering such Proceedings, till 'twas too late to prevent them.

Lastly, as to such of them, as had Notice of an Indictment of High Treason
exhibited against them; it is to be considered, how little Reason they had so
far to rely upon their Innocence or early Return to their Duty, as to put their
Lives in Predicament, when they found they were to be tried by Persons newly
exasperated against them; when they daily saw, contrary to all Law and
Practice, Indictments of High Treason exhibited and found against persons, who
had long layn in their peaceable Graves, and were past the making any Defense
in this World; when every day furnished Instances of the like Bills for High
Treason committed in Ireland, during the War, found against mere Children,
against persons who had not been there in some Time before, or since the War;
and even against some who had never been in that Kingdom; besides Indictments,
beyond Number, found for Treason committed upon the 13th of February, 1688.
being the very Day of their Majestle's Accession to the Crown; and of which, it
was altogether impossible to have had Notice in Ireland, in some Days after
these Treasons are laid. These, and a great Variety of the like Effects of the
Resolution then, by some, taken to root out that unfortunate Remnant were
sufficient, perhaps, to deter a wiser, and more hardy People from putting their
Lives in Hazard.

It may here appear proper enough, to say somewhat of such Acts and Complyances
as, in former Civil Wars, have been deemed not Treasonable; but I would not
seem too apt to plunge out of my Depth, and therefore must not undertake a
Topic I know so little of: I am withal not to forget, that I have taken the
Liberty to address this Treatise to an Assembly consisting of the Greatest and
Wisest Men; and that, if I can say enough to put them on Discussion of the
matter, it will be much more prevalent than any thing I can urge to support it:
I shall therefore, as to this, think it sufficient to observe, That in all our
Civil Wars, the Wisdom of our Great Council has been such, as not to have
inhanc'd these small and (if I may so say) natural Acts of Compliance into
Treason. There has ever been much allowed to humane Nature, and the Principle
of Self-preservation; when Men, and their Families are fallen under a Force not
to be resisted. The Civil Magistracy is an Institution merely for the Welfare
and Support of Society, to be a Barryer between the Weak and the Strong; and at
all Times, as much as may be, to preserve Peace and Order; and, in the Times of
Trouble and Tumult, has been found as useful toward these Ends, or rather more
than in the Times of Peace, and rightful Administration; and therefore in all
Ages the Magistrate, and civil Officer of what kind soever have been indulged:
And thus it has fared with some in Ireland, even at the time now Treated of;
for there were a great many Protestant Inhabitants, as well as Catholics, who
were forced to subsist Troops, and pay Taxes and Subsidys; and likewise several
Protestants in Posts and Stations, from the highest to the lowest, as
Privy-Counsellors, Judges, Commissioners, and other inferior Officers of
Revenue, and some, even Officers in the Army; and yet upon a Charitable
Supposition, that they acted in those Posts and Stations in their own
Preservation, and they having as soon as they could resorted to his Majesty for
Protection, they were received into Grace and Favor, and no Prosecution set up
against them; and it being a notorious Truth, that the Catholic Protectees
submitted as early as their Protestant Neighbors, that they were, whilst the
other party prevailed, under a greater Necessity of Compliance; for that any
Hesitation or Lukewarmness, was deemed altogether unpardonable in them, and
that they have ever since behaved themselves as dutifully; it seems very
unequitable, that the Measure they have met with should be so very different.

I can not omit here to specify their Majesty's Royal Declaration of the 22d
of February, 1688, whereby a full and free Enjoyment of their respective
Estates, etc. is graciously offered to all such, as, upon Notice of His Royal
Pleasure therein, should lay down their Arms, and retire to their respective
places of abode. It must be granted, That if these Protectees had been actually
in Arms, and had, on Notice of this Proclamation, surrendered their
Commissions, and returned to their usual and respective Ways of Living, and
places of Abode; that they had thereby, whatever payments of Taxes or other
unavoidable Acts of Compliance they had been guilty of, been within the express
Letter of this Declaration; and it seems to me as clear, that such as never
took up Arms, but continued in their before usual Stations, and at their usual
places of Abode, are comprehended within the Scope and meaning of it: For
otherwise, their having not been once in Arms against the Government, is that,
which excludes them His Majesty's tendered Grace and Clemency; which must
certainly appear an harsh and absurd Construction: And it is here to be
observed, that this Declaration does not require their thus quitting their
Arms, and retireing within any prefixed Time, but upon Notice; and whoever
considers the Strictness and Embargoes then of each side used, to shut out all
Intelligence must admit it very probable, that few or none of those, then
residing in Ireland, had ever heard of this Declaration, till the Time of the
near Approach of His Majesty's Troops; and then it was, that these Gentlemen
humbly sued to be received into Protection, and have lived sufficiently retired
ever since.

I wish these hardships here pointed at, and the many more not enumerated, were
justly to be looked upon, as the mere effects of the first Heat and Resentment
of Men upon the Close of the War: For there are many persons in Authority there
good natured and forgiving enough, to have been weary, before now, of adding to
the number of the Afflicted; but it will, perhaps, appear these Hardships (as
to some especially) are grounded upon the more lasting Foundation of Lands and
Tenements; if it be considered, that so lately as the very last Vacation, or
near thereabouts, a new Prosecution was set up all over the Kingdom; and in one
County, above one hundred Persons Indicted of High Treason, as committed during
the late Troubles, and some who were Indicted about three Years since, and who
resolved to stand Trial have been, every Term since then, continued upon Bail;
and though they have each Term pressed for a Trial, yet hitherto neither
Discharged, nor Tried, but continued on, under the innumerable Inconveniences,
and Scandal of so high an Accusation.

I shall here, as in other places, shun all Aggravation, and only say, that
this surprising Scrutiny, after 8 or 9 Years perfect Peace and dutiful
Behavior, does in Consequence, and in point of Interest, affect a great many
besides the Persons themselves thus charged: For others finding them, for such
a number of Years unmolested, were under no apprehension of their being still
in hazard of such public Charge, and frankly entered into Commerce, Marriages,
and Dealings of all kinds with them; and have now only a parcel of wretched
Criminals to trust to.

It is to be presumed, that these are Persons, who, in the beginning, had no
visible Fortunes, and were therefore overlooked in the Herd: But if since they
have been too Industrious, or, by a fourtune over Favorable, any thing is
devolved upon them, they may thank themselves, or their too kind Stars for what
has followed.

It is here to be feared, that some, who Preside of the other side the Channel,
remain yet too much tainted with the Examples they have seen in their Youth of
Foreign Confiscations; that, by being not enough acquainted with our more happy
Constitution, they are apt some times to carry things to too high a Pitch, and
that now and then they forget, they are in the Service of a truly Great Master,
who has too many Royal Virtues to want Sentiments of Pity for His People; and
who is too gracious a Prince to delight in Oppression, or to suffer it, when he
knows it, in his Substitutes.

I may now truly say for my Self, that I have spun out this Discourse to a
Bulk much beyond what I proposed, occasioned chiefly through a Want of Method,
and a Disuse of Undertakings of the Kind; I must therefore hasten to a Close;
and if, by any thing I have herein offered, I become Accessory to their being
so far taken into Consideration, as that some regard may, at the last, be had
to their quiet Behavior, during the War, and early Submission afterward; I
shall think my Time happily employed.

There are Sufferers of other Kinds there, whose Case and Circumstances, if
fully understood, might, perhaps, before so Just, so Equal, and so Fatherly a
Tribunal, render them deserving of some Marks of a favorable Distinction from
the more obstinate, and long persisting: But their Case being beside my
purpose, I shall only slightly take Notice, That there are of these some Young
Women of Quality, and mere Orphans, who, upon solemn Marriage Settlements long
before this Revolution, had suitable Fortunes secured on the Father's Estate;
but it being done by the usual Proviso, that the Father should have Power by
his last Will, etc. to charge the Estate with so much for the Daughters of that
Marriage, and the Father being outlawed and consequently the last will set
aside, though of no use or necessity here, than to apportion what each Daughter
was to have had of such a Sum in the whole ascertained by the Settlement; yet
by the Father's falling under such a Legal Dissability, though outlawed after
Death, or in England, at a time when it was impossible for him so much as to
have heard of any Prosecution; these Young Women are exposed to the lowest
Wants, and to, almost, a Necessity of being forced upon the vilest Courses.

There are of these others, whose Fathers happened to be of King James his
Menial Servants, and consequently the more obliged not to abandon their Master
in his adverse Fortune; and although the Paternal Estate is in some, or most of
these Cases secured to the Mother, and Children after the Fathers Death; yet,
in the mean time, they are both left destitute of any means of Subsistence.

There are some, who never bore Arms in Ireland, but retired soon into France;
and passed their Time in an absolute Privacy there, without any Dependence
upon, or Relation to the late King James; and yet, by Outlawrys, and
Attainders, incurred in their absence, they, and their numerous Families,
without any sort of Provision, are for ever excluded.

Lastly, there are of these some Eminent Persons, who now, and heretofore, have
deserved well of the Crown of England, who being placed in Foreign Governments
by K. Charles the Second, continued, notwithstanding the late Revolution in the
faithful Discharge of their Duty, and effectually employed their Fortune and
Credit in support of the English Rights and Sovereignity abroad; and being now
returned home, find themselves encumbered with empty Titles, and what else they
were to have derived from their Ancestors, swallowed up in the common gulf of
Forfeitures, and no sort of Support, or Provision left for them.

It is here again to his Glory to be noted, that such of these, as had Friends
in Credit enough, to lay their Case before his Majesty, had the effects of his
usual Bounty and Clemency; and, it is not to be doubted, but that, upon a fair
and equal Representation, his Clemency would extend to all the rest and outgo
all his Royal Predecessors: And not only in their Reigns, but during the
Oppressions of the late Civil Wars; the Widows, and Orphans of the then
reputed Offenders were so provided for, as not to fall into too low and abject
a Condition; and even such of the Delinquents themselves (as then termed) who
stayed at home, were so far considered as that they, and their Posterity were
upon a general Rule set up, reprized in one Province, in some proportion to
what they had lost in another.

I cannot fear to be so misunderstood, as from this Relation of what was then
done to intend any reflection upon the best of Governments; I mention this
Christian Moderation practiced in the worst of Times, from thence only to
insinuate how much more may be hoped for from so excellent a Constitution; how
conformable it may be found to the practice of the like good English Kings, and
Parliaments beretofore to set up Rules, and Qualifications by which to censure
Men and Actions, by which so far to distinguish the Time, and the Behavior of
Men, as to propound some Measure of Punishment upon which such, as by their
being unactive in the War, or early Repentance and Return to their Duty, or
other moving Circumstances may have qualified themselves for some Degree of
Mercy, may artone to the public for their Offenses.

Having thus far taken the Liberty to point at some moderate Expedients, I hope
I may without Offense humbly offer to Consideration, that those, who were then
in that Kingdom of what Judgment or Inclination soever, were upon the Principle
of Self-preservation, under an apparent Necessity of submitting to the then
prevailing Power; that the then late King was in Person there, at the Head of
such Troops as could enforce their Obedience; that how clearly soever the great
Turn of those Times was grounded upon right Reason and Religion, yet there were
numbers of wise, good and learned Men even in England, where, by the King's
having withdrawn himself, the Matter seemed less doubtful, who remained for
some time unresolved as to their Duty upon that Conjuncture. They are often the
more lasting, that are the more slowly Received Impressions; and they who took
time and pains to convince themselves of their Obligation to submit upon this
great Occasion, will, perhaps, prove as faithful as they who more readily
apprehended their Duty, and assented to what was done. I shall not, though I mean
all possible Deference toward the present Establishment, presume to dwell upon
this Argument, for fear of being thought (beyond my Intention) to make other
use of it than in Mitigation only; and if upon what is here humbly offered, and
what more may occur to so Great and Wise an Assembly, in extenuation of their
Faults, they shall nevertheless be adjudg'd unworthy any favorable Compromise;
I think, I may so far denounce against them, (as that, in Addition to their
own) the Sins of their Fathers are upon them, and that their Kingdom is not of
this World.

FINIS.

