THE CASE OF CHARLES Earl of BANBURY.
THE Right Honorable William Knollis, Created Lord Knollis and Viscount
Wallingford, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter by King James the
First; and by Letters Patents of the 18th of August 2 Car. I. Created Earl of
Banbury, To hold to him and the Heirs Males of his Body, with a Clause of
Precedence, to take place next after Francis then Earl of Westmerland, and
before Henry then Viscount Mandevil, and afterward Earl of Manchester.

The said Earl (having no Issue by Dorothy his first Lady) did, after her
decease, take to Wife the Lady Elizabeth, eldest Daughter to the Right
Honorable Thomas late Earl of Suffolk, and they had Issue Edward Earl of
Banbury, who dyed without Issue, and Nicholas late Earl of Banbury.

Some Questions arising in Parliament 3 Caroli, upon the Clause of Precedence
in the Patent of 2 Car. I. certain Earls did at the King's Request Grant
Precedence to the then Earl of Banbury; but ordered, that he should have that
precedence during Life only, and not descendable to his Heirs.

Earl William dyed 25 May 1632.

Earl Edward, his Eldest Son, being at the time of his Father's death aged
little above five Years, was not summoned to any of the Parliaments in time of
King Charles the First, nor could rightfully claim to be so summoned, being
under Age, and so dyed without Issue, as aforesaid.

Earl Nicholas being born January 3. 1630. did, after his arrival to full Age,
sit in Parliament, Convened in the Twelfth Year of the late King Charles the
Second, at the time of His Majesty's happy Restoration.

In the Parliament summoned in the Thirteenth Year of the late King Charles the
Second, the said Earl Nicholas, having received no Writ of Summons to that
Parliament, Addressed himself by humble Petition to his said late Majesty,
setting forth, in effect, the Matters before expressed, and praying that he
might be summoned by Writ to the said Parliament, and enjoy the Privilege and
Precedence granted by the said Letters Patents of King Charles the First.

This Petition being by his Majesty's Appointment delivered to the House of
Peers, by the Lord Great Chamberlain of England, was thereupon by them taken
into Consideration, and thereupon referred to the Lords Committees for
Privileges, who were upon hearing the Petitioners Counsel, and the Kings
Attorney General to make Report thereof.

The said Lords Committees being attended by Counsel and Witnesses on the
Petitioners behalf, and also by Mr. Attorney General for the King, it was fully
proved, that the said Earl Nicholas was born of the Body of the said Countess
Elizabeth, during the Coverture between her and the said Earl William.

Mr. Attorney insisted on an Office by which it was found in 9 Caroli, That the
said Earl dyed without Issue, and that it was reputed that he so dyed.

Whereunto it was insisted, That by the Common Law of the Land, if the Husband
be within the four Seas, and the Wife has Issue, no proof is to be admitted to
prove the Child a Bastard. And Mr. Attorney did admit the Law to be so. And
moreover, it was proved Ex abundanti, That the said Earl William was kind and
conversant with his Countess, and of a good state of Health, using to ride
abroad Hawking and Hunting, although of great Age.

And by a subsequent Inquisition, found in 17 Car. primi, it was found that the
said Earl William had Issue as aforesaid, (viz.) Edward the then Earl of
Banbury, his Son and Heir, etc.

Upon the whole matter the Lords Committees came to this Resolution, after
several Attendances to Report their Opinions, (viz.)

That Nicholas Earl of Banbury, being in the Eye of the Law Son to William late
Earl of Banbury, the House should therefore advise the King to send him a Writ
to come to Parliament.

That the said Earl ought to have place in the House of Peers, according to the
Date of his Patent, and not according to the Tenor of that part thereof, which
ranketh him before other Earls Created before him.

After those proceedings, and before any final Determination thereupon, the
said Earl Nicholas (having no Issue Male by the Lady Isabella, Daughter of the
Right Honorable the late Earl of Newport, his first Wife) took to Wife Anne
the Daughter of the Right Honorable the late Lord Sherrard, and had Issue by
her Charles, now Earl of Banbury, his Eldest Son and Heir, and about years
since dyed, leaving the said Charles Earl of Banbury an Infant under Age.

The said Charles Earl of Banbury has not been summoned to any of the
Parliaments of his late Majesty King Charles the Second, and by reason of his
Infancy has forborne to Claim or Petition for his Right:

But being now of full Age, and not being summoned, as other Peers are, has
humbly Petitioned the House of Peers to consider his Case, and represent the
same to the King, to the end he may be relieved according to Right.

The Clause whereby the King granted Precedence to Earl William, and his Heirs
Males, beyond what he would have had by his Anciency, and the Date of his
Patent, did first occasion the Question touching the enjoyment of his Honor,
which perhaps had never been otherwise questioned at all. But admitting the Law
therein to be one way or other, the Honor of the Earldom is indubitably
descended on CHARLES the now Earl of Banbury.

And neither the first Inquisition, or any Opinions or Presumptions concurring
therewith, or founded thereon, are to be received or regarded in prejudice of
the Legal and Rightful Heir, and the standing Rules of Law in Cases of Descent
and favor of Legitimation, upon these plain Reasons.

1. The first Inquisition is no Evidence to conclude against other direct proof
of the Fact, made in the Case upon Oath before the Lords Committees, of the
Birth of Earl Nicholas. 2. The second Inquisition is to the contrary, and does
in effect Answer and Avoid the former. 3. By Law, no Proofs or Presumptions
whatsoever, ought to be received to Illegitimate Issue born within Lawful
Wedlock, while the Parents are both within the Four Seas. And in this Case,
there was, besides the second Inquisition, Proof of Actual Kindness and
Conversation between the Parents, which the Law would intend, if not proved. 4.
By Law, no man ought to be Bastardized after his Death, when he cannot Answer
for himself. 5. The Law does so much favor Legitimation of Issue, That if a
Bastard, actually born out of Wedlock, became seized of an Inheritance, and a
Descent thereof to be cast on his Issue, even the Right of the Lawful Heir, or
Mulier (as the Law Terms it) is thereby barred, and therein that Descent, from
a man's Issue though Illegitimate, does differ from others.
The now Earl of Banbury is unquestionably descended from Earl Nicholas,
Actually Legal Heir of Earl William, in all Regular Qualifications, and
Entitled to all the favorable Presumptions the Law does afford; And it would
be an extraordinary thing, both besides, and contrary to all common Rules of
Law and Justice, to oppose a Legal Title, upon pretense and Opinion of Fact, so
long since past, and never proved, examined, or brought to Judgment in the
Lives of the Parties concerned, when themselves and many other Honorable
Personages of their Alliance and Acquaintance might have given Proof and
Testimony of their knowledge of many material Circumstances and other things
now buried with them, and the very truth whereof is become impossible to be
thoroughly discovered and made out.


