The CASE of many Coachmen in London and Westminster, and within the Weekly
Bills of Mortality, Licensed according to the Act for Licensing
Hackney-Coaches, but yet turned out by the present Commissioners.
BY an Act made in the fourteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, for the
reforming of Annoyances and Disorders in the Streets of, and places adjacent to
the Cities of London and Westminster. It is enacted that there shall be but 400
Coaches to be Let to Hire in and about the said Cities of London and
Westminster, and the places comprised within the Weekly Bills of Mortality,
(excepting Stage-Coaches:) Which said Coaches were to be Licensed by
Commissioners for that purpose, nominated by His Majesty under the Great Seal
of England: which said Commissioners are to take five Pounds yearly Rent, and
no more; for non-payment whereof, the Coach-men are liable to a Distress: and
for want of a sufficient Distress, to suffer Imprisonment; and for any other
Misdemeanors committed contrary to the said Act, are to suffer the Penalties
and Forfeitures in the said Act mentioned, which are fully set forth and
declared by the said Act. But amongst them all there is not one word of a
Forfeiture of the Licenses, nor any Direction or Declaration that they shall be
Licensed for a year only, and no longer; nor that the said Licenses are
determinable, or vendable at the Commissioners pleasure.

But not only in point of Law, (...) likewise by an Exposition upon the said
Act, they are intended to be for Life: for the persons first to be Licensed,
are to be Ancient Hackney-Coach-men, and such Coach-men as had been Sufferers
for His late Majesty, or His Majesty that now is, and the Widows of them, and
lively Support and Maintenance of them; which intention of the Act would have
been frustrated, and the Hackney-Coach-men absolutely ruined at the
Commissioners pleasure, if Licenses were grounded upon such uncertain grounds,
as the Commissioners that now are, pretend. For a Hackney-Coach-man not being
able to Let out to Hire a good Hackney-Coach, with Horses suitable to the
meaning of the Act, without a great sum of Money to buy the said Coach and
Horses, an^ ^o take a Dwelling House for himself and Servants, together with
Stables and Coach-houses; and to make Provisions of Hay and Corn for his
Horses, and a Sum to lie by him for the supplying of himself with Horses in
case of loss, which often happens, and for the payment of Servants Wages. But
it never was the intent of the Act to put them to this Charge for a year, which
had been an intent to ruin them.

Yet after all which great Expense and Charges, together with the great loss of
Horses, that some have had. The Commissioners that now are, being 16 persons,
did at one time take away 16 Licenses from 16 Ancient Hackney-Coach-men (as by
their Summons for Appearance to 16 Informations in the Exchequer may appear)
some of which have enjoyed their Licenses ever since the first time of granting
Licenses by virtue of the aforesaid Act: And all the rest of them for many
years, being Licensed by former Commissioners, as persons well fit and
quallified, and always by the former Commissioners so thought, approved and
allowed to be without the least molestation or interruption. And the (...)
Commissioners, or some of them under pretense of a new method of Regulation,
never before thought of, or mentioned, would have absolutely ruined and undone
the said 16 Ancient Hackney-Coach-men, if some of them had not put a stop to
it, by publicly declaring that they would Prosecute at Law those persons that
should buy any of their Licenses, they questioning not but it was their Right,
and due for life by the Act.

And former Commissioners never looked upon any person once Licensed, but as
Licensed for Life, notwithstanding they did yearly renew their Licenses: For
the first Commissioners that ever were (being very Industrious and prudent men,
and some of them well Learned in the Law) declared, that the only reason why
they did renew their Licenses yearly, was only that they might know what
Coach-men were dead; that if any License were Vacant, forthwith to fill up the
Vacancy, for the better preserving of the sum allowed by the said Act for
preserving of the Highways and Sewers, etc. And the Names and Habitations of
such persons as had Licenses might be known, in order to the said Commissioners
giving in their account yearly to the Commissioners of Highways and Sewers;
and to see what Fines and Forfeitures (if any such) were due, and likewise to
prevent the trouble and Charges of Distress, etc. By not continuing those
persons Licenses which did not pay, and discharge the sums required by the Act
at every years end; and though that Clause then was not agreeable to the
meaning of the Act; yet that Declaration of the Commissioners, and the Acting
pursuant to that Declaration made the Coach-men acquiess therein, and never
were molested, But now, though those Coach-men have paid their Rent duly as
long as the Commissioners would receive the same, and since tendered it, and
have performed all qualifications by the Act; yet are their Licenses taken from
them.

Since which Transactions aforesaid, by the negligence or indulgence of the
Officers employed by the Commissioners, and by the Licensing of new persons by
the Commissioners, in the room of those they turn out, the Streets have been,
and are at this time so Annoyed, so many abuses committed, and so many Coaches
worked by Unlicensed persons, with ill Coaches, and poor Horses: That the
Hackney-Coach-men who are lawfully Licensed, are not only blamed and imputed to
be guilty of abuses committed by persons that work unlawfully; but are also
very much impoverished and disabled to pay the Rent required by the Act, and
very hardly able to live and subsist, contrary to the intent of the Act, to the
abuse of the Kings people, and to the Ruin of those formerly Licensed.


