REMARKS On a Book entitled, Prince Arthur, an heroic Poem. With some General
Critical Observations, And several New Remarks upon Virgil.

By Mr. DENNIS.

Abrotonum aegro
Non audet, nisi qui didicit, dare: quod Medicorumest,
Promittunt Medici. --
Scribimus indocti doctique poemata passim.
Horace ad Augustum.

LONDON: Printed for S. Heyrick and R. Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborne, 1696.

To the Right Honorable Charles, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Lord Lieutenant
of Sussex, Lord Chamberlain of the Household, Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and one of the
Lords Justices for the Administration of the GOVERNMENT.
MY LORD.
THe Poem upon which I have made the following Remarks has met with very
different success in the World. Some have admired it as a Masterpiece of Art
and Nature. Others have exploded it with extreme Contempt. And a third sort,
amongst whom are some extraordinary Men, have been willing to encourage
something that is Generous in the Design, and something that is Happy at least
in foam parts of the Execution. I need not acquaint Your Lordship that for my
own part, I believe Prince Arthur to be neither Admirable nor Contemptible.
Forif I had the one or the other Opinion, I should certainly never have Written
against him. I have given my Reasons in the following Treatise why I cannot
admire him, which I hope will have the Aprobation of Your Lordship's Judgment.

It would be an intolerable presumption in me, if I should endeavor to give
Your Lordship any long diversion from that sublime Employment, which the King
to show the Judgment of his first Choice, has a second time conferred on You.
While England with Joy beholds You Exalted to Rule the State, which from the
first moment of Your Rising in it, You have always Enlightened, Adorned and
Animated.

Your Lordship with a certain Presage of Soul has all along taken care by
improving and encouraging Arts to soften and humanize that stubborn People,
whom You were one day designed to Govern. Yet You have always, with a Just though
an Absolute Sway, Ruled the most Capricious part of that People, and by much
the most difficult part to be Governed. I speak, MY LORD of the Men of Wit, a
Turbulent and a Tumultuous Nation, exceeding sufficient in their own conceits,
impatient of reproof, and greedy of glory. And he who has the Skill to command
these, with a great deal of ease can Govern the rest. Your Lordship has always
distributed Justice to them with undisputed Authority, but always with an
inclination to Mercy, when Mercy was not Cruelty: and by Your admirable
goodness of Nature joined with Your rare Qualities, have gained to that degree
upon them that the vainest of Men have been publicly seen to subject their
very Sense to You; and have been found to make it their vanity, (for vanity
will be sure to gain in one place what it has lost in another) to submit their
own to Your Lordship's Judgment. To imitate them in this I presume to lay the
following Remarks at Your Feet; and to assure Your Lordship that I am with all
respect imaginable,

MY LORD. Your Lordships most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obedient Servant.
JOHN DENNIS.

THE CONTENTS.
Part I.
Chap. I. OF an Epick Poem in general. p. 1. Chap. II. Of the Action of an
Epick Poem; which with the Moral, makes the Fable. p. 4. Chap. III. That Mr.
Blackmore ought not to have copied Virgil in his Fable, nor in his Action. p.
13. Chap. IV. Of the Unity of the Action. p. 17. Chap. V. Of an Episode in
Prince Arthur that corrupts the Unity of the Action. p. 20. Chap. VI. Of
another Episode that corrupts the Unity of the Action. p. 28. Chap. VII. Of the
Integri^y of the Action. p. 32. Chap. VIII. Of the Moral. p. 34.
Part II.
Chap. I. OF a good and a bad Taste. p. 39. Chap. II. That the Characters ought
to have Manners. p. 44. Chap. III. Of a Scene in the Hypolitus of Euripides. p.
58. Chap. IV. Of the Manners in Prince Arthur. p. 69. Chap. V. That the
Incidents in Prince Arthur are not of a delightful Nature. p. 121. Chap. VI. Of
the Number, Variety, and Disposition of the Incidents. p. 145. Chap. VII. That
the Incidents in Prince Arthur are not surprising. p. 177. Chap. VIII. That the
Episodes are not pathetick. p. 186. Annotations. p. 206.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author's Absence from the Town has occasioned the following Errors, which
the Reader is desired to mend with his Pen.

ERRATA.
PAge a. for All^gories, read All^gory. p. 53. r. Achilles is rage. p. 64. f.
whilst r. while, and so through the whole Scene. Ibid. f. concerned, r. conceived.
p. 74. r. that is a Monarchs. p. 76. f. Dubi^i de mente, r. D^biti Di nienente.
p. 80. f. Torrent, r. Terrent. p. 86. f. p^ti, r. p^te. ib. f. Palas, r. Palus.
ib. f. (...). r, refuso. p. 92. f. bil^, r. belli. ib. r. he had imitated. p.
105. f. mann^r, r. man^ers. p. 114. f. torrent, r. terrent. p. 115. r. before
the Desc^t of one of the Dirae. p. 119. r. that he has been so far from
preserving. ib. r. and through his Poem. ib. f. them, r. him. p. 145. f. every
large Incident, r, every artful Incident. p. 146. f. segraris, r. segrais. ib.
in the French, r. qui ont cru marcher sur ses pas. p. 146. f. semble, r.
semblent. p. 151. r. insidat. ib. f. Critics, r. Critic. p. 153 r. venu^, p.
155. f. tibi viri, r. tibi vis. p, 155. f. advers^, r. adversos. ib. f.
tumidam, r. tumidum. ib. f. procubuisti, r. procubuisse. ib. f. then a daring
Enterpize then a nocturnal Combat, r. then a daring nocturnal Enterprise then a
Combat. p. 159. f. in Name, r. his Name. p. 160. f. oculos, r. ventos. ib. f.
Baletum, r. Balatum. p. 164. f. tells that, r. tells him that. p. 171. f.
meritis vacat, r. meritis: vacat. p. 173. f. (...), r. (...). p. 174. f. has
Barbarity, r. has a Barbarity. p. 183. f. etiam, r. and jam. ib. f. he cited,
r. we cited. p. 184. f. Toll fuge, r. Toll fuga. ib. f. at O, r. ut O. p.
182. f. (...), r. (...).

THE PREFACE.
I Think my self obliged to give the Reader an account of the Method which I
propounded to use in the following Remarks. In the first Part I intended to
show that Mr. Blackmore's Action has neither unity, nor integrity, nor
morality, nor universality, and consequently that he can have no Fable and no
Heroic Poem. In the second Part I designed to come to the Narration; and to
show that it is neither probable, delightful, nor wonderful. I propounded to
show that there are three things that make a Narration delightful; The Persons
introduced, the Things related, and the Manner of relating them. I resolved to
consider the first of these, and to prove that the Poetical Persons ought to
have manners, and that those manners ought to have the following
qualifications: That they ought to be good, convenient, resembling, and equal,
and that besides there ought to be an unity of Character in the principal
person; and that that unity of Character like an universal Soul was to run
through the whole Poem. Next, I determined to make it appear that Mr. Blackmor's
Characters have none of the forementioned qualifications. Then, I pretended to
convince the Reader that the things contained in Mr. Blackmor's Narration are
neither in their own natures delightful, nor numerous enough, nor various
enough, nor rightly disposed, nor surprising, nor pathetick. And thus far I
have already gone.

My intention was next to enquire into the third particular; that makes a
Narration delightful. And that is the manner of relating the things contained
in it, which comprehends the Thoughts, the Discourse, the Expressions; and here
I designed to have inserted a Discourse concerning Poetical genius, of which no
one that I know of has hitherto treated. I designed to show that this
extraordinary thing in Poetry which has been hitherto taken for something
Supernatural and Divine, is nothing but a very common Passion, or a
complication of common Passions. That felicity in writing has the same effect
upon us that happiness in common Life has: That in Life when any thing lucky
arrives to us, upon the first surprise we have a transport of Joy, which is
immediately followed by an exaltation of mind: Ut res nostrae sint ita nos
magni atque humiles sumus; and that both these, if the thing that happens be
beyond expectation fortunate, are accompanied with astonishment: we are amazed
at our own happiness: That the very same thing befalls us upon the conception
of an extraordinary hint. The Soul is transported upon it, by the consciousness
of its own excellence, and it is exalted, there being nothing so proper to work
on its vanity; because it looks upon such a hint as a thing peculiar to it
self, whereas what happens in Life to one Man, might as well have happened to
another; and lastly, if the hint be very extraordinary, the Soul is amazed by
the unexpected view of its own surpassing power. Now it is very certain that a
Man in transport, and one that is lifted up with pride and astonished,
expresses himself quite with another air, than one who is calm and serene. Joy
in excess as well as rage is furious. And the pride of Soul is seen in the
expression as well as in the mien and actions, and is the cause of that
Elevation, which Longinus so much extolls, and which, he says, is the image of
the greatness of the mind. Now it is certain that greatness of mind is nothing
but pride well regulated. Now as Joy causes Fury, and pride elevation, so
astonishment gives vehemence to the expression.

This was the Doctrine which I designed to deliver, of which I had the first
hint from the following verses,

Rapture and Fury carried me thus far
Transported and Amazed.
Which are in an admirable Poem Written by a very great Man, who with all that
wonderful fire which is so conspicuous in him, has all the discernment and the
fine penetration, which is necessary for the reflecting upon the most secret
motions of his own mind, and upon those of others.

After that I had done this, I designed to lay down this definition of genius,
that it was the expression of a F^ious Joy, or Pride, or Astonishment, or all
of them caused by the conception of an extraordinary hint. Then I intended to
show, that a great many Men have extraordinary hints, without the forementioned
motions, because they want a degree of Fire sufficient to give their animal
spirits a sudden and swift agitation. And these are called Cold-writers. On the
other side, if Men have a great deal of Fire and have not excellent Organs,
they feel the forementioned motions in thinking without extraordinary hints.
And these we call Fustian-Writers. When I had done this I intended to show that
Mr. Blackmore had very seldom either the hints or the motions. In order to
which I designed to consider the several sorts of hints that might justly
transport the Soul by a conscious view of its own excellency. And to divide
them into hints of Thought and hints of Images. That the Thought which might
justly cause these motions of Spirits were of three sorts, such as discover a
greatness of Mind, or a reach of Soul, or an extent of Capacity. That Images
were either of Sounds or of Things, that Images of Things were either Mighty or
Vast ones. I designed to give examples of all these from Homer and Virgil, and
from Milton and Tasso; and to have compared them with several passages in Mr.
Blackmore's Poem. I designed particularly to have treated of the clearness, and
justness, and of the energy of Images.

After this I resolved to descend to consider the expression, and to show that
it ought to have the following qualifications. That it ought to be pure, clear,
easy, strong, noble, poetic, harmonious. I designed particularly to have
examined the difference between a Poetic and a Prosaick Diction, and to have
said as much as the little observation which I have made, would give me leave
of our English numbers, and of our Rhymes and Cadences; and then to have come
to Application, and to have shown that Mr. Blackmore has been very faulty in
all the forementioned particulars.

But having just gone through the one half of my Method it will be convenient,
before I proceed, to see how the Reader relishes this. I desire him to excuse
the Style; which is neither exact nor equal, the Book being written with too
much dispatch for that. I think it is but just that the Reader should pardon
this, if the matter will make any amends for it.

But that he may come with the less prejudice to the Reading the following
Criticism, I desire to prepare him, by Answering some Objetions which have been
made against Criticism.

Three Objections have been made against Criticism in General: The First, That
it is an invidious ill-natured thing. The Second, That it is a vain and
successless Attempt. And the Third, That it tends to the certain diminution of
the happiness of the Reader. First it is Objected, That Criticism is a very
ill-natured thing.

In the following Treatise I have had an occasion to speak concerning Goodness
of Nature, and if the account which I have given of it there be reasonable, I
make no doubt but that the Reader will be convinced, that a man at the same
time that he Criticizes may have a great deal of Goodness of Nature. At present
I will only say this, That I know not what Good Nature may be in a Beast, but
that in a Man I cannot think it to be contrary to Justice, that is to Reason;
and therefore I cannot think there can be any illnature in Detecting the faults
of an ill or indifferent, though a successful Writer. For if it be just and
reasonable in every Man to contribute what he can to the public happiness,
because upon that depends his own, and if the advancing of Arts and Sciences
conduces to the good of the State; and lastly if Men of Merit are more capable
of advancing Science than those who want it; I cannot but think it the most
reasonble thing in the World to distinguish good Writers by discouraging bad.
For it is impossible in this case to encourage a Coxcomb, but you must at the
same time mortify a man of Wit, tho he happens to find the same encouragement:
Since the last Writing, by an impulse of vanity rather than interest, quarrels
with fortune to make his Court to Fame, and seeks distinction rather than
riches.

Nor is Criticism an ill-natured thing in relation even to the very Persons
upon whom the Critic makes his Reflections. It is true it may deprive them a
little the sooner of a short profit and of a transitory reputation. But then it
may have a good effect upon them and oblige them before it be too late to
decline that for which they are so very unfit, and to have recourse to
something in which they may be more successful, whereas if they are suffered
still to impose upon the People, Time, which is a slow but a certain Friend to
truth, will at last undeceive them, and oblige them to abandon the unhappy
Authors after they have exhausted their Youth and their Vigor in fond
endeavors to please them.

From what has been said, I think it is plain, that a Critic cannot be justly
accused of ill nature, if it appears that he Writes with a Design to contribute
that little which lies in his power to advance the Art upon which he makes his
Reflections. And charity will oblige us to believe that, if his Objections are
found to be Solid. But he who cavils at an Author is moved by envy and not by a
public Spirit; by envy the basest of all the Passions, and to which none but
the basest of men are liable. Yet I believe a Critic obliged to these two
things, though the Objections which he has to make are never so Solid. The first
is, not to be severe upon faults where the beauties are more and greater. The
second, is not to treat a young Author with Rigor, if it appears that genius
shines through his incorrectness. For the doing of either of these, by the
discouraging even of good Artists, would tend to the destroying the Art. And
though we are now speaking of general Criticism, yet I think fit to give the
Reader a hint that neither of these will reach Mr. Blackmore's case.

The second Objection against Criticism is, that it is sure to prove a vain and
successless Attempt. Men will not be writ out of what they like, nor can they
endure that any Man should alter their tastes but themselves. We find (say the
Objectors) that it is exceeding difficult to reform the manners, and
Philosophers have attempted it for some thousands of years in vain. So
difficult a thing it is to persuade Men to leave their pleasures. What hope can
remain then for those who endeavor to reform their tastes; since to do that
would be to deprive them of the very greatest of pleasures? For it is upon his
taste that a Man chiefly builds the dear opinion which he has conceived of
himself, and therefore he cannot be reasoned out of that without an
unsupportable mortification. And it is for this Reason that the Duke De la
Rochefoucaut assures us, that on renonce plus aisement a son interest qu'a son
goust, A Man will more easily resolve to give up his interest than to part with
his taste.

This is an Objection against Criticism in General. But a Gentleman of a great
deal of Wit and Judgment has applied it to the following Treatise; But I desire
leave to tell him with all the submission that is due to his extraordinary
merit, that the validity of this Objection in relation to the following
Remarks, depends upon a supposition which is more to the disadvantage of Mr.
Blackmore than all the reflections which can be made on his Poem. The
supposition is this, That no Man will ever read Mr. Blackmore but who has
already perused him. For though I should grant that a man is not to be argued
into a dislike of that, by the approbation of which he has for some time
flattered himself into an Opinion of his own Judgment, yet there are, or at
least there may be Readers, who may know as soon of the following Criticisms,
as they may hear of Prince Arthur, and who consequently may take in the
Antidote before or immediately after the Poem. I say there may be such Readers
as these, and a Man who Writes with a public Spirit, certainly Writes for
posterity. But then on the other side, I cannot believe it so exceeding
difficult to argue People out of their tastes. Between the years sixty and
seventy, the taste of England was for Rhyming Heroic Fustian. Now the
Rehearsal almost alone reformed the taste of the Age. So great an influence had
the Ridiculum in that Play joined with good Sense, upon the minds of the
People, and consequently upon the practice of those who Writ. Now whatever has
been done once that may certainly be done again. And nothing is more vain than
to argue against experience. But this is certain; That some will hardly be
persuaded by any Arguments to come off from their tastes immediately; but Reason
will lie brooding on their Minds till it has hatched Conviction, and then they
will be seen gladly to part with their tastes, when they have staid so long
after they have been informed that they may easily persuade themselves that
they owe their conversion only to their own sufficiency.

But to come to the third Objection, Suppose, say they, the People were to be
reasoned into a dislike of the Things which they now approve; Yet to reform
their tastes would be to do them a disservice. For Happiness is the Universal
aim, say they. It Is a Man's business and interest to make himself Happy: and
Happiness and Pleasure are Terms Synonymous. Now in regard to the delights of
the Mind, this is self Evident, that the more Delicate we grow the more we
retrench our Pleasure. There are two whimsical sorts of People (say they) who
fancy they do a great deal of good in the World, and those are Stoics and
Critics. The Stoic sets up a vain Tranquillity, a Fantastic Felicity which
is not to be found in Nature. And the Critic makes it the business of his Life
to instruct People, how they may be discontented by Art. The Sage of the Stoic
is a Chimerical Person, who has extirpated all his passions, and raised himself
by Precept and Practice to a perfect state of Tranquillity, from which Happy
State he looks down with scorn upon the disorders of Men below him. The Critic
seems to be the real reverse of this Philosophical Fantom. He is of the number
of those grumbling People, who value themselves upon their being dissatisied.
He places his perfection in his discontent, and if you observe him at a Play or
at a Recital, he industriously seeks out occasions to vex himself, and looks
with contempt upon all who are Happy about him.

For their Parts (they say) when they are at a Play or at a Recital, they are
for Pleasure, because Pleasure is Happiness, and they are for a greater degree
of Pleasure rather than for a less, because they find something in their
Natures that tells them, they ought to be as Happy as they can; and they cannot
for their lives (they say) conceive, but that he for example, who laughs at a
Comedy must have by much a more sensible Pleasure than he who makes his
Objections there. And therefore any thing which makes them laugh there, shall
be to them a beauty. That Man (they say) is a Fantastic Creature, who chooses
to be wretched that he may be thought Wise, when that very choice must make him
pass for a Coxcomb with all Men who think rightly.

This is the sum of what has been said to enforce this second General
Objection, which has been made by some Gentlemen against Criticism. But here
methinks are too many words to have substance in them. For Truth (like the
Innocence of our first Parents) loves to appear naked, and Solid Sense like
perfect Beauty, is but hid by Ornament.

For I would ask these Gentlemen, If they could resolve to possess a Woman only
for the sake of the Pleasure, though they were very certain to pay for it by a
severe Distemper? If they Answer that they could not, then it is plain that a
lasting trouble can more than balance a momentary satisfaction. I would ask one
of them yet further, Whether if it lay in his Power he would corrupt the Wife
of his Friend, though she appeared the most delicious Creature of all her Sex to
him? A Man of Honor would certainly Answer no. But why? For Pleasure is
Happiness and Happiness is the business and interest of Mankind. '^is certain.
But he will not purchase a short Pleasure by a tedious Mortification. For
Mortification is trouble. Besides vanity is the Original of every Delicate
Pleasure, and nothing could please him to a height, that would destroy the good
opinion which he had conceived of himself, as so persidious an Action would not
fail to do. Very good! But then me thinks the doing a foolish thing should
mortify a Man as much at least as the doing an ill thing. Since the doing an
ill thing helps only to degrade him from the rank of those that are good, but
the doing a foolish thing helps to degrade him even from the rank of Men. I
know indeed that there is this considerable difference, that a Man always knows
when he does an ill thing, and is seldom conscious to his doing a foolish
thing. But though he is ignorant of it at the time of his acting, yet others
prompted by Charity or by Malice, may one day make him a Mortifying
Remonstrance. And therefore a Man who would keep in good humor with himself
ought to decline the doing a foolish thing, as much at least as the doing an
ill thing, and ought consequently to avoid the passing a foolish Judgment, and
the being tickled with what an indifferent Author Writes, the which to prevent
is the main Design of Criticism.

Yet Criticism does not only prevent trouble, by restraining the Reader from
passing a foolish Judgment, but it also makes him capable of being pleased to a
height. For Delicacy augments the Pleasure which it retrenches. A man indeed
who is able to Judge is not pleased with so many things. But when he finds he
has Reason to be pleased, his Pleasure is infinitely greater than that of
others. For the reflection that so few are capable of it exceedingly sooths his
vanity. Now as Criticism prepares a Reader to receive this Pleasure, so by
advancing the Art upon which the Critic makes his Reflections, it capacitates
a Writer to give it.

Thus we have endeavored to Answer the Objections which are made against
Criticism in General. But there are two particular Objections which are made
against the following Treatise.

The First is, That it is Written against a Book which has been very agreeable
to a great many Readers.

The Second that it is intended to expose a Poem which was designed for the
service of the Government. The first Objection has been already Answered in the
First Chapter of the Second Part of the Remarks, and thither I refer the Reader.

The Second Objection was urged with all the force, that it was capable of
receiving. That the Government comprehended the Church and State, for both
which I had in a peculiar manner declared and therefore to endeavor to
invalidate that which was designd for the Service of both, would show
alteration of Mind or a want of Thought; and that as the last of these was a
Scandalous Weakness, the first was both an Odious Crime and a Contemptible
Indiscretion.

But that my Transgression in this affair, if there be any Transgression,
proceeds from no alteration of Principles, I think may be easily demonstrated.
For since it is plain that to the considerable detriment of my little affairs,
I declared for the Government at a time when I had no Encouragement, nor any
Prospect of receiving the least return; I think, I should prove as well the
most foolish as the most ungrateful of Men, if I could fall from my English
Principles at a time when I have received repeated Encouragements from an
Extraordinary Man, whose Favor is sufficient to give Force and Fire to the
most Spiritless, and Pride to the Least pretending.

So that if I have been Guilty of any Offense in Writing the following Remarks,
it can proceed from nothing but want of Thought, and such an Offense must be
allowed to be at least in some measure pardonable; it being Evident that no man
would have any Weakness if he could help his Infirmity.

But let me assure all those into whose hands this Book may happen to fall,
that before ever I set Pen to Paper, I endeavored to hearken to the voice
within me with all the attention of which I was capable: And let my Friends
bear Witness for me that I Consulted them with all the sincerity of a Man who
is willing to be informed, and yet that neither they nor I were able to think
of this affair so seriously, but that we were inclined to treat those Men as
ridiculous, who looked upon the Writing against Prince Arthur as the committing
a Crime of State, and the incurring a praemunire.

Boileau in his Epistles to the French King, laughs very freely at all the Dull
Authors who had Written in that Monarch's praise, and if he who is a Slave
could discover by the force of his Reason that he might make so free with his
Master, I am confident that no man can take it amiss, that an Englishman who
Writes to his Fellow Subjects should take the old honest English Liberty of
publicly reprehending what he disapproves.

I never designed to make an Enquiry into any of Mr. Blackmor's Principles,
which may regard either Church or State. A Man had need have a great deal of
time upon his hands, who has leisure enough to Examine a Poet's Politics, or a
Physician's Religion. My intention was only to consider this Gentleman in his
poetical capacity, and to make some Remarks upon the reasonableness of his
Design and upon the felicity of his execution. And therefore the College of
Physicians, to whom he in a peculiar manner belongs, have juster cause to be
alarmed at the following Treatise, than either the Church or the State, who are
no further concerned in him than they are in any other Englishman.

My little penetration could never discover what motive can prevail upon any of
the Clergy of the Church of England to espouse a very faulty Poem, in the which
they cannot be in the least concerned,

For First I have demonstrated in the first part of the following Treatise as
clearly as any thing in Humanity can be demonstrated, that the action of Mr.
Blackmor's Poem is an empty Fiction, without any manner of instruction; and I
cannot for my Soul comprehend how Legends in Rhyme should become Sacred at the
same time that Prosaick Legends are contemned and exploded.

Secondly, Boileau tells us with a great deal of Reason in the Third Canto of
his Art of Poetry, tho it is spoken in Rhyme,

That the Terrible Mysteries of the Christian Faith are not capable of
delightful Ornaments. That the Gospel offers nothing to us but Repentance on
the one side, or Eternal Torments on the other, and that the Criminal mixture
of Poetical Fictions gives a Fabulous Air, even to its most Sacred Truths.

De la Foy d'un Chrestien les Mysteres Terribles;

D'ornemens egayez ne sont point susceptibles.

L'Evangile a l'Esprit n'offre de touscotez

Que Penetence a fair ou tourmens meritez.

Et de vos fictions le melange coupable

Meme a ses veritez done l'air de la Fable.

Now if this be reasonable in the Roman Church, I cannot but think that it must
have as much force in a much purer Religion.

Thirdly. All Mr. Blackmor's Celestial Machines, as they cannot be defended so
much as by common received opinion, so they are directly contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of England. For the visible descent of an Angel must be
a Miracle. Now it is the Doctrine of the Church of England, if I am not
mistaken, that Miracles had ceased a long time before Prince Arthur came into
the World. Now if the Doctrine of the Church of England be true, as we are
obliged to believe, then are allthe Celestial Machines in Prince Arthur
unsufferable, as wanting not only Humane but Divine probability. But if the
Celestial Machines in that Poem are sufferable, that is, if they have so much
as Divine probability, as all the Machines in every Poem certainly ought to
have, it follows of necessity that the Doctrine of the Church must be false. So
that I leave it to any impartial Clergyman to consider, if it can consist with
the credit or interest of our Religion so violently to espouse a Book, whose
errors he cannot possibly defend, but by contradicting the Doctrine which he
is bound to Teach.

But to come to the Second Part of the Objection. I cannot with all the
application of Mind that I am able to use, Discover, that the State is
concerned in Prince Arthur any more than the Church. If the State is concerned
in this Poem, it follows by Manifest consequence that there must be a Parallel
between the late Revolution and the Expedition of Arthur. Now if there is such
a Parallel it must necessarily reach to the Characters, and especially the
principal Characters. For to make two actions like the Causes of them must be
resembling, and the Causes af actions are the manners of the Agents, as has
been more than once declared in the following Treatise. From what has been said
it follows that to constitute a Parallel between the Revolution and the
Expedition of Arthur, King William and Prince Arthur must have resembling
Characters. Now I would fain ask the Friends of Prince Arthur one Question,
Whether the resemblance between Prince Arthur and the present King was designed
to be total or partial? If they Answer that the resemblance was designed but
partial, then I would ask them in what Qualities these Princes consent and in
what they differ, and whether a partial resemblance sussises to make the
Parallel. For I cannot possibly apprehend how any actions can be very like,
whose causes are not very like. But if those Gentlemen reply that the Author
intended a total resemblance, between the present King and Prince Arthur, then
I must freely tell them, that whatever they may pretend they cannot be Mr.
Blackmore's Friends, who either tax him of so prodigious a want of discernment,
as even his honest enemies would blush to accuse him of, or affirm that he
intended to expose the King in a very disshonourable Character, which I am sure
he has a great deal more Honor and Justice, than to design. Prince Arthur when
he is upon the Coasts of Armorica, seems very much concerned for the Cause of
Religion, and for the welfare of Great Britain. But after he has beaten King
Oct's Navy, anp made a League with that Saxon Monarch at Land, he throws of the
Mask, and appears concerned neither for Religion nor for his Subjects, and
gives them cause to believe, that his zeal and his care were only pretenses,
which now it was time to disclaim since in all appearance he had compassed his
Sole Design. Now can any of the Kings most inveterate Enemies urge any thing
against him that is more Maliciously false? Is not this the very thing which
their miserable Libels have so often in vain repeated? That Religion and the
State were only pretenses and that he valued himself alone? Have they not
stupidly objected this to a Hero, who has been seen by assembled Nations to
value himself and human greatness so little, that if I could be presumptuous
enough to find fault with a Prince who shall always be Sacred to me, it should
certainly be upon this account because he is the only Person of all the
Confederates, who has not a due regard for that important Life, upon which the
safety of the Christian World depends. Yet of all the things that his Enemies
have basely objected to him, not one of them has had courage enough to accuse
him of fear. But Mr. Blackmore has made his Prince Arthur afraid upon every
occasion as has been manifestly proved against him in the following Treatise.
And therefore these Gentlemen ought to consider that by affirming Prince Arthur
was designed to resemble the King, they affirm that Mr. Blackmore has drawn a
more unjust and a more unreasonable Character of him than his most Malicious
and most Profligate Enemies have been known to invent: I say, to invent. For
his Enemies tn the midst of their loudest Clamours have inwardly the opinion of
him which we have. For why the late damnable ^esign, if they had not conceived
an Opinion of him that is infinitely greater than that which Prince Arthur
could give them? Why should they divest themselves of humanity, by resolving
even while they were under his Protection, to take away his Sacred Life
deliberately, if they did not regard him as the unsurmountable Obstacle to
their Designs, the Guardian of Law, the Defender of Faith, and the Invincible
Champion of Liberty? Have not his Enemies declared by this very Conspiracy that
they think him above a thousand Prince Arthurs? And at a time when his mortal
Enemies make even the excess of their Malice his Panegyric, shall the Friends
of Mr. Blackmore by the fondness of a mistaken zeal derogate from the greatness
of his Glory? Mr. Blackmore has discernment enough to perceive that the King
incomparably transcends Prince Arthur: And has too much Judgment to attempt the
drawing a Picture, which whoever presumes to Design should tremble, unless he
can place it in so true, so glorious a light, that the consenting World may
admire it.

THere is lately Published the Reports of Sir Tho. Raymond Knt. late one of the
Judges of the Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, of Diverse Special Cases
in all the said Courts, many of them taken whilst he was a Judge: And all
Printed from the Original, written with his own hand, and sold by Samuel
Heyrick, at Grays-Inn-gate in Holborn, and Dorothy Hargrave, in Fleetstreet.

Books Printed for R. Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn.
THe Genuine Epistles of the Apostolical Fathers, Translated by Dr. Wake.

A Practical Discourse concerning Swearing, by Dr. Wake.

Erasmus Colloquies.

Quevedo's Visions both by Sir Roger L'Estrange.

Epictetus's Morals, with Simplicius's Comment, by Mr. Stanhop.

The Turkish Spy, in Eight Volumes.

CATALOGUE.
The Art of Writing and Judging of History, by Father Le Moyne.

Moral Maxims by the Duke of Rochefoucaut.

An Essay on Reason by Sr. G. Mackenzie.

REMARKS UPON Prince Arthur.
CHAP. I. Of an Epick Poem in general.
REsolving to Publish some Remarks which I have made on Prince Arthur, I think
it convenient to say something beforehand of an Epick Poem in general, and to
begin with a Definition of it.

An Epick Poem is a Discourse invented with Art, to form the Manners by
Instructions disguised under the Allegory of Action, which is important, and
which is related in Verse in a delightful, probable and wonderful manner.

This Definition is Bossu's. It will not be amiss to explain it.

An Epick Poem is a Discourse invented with Art to form the Manners by
Instructions disguised under the Allegories of an Action. That is, an Epick
Poem is a Fable, which consists of two Parts First, of Truth, which is its
foundation, and upon which it is built: Secondly, of Fiction, which
allegorically disguises that Truth, and gives it the Form of a Fable. The Truth
is the Moral, and the Fiction the Action which is built upon it. But the
Action, must be Important, and that distinguishes an Epick Poem from Comedy.

It must be an Important Action related; and that makes a distinction between
an Epick Poem and Tragedy.

It is a Discourse in Verse relating an Action, and this makes it a Poem.

The second part of the Definition ordains, that the Relation be probable,
delightful and wonderful.

Thus have we explained the Definition of Bossu, which is grounded upon the
Doctrine of Aristotle: and though we are under no necessity of saying any more,
because Mr. Blackmore having owned the Jurisdiction of Aristotle, is obliged to
be tried by him; yet lest some of his Friends should decline that Jurisdiction,
and fly to Reason for Refuge, we shall take care to show, That Aristotle
prescribed nothing concerning this matter, but what Reason suggested to him,
and what she repeats to us. In the next Chapter, we shall consider that part of
the Definition which relates to the Fable and Action. And because the
Distinction between them is very small, we shall treat of them both together.
We shall endeavor to show, that Right Reason, as well as Aristotle, will have
a Fable to be the Form of an Epick Poem, and an Action the subject matter of
it. This we shall endeavor to prove, by showing the design which every Man has
who writes an Heroic Poem, and then by discovering what means are proper for
the compassing that design.

CHAP. II. Of the Action of an Epick Poem; which, with the Moral, makes the
Fable.
THE Design of every Man who Writes an Epick Poem, is to give Moral
Instructions to Mankind, and particularly to his own Countrymen. Now there are
but two Ways of giving Moral Instructions: The one is by Precept, which is
called Philosophy; the other by Example, which, in other words, is History; and
ever since there have been Societies of Men in the World, there has been both
History and Moral Philosophy, either Written or Oral. But Homer, who had a
Discernment altogether extraordinary, and a Genius capable of Reforming the
World, saw that Common Precepts were ineffectual, and Common Examples impotent.
That Precepts were too shocking to be Persuasive: Because they show us our
faults too directly. For Men, for the most part, are more greedy of Happiness,
than they are provident of Future. We are impatient of Delay, and would be
Happy now. Happiness and Pleasure are terms Synonymous: Therefore he who would
make us Happy, must please us; whereas Precepts only mortify us. Besides, when
Precepts grow irksome to us, we believe, to excuse our selves, that what they
persuade is impossible. Therefore Examples are found more prevalent: Because
they prove the Possibility of what they persuade. But Historical Examples are
not Philosophical enough to instruct, because they are too Particular. Upon
which account it very seldom happens, that they are proportioned to those who
read them; and there is hardly one amongst a thousand Readers with whom they
agree exactly. Nay, those very Persons with whom they square, scarce in all
their Lives meet with two Occasions to make advantage of them. Besides, we are
not so much instructed by what Men do, as by the Causes and Springs of their
Actions; which an Historian seldom transmits to us, because he seldom knows
them: And when he ventures to give those Causes, they are, for the most part,
Conjectures, and very seldom Certainties. Homer and Virgil, without doubt, knew
this very well; and therefore, though they saw that Action was more proper for
Instruction, than bare Precept; yet they found that it must be General Action;
something in which all might be equally concerned; and something of which the
Writers might be perfectly Masters, so as to render a Reason exactly of every
part of it, and to discover the Causes, and to make known the Effects of every
little incident. This they saw very well, and saw at the same time that this
General Action must be their own Creation; that is, that it must be a feigned
one; or, in other Words, a Fable: That the feigning; that is, the imitating an
Action, was the likeliest way both to instruct and please: That Imitation is
natural to Man; and that nothing delights us more; and that Imitation alone
makes a Writer of Verses a Poet. To give all this still further Light by
Example; The Design that Virgil had in Writing the Aeneis, was to reconcile all
the World, and more particularly the Romans, to the New Establishment, and the
Person of Augustus Caesar. To compass this design of his, he frames this
General Maxim, That those good and great Men, of whom Heaven made choice for
the Instruments of its great Designs, were highly favored and protected by
Heaven; and that their Opposers were impious in vain, and should be severely
punished for their Impiety. After he had done this, he found that the best way
to teach this Precept, would be to convey it by Example; that is, by Action.
But he knew very well, that from a Particular Action, a General Precept could
not be deduced: Upon which he forms this Universal and Allegorical Action. A
great State is destroyed by its Enemies, and by the Permission of Heaven, for
the Injustice of those who governed it. But one Man, who was greatly Good, and
who was not an Accomplice in that Injustice, is preserved by Heaven; and is
chosen King by the Remnant of his wretched Countrymen, with whom, and with his
Gods, he sails to a foreign Land; to which he is commanded by those very Gods,
and there lays the foundation of a Mighty Empire to his own Glory, and the
utter Destruction of all who dared to expose him. Thus Virgil formed a General
Action upon an Universal Maxim; and thus we see what the Fable is, which is the
Soul of an Epick Poem. But he who first writ an Epick Poem, saw, that it was
not only necessary to instruct by Action, and by General Action, which alone is
capable of giving General Instruction; but he saw that That Action, to attain
the End which he propounded to reach by it, must, besides its Universality,
have likewise Unity: And that for the following Reasons. To avoid tediousness;
because nothing that over burdens the Memory, can instruct the Mind as it
should do; and therefore Horace gives this General Rule for Precepts, Quicquid
praecipies, esto brevis; And to avoid confusion; for nothing that troubles the
Memory, can instruct the Soul. And Thirdly, because he had but one General
Moral Maxim to convey by it; for he knew very well, that one main Doctrine well
inculcated, would be sufficient at one time for the infirmity of Humane-kind;
and that there was an Occasion but for one Action to convey and inculcate one
important Doctrine.

But it is time to look back, and sum up what we have said; which is, That the
Design of him who writes an Epick Poem, is to give Moral Instructions to
Mankind. That there are but two Ways of giving Moral instruction, Precept and
Example, or, in other words, Action; that Historical Actions were too
particular to give general Instructions, and consequently, that the Action,
which is the Subject of an Epick Poem, must be general; that is, feigned, or,
in other words, a Fable; a Fable compounded of Truth and Fiction; the Truth
disguised and conveyed by the Fiction. Then we proceeded to prove, that the
Action, besides its Universality, must have Unity: And thus we considered it as
far as we can do, till we come to make that general Action singular by the
imposition of Names. But here it will not be amiss to observe what has been all
along hinted. That the Action is only framed for the Instruction; and that it
is designed for a proof of the Moral; that every part of that Action ought to
be a gradual Progress in the proof; and that consequently all the Parts of it
ought to be as dependant one of another, as the Propositions are of a
Syllogism; and that to insert any thing between the Parts, which is foreign
from the Action, that is, from the Argument, is to destroy, or at least to
weaken that Argument; and is as absurdly impertinent, as a Parenthesis would be
between the Propositions of a Categorical Syllogism. That an Epick Poet is to
drive on his Action, which is but urging his Argument; and that he is still to
have an eye to the end of his Action, and to make have to that which is the
conclusion of his Argument. That Homer, one of the greatest of Poets apparently
took this Method, and accordingly received Commendations for it, from one of
the greatest of Critics. Semper ad eventum festinat. The reason of the
Commendation is plain: For only the last Event can be an absolute proof of what
the Poet designed to prove; which is either that Success attends a design which
is conceived by Virtue, and carried on by ^rudence; or that Actions derived
from ill Principles, have often unhappy and fatal Consequence^*

Thus far we have considered the Action in general: But there is no Action
which can be performed without Agents; every thing that is done, must be done
by somebody. The Poet, after he has invented his Action, is obliged to impose
Names. And here he ought to observe two Things. First, To take those Names from
History, to give the Action an Air of Truth. Secondly, To take the Names of
Kings and Rulers of the Earth to make this Action important. For the Divinity
is to appear concerned in it, in order to enforce the Moral; it being certain,
that Religion is the only solid Foundation even of Moral Virtue. And for that
reason the Subject must be important, to make it in some measure deserving of
the Care of so August a Super-intendant. Well then, illustrious Names are to be
imposed on the Persons, to heighten the Subject, and to distinguish the Actors.
Which imposition of Names, does in some measure make that Action Singular,
which was before General. But as that Action which is thus made Singular, is
still at the bottom General; so those Poetical Persons, to which Particular
Names are assigned, remain at the bottom Universal and Allegorical. As soon as
the Poet has imposed his Names, he is to frame his Episodes; which are nothing
but the necessary Parts of the Action extended by probable Circumstances. This
is not to be done till after the Names are imposed. Because if the Poet should
find that any thing would accommodate him, which was really done by the Persons
to whom those Names belong, he is to make his advantage of it; that thus he may
make his Action credible, by making it enter into the Truth of History. But
here he is to take care, that the Episodes do not corrupt the Unity of the
Action, for Reasons which we have mentioned above. And that they may be sure
not to do that, they are to have three Qualities. First, They are to be
derived from the first Plan of the Action. Secondly, They are to have a
necessary or probable Dependence one upon another. Thirdly, Not one of them is
to be an Action it self, but only a necessary Part of an Action extended by
probable Circumstances. Thus we have endeavored to show, that Reason, as well
as the Doctrine of Aristotle, demands, that a Fable should be the form of an
Epick Poem; and that the Action, which is the subject matter of it, should be
Allegorical and Universal; that it should be one, and that it should be
important. It remains that we prove, that it must be likewise entire: That is,
that it must have a Beginning, a Middle, and an End. First, it must have a
Beginning: For since an Action instructs chiefly by its Causes; and the first
Motive to any Action is the Foundation of the Merit or Demerit of the Agent; to
be satisfied, that That Agent is either made happy, because he does well; or
else miserable, because he does ill; I must be satisfied that such or such a
Principle was his first Motive to, or his first Cause of, that Action, which
makes him happy or miserable. Thus Aeneas, upon the Destruction of Troy, is
chosen by the Gods to re-establish the Trojan Empire in Italy. But what is the
Motive to his putting to Sea? His Piety. The Gods command him, and he obeys;
and he prospers accordingly. Thus Achilles quarrels with Agamemnon, and
separates himself from the Common Cause, and loses his dearest Friend by it.
But why did he quarrel? Because he was haughty, violent, unjust and inexorable.
But, Secondly, the Action must have an End; and that End must be such, that I
may either read the very last Event, or have a certain prospect of it. For if
the Poet leaves me in any reasonable Doubt of that; how can I deduce any
certain Moral from the Action? Thirdly, The Action must have a Middle: For
every thing that has a Beginning, and an End, must consequently have a Middle,
and that Middle must have a necessary dependence both upon the one and the
other. I will only speak one word more concerning the Duration of the Action.
The time of it ought certainly to be much longer than that of a Tragedy:
Because the last is designed to move the Passions in order to the correcting
them, and the Violence of the Passions is not durable; and the first is
intended to alter the Habits, which are not quickly either rooted out or
imprinted. Now an Epick Action having longer Duration than a Tragical Action;
for that very reason it ought to have greater compass, and to be extended with
Episodes.

Thus have I endeavored to prove, that Right Reason requires, as well as
Aristotle, that a Fable should be the form of an Epick Poem, and an Action the
Subject Matter of it: That that Action should be one, and at first should be
Allegorical and Universal, and should in a manner become afterward Singular by
the imposition of Names; and by the same imposition of Names should likewise
become important; and then too, that it should be extended with Episodes, but
Episodes which would not corrupt its Unity; in the next place, that it should
be entire; that is, that it should have a Beginning, a Middle, and an End; and
lastly, that its Duration ought to be longer than that of a Tragical Action.
Thus have we treated of the Action. It remains now that we should treat of the
Manner of relating it, and of the Persons employed in it. But first let us
consider Mr. Blackmore's Fable, and the Action of his Poem.

CHAP. III.
THE design of Mr. Blackmore is the very same with that of Virgil, for which he
can never be too much commended. But not only his Design, his Moral is the same
too, if he has any Moral. And here it may be convenient to repeat the Moral of
Virgil, which is this, That those great and good Men, whom Heaven makes the
Instruments of its high Designs are highly favored and protected by Heaven;
and that all who dare to oppose them are impious in vain, and shall be severely
punished for their Impiety.

The Fable which Mr. Blackmore builds upon the Moral, if there be any, is this,
A State is overthrown, and the King destroyed, and his Son forced into
Banishment: That Son, at the end of about ten Years, in Obedience to the call
of Heaven, returns to his Mother Country, and there establishes himself and the
true Religion to his own Glory and the ruin of those who oppose him. The
difference between this and the Fable of Virgil are so very inconsiderable,
that they may be called the same. Mr. Blackmore is so far from denying this,
that he triumphs upon it. He says, he formed himself upon Virgil's Model. Nay,
he has copied him not only in his Fable, but in his Action episodiz'd. He has
done more, he has, for a long time, servilely followed him in the very order of
his Episodes, for which he does not think himself obliged to make any excuse.
For the same great Master copied Homer as closely, and yet has been condemned,
no not by one of his Critics. It Is true indeed, Virgil has imitated Homer, but
never in his Fable, nor in the ranging his Episodes. He had infinitely more
Judgment than to do that; he knew very well, that a Poet was obliged to be the
Author of his own Fable. Aristotle had given him a reason for it in the ninth
Chapter of his Treatise of Poetry: For, says Aristotle, no Man is a Poet any
further than he imitates; and the Poet, who imitates, imitates an Action, that
is, invents a Fable. But to copy another not only in his Fable, but to follow
him servilely in his Action episodiz'd, is rather to imitate an Author than an
Action, and rather to copy a singular Action, than to frame a general one. But
to make the unskilfulness of such an Imitation apparent, I would feign put the
following Questions to Mr. Blackmore's Friends; First, Whether the copying
Virgil, not only in his Fable, but in his Action episodiz'd, must, not of
necessity, to all his Readers, who are acquainted with Virgil, that is, to all
the best of them, make his Incidents not surprising, and consequently, not
agreeable. Secondly, Whether this servile Imitation, must not with all, who
have conversed with Virgil, destroy the Probability of the Poem, and give the
Action an Air of Fiction, which ought to have an Air of Truth. Thirdly, I
desire to know whether, when the Incidents appear neither surprising nor
probable, they can appear admirable, since Aristotle tells us in the same
Chapter which I cited above, that the most admirable Incidents are those which
surprise us, (which Experience confirms,) and since Reason tells us, that no
Man of Sense will admire what he does not believe. Fourthly, I desire to be
informed, whether some Episodes, which do not in the least offend against
Probability or Reason in Virgil, may not be reasonably supposed to be highly
improbable, when they are copied in a modern Poem, by a Poet of our Age, by
reason of the vastly different Circumstances of Times, Places, Persons,
Customs, Religions, and common received Opinions. Fifthly, I should be glad to
be certified, whether since the Episodes, as has been said above, are but the
necessary parts of an Action extended by probable Circumstances, Parts which
have a necessary dependence one upon another, and which may be said to produce
one another, as Causes do their Effects; so that the very first Incident in a
Poem of skillful Structure virtually influences the very last Event: I say,
since this is so, I should be glad to be certified whether the Improbability
even of one Episode must not ruin the Probability of the Poem, and destroy the
Moral. Since that which is probable can never have any dependence upon what is
absurd. But it will then be time to speak of what is probable, or admirable, or
agreeable in the Poem, when we come to the Narration. At present I desire leave
to prove three Things. First, That the Action of Prince Arthur is not one.
Secondly, That it is not entire. And Lastly, that there are Things in the
Action, as it stands in the Poem, with its Names and its Episodes; which,
without referring them to any thing else, or without offending Probability, are
singly and directly utterly destructive of the Moral; which being destroyed,
the Fable falls, of which it is the Foundation, with which the Universality of
the Action falls; so that the Action is nothing but an empty Fiction, of no
manner of concern to us, without any kind of Instruction, and without any
reasonable Meaning.

CHAP. IV. Of the Unity of the Action.
THE Action of the Poem ought to be one not only in the Plan of the Fable and
in the first Project, but likewise after the Imposition of Names, and after the
framing the Episodes. Now that the Action may be one, after it has its
Episodes, care is to be taken, that the Episodes may be proper to it; for it is
the Propriety or Impropriety of the Episodes that preserves or corrupts the
Unity of the Action. Now that the Episodes may be proper to the Action, they
ought to be necessary parts of it, as we hinted above; but then those necessary
parts of it, ought to be extended by probable circumstances; as for example,
The necessary parts of Virgil's Action, are first, The Destruction of a State,
and the Death of a Monarch. Secondly, His Successors setting sail with his Gods
and the remnant of his Countrymen, in order to establish himself and his
Religion in a foreign Country. Thirdly, The Obstacles that he meets in his way.
Fourthly, His surmounting those Obstacles. Fifthly, His Arrival in that foreign
Country. Sixthly, The Obstacles to his Establishment which he meets with there.
And Lastly, His surmounting those Obstacles. These are the necessary parts of
the Action: necessary, because if you remove but one of them, the Action is
destroyed or is rendered imperfect; and these necessary parts extended by
probable Circumstances, make the Episodes: But then an Episode is not only to
be part of the Action, and a necessary part of it; it is not only to be drawn
from the very bottom of the Fable and of the Subject; but it is to have as
strict a Connection with the rest of the Parts, as the Members of one Body ought
to have with each other; which Members have a necessary mutual Dependence, and
are each of them serviceable to the whole, and each of them to every one of the
rest. Now it is plain, that this strict Connection cannot be made by words; but
that it must proceed from the necessity of the Action, or from the Probability
of its Circumstances. The Episodes are not only to be contiguous but
continuous, they are not only to follow one another, but to be consequences of
one another, and to produce one another, as Causes do their Effects; so that
the Precedent be the necessary or probable cause of the Subsequent Il ye bien
dela difference (says B^ssu) enter lier le recit de l'Action a quelque chose,
and y lier l' Action meme.
. Well then it is plain, from what has been said, that the Episodes are to have
these two Qualifications. First, That they are to be drawn from the very bottom
of the Fable and of the Subject. And secondly, that they are to be well joined
with one another. And as the first of these Qualifications provides, That no
Episode can be true and proper, if the Action is perfect without it. So it is
provided by the second, that the Episodes ought to be such, as that not one of
them be perfect without the rest of the Action. An Episode is not an Action,
but a part of one, and is still to be shown in its own nature, that is, in the
Nature of a Member of a Body, and of a part, which being disjoined from the
rest, remains still a part, and can never become a whole. If an Episode were an
entire Action, it could never have so strict a Dependence upon the rest of the
Episodes, as to give it the second requisite Qualification.

Thus we have spoken succinctly of the Nature of Episodes, according to the
Doctrine of Aristotle, and his Interpreter Bossu, and have shown in as little
compass as we could what Qualifications they ought to have; when they have
those Qualifications, then they may be said to be proper and regular: when they
want one or both of those Qualifications, then they may be said to be vicious
and irregular, and to make the Poem episodique, and the Action double. We shall
now endeavor to prove, that there are some of these irregular Episodes in Mr.
Blackmore's Poem.

CHAP. V.
THE first Episode that I design to examine, is the Death of King Uter, related
by Lucius one of Arthur's Attendants to Hoel King of Armorica, in the fourth
Book of the Poem. And here I would fain ask Mr. Blackmore one question. If the
Death of King Uter be or be not a part of the Action of the Poem: If it be not
a part of the Action, I have already gained my point; for it makes the Poem
episodick and the Action double. I know indeed, very well, that an Incident,
which is neither a part of the Fable nor of the Action, may be inserted into
the Action, provided it be necessary to give a reasonable account of something
which is a part of it, such is the relation in the Odysses of the wound which
Ulysses received upon Mount Parnassus, which is absolutely necessary to prepare
the Discovery; and such is the Story of Dido, which Venus relates to Aeneas in
the first of the Aeneis, which is necessary to prepare the Reception of Aeneas,
and the Passion of Dido; but then such foreign Incidents are to be dispatched
in a few Lines, as Homer and Virgil have well observed; whereas the relation of
the Death of King Uter is stretched to the extent of a just Episode. Since
therefore, it has the length of one, it is an Episode, and if it be not a part
of the Action, it is an irregular Episode, and makes the Action double. But
that is not all, it makes it likewise imperfect. Since if the Death of Uter be
not part of the Action, it must want a beginning: For what other beginning can
Mr. Blackmore assign to his Action? Prince Arthur's setting sail from Neustria,
is indeed the beginning of the Narration, but not the beginning of the Action:
For that alone, according to Aristotle, is the beginning of an Action, which
necessarily supposes nothing to go before it. Now Prince Arthur's setting sail
from Normandy, in order to go for England, necessarily supposes, that something
went before. For it supposes, that Prince Arthur had made Preparatives for this
Expedition, and that he had done it by some means, and for some extraordinary
reason, of all which the Reader ought to be informed, since all this comes into
the Action, and is absolutely necessary for a clear understanding of the whole.
Thus Virgil begins his Narration with Aeneas's setting sail from Sicily; but
then in the second and third Books of his Poem, he makes his Hero relate to
Dido, from whence, and how he came into Sicily, and whither he was going, for
what End, and upon what Motives. But now, if Mr. Blackmore shall tell me, that
the Death of King Uter, and the Escape of Prince Arthur his Son, related by
Lucius in the fourth Book, to Hoel King of Brita^ny, informs the Reader of the
Action, and is therefore a necessary part, and a just beginning of that Action;
if Mr. Blackmore, I say, urges this, I can make no reasonable reply to it: But
in that case, I must desire him to satisfy me in another thing, and that is,
whether that which follows King Uter's Death and Prince Arthur's Escape in the
relation of Lucius; as Prince Arthur's Journey to Odar's Camp, his Wars with
the Goths, etc. whethe^ this be not wholly foreign from the Subject? Whether it
does not constitute an irregular Episode, and make a monstrous Gap in the main
Action? For to what purpose is this recited? What relation has the Journey to
Odar's Camp, or Arthur's declamatory Speech by the way, or his serving against
the Goths? What, I say, what necessary or probable relation can all this have
to the Action of the Poem? Is there so much as the least show of likelihood,
that Lucius, who came with Arthur from Normandy, should relate these things to
Hoel, whose Dominions were contiguous to Normandy, and who, consequently, could
not but know all this as well as Lucius himself? All of it, I mean, but the
Speech, for that being long and sententious, and crowded with speculative
Notions, in all likelihood, had not come to his Ears; and this Lucius must have
had an admirable Memory, who could repeat it ten years after it was spoken. I
had made no mention of this at present, if it had not been to put the Reader in
mind, that there is such a thing as this Speech, because I shall be obliged to
come back to it anon. Thus we have endeavored to show, that Arthur's Journey
to Odar's Camp, his Speech by the way, and his Service in the Gothic Wars, as
they are delivered in his relation of Lucius, make the Poem episodick, and
corrupt the Unity of the Action. Let us now consider that which precedes the
Death of King Uter, in the same relation of Lucius. In the first part of which
we have a long account of the Roman Invasion, the Decay of the Empire, the
Saxon Usurpation, the Battle of Salusbury, the Treachery of Carvil, and the
Death of Uter. Now I would sain ask any one, Whether to begin the relation of
Arthur's Expedition, with an account of the Roman Invasion, be not to do like
the Poet, who begun the War of Troy, with an account of the Birth of Helen.
What necessary, nay, what probable relation has the Roman Invasion, or the
beginning of the Saxon Usurpation to the immediate Action of the Poem? Is it so
much as likely, that Lucius should make a tedious recital of these things to
Hoel, who was near enough to great Britain, to be long informed of them before.
As for the Romans, the French were acquainted with them long before the English
knew them; and therefore Hoel might have reason to wonder to hear one born in
England instruct him in the asfairs of Rome. Thus we see, that this relation of
the Roman Invasion and of the Saxon Usurpation, is neither necessary nor
probable; and that they make an Episode or Episodes, which precede the Action
of the Poem, and which consequently corrupt its Unity. The first part of the
Action, as we have said in the third Chapter, is the change of a State, as was
likewise the first part of Virgil's Action. The Gods save a Prince from the
ruin of a powerful State, which Prince is elected King by the remains of his
Countrymen. This is the first part of Virgil's general Action; which when he
had singulariz'd, by making use of Aeneas's Name, he was then obliged to set
the Destruction of this State before us, that is of Troy, and to begin with an
Incident that supposed nothing preceding it. Now if Virgil had made the siege
of Troy the cause of its ruin, he would have been obliged to have related the
beginning of the Siege and the whole ten years War, or else he must have begun
with an incident, that supposed something before it, and consequently that
beginning had not been just: This he had Judgment enough to see, and therefore
had recourse to the Treachery of Sinon, and the Invention of the Trojan Horse;
which is an incident that supposes nothing before it. For the Town might have
been taken by this Stratagem at the beginning of the Siege, as well as at the
ten years end. And Virgil is so far from deriving the Destruction of Troy from
the Siege, that at ten years end, he shows you the Town in a flourishing
condition, and the Graecians broken and conquered. -- Fracti bello, fatisque
repulsi Ductores Danaum, tot jam labentibus annis Instar montis equum divina
Palladis art Aedisicant. And consequently he makes the setting up of the
Troj^n Horse, the very first cause of the Destruction of Troy. Thus Virgil by
his Address and his admirable Judgment, had a recourse to a just beginning.
Almost the very same expedient, which Virgil made use of, lay before Mr.
Blackmore; but he, not having an equal degree of Judgment, did not see it, but
used it without its advantage: For Mr. Blackmore's Action truly and naturally
begins with the Treachery of Carvil. The Battle before it ought not to have
been described at length: for that Battle being so far from contributing to
Uter's ruin, that it rather secured him and weakened the Saxons, could not be a
part of the Action. Carvil's Treachery might as easily have destroyed him
before there was any Battle. The Success of the Battle and Uter's attempt to
rescue the Island from the Usurpation of Octa, ought to have been described in
the compass of ten lines. Mr. Blackmore ought immediately to have come to
Carvil: Then all those Preliminaries had been omitted, which are necessary
neither upon the account of the Action, whose Unity they plainly corrupt, nor
of the person to whom they are related, who is supposed to have known them
before: And the circumstances of Carvil's Treason had been retained, which are
necessary both upon the account of the Action, and of the person to whom they
are related, who might have been reasonably imagined to have been unacquainted
with them. And thus we had had a just beginning of an Action, a beginning which
had left nothing to be supposed, as necessary before it. We ^ad se^n Uter
dying, Arthur escaping and received by Cdar; and then this just beginning of
the Action had given us but a very reasonable account of the beginning of the
Narration, and had shown us how Arthur came to equip a Fleet in Normandy, and
what was the motive that obliged him to sail for England. But still there would
have remained one difficulty, and that is the interval of Time betwixt the
Arrival of Arthur in Normandy, and his sailing for England. For what must have
been done with that? This has been already demonstrated, that Arthur ought not
to have been shown employed about any thing foreign from the Action; and it is
certain, that the Action ought not to stand still. Mr. Blackmore has given the
reason for this in his own Preface. The Action must be but one, says he; when
it ceases, the Poem is ended; and if it be revived and taken up again, it is a
new Poem begins. Action is Motion, and if it ceases cannot be revived so as to
be numerically the same. Well then, what remedy could have been found for this:
why, if I had been to advise Mr. Blackmore, I would have wished him to have
placed the Death of Uter but six Months before the Expedition of Arthur, which
would have just given him time for his Arrival in Normandy, and for the
preparatives for his return. And then Lucius had omitted in his relation, those
foreign Incidents of Arthur's Journey and of his serving against the Goths,
which visibly corrupt the Unity of the Action and the Probability of the
Narration. This indeed might have contradicted the History: But at the same
time, that it would have been less true, it would have been more probable; and
it is Probability not Truth that a Poet is to follow. For a thing that is true
may be very incredible, whereas Probability always persuades. Besides the
History of Arthur is so remote and so little known, that not one Reader in a
hundred would have discovered it, and they who had discerned it, would have
been so far from being offended with Mr. Blackmore for the boldness of so
skillful a Parachronism, that they would infallibly have extolled his Judgment.

CHAP. VI.
LET us now consider another part of the Poem, which makes the whole Episodique
and the Action double: and that is the relation which Arthur makes to Hoel,
which takes up a fifth part of the Poem, and brings into the Action a foreign
Episode or a medly of Episodes. We have said above, that an Episode to be just
and regular, ought to be a necessary part of the Action; that is, that it ought
to be taken from the very bottom of the Fable and of the Subject; and then that
it ought to have a necessary or a probable Connection with the rest of the
parts, which necessary or probable Connection can never be made by words, but
either by the necessity of the Action or the Probability of Circumstances: for
says Bossu, Il y a bien de la difference, enter lier le recit d'une Action a
quelque chose, and y lier l'Action meme. There is a great deal of difference
between connecting the recital of an Action to something, and connecting the
Action it self. An Episode that is just and regular, will be imperfect, when
disjoined from the body of the Action, and the separation will render the body
of the Action imperfect. But now to come to the relation of Arthur, what has
that to do with the business of the Poem? Can any thing be more foreign from
the British Expedition, than those tedious accounts of Chaos and the Creation?
May not the relation in the second Book be disjoined from the rest of the Poem,
and yet be perfect alone? Certainly. For if the relation had been printed
alone, beginning at the third Verse, and continuing to the fourth Verse of the
63d. Page; I say, if all this which consists of about eight hundred Verses, had
been printed alone, and published before the rest of the Poem, no man would
have discovered that it had been a relation taken from the Body of a larger
Poem. Because in all that compass of Verses, it does not appear, that any one
but the Poet speaks, or, that it is addressed to any one but the Reader. So
vastly different is Mr. Blackmore's Conduct from that which Virgil observed in
the relation that Aeneas made to Dido, as we shall have occasion to observe
more at large in another place: For the reason that I have mentioned, if this
part of the Poem had been published before the rest, it would never have been
thought to have been a relation, or indeed a part of any thing else, but it
might have passed upon the world very well with the Title of a religious Poem
upon the Creation of the World and the Redemption of Man: which had made me
almost inclined to think, that all, or the greatest part of this relation, was
by no means designed for what it is employed now; but that it was writ long
before Mr. Blackmore had any intention to write an Heroic Poem; and that upon
forming the design of writing Prince Arthur, he contrived to tack it to the
Work. I shall give my reasons for this Conjecture, when I come to treat of the
Probability of the particular Episodes: But at present I intend to show, that
as part of this relation, if it were disjoined from the body of the Action,
would be perfect and entire by it self, which has been already proved; so if
the whole were retrenched, the Action would not be altered by it; which I
demonstrate thus. Let the Reader end the first Book with this Verse in the 32d.
Page.

What worship to him, what belief I owe?
And begin the fourth Book with these words, Then in, instead of In such, and
the Action will remain as whole and entire, as it is at present, and the
Structure of it will be more regular. Nay the very Connection will be just, and
the Poets business will be done in two Lines, better than he did it in two
Books: For the Reader will conclude from the first two Verses, that Arthur
finished what the Machine began and confirmed Hoel a Christian. Well then,
Since we have clearly shown, that part of this relation may become a whole, and
that if the whole relation were retrenched, it would not in the least maim the
Action, we ought to conclude, that this relation is an irregular Episode, or
rather a Medley of irregular Episodes which corrupt the Unity of the Action.
For a just Episode must be a part of the Action, but an Episode, says
Aristotle, which can be transposed or removed, without maiming or altering the
Action, that is by no means a part of the Action. Thus we have endeavored to
show, that the Action of Prince Arthur has Episodes in it, which are vicious
and irregular, and which corrupt its Unity. Two things are yet to be proved,
that this Action is not entire, and that there are things in the disposition of
it, which destroy the Moral.

CHAP. VII. Of the Integrity of the Action.
WE have said already, that an Action to be entire, must have a Beginning, a
Middle and an End: And that as that was a just beginning of an Action, which
began it so, as that the Reader should require nothing preceding it to
understand what he reads, so that was a just end, which required nothing to
follow it, and left the Reader in no expectation, or at least, no doubt of what
was to come; We are now to show, that Mr. Blackmore's Poem has not this just
end. For after the Combat between Prince Arthur and Tollo, the Poet should have
shown us the former in the quiet possession of his Dominions, and restored to
the Throne of his Father. Perhaps Mr. Blackmore may say, that Virgil has ended
his Action with the single Combat between Aeneas and Turnus. It Is true, he did
so; but Mr. Blackmore may be pleased to consider, that Turnus had been the main
Obstacle to the Trojans Establishment. Yet Virgil was not contented with
removing him, he had before taken care to remove the less, as Amata, Mezentius,
Camilla. But Octa is all along the main Obstacle to the Restoration of Arthur,
and therefore he continuing in power and place at the end of the Poem, the main
Obstruction is yet in the way, and the end of the Action cannot be just. It Is
true, Latinus remained in Power after the single Combat; but first he had never
opposed Aeneas, quite contrary he had at Aeneas his very first Arrival desired
him for the Heir of his Empire, and for his Son-in-Law.

-- Hunc illum poscere fata
Et reor, and siquid very men's augurat opto.
And Secondly, he had taken a solemn Oath, to deliver up his Daughter to Aeneas
upon his success. Octa, it will be urged, had taken the like Oath. But what
signifies an Oath, to a Man of Octa's perfidious Principles? Latinus was just
and honorable, and was inclined to the Trojan; Oct'a was base and treacherous,
and and mortally hated the Briton. It Is true indeed, he had made a solemn
Covenant; but then he had made one before too, which yet upon the first
advantage he broke. What security then can the Reader have, that he intended to
keep this inviolable? And consequently, how can we have any Moral assurance
from the Action, that Arthur, upon the success of the single Combat, was
restored to his Father's Kingdom. Thus it appears, that the main Obstruction
continuing, the Action cannot be justly ended, and Octa lies as a scandal in
our way to the Moral: Of which we design to say more in the following Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Moral.
SInce Mr. Blackmore's Poem wants a just End, it manifestly wants a Moral;
which must always be deduced from the very last Event. If Prince Arthur has any
Moral, it must be the same with Virgil's. Which is this: That those great and
good Men, who are chosen by Heaven to be the Instruments of its great Designs,
are highly favored and protected by Heaven; and that all who oppose them are
impious, in vain, and shall be severely punished for their Impiety. This Moral
has Two Parts: The first is, that the great and good Men, whom Heaven chooses
to be the Instruments of its great Designs, are under the divine Protection;
and consequently shall infallibly succeed in their Undertakings. We have said
once already, that the Action is to prove the Moral; and if any one shall urge
against this, that to conclude from Particulars to Generals, is not a Logical
proceeding: To this we answer, That the Action, at the bottom, is Universal and
Allegorical, even after the Imposition of Names; and that the Persons likewise,
after they are made Singular by the Imposition of Names, remain at the bottom
Universal and Allegorical. To illustrate this by Example, Aeneas succeeds in
his Undertaking, and is established. Aeneas, at the bottom, is an Universal
Character; and is put for any or every good and great Man that is chosen by
Heaven to be instrumental in the carrying on its great Designs. And therefore
the showing that Aeneas succeeds, shows that every such good and great Man,
succeeds in such Enterprises, and is established: To show which, is to
demonstrate the Moral; but then it must be shown, or the Moral remains
unprov'd. Now I would fain ask how Mr. Blackmore's Poem shows Prince Arthur's
Establishment; when we neither see it, nor have any Moral assurance of it; but,
on the Contrary, have very just Reasons to doubt of it. But there is yet
another Place in the Story which is destructive of this first Part of the
pretended Moral. King Uter is a very good King, (at least Mr. Blackmore tells
us so, though the Character which he gives of him does not inform us so: but of
that we shall speak in its place;) and yet this very good King, who begins a
very just War for the recovering Liberty, and the securing Religion, loses at
once his Life and his Kingdom by the Villainy of a treacherous Pagan. But now
let us come to the second Part of the Moral: which is, That all who oppose
these great and these good Men, are impious, in vain, and shall be severely
punished for their Impiety. Now Octa first opposes King Uter, and that by a
base and a treacherous Way, and not in an open and honorable Manner, as
Mezentius and Turnus resisted Aeneas; yet Treachery prevails, and Right and
Innocence fall. But that is not all: The same Octa opposes the Restoration of
Arthur; makes a League upon his ill Success, and then perfidiously breaks it;
yet at last is left in Power and Place; and we find, to our Sorrow, that the
very worst thing that can happen to him, is, that he is like to Marry his
Daughter to the Hero, whose Father he Murdered. Thus we have shown, that there
are two things in Mr. Blackmore's Poem which destroy his Moral: which being
destroyed, the Fable falls of course. For, says Bossu, the most essential Part
of a Fable, and that which indispensably ought to be the Foundation of it, is
the Truth that is signified by it. Now the Fable being fallen, the Action is
gone: For the Fable, says Aristotle, Chap. 6. is the Imitation of an Action;
that is, it is an Universal and Allegorical Action. And thus we see, that there
is no Universal and Allegorical Action in Mr. Blackmore's Poem; and
consequently, that Prince Arthur is not an Epick Poem; for an Epick Poem, as we
have laid down in the Definition of it, is a Discourse invented with Art, to
form the Manners by Instructions, disguised under the Allegory of an Action;
That is, that it is a Fable, or the Imitation of an Action, or an Universal and
Allegorical Action. But the Subject of Mr. Blackmore's Poem, as we have proved,
is not an Universal and Allegorical Action, but the particular Adventures of
Arthur; which Adventures, to make use of the Words of Bossu, if they are
feigned, make the Poem an empty Fiction and a mere Amusement. And though they are
true, the Poem is at the best but an historical and faithful Narration. It is
by no means one of those Epick Poems, of which Aristotle and Horace have left
us such admirable Rules, and Homer and Virgil such just Examples. And thus we
have done with the First Part of the Definition of Bossu: which is, That an
Epick Poem is a Discourse invented with Art, to form the Manners by
Instructions, disguised under the Allegory of an Action; That is, that it is a
Fable, or an Universal and Allegorical Action. We have endeavored to give the
Reasons why a Fable must be the form of it, and a General Action the subject
matter; we have shown why that Action must be one, and why it must be made
important, by the imposition of Illustrious Names. Then we proceeded to show,
that after the Action is rendered in a manner Singular by the Imposition of
Names, it remains still at the bottom Universal and Allegorical; that it must
be one, and that it must be entire. Then we came to examine Mr. Blackmore's
Poem, and endeavored to prove, that his Action is not one, and that it is not
Entire, nor Universal, nor Allegorical; and consequently, that his Poem is no
Fable, and no Heroic Poem.

REMARKS UPON Prince Arthur. PART II.
CHAP. I.
WE are now come to the second Part of the Definition of an Epick Poem, which
is, That it is a Discourse related in Verse, in a delightful, probable and
wonderful Manner. It is an Action related and not represented, which
distinguishes an Epick Poem from Tragedy. An Epick Poem is then a Narration,
and that Narration must be delightful. For as Tragedy and Epick Poetry are
more grave and more philosophical than History, because they are more general,
so they are more persuasive than Philosophy, because they are more delightful;
for Pleasure is the first mover of the Soul. It has not the least Motion,
Inclination or Tendency, but in order to the being pleased: The Men who are
most abandoned to interest, always propound Delight, and the Miser himself, at
the very time that he endtres Hunger, and Thirst, and Cold, and Care, and
Anxiety, is a wonderful Martyr to Pleasure: But before we come to examine,
whether Mr. Blackmore's Narration be or be not delightful, it will be
convenient to answer an Objection: For, says one, to make short of the matter,
the Narration of Prince Arthur pleases me, and pleases ten thousand more, and
therefore it is delightful. I can bring a Gentleman who will use the same
Argument in the behalf of Quarles, that he pleases him and ten thousand more,
and therefore he is delightful. I do not say this, to make any comparison
between Mr. Blackmore and Quarles. I know very well there is none. I only say
this, to put the Reader in mind, that there is a good taste, and that there is a
bad, and that the latter very often prevails. I am perfectly persuaded that
Bavius and Maevius had a formidable Party in ancient Rome, a Party, who thought
them by much superior both to Horace and Virgil. For I cannot believe, that
those two great Men would have made it their business, to fix an eternal brand
upon them, if they had not been Coxcombs in more than ordinary credit. But some
will tell me, that Men of good sense are pleased with Mr. Blackmore's Poem:
It Is granted. But that which is commonly called good sense, is not sufficient
to form a good taste in Poetry, though the good sense should be joined with an
inclination for Poetry, and with a tolerable share of experience in it: For if
this were sufficient, it would undeniably follow, that all who have this
Experience, this Inclination, and this good Sense, would have the same taste:
whereas it is manifest, that they who are not without these qualities, differ
very considerably in their opinions and in their tastes of Verses and Poems. Nay
men differ very much from themselves. A Man of Sense is a Man of Sense at five
and twenty; and yet at that Age he has often a quite different taste from what
he has at five and thirty. I think, I need not be troubled to prove that in
each of the Nations of Western Europe, there are a great many Men of good
Sense, who have an inclination for Poetry, and who are not without some
experience in it. This will be easily granted, nor can that which follows be
easily denied: That there are some of our Neighboring Nations, in which a good
taste is very rarely or not at all to be found: from whence I conclude, that
good Sense and Experience joined with an inclination for Poetry, are all
insufficient to the forming a good Taste. I will venture to affirm yet further,
that there are several persons who are not without a Taste for the little
Poetry, and who can judge exactly of Elegies, and Songs, and Amorous, and
Bacchanalian Odes; who can tell whether they have a Poetical Spirit in them,
and whether Nature be not too much beholden to Art; I say, there are several of
these, who besides that their Judgments are often perverted by Affection or
Interest, which frequently debauch the very understanding, as well as they
corrupt the Will, have not the least Knowledge of the rules or the least Notion
of that which the French and we call Genius; and consequently cannot be rightly
qualified to judge of the greater Poetry. But here it will be convenient to
obviate an Objection. For, says one, if a true taste for Epick Poetry were
confined to so small a number, and consequently, so few were capable of
receiving the true delight from it, it would follow from hence, that its
Instruction, which it conveys to the Reader by pleasure, would not only be
restrained to a very few, but to those who want it least; whereas a general
Instruction being designed by it, the Pleasure must be general too. To this I
answer, First, That by pleasing the best Judges, it will infallibly please the
rest, and please them more than it could have done, if the others had not been
satisfied. Secondly, That if the best Judges, and those who have a true taste
are disgusted, the rest will quickly be cloyed. For time will be sure to
propagate Truth, when it is once discovered. Pebbles may, by their false
glittering, be imposed on the ignorant for Diamonds, but they cannot be long in
an Error. The first Artist that sees the Stones will soon discover their want
of Solidity, and others then will find out their want of Beauty. It Is in Poems
as it is in Stones, Time will easily make the Discovery, whether they are solid
or no, and the more solid they are found, the more and the longer will they be
seen to shine, for their full and their lasting Luster depends on their perfect
Solidity. But now if any one shall tell me, that Persons every way qualified
for Judges, commend Mr. Blackmore's Poem; to that I answer, that there are
several things in it, which may stand before the strictest Judges. But that the
greater part of the Narration, neither is nor can be delightful to Men of the
best taste, is what I shall now endeavor to prove.

CHAP. II.
THere are three things which render a Narration delightful: First, The
Persons that are introduced in it. Secondly, The Things related in it. And
Thirdly, The Manner of relating them. I shall begin with the Persons that are
introduced. In speaking of which, I shall be the more succinct, because Bossu
has so fully, and so admirably treated of them, that scarce any thing can be
added to what he has said, and the Reader may very well be referred to him. The
Persons then introduced in an Epick Poem, ought to have Manners: that is, their
Discourse and their Actions ought to discover their Inclinations and their
Affections, and what Resolutions they are certain to take. The Manners then are
to appear of the Persons that are introduced, and they are to have four
Qualities. First, They are to be Good. Secondly, They are to be Like. Thirdly,
They are to be Convenient. And Fourthly, they are to be Equal. First, They are
to be Good: By Goodness, I do not mean a Moral Goodness; for the Manners may be
Poetically Good, though they are Morally Vicious. The Manners then are Poetically
Good, when they are well marked; that is, when the Discourse and the Actions of
the Persons which are introduced, make us clearly and distinctly see their
Inclinations and their Affections, such as they are, and make us judge by the
Goodness or the Pravity of those Inclinations, what good or what evil
Resolutions they are certain to take. The Manners of the Persons then ought to
be good, that is, they ^ought to be well marked: and this Goodness is the first
and fundamental Quality of the Manners, without which, they can have none of
the other three; for if they are not well marked, it is impossible they should
be Like, or Convenient, or Equal. And they are to be Good, not only upon the
Account of Instruction; (for an Action instructing by its Causes, which Causes
are the Manners, unless I can be certain, what the Principles of the Agents
are, I can never deduce any certain Moral from the Action) but they are
likewise to be good, that the Narration may be delightful. The Man who seeks
to entertain himself in an Epick Poem, where the Manners of the Persons are not
distinctly marked, is like one who goes for Conversation into a strange
Company, where they are all reserved; upon which reservedness he grows uneasy,
and stretches and gapes, and takes the first opportunity to be gone, whereas,
if that company had discoursed and had acted so freely, as to have discovered
their real Sentiments, and so to have made themselves known; they would not
only by that means have secured his Attention, but such of them, whose
Inclinations and Humors he had liked, would have insinuated themselves into
his Affection, and by little and little engaged him to wish them well. The
proper delight which Poetry gives us, it gives us by Imitation. Now the Persons
that it introduces are designed for Imitations of Men; but they cannot be
Imitations of Men, unless the Manners are clearly marked: For as I can discern
in every Man, with whom I converse for any time, and attentively, how he stands
inclined and affected, if he is not reserved; So if I do not make this
discovery in the principal Persons, which are introduced in an Epick Poem, I
strait conclude, that those Poetical Persons are not Imitations of Men, but
only Fantoms and mere Chimera's.

And so much for the first and fundamental Quality of the Manners, which is
their Goodness. The second is their Likeness. But this has relation only to
known Characters: That is, to such as have been made famous by History or
Common received Opinion. When a Poet introduces any such notorious Person, he
is to paint him with the very same Qualities, which he is known to have had, or
to have. And a Poet, who would please, must be sure to keep this Resemblance:
For otherwise, he does like a Man who pretends to give me a Character of an old
Acquaintance; and gives him such Qualities as I am certain he never had. Which
makes me conclude, that this Giver of Characters is either incapable of knowing
Mankind, or else he raises my Indignation by endeavoring so grossly to impose
upon me. Monsieur Dacier has observed, that Monsieur Racine has offended
against this second Quality of the Manners in his Hippolytus; for he has made
him a Lover. Mr. Dryden made the same Observation before him in his Preface to
All for Love. If I would reckon up all our Tragedies, whose Characters are not
resembling, it would be a very tedious Catalogue. We need not wonder at it,
since we have so few of our Tragedies that have the first fundamental Quality
of the Manners, and have any Characters at all. The third Quality of the
Manners, is their Convenience: They ought to be agreeable to the Age, the Sex,
the Climate, the Rank, the Condition of the Person that has them. And the
Manners ought to have this convenience particularly in the principal Persons of
a Tragedy, and of an Epick Poem, for the following Reasons. For, first, those
principal Persons being Illustrious, and by their high Station rendering the
Action important, if a Poet gives them any base Qualities, unworthy of their
Rank, and unbecoming of their Power and Place, he manifestly corrupts the
Dignity of his Characters, and the Majesty of his Poem: And consequently makes
an absurd and unnatural mixture, which will be sure to disgust all who are able
to judge. Secondly, He offends against that Precept of Aristotle for drawing
the best Likeness. He is to do like a good Painter, he is to draw his Character
like; but he is to conceal its Blemishes, if it has any, and is to give it all
the Imbellishments, which will not corrupt its Resemblance: For it is a Poet's
business to please, and it is self-evident that a best Likeness will please
more than a worst. In order to the giving this best Likeness, a Poet is not so
much to consult Nature in any particular Person, which is but a Copy, and an
imperfect Copy of Universal Nature; he is to examine that Universal Nature,
which is always perfect, and to consult the Original Idea's of things, which in
a Sovereign manner are beautiful. This is the Precept of Aristotle, and his
Interpreter Horace.

Respicere exemplar Vitae, morumque jubebo
Doctum Imitatorem and veras hinc ducere voces.
Thus if a Poet is to draw a King or a great Captain, which are famous in
History, he is to draw his Characters like, that his Manners may have the
second Quality, which Aristotle and Nature with him requires. But that they may
have the third Qualification likewise, if History has given that King or that
Captain, any shameful Frailty, or low Vice, which are unworthy of the Majesty
of the one, and of the high Command of the other; the Poet is obliged to
conceal that Frailty, and to dissemble that Vice. He is not indeed to give them
the Excellence which is opposed to the Frailty, or the Virtue which is contrary
to the Vice, with which they are attainted by History: Because that would be
manifestly to destroy the Resemblance. But he is to give them all the
Imbellishments which may be becoming of the Dignity, and not destructive of the
Likeness. And therefore in drawing a King, or a great Captain, he is to
consider what Inclinations, what Sentiments, and what Designs may be probably
inspired by those high Offices; and then to choose such as may neither destroy
the Resemblance of his Characters, nor oppose the Design of his Action.
Aristotle has taken notice that Earipides has offended against this convenience
of the Manners, in the Ulysses of his Icylla, and in his Menalippe, whom, though
a Woman, and young, he has introduced as perfectly instructed in the Physical
Doctrine of Anaxagoras. The same Euripides has offended against this third
Quality of the Manners in his Hippolytus. For Phaedra, in the Scene in which
she discovers her Love for her Son, speaks too Philosophically either for her
Sex or for her present Condition. For a Speculative or a Sententious Discourse;
besides, that it puts a stop to the Action of the Poem, is by no means the
Language of a very violent Passion. I the rather mention this, because Mr.
Rymer, who has Translated this Scene of Euripides, in his Observations upon the
Tragedies of the last Age, has been so far from finding this fault, that he
rather seems to mistake it for an Excellence. I had once some thoughts of
bringing Hippolytus upon the English Stage. In order to which, I had imitated
the forementioned Scene of Euripides; in imitating which, I took care to avoid
his Defects, as Racine had judiciously shown me the way; who has copied all the
Beauties of the Grecian, and has prudently declined his faults. I have caused
it to be printed at the end of this Chapter, that the Reader, by comparing it
with Mr. Rymer's Translation of Euripides, may see his fault against the
convenience of the Manners more clearly, and may meet with a little diver^on
amidst the barrenness of these dry Speculations. One reason, amongst others,
why I did not finish that Tragedy, was, because I saw there was a necessity
either for destroying the Likeness of the Manners in the Person of Hippolytus,
or for introducing a Character, that would by no means be proper for the
English Stage. But it is time to proceed to the fourth Condition of the
Manners, and that is their Equality. The Manners are to be constant and
consistent. Every Person is so clearly to be shown at his first appearance,
that he may afterward assume no resolution, which may deceive the Expectation
which he gave of himself at first. This Equality of the Manners must be
maintained for the following Reasons. First, because it is so in Nature; which
every Poet imitates; and by the imitation of which alone he can pretend to
delight. For Nature, for the most part, is uniform and regular, and maintains a
constant course. Indeed sometimes, for the sake of variety, she appears unequal
and irregular; and therefore when a Poet copies such an Original, Aristotle
allows him to copy him like; but in order to the doing that, he is to draw him
everywhere equally unequal and irregular. But secondly, this Equality of the
Manners must be maintained on the account of the Moral. For since every Action
instructs by its Causes, which Causes are the Manners; how can I deduce a
certain Moral, from the Event of that Action, whose Causes are contradictory.
But thirdly, the Manners must be maintained; because unless they have Equality,
they have neither the requisite Goodness, nor the Convenience. This is Monsieur
Dacier's Reason, and it is very solid. As I shall show by Example. Euripides
has offended against this Equality of the Manners in his Iphigenia in Aulis.
For the timorous and suppliant Iphigenia that appears at first, is by no means
the same with that generous Princess, who so nobly contemns Death for her
Father's Glory and the Confederate Cause. The Manners then in Iphigenia are not
well marked, and consequently are not good. For how can I believe, by what she
appears at first, that she will at last assume that heroic Resolution of
joyfully resigning her Life for the good of her Country? Nor are the Manners in
her convenient. For if the Excess of Fear, which she shows at first is becoming
of her; the Excess of Courage, which she shows at last, must by consequence be
very undecent in her. But I think we may safely affirm, That neither is that
Excess of Fear becoming of her Rank, nor that Excess of Courage of her Sex. And
so there appears in one Character a double inconveniency of Manners. And thus
we have gone through the four Conditions of the Manners, and have given the
Reasons why they ought to be good; that is, why they ought to be well marked;
why they ought to be convenient; why they ought to be like, and why they ought
to be equal. But in speaking of the first Condition of the Manners, I omitted a
very important thing. I showed, that by their Goodness, I meant a Poetical and
not a Moral Goodness: that the manners may be Poetically Good, though they are
Morally Vicious. But this I forgot to add, That they are never to be Morally
Vicious, unless it appears to be necessary, and that there is to be no vice in
any, especially, in the principal Characters; unless the Action and the Fable
require it. And thus we have laid down the Doctrine of the two great Critics,
Aristotle and Horace in relation to the Manners. Let us now take notice of two
or three very important Precepts, which Bossu has grounded upon that Doctrine,
and which he has drawn from his piercing Observations of the Conduct of Homer
and Virgil. The first Precept is grounded upon the first Condition that
Aristotle prescribes for the Manners. And there is the same reason for it: For
the Manners are to be good, that is, they are to be well marked; because Poetry
is an Imitation of Nature, and the Persons in a Poem are Imitations of Men. Now
it is plain, that any Man who talks without any reserve, will, in some measure,
show how he is inclined and affected. And therefore a Poet is to mark the
Manners of his Person, so as to show how they are inclined and affected. But
that is not all, says Bossu, he is to mark the Manners of his principal Persons
so clearly and so fully, as to distinguish them from the rest of Men. Because
to do that, is to imitate Nature exactly; without an exact Imitation of whom, a
Poet cannot give perfect delight, Now this is certain, that Nature has as much
distinguished every individual Man by the turn of his Mind, as by the form of
his Countenance. Bossu has observed, that there are Qualities of three sorts
which go to the composing the Character of the Hero of an Epick Poem. The first
sort are such as are absolutely necessary for the Fable, and for the Action.
And those are always not only to appear, but to appear predominant over the
rest, so as that the Hero is to be known and distinguished by them. The
Qualities of the second sort are such as are to embellish the first. And the
third are such as are to sustain them both. The first of these Qualities in the
Hero of Virgil, is the transcendent Goodness of his Nature. The second Quality,
which beautifies and exalts the first, is his solid Piety, and the entire
Resignation of his Will to the Gods. The third Quality, and that which sustains
the two first, is an Heroic Fortitude, which is absolutely necessary for the
carrying on a great Design; and such is the Design of the Hero of an Epick
Poem. And thus, in the Character of Ulysses, we find Dissimulation set off by
Prudence, and sustained by Valor. And the first of these Qualities which
distinguishes the Hero, is always to appear, as we said above, and is always to
predominate over the rest: Nay, it is to reign in those very Episodes, which
appear to be contrary to the predominant Quality of the Hero. Thus the
Character of Achilles's Rage is set off by a noble Vehemence, and sustained by
a wonderful Valor. But Rage is the principal Quality, and therefore that
always appears. Achilles is angry, whether present or absent; and he is as
furious in the Council where he seditiously threatens his General, and in the
Funeral Rites ^f Patroclus, where he drags about the Body of Hector, as he is
in the Combat. The fundamental Quality of Aeneas his Character, is the
transcendent Goodness of his Nature; which was easy to be maintained in the
first six Books of the Aenei's, because they seem to require a sweetness of
Nature. But the six last are full of the Horrors and Distractions of War,
where it was no easy matter to make this fundamental Quality of the Hero's
Character shine. The fourth Condition which Aristotle prescribes for the
Manners, which is their Equality required, that Aeneas, who in the former part
of the Poem had shown so much Goodness of Nature, should show no Cruelty in the
latter; but it required no more. If Aeneas, in the latter part of the Poem, had
shown Heroic Fortitude without Compassion or Cruelty, the Equality of the
Manners had been maintained; because there had been nothing in one part of
them, which could be thought contrary to the other. But now see the Precept
that Bossu has grounded upon this fourth Precept of Aristotle. It is not
sufficient, says he, that the Manners be equal; there must besides be an Unity
of Character, and the Hero must everywhere appear to be animated with the same
Spirit which inspired him at first. That Quality which makes the fundamental
Part of his Character, is to predominate always, and upon all Occasions. For it
is that which distinguishes him from all other Persons, and makes him such an
individual Hero; and therefore as soon as he loses that, he certainly loses his
Character. And therefore Aeneas shows the same sweetness of Temper in killing
Lausus, that he did in the distribution of the Rewards at the Funeral Rites of
his Father. Thus has Bossu, from observing the Conduct of Homer and Virgil,
judiciously grounded two Precepts upon the first and fourth Condition, which
Aristotle prescribes for the Manners. The Poet is not only to mark the
Inclinations and Affections of his Hero; but he is to mark them in such a
Manner, as clearly to distinguish him from all other Persons, and to constitute
him that individual Hero. In the next place, the Poet is to take care, not only
that his Hero appears to have no contrary Sentiments, which the fourth
Condition of the Manners requires; but that the Quality, which is the
Foundation of his Character, and which constitutes him that individual Hero,
should always shine, and always predominate, either on like or on contrary
Occasions. Bossu has gone yet further, and by observing the Conduct of the two
Princes of Poets, has clearly shown us, that this Quality, which is the
Foundation of the Hero's Character, and which must always predominate in him,
must also shine throughout the rest of the Poem, and be seen to prevail in the
rest of the Persons, even in the opposite Characters, whose very Natures are to
be subjected to the Hero's Nature as he subdues their Persons; that all the
parts of the Poem, as parts of one and the same Body, may appear to have the
same Nature, and to be animated all with the same commanding Spirit: From a
consideration of which exact Uniformity as from an exact Imitation of Nature, a
Sovereign Delight must result to discerning Readers: I should be too tedious,
if I should show how Virgil has brought about this by the Passions and the
Dependencies, which he has given to the Characters which he has opposed to his
Hero. Besides, I shall have occasion to say something of this, when I come to
examine Mr. Blackmore's Characters. But I desire leave to go back a little, and
to take notice of an observation, which Bossu has made upon the first condition
of the Manners. The Manners, says he, are to be good; that is, they are to be
well marked, but they are not to be shown so fully in some Persons as they are
to be shown in others; for every Man's Character is to appear no further than
he is concerned in the Action. This observation of Bossu is a plain consequence
of the Doctrine of Aristotle; for says he, (...). Then the Manners are good,
when a Person shows by his discourse or by Actions, what choice or what
resolution he will take: That is, when a Person by his present Sentiments, and
by his present Actions makes us foresee the Future, then are the Manners of
that Poetical Person good. Now it is plain, that a Man, by what he says, or
what he does, can never show what he will do, unless, what he says, or what he
does, is efficient of what he will do; which can never appear till the thing is
done. From whence it clearly follows, that the Manners can never be well
marked; and that they are Poetically bad, when they do not influence the
Action. Aristotle has formally declared it a little lower, (...). The Manners
when they are not necessary, are Poetically bad. Now they can never be
necessary, but as they are Causes of Action. And indeed, since the Action of a
Poem is only for Instruction, and it instructs by its Causes, which Causes are
the Manners; I cannot find out a Reason why any Manners should be shown, which
are not Causes of the Action. Thus we have considered the Manners according to
the Doctrine of Aristotle and Horace, and the Observations of Bossu. We have
shown that they are to be well marked; that they are to be convenient; that
they are to be like; and that they are to be equal; and that besides this, a
Unity of Character is to be preserved in the Hero, and to be maintained through
the Poem. I shall now give the Reader the forementioned Scene, and then
proceed to consider the Characters which are to be found in Prince Arthur.

CHAP. III.
FOR the better understanding of the following Scene, it will be necessary to
premise some things which are out of the Action, and some which are delivered
in the foregoing Scene.

Phaedra was the Daughter of Minos and Pasiphae, and the Sister of Ariadne.
Pasiphae was the Daughter of the Sun, who had discovered the Intrigue between
Mars and Venus, which Goddess had resolved to revenge the Discovery upon all
his unhappy Offspring. The incestuous Passion of Pasiphae is very well known,
and so is the Love of her Daughter Ariadne, who was abandoned by Theseus on the
Shore of Naxos, one of the Aegaean Isles. Theseus afterward married her Sister
Phaedra; who, upon her first Arrival at Athens, fell desperately in Love with
Hippolitus the Son of Theseus by an Amazonian Lady. But Phaedra being a Lady of
a great deal of Virtue, looked upon so criminal a Passion with Horror, and
resisted its violence with the last Reluctance. She kept what she felt
concealed from all the World, even from Euphrasia her Friend and her Confident,
who came from Crete with her. She pretended a Mother-in-Law's Aversion for
Hippolytus, and caused him to be banished her Presence, and commanded that no
one on pain of Death, should presume to pronounce his Name in her hearing; and
at last prevailed upon Theseus, by her importunity to send his Son to Tretzene,
a Town that belonged to him, and situated upon the Aeaean Sea on the Coast of
Peloponnesus. Time, at length, had palliated her Passion, which it was not in
its power to cure, when at three years end, she was carried by her Husband to
Tretzene, which he looked upon to be a proper place for her Residence, while he
took a Journey with Pirithous into Epirus. Phaedra saw Hippolytus in her
Husband's Absence, at the sight of whom her Passion broke out with so much
redoubled Fury, that this unfortunate Lady saw very well, that nothing less
than dying could preserve her Honor and Innocence: she resolved to die then,
and for three days and nights had neither slept nor received any Sustenance; at
the end of which time, the Action of the Play begins, which is opened by
Hippolytus and his Friend Alcander, who prepare the Audience for the following
Scene. Phaedra resolves once more to behold the light, in order to which, she
sends Euphrasia before, to clear the outward Court of the Palace. Hippolytus,
who delighted in Hunting and Horse-races, and who was by nature averse from
Love, did not in the least guess at the Passion of Phaedra. And Euphrasia
resolved to take this opportunity for the making a last Effort to oblige her
distress to discover the cause of so violent and so strange a disorder. Three
things dissuaded me from the going on with this Play: The first was, That its
Subject appears to depend too much on the fabulous History. The second was,
That I could not be reconciled to the fatal necessity which lay upon Phaedra,
and which was the original cause of her ruin. The third was, The necessity that
there was for the framing the Character of Hippolytus not resembling, or the
forming it improper for the English Stage, which will never endure, that the
principal Person of the Drama should be averse from Love.

Hippolytus, Alcander, Euphrasia.
Euph. LOok down relentless Heaven, look down: ah Prince!
Could ever trouble be compared to mine?
Amain the dreadful hour comes hurrying on,
When the unhappy Queen must be no more:
Even in my Arms, she languishing expires,
But stubbornly conceals the fatal Cause.
Some secret Charm eclipses all her brightness,
Which struggles with eternal Night in vain.
Now Passion plays the Tyrant in her Soul,
And raging, tears her from the arms of Fate
To see the Sun once more. Her awful grief
Commands that all respect it and retire.
But see, she comes.

Hipp. Enough, I Will instantly withdraw,
And not inhance it by my hateful Presence.
Exeunt Hipp. Alc.
Enter Phaedra.
Phaed. Stop, stop Euphrasia, for I faint, I die;
My trembling Knees betray their lifeless burden;
Alas I die, support the wretched Phaedra.
My Eyes are dazzled at the unwonted light,
And every Object seems to dance around them:
The World appears to move in have before me,
And in the hurry leaves me.

Euph. Ye Powers, ye cruel Powers, can you see this?
And can you persevere?

Phaed. Gods! how these ornamental Trifle^ plague me.
What vain officious hand, has with such care,
Composed my Dress, and ranked my plaited Hair;
O fond Attempt to beautify Despair!
How every thing torments me? every thing conspire^
T'undo me more? have, have, let me be gone,
And hide my Face for ever.

Euph. How all her wishes contradicting clash?
It Is scarce an hour, since you your self condemned
Your barbarous Design upon your self:
Since you provoked your Woman's artfull Hand,
T'adorn you like the charming Queen of Athens,
The beauteous Partner of a Hero's Bed.
It Is but a moment since you wished once more,
To see the cheerful, lovely Face of day,
And can it be thus hateful grown already?

Phaed. Bright, glorious Founder of a mournful Race:
O thou of whom my lofty Mother dared
To boast her self aloud, the high born Daughter!
Refulgent God, who now perhaps may blush
At the distraction of abandoned Phaedra:
Of thee, O Sun, I come to take my leave,
To take my leave for ever.

Euph. What? still thus obstinately bent on Fate?
What? still preparing thus to meet that Death,
Which but too fast advances?

Phaed. Gods! how I hate these Walls, this loathsome Court.
O for the Chase, the Woods enchanting Sport!
Hark! the s^ril Cornet through the Groves resounds!
Hark! the young Hunter chears his fainting Hounds!
How to the charming cry my ravished Heart rebounds!

Euph. Madam, what means! --

Phaed. Quickly let some transport me to the Barriers,
Whence with immortal Raptures, I may see,
The Hero in his glorious Flight to Conquest,
Whilst his exulting Chariot smoaks
Along the dusty Plain.

Euph. Madam, this wild Discourse. --

Phaed. Ah, Wretch! Ah, cursed of Heaven! what have I said?
And whither have my fatal Wishes hurried me?
O whither is my wandering reason strayed?
Alas'tis gone, it is flown, for ever lost;
For so the Gods the cruel Gods determine.
Hide me, Eup^asia, or I blush to Death:
Confusion! ev^ry way my Blood rebels:
Too much I h^ve exposed my shameful Grief,
Yet still in spite of me the streaming Tears
Flow on.

Euph. If you must blush, blush rather at your Silence,
Whose stubbornness exasperates your Grief,
And makes it sting the fiercer.
Why are you deaf to entreaties and Advice?
Why pertinaciously resolved on Ruin?
What Fury drives you to provoke the Fates,
While all your wondrous Beauty's in the Bloom,
And greedy Death respects your Form divine.
What deadly draught has tainted your pure Blood?
Or Magic Charm has over-turn'd your Mind?
Thrice have the rolling Heavens obscured the World,
Since sleep has been a Stranger to your Eyes.
Thrice has the glittering God of Day dispersed
The Shades, and thrice illustrated all Nature,
Since you received the frail Support of Life.
How durst you thus attempt your own Destruction?
Think, you offend the Gods who gave you Being:
Think, that your Husband you betray, to whom
Your solemn Faith was plighted.

Phaed. Ah miserable me!

Euph. Nay, you betray your poor unhappy Children,
And bring them under a hard Yoke, for know,
That the black hour which sees their Mother die,
Will animate the strangers haughty Son;
That Son which a Barbarian bore to Theseus,
That mortal Enemy to you, to yours,
Hippolytus! Hippolytus!

Phaed. Ah Gods!

Euph. Ha! this touches to the Quick, this stings you.

Phaed. What have thou done? what fatal Name escaped thee?

Euph. Ah, now indeed your rage breaks out with Reason;
At that dire Name I love to see you tremble:
Live then, let Love and Duty joined prevail:
Oh live, and let not a Barbarian 's Son,
Oppressing yours with his detested Sway,
Insult the richest Blood of Greece,
The Progeny of Gods.
But quickly live, the least delay proves mortal;
With utmost speed your broken Strength repair,
Whilst yet life's wasted lamp burns glimmering on,
And yet may be recruited.

Phaed. Too long it has already burnt,
And with too guilty Fires.

Euph. Ha! can it be remorse that tears you thus?
What horrid crime creates this dire disturbance?
Your hands were never embrued in guiltless Blood.

Phaed. My hands, I thank the Gods, were never stained:
Oh! had those Gods but kept my Heart as spotless.

Euph. What horrible design has that concerned;
The very thought of which thus shakes your Nature.

Phaed: Hold there, upon thy life no more, for know,
I die to avoid that terrible Confession.

Euph. Then die, persisting in your barbarous silence;
But think not, I shall close your Eyes in Death,
Or fondly your untimely Fate deplore.
No, while you fainting, linger over the Precipice;
I Will run, and down I Will take a desperate leap
To the Infernal World before you.
Why have I met with this inhumane usage?
Have I in all my lifetime once deceived you?
For this has my firm Faith severely stood
A thousand Trials? Have I left for this,
My Children, Parents, Kindred, Country, all,
To follow you to proud insulting Athens?
Have I left all, and am I thus rewarded?

Phaed. Why will thou offer such ungrateful violence?
If this infernal Secret once escapes me;
Think, that 'twill bring Confusion to thy quiet;
Tremblings will seize thy feeble Limbs,
And Horrors shake thy Soul.

Euph. Your Death would shake it with excess of Horror,
And all that damned despair could ever inflict,
To plague the wretch by Gods and Men for saken.

Phaed. Tho'thou should know the Crime, whose Weight o'erwhelms me,
And sinks me down to Hell, I yet must down;
But blacker fall, a guiltier Ghost descend.

Euph. By all my Tears, my Bitterness of woe;
And by my faithful Heart, which now weeps Blood for you;
By your dear trembling Knees which thus I grasp,
Speak out, and clear the Doubt which now distracts me.

Phaed. Rise, thou will have it so, thou shall be satisfied.

Euph. Speak, I Am all Ear, I have no Sense but Hearing.

Phaed. Lightning this moment blast me! What can I say?
Or where can I begin?

Euph. By all the Gods, I here conjure you speak,
And with vain Terrors pi^rce my Soul no more.

Phaed. O dreadful Hatred of revengeful Venus!
O Fury fatal to our mournful Line!
To what prodigious things did Love compel,
And goad my raving Mother?

Euph. Let them be buried in eternal silence.
And rot the Tongue, and rot the audacious Hand,
That dares transmit them to the Times to come.

Phaed. Poor Ariadne! lost, abandoned Sister!
How most deplorably the love sick Maid
Died on the Shore, where my false Hero left her?

Euph. Against your whole unhappy Line.
What mortal rage provokes you?

Phaed. Yes, since the cruel Goddess has decreed it;
I fall the last of our unhappy Race;
The last and most deplorable.

Euph. Are you disturbed by Love's unruly Fires?

Phaed. His Fires? His Flames which rage with utmost Fury,
While my Heart feels what never Tongue can utter.

Euph. For whom?

Phaed. Ay, there is the dire demand, which when '^is answered,
Will freeze thy Blood with Horror, shake thy Frame,
And overturn thy Nature. Know I love --
But 'twill not out, my guilty Soul starts back,
And wants the power to inform its vocal Organs.
I love --

Euph. His Name?

Phaed. Gods! how I shudder at that fatal Name?
I love --

Euph. I grow impatient, Whom?

Phaed. Do thou not know that Son of the Barbarian?
That Prince, whom I my self so long oppressed?

Euph. Hippolytus! Confusion! Hippolytus!

Phaed. I said it not, it is thou thy self have named him.

Euph. O Heavens! O Earth! and ye infernal Powers:
By what I have heard, we are sunk and lost for ever.
O Horror! Height of Horror! O Despair!
O strange unutterable Guilt!
O miserable Race!
Black fatal Voyage! execrable Soil!
Why have I lived t'approach thy balefull Shore?

Phaed. Thou see no new, no transitory Grief,
But long it has been raging.
Scarce was my solemn Faith to Theseus plighted,
And I the Partner of a Hero's Bed:
By all the world, and by my self thought happy.
When Athens showed me first my haughty Enemy;
I saw him, and I trembled at the sight;
Trembled and blushed, turned pale, and burnt, and shivered,
Whilst strange disorder seized my astonished Soul,
Confounded by a stroke unseen.
My Eyes, my Ears, my Voice, with all my Powers,
But that of feeling in a moment failed;
I felt so much, that I could only feel:
Then I the inexorable Goddess knew,
And her devouring Flames, th'avoidless Plagues
Of our unhappy Race, which her fierce Anger
To Extirpation urges.
But yet I thought my fervent Supplications,
And low Submissions might avert her Wrath,
And vainly hoped t'asswage immortal Fury.
I built th'incens'd divility a Temple,
Where I whole Hecatombs of Victims slew,
And in their panting Hearts, I sought my absent Reason.
Weak Remedies! and mortal the Distemper.
For whilst my costly Gums perfumed the Shrine,
And my fond Tongue implored the avenging Goddess;
My Soul adored Hippolytus alone,
Hippolytus alone was always present to me,
Even at the smoking Altar where I sacrificed;
I offered all to him, the God,
Whose Name I durst not utter.
But yet my conscious Virtue strugled still;
I shunned him, as I would have shunned Destruction:
But O extremity of mortal Woe!
Shunning, I meet him in his Fathers Features.

CHAP. IV.
LET us now consider the Manners that are to be found in Prince Arthur. We will
begin with those which are in the Hero himself. We have said above, that Bossu
has observed, that the qualities, which compose the Character of the Hero,
ought to be mainly three. The First of which is such as is necessary for the
Fable and for the Action, which in Aeneas is the transcendent Goodness of his
Nature, which is the cause of the Subjection and Resignation of his Will to the
Gods. The Second, is the Embellishment of the First, which in Aeneas is his
Piety. The Third, is that which sustains them both, which in Aeneas, is Heroic
For^itude, and which ought to be inseparable from the Hero of every Poem,
because Valor is necessary for the carrying on a great design. The first of
these Qualities is the Characteristical Mark of the Hero, it is that which
distinguishes him from all other Men, and therefore it is that which ought
always to appear; because when the Hero loses that, he certainly loses his
Character. Let us now proceed to examine the Qualities that compose the
Character of Arthur. In order to which, let us survey him at his first
appearance, while he is tossed by the Fury of that Storm, which Mr. Blackmore
endeavors to describe so terribly.

When the just Arthur fils'd with Grief and Dread,
And pale confusion, deeply sighed and said,
O righteous Heaven, why have thou ranged this day
Against me all thy Terrors in Array?
Armed in thy Cause thy Temples to restore,
And give that Aid thy sacred Priests implore.
If thou such fierce destruction do dispense,
To punish some unpardoned old Offense;
On me let all thy fiery Darts be spent;
Let not my crime involve the Innocent.
Whelm over my guilty Head these raging Seas,
And let this Sacrifice thy Wrath appease,
But let the British Youth return in Peace.
Here are two Qualities which are apparent in Arthur: The one is his Piety, and
the other his Concern for his People. But the Reader will be apt to say, That
the Hero appears to be afraid here. We know it very well, and we are very
willing to excuse it; because Mr. Blackmore may very justly defend it: He is
afraid indeed, but not for himself, it is for those for whom his Duty obliged
him to appear concerned. The pious Prince is afraid for his People.

Let us now consider him after the Storm. As soon as that was allayed, by the
Virtue of Uriel, Prince Arthur, whose Ship had struck on a Quicksand upon the
Coasts of Armorica, leaves it, and makes to shore in his Boat, where as soon as
he arrives, hereturns thanks to Heaven for his own Preservation, and prays for
that of his absent Friends. Then he climbs the Rock, to see what Ships he can
descry, but not so much as one sail appears in view. Returned; he makes a
Speech of forty Lines to his Men, crowded with Sentences and with speculative
Notions, of which the latter end is only to the Purpose, and that I beg leave
to recite.

We armed thus to restore in Hell's Despite,
To Heaven its Worship, and to Men their Right:
Resume your Courage then, it cannot be true,
That Heavens Revenge, should Heavens own cause pursue.
These Evils are not in Displeasure meant;
Heaven is too just, and you too innocent.
Success and Triumph will our Arms attend,
And these rough ways lead to a glorious End.
This is what they call oration morata. For here Arthur once more makes a
Discovery of his Piety and his Concern for his People. And here too he shows
another Quality, which did not appear before, and that is his Courage. Here
then are three Qualities, which are conspicuous in Arthur, his Piety, his
Concern for his People, and his Courage. But where all this while is the
Characteristical Mark of the Hero? Where is the Quality that distinguishes him
from all other Heroes? Aeneas was pious and Valiant, and was concerned for his
People; and so was Godfrey of Bolloign. How is Arthur different from the Hero
of Virgil or Tasso? where is that Quality, that ought always to be seen in him
to preserve the Unity of his Character, and which like an universal Soul, ought
to run through the Poem, and to animate every part of it? It was observed in the
former part of this Treatise, that the principal Person of the Poem remains at
the bottom, universal and allegorical; from whence it follows, that the
principal Qualities which compose that Character, ought likewise to be
universal and allegorical. Now I think it would be needless to go about to
prove, that the Concern which Prince Arthur shows for his Subjects, is not an
universal Quality. Thus it is plain, that Prince Arthur wants something to
constitute him Mr. Blackmore's individual Hero. The Poet ought to have set his
Mark upon him before he had turned him out upon the Common, that he might have
been known to have been his proper Goods, and might have been distinguished
from the numerous Herd of Heroes. But as we have proved, that there is
something wanting to Mr. Blackmore's Hero: let us now take notice of a Quality,
which he has, which he ought by no means to have, and by giving him which, the
Poet offends against the Convenience of the Manners. And that is that
Academical Temper of Mind, which obliges him to declaim upon every turn, and to
crowd his Harangues with Sententious and Speculative Notions. For Arthur is a
King, and a King is to be shown grave, majestic, jealous of his Authority;
with all which, methinks the declamatory Style is not so very consistent: But
above all, a King is to be shown active: for the Kingly Office consists in
Action, which Sententious and Speculative Discourses are always sure to
obstruct. But Mr. Blackmore will say, perhaps, That Sententious Discourses
instruct, and that Instruction is the end of Heroic Poetry. But as Aristotle
says of Tragedy, That it is not to give all sorts of Delight, but only the
Delight which is proper to it, which it gives by moving Compassion and Terror:
so we might perhaps affirm of Heroic Poetry, that it is not to give all sorts
of Instruction, but only that which is proper to it, which it imparts by
Action, and not by Precept. But this is indubitable, that the Author of an
Epick Poem, ought not to delay or to discontinue his Action, by which, as by a
proper Instrument, he conveys his Instruction to us, to give us the same
Instruction by an improper Method. Now this is Mr. Blackmore's particular Case.
For by the Sententious Harangue which we cited above, he both delays and
discontinues his Action to give a tedious Account of the very Moral of that
Action, if it can pretend to a Moral. But perhaps Mr. Blackmore may say, that
to instruct by Fable, is not so Christian, as to instruct by Precept. To this,
I answer, First, That if he was of that Opinion, he ought not to have begun to
write an Epick Poem. And secondly, That the Author and Founder of our Religion,
as appears by his Parables, is of another Mind. Now, as it is plain, that Epick
Poetry properly instructs by Action; so it is manifest, that the true
Philosophy, and the true Religion can be only shown by Action. If a Poet has a
mind to make his Hero perfectly virtuous, he has free Liberty to do so. Let him
make him as much a Philosopher, and as much a Christian as he pleases. But let
his Philosophy, and let his Religion both appear by his Action. It is the
King's Example that influences the People, and not the Words which he speaks.
Let him take care to make his People prosper out of a sense of his Duty, and
that in a Monarch's Religion. Aeneas never is discovered Preaching, but he is
always found to be the same; Always good-natured, always pious, always careful
and anxious for his People. Now let us examine Mr. Blackmore's Speculative
Hero, and see how constant he is to himself.

We find Prince Arthur appearing at first with three very commendable
Qualities; which were, Piety, Valor, and a Care and Concern for his People. So
that the Poet is now obliged to maintain these Qualities in his Hero, and to
make him behave himself throughout the whole Poem, like a Man that has Piety
and undaunted Courage, and the tender'st Concern for his People. What will any
one say now to see this very Hero, who in the first Book of the Poem is so
concerned for the Souls of his Subjects; that though they were but just escaped
from a Storm, in which they had been terribly Tempest-beaten, and were wet, and
cold, and weary, and hungry, and spiritless, yet does not suffer them so much
as to refresh themselves before he instructs them: What will any one say to see
this Prince neglect this People after the strangest manner? What will any one
say to see this Valiant and this Pious King, become as fearful as the meanest,
and as impious as the most profligate of all his Subjects?

In the Sixth Book, while the Plague was raging in the British Army, Arthur, by
Devotion, brings down the Angel Raphael, who tells him the Cause of his
Affliction in the following Verses.

The Angelick Guards returned to Heaven complained,
That your flagitious Troops you never restrained.
Your Captains boldly Whoredoms, Riots, Rapes,
Commit, and yet each Criminal escapes.
Thus you avow the Ills by others done,
And their unpunished Guilt becomes your own.
And thus, if we will believe the Poet's own Angel, the Hero is neglectfull of
his People, and impious. But this is at the latter end of the Sixth Book. Let
us now return to the First. Upon the return of the Message which the
Ambassadors of Arthur brought back from Hoel, Mr. Blackmore says, That when

Arthur heard the Message first,
His wavering Mind with fears, and wise distrust,
And rising Tides of sudden Joy was tossed,
Uncertain which strong Passion pressed him most.
But when he saw the Presents Hoel sent,
His Doubts suppressed, he grew more confident;
And his calm Mind, eased of his anxious Cares,
TO embrace his new and generous Friend, prepares.
Here for six lines together the Author takes care to set before us the
extraordinary Fear of Arthur. Indeed he seems to repent at last, that he called
it by its proper Name. And so that which was plain Fear in the second Verse, is
called Doubt in the sixth, and Care in the seventh. Which puts me in mind of a
Custom of the Modern Italians: They are very sensible how scandalous a Passion
Fear is; and therefore when they have a mind to encourage any one whom they
respect; they never cry, Don't be afraid, Sir; but, Quae Vossignoria non si
dubiti de mente; Don't let your Worship doubt. Thus we have seen Prince Arthur
fearful, neglectfull, and impious. The Manners then of the Hero are ill
expressed, because they are not maintained. And they are unequal, which is
self-evident. And they are inconvenient. For neither is Fear becoming of a
Captain, nor Impiety of one who takes up Arms to re-establish Religion; nor is
Neglect of his Subjects becoming of a good King.

But the Impiety of the Hero is not shown only in the Sixth Book. It is
apparent from his very Fear in the First: For before he left England, the
Archangel, Gabriel, had assured him that he should Triumph over Octa at ten
Years end. These are his Words in the Fourth Book, and the 115th Page.

Now Albion sinks beneath the Saxon Weight;
So Heaven decrees; it is so ordained by Fate:
But after ten times the revolving Sun,
His crooked Race has through the Zodiac run,
The Clouds dispelled, propitious Heaven shall smile
On Uter's House, and this reviving Isle.
Octa shall feel just Heavens avenging Stroke,
And Albion's Youth shall break the Saxon Yoke.
This we find in the Relation which Lucius made to Hoel. Now the ten Years that
the Angel mentioned, were elapsed before Arthur set Sail from Normandy, as
Lucius assures us in the same Relation, and the 122d Page of the same Book.

Ten times the Sun had passed his Oblique way,
By turns contracting and increasing way,
Darting to either Pole a warmer Ray:
And now the British Lords, etc.
Thus was Arthur assured by Gabriel in England. And he was afterward
re-assur'd by Raphael on the Coasts of Britany: Who says to him, Page 16. Book
the First,

No Force or Arts shall your Design prevent,
Propitious Heaven decrees your wished Event;
You on these Coasts for happy Ends are thrown,
And after this expect the British Crown.
And immediately afterward he bids him particularly not be afraid of Hoel.

But fear not Hoel's Power, though now your Foe,
By Hell incensed, he will not long be so.
This, I must confess, is strange Language for an Angel. However, we are to
suppose that Prince Arthur understood it. And yet by and by, as we have
observed above, he appears exceedingly afraid of this very Hoel. Now that
person, methinks, must show an extraordinary inclination to Fear, whom an Angel
from Heaven, nay whom two Angels cannot ensure; Besides, that he must appear to
be impious and unbelieving. But Hoel is not the only Person of whom Prince
Arthur appears afraid. For afterward, in the Seventh Book, when upon the
Ravage that the Plague had made amongst the Britons, Octa prepared to Attack
them: Mr. Blackmore tells us, That

The Tidings soon through all the Army ran,
When in their Minds tormenting Fears began.
First, the Army was afraid, and afterward the Hero, as appears by the Prayer
which he makes immediately upon it.

Shine forth, and with thy Beams dispell this Night,
Whose horrid Shades my laboring Soul affright.
And thus we have shown the Hero of the Poem neglectfull, impious and fearful.
And consequently we have in one Character, seen Mr. Blackmore offending, not
only against the Unity of Character in the Hero, and in the Poem, and against
three of the four Conditions of the Manners; but against the Necessity of the
Fable, and of the Action. For if the things which we observed in the First Part
of this Treatise had not ruined the Moral, it is manifest that these base
unnecessary Vices which Mr. Blackmore has given to his Hero, would have
weakened it considerably if they had not destroyed it. But it will be objected
by the Friends of this Author, that the Hero of the Prince of Poets, appears to
be afraid at the Rising of the Storm in the first of the Aeneis.

Ex templo Aeneae solvuntur frigore membra,
Ingemit, etc.
To this I answer. First, that we excused Prince Arthur's Fear upon the like
occasion: Though his Fear is directly expressed by the Poet.

When the Just Arthur, filled with Grief and Dread.
Whereas the Fear of Aeneas is not directly expressed. Secondly, That supposing
Aeneas was afraid, we can yet make a better Defense for him than can be made
for Arthur, though a good one may be made for him too. For Aeneas had not only
the same Cause of Fear which Arthur had, which was his Love for his People; but
he was afraid of missing the Rites of Funeral, which they who missed were
denied the passage of Styx: And besides all this, he was afraid of the Anger of
Juno, who peculiarly commanded the Air, and from whose Fury he knew the present
Storm proceeded. These are the Excuses which are made for Aeneas, by those who
allow that he was afraid. He was afraid indeed, say they; but he was afraid of
the Anger of the Gods, and that comes into the Character of Piety. But in case
of any humane Danger, he always appears intrepid. Nay, Turnus, who is a Hero of
a much inferior Rank to Aeneas, as Bossu has plainly demonstrated, scorns to
be afraid of less than a God: For he says to Aeneas, in the Twelfth Book, when
his Life was in utmost danger from him. V. 894.

-- -- Non me tua turbida torrent
Dicta ferox, Dii me terrent and Jupiter Hostis.
Think not that your Threats can terrify me insulting Man. None but the Gods
and adverse Jove can terrify Turnus. To be afraid neither of God nor Man, was
only becoming of that Contemner of the Gods Mezentius.

Nec mortem horremus, nec divum parcimus ulli,
Desine, jam venio moriturus.
All the Second-rate Characters in the Aeneis, Nisus, Eurialus, Pallas and
Lausus shine with undaunted Courage. But the Hero distinguishes himself from
them all; and is, in the midst of a Battle, like Thunder in a Storm: He appears
Superlatively brave upon every Action, and upon every approach of Danger, in a
Sovereign Degree, magnanimous.

These are the Excuses that are made for Aeneas, by those who allow him to have
been afraid in the Storm.

But I would fain ask those Gentlemen one question: And that is, Why they
should allow Aeneas to have been afraid, when Virgil has never said so? For the
Words, Aeneae solvuntur frigore membra, express no Fear. And why should they be
thought to imply any, when that which immediately follows implies that Aeneas
was not afraid, and when the very Words which we have cited have a much better
and a much more reasonable signification? The Words which Aeneas utters, imply
that he was not afraid For it is plain, that a Man, like Aeneas, who wishes
himself dead, is not afraid of Death. Indeed, why should he be afraid? He knew
very well, that he should survive this Storm. He had divine Assurance for it,
and he was perfectly Pious. The Ghost of Hector had told him he should be
established in a Foreign Country. The Soul of Creusa had averred it. His
Houshold-Gods had assured it, and Delian and Buthrotian Apollo had given it the
last Confirmation. Well then, I think it is pretty plain; that the Man who
wishes that he were dead, and who knew that he should not die, could not be
afraid of the present Danger. Nor do Virgil's Words, Aeneae solvuntur frigore
membra, express any Fear. Why then should they be thought to impl^ any? Why
should the Man, who in all other places writes with perfect Logic and perfect
good Sense, be believed in this, to contradict himself so absurdly? Especially
when these very Words may be interpreted a much better way, and so become more
consistent with the Character of Aeneas, and with the Sense of the Lines which
follow. For this Cold and this Trembling, which relaxed the Nerves of Aeneas,
may very well be thought to be the Shuddring of a Religious Horror, conceived
at the Presence of the Revengefull Queen of the Gods, who immediately commanded
the Air, and by whom the Hero knew, that the present Storm was occasioned. For
the Sense of the Anger of so great a Divinity, must needs be an intolerable
Burden upon the Soul of so Pious a Man as Aeneas. Now Aristotle has observed in
the Thirteenth Chapter of his Treatise of Poetry, that Horror is a very
different thing from Fear, which Reason and Experience every day confirm. Since
therefore these Words, Aeneae solvuntur frigore membra, may as well be
interpreted of Horror as Fear; since if they are meant of the first, they make
the Poet consistent with himself; whereas they make him contradict himself; if
they are meant of the last; since this incident of the Storm may be very well
thought to have occasioned Horror in Aeneas; and lastly, since it appears by
the Words of the Hero, that he was not afraid; and it is very plain by his
Circumstances, that there was no occasion for Fear; we have all the reason in
the World to conclude, that by Aeneae solvuntur frigore membra, the Poet meant
that his Hero felt Horror, and not Fear.

Thus have I done my endeavor to clear Aeneas from the Imputation of Fear; and
to show that the Trembling which seized him from the Rising of the Storm, might
very well be supposed to proceed from another Cause. And I have the rather done
this, because I could never be reconciled to the Excuses which are commonly
made for him; which are, that he was afraid for his People, or that he was
afraid of the Anger of the Queen of the Gods. For it is hard to imagine in this
case, that he could be afraid for his People, without ^ing afraid for himself;
or that he could in this co^ncture, tremble with Fear at the Anger of Jano,
without trembling at the Thoughts of approaching Death. As for two or three
other Passages, in which the Poet mentions his Fear, it is manifest that in
those places he fears for others, and not for himself. But let us now consider
the two other Qualities that compose the Character of Aeneas; that by thus
opposing the Conduct of Virgil to Mr. Blackmore's management, the judgment of
the one, and the unskilfulness of the other, may the more plainly appear. As it
was necessary that Aeneas should be Valiant, because he was to be the Founder
of the Roman State; so it was requisite that he should be Pious, because he was
to establish Religion as well as Empire And the Poet was obliged to make the
Hero show his Religion by Action, and not by Words, as Mr. Blackmore has done;
because, as we hinted above, Epick Poetry properly instructs by Action, and
Religion can only appear by Action; and lastly, because it is the Prince's
Example by which his Subjects are framed. And Virgil was obliged to make the
Acts by which Aeneas discovered his Piety, parts of the Action of his Poem; and
not to do as Mr. Blackmore has done, to crowd the greatest part of his Religion
together, and make it constitute a Medley of irregular Episodes; which would
have discontinued his Action, and would have corrupted its Unity. Besides, as
one and the same Design of the Hero comprehended the establishing the Trojan
Religion and Empire in Italy, it was but just that they should go hand in hand
in the Poem; and as the establishing the Trojan Power was to be a means for the
setting up their Religion, so it was but just that the Religious Acts of the
Hero, should contribute to the Foundation of Empire. Let us now examine the
particular Acts by which Aeneas discovers his Piety; which are, First, the
actual Obedience which he pays to the Command of the Gods. Secondly, The making
those very Gods the Guardians of his Navy, and the Companions of his Voyage.
Thirdly, His Religious Duties, which are Prayer and Sacrifices. And Fourthly,
the Proofs which he gives of his filial Affection; and those are principally
two. First, the Funeral Games celebrated in the Honor of Anchises his Memory.
And Secondly, the Descent of Aeneas to Hell. In the next place, let us consider
how these Religious Acts apparently influence the Action of the Poem, and
evidently advance the Design of the Hero.

The First is the actual Obedience that he pays to the Commands of the Gods:
From which it is manifest, that the Action had its beginning.

-- Vix prima inceperat aestas,
Et Pater Anchises dare fatis vela jubebat. Lib. 3.
Another Act by which Aeneas discovered his Piety, is Sacrifice. Upon his
Arrival in Thrace, and his laying the Foundation of the City, which he designed
to build there, he Sacrifices to his Mother, and to the King of the Gods; and
wanting Boughs to adorn the Altar, that want conducts him to Polydorus his
Tomb, whose Spirit informed him of his unfortunate Tragedy; and assured him,
that Thrace was by no means the Country that the Gods and Fate had designed for
him. Upon which they removed from that unfortunate Climate, and set Sail for
Delos. There Aeneas prays to Apollo to instruct him where he shall settle.
Apollo directs them to their Original Mother. Upon which, by a mistake of
Anchises, they set Sail for Crete; from which Country Teucer derived his
Descent. But nevertheless, by that very mistake, they were considerably
advanced in their Way to Italy. As soon as they began to settle in Crete, they
found by the Plague that raged amongst them, that Crete was not the Place that
was destined for their Establishment, and took a Resolution to go back to the
Oracle at Delos; when Apollo saved them the Trouble, and delivered his Mind to
Aeneas in the Night by the Mouths of the Houshold-Gods, who had been the
Companions of his Voyage. Thus it is plain that Aeneas his Obedience to the
Commands of the Gods, his Sacrifice, his Prayer, and his carrying his Gods
along with him influenced his Action, and advanced his Design. Let us next
consider his filial Affection: of which he gave two signal Proofs. The first
was the Institution of the Funeral Games; and the second his Descent to Hell;
whether he descended in Obedience to the Command that he received from his
Father's Spirit.

-- Gens dura atque aspera cultu,
Debellanda tibi ^atio est. Ditis tamen ante
Infernas accede domos, and Averna per alta,
Congressus peti, Nate, meos. Lib. 5.
And Aeneas says afterward to the Sybil in the Sixth Book.

Unum oro, quando hic inserni janua Regis
Dicitur, and tenebrosa Palas Acheronie refusa;
Ire ad conspectum chari genitoris, and ora
Contingat: doceas iter, and sacra ostia pandas.
Illum ego per flammas and mill sequentia tela
Eripui his humeris, medioque ex host recepi:
Ille meum comitatus iter, Maria omnia mecum,
Atque omnes Pelagique minas coelique ferebat
Invalidus, vires ultra sortemque Senect ae.
Quin ut te supplex peterem, and tua lumina adirem.
Idem orans mandata dabat. Natique patrisque
Alma precor miserere.
Now the Celebration of the Funeral Games, by drawing all the Men together, was
the occasion of the Women's burning part of the Fleet, and consequently of the
Trojans sailing for Italy without their Wives, which left them free to mix with
the Blood of the Italians, and so pr^pared their Establishment. And the Descent
of Aeneas to Hell, upon his Arrival in Italy, animated and exalted the Hero by
the view of a glorious Posterity.

And thus we have shown as succinctly as we could, that the Piety of Aeneas
discovers it self by Action, and that it advances the Hero's design. I should
be too tedious if I should show that this Piety of the Hero, is apparent
throughout the whole Course of the Poem; and that it every where influences the
Action, not only by the insensible Operation of the Powers, whom the Greatness
of his Piety engages to favor him, but very often by manifest visible
Consequence. It would be an easy matter to prove this, and to demonstrate
further; That as the Religious Acts of Aeneas, are efficient of something which
follows them, so they are necessary or probable Consequences of something which
went before them; and that therefore they are just and regular Parts of the
Action.

Let us now come to the third Quality, which goes to the Composition of Aeneas
his Character: And that is the transcendent Goodness of his Nature; which the
Poet gave him as the very Ground and Original of his Religion. For an excellent
Goodness of Nature was very reasonably believed by the Heathens, to be the
Principle and Foundation of Piety. And therefore Mezentius, a Man of an ill and
of a cruel Nature, is represented as a Contemner of the Gods, at the same time
that he is a Destroyer of Men. I think it would be superfluous to show that
this surpassing Goodness of Nature, is a predominant Quality of Aeneas his
Character; since the sweetness and tenderness of his Nature has been objected
as a fault to him, and as lessening of his Merit, and destructive of his
Courage, by those who have condemned him something too rashly, without
considering the Design of Virgil, or the Necessity of his Fable, or the Nature
of True Valor. We ought now to show that this Excellence of Nature shines in
the Character, throughout the whole Course of the Poem; and that it appears
even in the Characters that are opposed to the Hero's. But that the Reader may
not languish by dwelling too long upon one thing, we shall first examine some
other persons who are concerned in Mr. Blackmore's Poem.

The next who presents himself is Hoel King of Armorica. Now I desie any Man in
the World to give me this Hoel's Character. Hoel is as obs^re, and as much
concealed, as if he were a Politician: Though it is manifest that he is none. For
notwithstanding he is everywhere mentioned throughout a Third Part of the
Narrative, yet he has very little hand in the Plot. Monsieur Hoel indeed is a
mere Machine, a Monarch of Brioches's making. He seems to have neither Life nor
Soul of his own, but is actuated by invisible Springs at first from below, and
by and by from above. The first news we hear of him, is, when that Devil
Persecution, appears to him in the reverend Shape of Alman. She gives him an
account of Arthur's being thrown upon his Coast; and tells him, that the most
obliging way of receiving him, will be to cut his Throat; that it was the most
signal Favor, that could be conferred either upon him or his Company; that
they would look upon him as their Friend in it, and their Benefactor; who did
them the greatest Honor they could expect, and to which they had hitherto
pretended in vain. This, she assures him, in a long Speech of above forty
Lines. It seems, Mr. Blackmore judiciously saw, that this Fury ought to make a
long Speech, or else she would go out of her Character, and that her very words
ought to appear to persecute the passive Ears of Hoel. He hears all this with a
great deal of Patience, and without the least Interruption, and what is still
more wonderful, without the least Reply. So that hitherto we have found in
Hoel neither Thought, nor Voice, nor Motion. Persecution withdraws, but before
she takes leave of him, the Poet tells us, that,

She breathed her Soul into his Breast.
Well then, since Hoel has now got a Soul in him, we may certainly expect to
hear him speak. No, hold a little; in the mean while we are assured, that he is
in a very great Rage, nay, in a more than mortal Fury.

Infern al Flames rage in his poisoned Blood,
And his swollen Soul boils with the impetuous Flood.
Now as soon as ever we find that Hoel is thus outrageous, we are immediately
assured, that he thinks, and revolves, and is pleased.

-- Hoel surpised, revolves
The welcome Message in his Mind.
Because these you know are the common and natural Effects of Fury. But not a
Syllable has he said all this while; at last indeed we are told, that he speaks
to those who are about him. But the words we are unworthy to hear, yet as far
as we can guess, they must be the very same that Sir Fopling uses to his
Equipage. Hey, Champain, Norman, La Rose, La Fleur, La Tour, La Verdur follow
me all. Thus attended with these, and a crew besides of Anonymous Ruffians;
this Monarch of Little Britain sets out to murder a Hero: Which without
Raillery, would be a most execrable thing, if it were a voluntary Act. But Hoel
has a Proverb on his side; he does not go but is driven. But by the way he
meets with a Miracle which changes his mind, and makes him a Christian; and has
besides, another no less amazing effect upon him: for immediately upon the
sight of it, Hoel is heard to speak. Thus we find, that Hoel, before the Soul
of Persecution was breathed into him, appears to have had neither Voice, nor
Motion, nor Thought. As soon as he is possessed, he continues silent, but is said
to be in a terrible Rage. And indeed Silence and Rage are affirmed to be usual
Signs of Possession. This Rage continues till the Sight of the Miracle, which
makes the greatest alteration that can be imagined in him. For o^ a gloomy but
an outrageous wight, he grows on a sudden to be, of all Mortals, the most
gentle and the most talkative.

But before we come to discover that, let us examine the Conduct of Virgil upon
a like occasion. The principal Quality in the Character of Turnus, is Anger.
Now the Poet takes care to make this Quality appear in him upon the first
introducing him. The first time that Turnus is introduced, is in the seventh
Book, when Alecto appears to him in the Shape of Calibe, the Priestess of Juno.
Now Virgil, with a great deal of Judgment, takes care to make Turnus appear
what he was by his natural Temper, before Alecto had lashed him into the last
Fury, and before she had fixed her flaming Brand in his Breast: For he appears
to be angry with Calibe, for the very News which she seemed to have brought out
of Kindness, and by the Command of Juno. For says he,

-- Classes invectas Thybredis alveo
Non, ut rere, meas effugit nuncius aures:
Ne tantos mihi singe metus, nec Regia Juno
Immemor est nostri
Sed te vict a situ, verique effoeta senectus,
O matter curis nequicquam exercet; and arma
Regum inter, falsa vatem formidine ludit.
Cura tibi Divum effigies and templatueri:
Bella viri, pacemque ger ant que is bella gerenda.
Nay afterward, when Alecto confessed the Fury, lashed the Rutilian into Rage,
and fixed her burning Brand in his Breast; Virgil distinguishes with admirable
Judgment, the Operation of his natural Anger, from the influence of infernal
Fury.

Arma amens fremit, arma toro tectisque requirit,
Savit amor ferri and scelerata insania bilis,
Ira super.
Where in the two first Verses, the Poet marks the influence that Alecto had
upon Turnus his Soul, and by the beginning of the third, the Violence of his
natural Temper, which observation must be allowed to be well grounded, or
Virgil must be acknowledged to have made a very scandalous Anticlimax here, of
which the most judicious of Poets could never be guilty.

From what has been said, it plainly appears, that the Conduct of Virgil, upon
this occasion, is directly contrary to Mr. Blackmore's, who had done very well,
if here he imitated the Prudence of that admirable Poet, since it is founded so
much upon reason, and upon the very design of the Art: For since Poetry in
general is an Imitation of Nature, it follows by undeniable Consequence, that
the human Persons, which are introduced in an Epick Poem, should be shown, as
they are, according to their natural Tempers, and not only as they are, when
they are either inspired or possessed.

But now let us see how Hoel behaves himself after the sight of the Apparition.
Before, as we have observed, he was as mute as a Monk, whose order obliges him
never to be impertinent, that is, never to speak. The Devil him^ ^ld not draw
so much as a word from him. (...) Devil a word can any Man speak in his co^y.
Arthur sends his Ambassadors to him extraordinary; and Hoel receives them in an
extraordinary Manner. Gentlemen, says he, as soon as they came within Ear-shot,
I know what you come about, and you may even fairly go back again, for your
business is done to your Hands; and pray let your Master know so. Tell him,
that this Morning, I had some Thoughts of slitling his Windpipe. But assure him
now, that I am his heartily do' see; and that I long to hug him with both my
Hands.

Now Arthur's Ambassadors, being Men of a deep Reach, and so soon finding Hoel
out, and being convinced, that he loved to talk all himself, and that the Fury
Persecution, though the Miracle had driven her from his Breast, yet still kept
the possession of his Tongue, like an Enemy, that being chased from the Heart
of a Country, hovers still upon the Borders; what do these men of Sagacity do,
but depart without speaking a word? Arthur encouraged by what they told him,
resolves to go to Hoel himself; who has now another opportunity of making a
Speech. For all the business that Hoel has in this Poem, is the making a
Speech: a fine Speech, as Mr. Petulant says, a long Speech, such a Speech, as I
think, as Mr. Bays says, you will say is a Nonpareilo.

As a faint Traveller in Arabian Sands,
Scorcht with the burning Sunbeams, panting stands,
Views the dry Desert with desparing Eyes,
And for the Springs and distant Rivers sighs:
As Sailors long for Land, Heavens Aid implore,
And with their greedy Wishes grasp the Shore;
When beaten from the hospitable Coast,
And in loud Storms upon the Ocean tossed,
Where ruin in so many Shapes appears,
They scarcely can attend to all their Fears;
I Have wished to see you with the like Desire.
And so he goes sweetly on.
Now let us consider the time when this Harange was spoke; Mr. Blackmore marks
the time to us, immediately before it begins.

Scarce had the Sun his glittering Chariot driven
Up the steep brow and sharp ascent of Heaven;
When the glad Princes did each other meet,
And Hoel first did thus the Stranger greet.
So that we may observe, that these two Princes having longed to see one
another, and being glad to meet one another: Hoel to express his share of the
Joy, greets Arthur with a Speech of about forty Lines, which he begins with a
couple of Similies; because you know Similies are proper for Passion, and a Man
that is transported always makes a long Speech.

I have indeed heard of a King, that has been entertained at this rate, in an
University Quadrangle: But can any one believe, that ever any one King greeted
another so? Is there any thing like this in Nature, and in the world? If not, I
think I may venture to affirm, that there ought to be no such thing in an Epick
Poem. For though true Sublimity, like Grace, may exalt Nature, it can never
invert it.

Not but, I know, that very fine excuses may be made for this. For perhaps the
Friends of the Author may say, That as there is a vulgar Error in the World,
that a Man may be indicted for having two Wives, but that by marrying five, or
six, or seven, he gets out of the power of the Law, because, say they, by
taking such a number, he commences Turk, and so stands exempted from Christian
Chastisement: even so an Author, that makes one of his Poetical Persons express
his Joy for the meeting another, by greeting him with a Speech that begins with
a Simile, is certainly liable to be arraigned for it, because he offends at
once, against the light of Nature and Poetical Statute; but that he who makes a
Person begin such a Speech, with two, or three, or more Similes, is secure from
Law, by the enormity of his offense, for who should call him to an account for
it?

Perhaps, after all, the Poet may have shown his Address by this. Perhaps he
did it in this time of War, to render our Enemies contemptible, and to show
what an impertinent Generation the French are.

But to resume the Didactique Style, which I have so long laid aside for the
Reader's Diversion, I desire to return to an observation which I have cited
from Aristotle, which is, that the Manners ought to be necessary, and that no
vicious or base Inclination should be given to any of the Poetic Persons,
unless they appear to be absolutely requisite for the carrying on of the
Action. Now this black intention of Hoel, cannot be said to be necessary:
First, Because Hoel might have been made a Christian, without this hatred and
malice. For he might have appeared to be the Friend of Arthur, and then good
Nature and Friendship had prepared his Conversion. Secondly, Because this
murderous Intention is not productive of Action. To have managed the Suggestion
of Persecution to purpose, Mr. Blackmore should have shown Hoel ipso facto,
surprising and attacking Arthur; who should have resisted with incomparable
Valor, both the Force and Rage of unequal Numbers, to the Terror and Amazement
of Hoel, and the Destruction of those around him, till at last, being like to
be oppressed by multitudes, yet remaining still unterrify'd, and ^ch moment
performing of new Wonders, he should have cast up his sparkling Eyes to Heaven,
and by a sublime Apostrophe, have obliged the descending Machine to interpose
for him. Thus the intention of Hoel would have been productive of Action, and
have formed an Obstacle to the Hero's Design, which he had surmounted by the
force of two of the Qualities, which go to the composing his Character, and
those are his Valor and Piety.

I am sensible, that I have insisted too long upon this Character. I now
proceed to Octa's; for we shall have occasion to enquire into Uter in another
place, and Lu^ius is so very a nothing, that he is not worth the mentioning.
The first News that we hear of Octa, is in the relation of Lucius, Lib. 4. Page
106.

Octa the famous Hengist 's Son, a bold
And warlike Prince, did then the Scepter hold.
And now we may reasonably, through the whole Action, expect to see Octa bold and
warlike. But before we enquire into that, let us see if Mr. Blackmore has given
him any other Qualities. Ibid. p. 113.

Octa, whose Arts and purchased Treasons won
More Towns and Battles than his Sword had done.
Here we find him treacherous and undermining, which by the way, is not so very
consistent with the forementioned Quality of his Boldness: For Boldness comes,
for the most part, either from the hope or assurance of Success, and Treachery
from the Fear or from the Despondency of succeeding by open Force. Let us
observe him a little further. Lib. 5. p. 131.

All rest enjoy, but Octa anxious lay,
Watchful and longing for returning Day.
His dreadful crimes affright his start led Soul;
And in his Breast black Tides of Horror roll.
Dire Shapes of staring Ghosts pass threatening by,
And streaks of Fire across the apartment fly.
He hears the Shrieks of those his bloody Hand
Had murdered, or that died by his Command:
He hears the Widows Sighs and Orphans moans
Himself had made, and tortured Prisoners Groans.
I am obliged to take no notice of the Verses yet awhile, let them be never so
obnoxious, for that would make too great a Confusion. But here we find this
Prince an abominable Oppressor, and a most bloody Tyrant. Let us see him yet a
little further, Lib. 6. p. 171.

Octa forthwith commands his Lords to meet
In Council, where they long in order sat,
T'advise what best might save the threatened State.
This methinks does not agree so very well with the Character of his Boldness,
which was given above. For if this Octa is bold, what should he think of, for
the saving his State but a Battle; since there had not been a stroke struck at
Land yet. But Lucifer tells us anon, in the same Book; nay, and in downright
Terms, that Octa was afraid. Page 171.

Octa defeated, dreads Prince Arthur 's Arms,
And sues for Peace by Ethelina 's Charms.
And in the seventh Book, the Poet tells us, no less than twice, that he is
afraid, p. 193.

Mean time, ill-boding Prodigies affright
King Octa, and dissuade his Men from fight.
And page 201.

Octa, that viewed the important Prodigy,
Trembled to see the Eastern Army fly.
He wisely hid his Fears within his Breast.
But now it is high time to sum up the Evidence. The Criminal that is
arraigned, has at his first appearance, seemed to be bold and warlike. But
since that, he has been found to be treacherous and undermining, and an
Oppressor of his own People, a cruel Tyrant, and a black and barbarous
Murderer. Then he comes to lie under a Suspicion of Cowardice, though his
cruelty might have given us that Suspicion before. Then he is twice declared to
be afraid by the Poet, which is attested and fully confirmed by the Devil his
own dear Friend, and his most faithful Servant. So that we know not what to
make of this Octa, because the Manners are ill expressed in him; and as they
are ill expressed, they are inconvenient. For Fear is unbecoming of him, either
as a King or General. Nor are they constant or consistent. For Boldness and
Treachery are rarely joined, if they are not incompatible: and though there may
be found such a Prodigy, as a bold perfidious Person; yet a Poet, who is to
imitate Nature, and to give the best resemblance, whenever he pretends to draw
a Man, ought not to paint a Monster. Nor are the Crimes and the Baseness of
Octa necessary: I mean, that all his Crimes are not necessary. His
Perfidiousness will be found to be of that number: For the making of the League
upon Arthur's Landing, manifestly retards the Action, and causes its Motion to
cease, and the breaking that League upon the Plague which followed, corrupts
the Action's Integrity. For it has been clearly proved in the former part of
this Treatise, that therefore the Action is not entire, because at the end of
it, Octa, upon whose Oath we cannot rely, remains in power and place. Nor does
the fear of Octa serve to advance the Action. For why should he appear
beforehand to be afraid of fighting, who afterward, in Battle, behaves himself
like a Lion. Nor was it necessary to make him a Murderer: For why should Mr.
Blackmore provide for his Hero a Father-in-Law, that deserved to be empal'd
alive? It is evident, that the Murders, which Octa is said to commit, are so
far from being necessary to the carrying on of the Action, that they appear to
be entirely out of it. And it is as certain, that the leaving such a Villain,
as this Saxon alive, is contrary, not only to common Poetical Justice, but to
the Moral of the Poem, and to the Fable, and to the Universality of the Action.
But they who favor Mr. Blackmore, will tell me, that Mezentius too was a
Murderer. It Is easily granted, but the case is vastly different. For the Crimes
of Mezentius are necessary, as Causes of Action. It was decreed by Fate, and
ordained by Jove, that Aeneas should be established in Italy, and lay the
Foundation of the Roman Empire, which Turnus and Mezentius very well knew. For
all their Priests and Oracles had asserted it. Now Turnus worshipped the same
Jupiter, and Mezentius had no other God. From whence then should it proceed,
that these very Persons should be the grand Opposers, of what they knew had
been pre-ordain'd by him? Why should Mezentius and Turnus do this? the cause is
plain; because Turnus had a Passion upon him heightened and inflamed by a
turbulent Temper; and because Mezentius was a bloody unnatural Tyrant, a
Contemner of the Gods, and a Foe to Men. So that here we have an admirable
Moral, which is, that none can be capable of opposing the revealed designs of
Heaven; but either they, who are carried away headlong by Passions made
untractable, by the violence of their natural Tempers, which, by neglect are
become incorrigible; or else they, who have stifled the Dictates of Reason and
Conscience to such a degree, as quite to have divested themselves of Humanity.
For this is certain, that as long as we have any tenderness for others, we must
have some for our selves. Because the very Foundation of our Compassion for
others, is a concern for our selves. I have already shown this in a former
critical Treatise. Now he can have little tenderness for himself, who is
impious enough to oppose, in so bold a way, the known Designs of Heaven. And he
who has thrown off all concern for himself, is not likely to have much
Compassion for others. The Truth of this Moral is manifested every day; for no
men appear with so much impious boldness against the cause of Heaven, as either
they, who have lost their Reasons, or they, who have thrown them away.

Thus we have already shown one considerable difference betwixt Mezentius and
Octa. For the Saxon never so much as dreamt of opposing the Designs of Heaven.
He worshipped his Idols, whom he thought he served by opposing Arthur's
Establishment. And this, and his Interest, to which his Ambition might have
been added, would have been sufficient causes for what he did; so that there
was not the least occasion for making him a bloody perfidious Villain.

But there is another considerable difference between Mezentius and Octa. For
as from the Characters and the Designs of Mezentius and Turnus, a very good
Moral may be deduced, which, is, that they who oppose the known Designs of
Heaven, are either such as are hurried on by the Fury of a violent Temper,
grown incorrigible by neglect; or such as are instigated by an inveterate,
inbred Malice; so from their Catastrophes an admirable Moral may likewise be
drawn; which is, that the grand and Impoious Opposers of the known Designs of
Heaven, are sooner or later severely punished for their Impiety, and not only
so, but that the hand of Heaven is immediately in their Punishment, and that it
makes use of the very Furies of their Passion, and the Venom of their Malice,
which caused their Crimes to bring on likewise their Ruin. Thus Jupiter in the
Tenth of the Aeneis, prevails upon Mezentius his thirst of Blood, and his lust
of Revenge, to enter that fight, in which his Son and himself were slain.

At Jovis interea monitis Mezentius ardens
Succedit pugnae. Aen. 10. V. 689.
And as for Turnus, that very excess of Rage which made him begin the War, made
him lose two signal Occasions of ending it to his advantage, and the losing
these, occasioned his final Ruin.

The first of these happened at the Siege of Aeneas his Camp, Lib. 9. For
Pandarus and Bitias, in a Bravado, having set open the Gates, the Rutilians
rushed in upon them, and Turnus among the rest; and made such a Slaughter of
the Trojans, and terrified them to that degree, that if he had but thought of
opening the Gates which the Trojans had shut again, and letting in his
Rutilians, the very Ruins of Troy had perished. Lib. 9. V. 757.

Et si continuo victorem ea cura subisset
Rumpere claustra manu, sociosque immittere portis;
Ultimus ille dies bello gentique fuisset.
But instead of that, his Fury engaged him in the Pursuit of those who were
flying. Lib 9. V. 760.

Sed furor ardentem, caedisque insana cupido,
Egit in adversos.
The second occasion happened, when Aeneas sent his Horse to beat the Field,
while he led the Foot over the Mountain to Laurentum. Turnus, who heard of it
from his Spies, opposed the Laurentian and Rutilian Horse to the Trojan, and at
the same time led the Foot by a nearer way to the Mountains, and laid an
Ambuscade for Aeneas; which Ambuscade had infallibly succeeded, had Turnus had
Patience but a moment longer. But upon the News that Comilla was slain, and
that his Horses were routed, he rises in Fury, and departs but a Moment before
Aeneas arrived. And the Poet takes care to tell us, that this very Fury, which
occasioned his Miscarriage, and consequently his ruin, was appointed by
Jupiter. Lib. 11. V. 901.

I^e furens (and saeva Jovis sic numina poscunt)
Deserit obsessos colles, nemora aspera linquit.
Vix e conspectu exierat, campumque tenebat:
Cum pater Aeneas, saltus ingressus apertos,
Exuperatque jugum, sylvaque evadit opaca.
And thus I have endeavored to prove, that the murders which Mezentius
committed, being requisite to show the extraordinary Malice which caused them,
are necessary, both on account of the Action and on account of the Fable.
First, On account of the Action; because Mezentius could not be one of the
grand Opposers of Aeneas, without either excessive Passion or extraordinary
Malice; and the Poet could not make him act by the former only, because in
doing that, he would have confounded his Character with that of Turnus. Nor
could he give him both violence of Temper and excess of Malice, as his
principles of Action; because though by doing that, he would have distinguished
him very fairly from Turnus, yet he would have given him a Defect more than was
necessary for the Action. The Poet then was obliged to give him extraordinary
Malice only. But secondly, these Murders of Me^ius are necessary upon the
account of the Moral: For by showing the extraordinary Malice of the Man, they
convey two important Instructions to us. The First is, That a Man can never
considerately be the grand Opposer of Heaven, without such a degree of Malice,
which is a subordinate Moral. The Second, Which is part of the main Instruction
of the Poem, is that, when Malice perverts a Man's Nature to such a degree, as
to make him wilfully and deliberately oppose Heaven, that Malice occasions the
final Ruin of the Agent.

But now the Murders which Octa commits, are of no manner of Necessity, either
upon account of the Action, because Octa's being of another Religion, as we
have said above, is a sufficient reason for his opposing Arthur, nor on account
of the Moral, because Octa comes off unpunished.

But it is time to return to the Hero of Virgil, and to show, as we propounded,
that the predominant quality of his mind, appears not only in those very
Episodes that seem to require a quite contrary Character, such extraordinary
care has the Poet taken to distinguish him everywhere, and to maintain in him,
not only a Constancy of Manner, but an Unity of Character; but this reigning
Quality is made to shine too even in the Characters which are opposed to the
Heroes. So divinely has this Maker provided, that the same universal and
quickening Soul, should, though not in an equal degree be diffused through his whole
Creation. We shall have occasion to prove the former of these at large in
another place. Let us now demonstrate the latter, which is that, the
predominant Quality of the Hero appears even in the Characters which are
opposed to him.

Thus the Malicious, the Cruel and Revengefull Mezentius, speaks in the Tenth
of the Aeneis, in the most moving and tender Manner; And in the Twelfth Turnus,
the Violent, the Wrathful, the Fiery Turnus, appears to be gentle, and soft,
and supplicating. And this the Poet, by his admirable Address, has brought
about, without the least Violation of Decency, or of the Fourth Condition of
the Manners.

The Manners indeed are to be constant, not because Aristotle has said it; for
to affirm that would be absurd, but because Nature will have it so. For the
Rules of Aristotle, as we have said above, are but Directions for the
Observation of Nature, as the best of the written Laws, are but the pure
Dictates of Reason and Repetitions of the Laws of Nature. For either this must
be granted, or Aristotle must be confessed to have contradicted the Design
which he had in prescribing those Rules: Which Design was to teach Men to
please, more than they could do without these Rules. It being undeniable that
the Writer, who follows Nature closest, is certain to please most. For Poetry
is nothing but an Imitation of Nature, which Aristotle, who knew her well, has
very well taught us to imitate. And he who keeps up strictly to his Rules, is
as certain to succeed, as he who lives up exactly to Reason is certain of being
happy. But it is as impossible for any Man who has not a great Genius, strictly
to observe the Rules; as it is for any one who has not supernatural Assistance
to live up to the Dictates of Reason. For People may talk as long as they
please, I defy any one to show me a regular Epick Poem, or Tragedy which was
not writ by a very extraordinary Man. But to return to the business from which
we may seem to have in some measure digress'd.

The Manners are to be well maintained, because Nature is uniform: For Poetry
being an Imitation of Nature, it follows, that the humane Poetical persons are
to be Imitations of Men. Now if Nature in Man is always uniform, it is certain
that the Manners in the humane Poetical persons ought never to vary. But if
Nature in one and the same Man may sometimes appear irregular, it is evident
that the Manners of the humane Poetical persons may in some Cases differ very
much from themselves.

Thus the Humors in Children alter every Hour, and in the Bloom of Youth they
are very rarely consistent. And therefore Aristotle in those Cases allows of
unequal Manners, provided the inequality of Humor be throughout maintained. I
had almost forgot another sort of Persons in which the Manners are variable,
and those are such as come indeed to years of Maturity; but by reason of the
inconsistency of their Brains, never come to years of Discretion.

But besides these inborn Causes of the Inconstancy of the Manners, which are
want of Maturity, and defect of Temper, there are accidental Ones; the which
are chiefly two; a very great Calamity, and a very violent Passion; which have
both been seen to inspire Men with Sentiments and with Resolutions that have
been unexpected from them. Nay, so Powerful have their Effects been, that as
the last has made People act and talk with Transports that have been contrary
to the Bent of their Natural Tempers, so the first has been often known to
assuage the Fury of the most turbulent Passions.

But to come closer to the Matter in hand: The principal Characters of an Epick
Poem, which are those of which we chiefly Treat, are not to vary their Manners
at every turn, either from an immatureness in Years, or from a defect in
Temper; because such a Frailty is inconsistent with those extraordinary
Qualities, which they must have who are fit to oppose or to carry on great
Designs. And though even such Persons as these are supposed to be altered, by the
Violence of an extraordinary Passion, or the Distress of some strange Calamity;
yet, considering the intrepidity of their Natures, and the firmness of their
Resolutions, they must be exceeding mournful or terrible Incidents, which can
either subdue their Souls by the Force of a Passion, which is contrary to the
Bent of their Natural Tempers, or assuage the impetuous Motions of Rage, which
is grounded on their inborn Vehemence. And therefore it must be the most dismal
of all Misfortunes, which can make Mezentius bewail his Misery, and bewail it
with so moving an Air, that our very Souls are pierced by the Sufferings of one
whom we abh^r'd but just before. And it must be the most amazing of all
Catastrophies, which could ^tonish and break the wrathful Mind of Turnus, and
bring it to a sense of its wretched State, and force it to sue for Forgiveness
to one whom it had with so much Fury, and with so much Disdain opposed. Let us
now consider that which happened both to the one and the other. Mezentius, as
we have said above, was a Contemner of the Gods, and a Hater of Men. Yet this
inhumane Tyrant could not so perfectly divest himself of Humanity, but that he
excepted his Son from the Number of those whom he hated; a Son, who indeed
deserved the Affection of a much better Father. And this Violence of Love was
by so much the stronger in the Soul of this Barbarian, because all its Softness
was centered in Lausus; whereas the Tenderness of other Men is in different
Degrees diffused through the whole Species.

Judge then what Impression the cruel Death of this lovely Son; and a Son, who
died for his Father, must make even upon a Barbarians Soul? Can any one be
surpised upon this occasion, to behold even the bloody inhumane Mezentius,
strowing Dust on his Head, and clinging round round the Body in all the
Convulsions of Sorrow; then stretching out his Hands to Heaven, and crying out
with so pathetick an Air.

Tantane me tenuit vivendi, Nate, voluptas,
Ut pro me hostili paterer succedere dextrae
Quem genui? tua ne h^c genitor per vulnera servor?
Morte tua vivens? heu nunc misero mihi demum,
Exilium infoelix! nunc alte vulnus adactum!
And thus we have seen the predominant Quality of the Hero's Character
appearing in Mezentius, without the least Violation of the fourth Condition of
the Manners. For Mezentius does nothing upon this occasion, but what Nature and
Reason tell us he would do upon such an astonishing Incident; and therefore he
does nothing but what is extremely regular. But let us now behold the
Catastrophie of Turnus. And as we have seen a very tender Passion excited, even
in the Savage Mind of Mezentius, by the admirable Address of a most deplorable
Incident, and that without any Offense against exact Regularity: Let us now see
the lofty turbulent Spirit of Turnus, humbled by the Plagues that the Terrors
of Jove inflict upon him. Let us see this wrathful outrageous Prince dejected,
and soft and supplicating: Let us see this intrepid and hitherto invincible
Warrior, stretching out his Hand for Mercy, and not for Conquest.

Ille bumilis supplexque, oculos dextramque precantem
Protendens, Equidem merui, nec deprecor, inquit,
Utere sort tua, miseri te siqua Parentis
Tangere cura potest; oro (fuit and tibi talis
Anchises genitor) Dauni miserere senectae:
Et me seu corpus spoliatum lumine mavis
Read meis, vicisti, and victum tendere palmas
Ausonii videre: tua est Lavinia conjux:
Ulterius ne tend odiis.
Here we may take notice of the following Particulars. First, he acknowledges
the Wrong which he had done to Aeneas, by unjustly constraining Latinus to
declare War against him; and by Attacking his Men in his Absence, after he was
Wounded upon the breaking the League. Secondly, he confesses Aeneas the
Conqueror. Thirdly, he resigns his Mistress. And lastly, he begs his Life.
This seems to be quite contrary to the Character of the Violent, the Unjust and
Inexorable Turnus. So that here is an appearing Violation of the fourth
Condition of the Manners. But upon enquiry we shall find, that all this is
extremely Just; and that Nature and Reason being observed, the Rules remain
unviolated. To show which, we are not only to consider, that now the fatal Blow
has been struck, which has brought Turnus to the very brink of Destruction, and
laid him at his Enemy's Mercy, but we are to take a short View of what happened
before. As Aeneas Sailed by the Gods Commands for Italy, so his Arrival was
foretold there by Portents and Prodigies, and by the Oracle of Faunus. The last
of which, as well as the other two, had not only deterred Latinus from Marrying
his Daughter to Turnus, but had just before the Arrival of Aeneas, assured him
that a Foreign Hero was coming, who was to lay the Foundation of a glorious
Empire there, and for whom his Daughter and Dominions were both predestined,
Lib. 7. v. 98.

Externi veniunt generi qui sanguine nostrum,
Nomen in astra ferant, quorumque ab stirpe nepotes
Omnia sub pedibus qua sol utrumque recurrens
Aspicit Oceanum, vertique regique videbunt.
And Virgil takes care to show, that what this Oracle delivered was no Secret;
but that Fame had taken care to divulge it just upon the Arrival of Aeneas.

Haec responsa patris Fauni, monitusque silenti
Nocte datos, non ipse suo premit ore Latinus:
Sed circum late volitans jam Fama per urbes
Ausonias tuler at: cum Laomedontia pubes
Gramineo rip^ religav^ ab aggere classem.
Ibid. v. 105.

Yet Turnus, though he was acquainted with this, urged by Alecto and his inborn
Fury heightened and inflamed by Love; not only persists in his Pretensions, but
causes his Subjects to Arm, and Alarms his Neighbors, and constrains Latinus
to begin a War against his own Inclinations, and the Commands of the Gods: Upon
which Latinus threatens him with the certain Consequences of so impious an
Undertaking.

Frangimur heu fatis, inquit, ferimurque procella?
Ipsi has sacrilego pendetis sanguine poenas:
O miseri: te Turn nefas, te triste manebit
Supplicium; votisque Deos venerabere seris.
Ibid. 594.

In consequence of which, Turnus is twice beaten, his Friends destroyed, and
his Party broken; and Latinus, in the beginning of the Twelfth Book, takes care
to put him in mind, that this was all an Effect of Divine Vengeance. And Turnus
seems to be sensible of this, when he approaches the Altar in order to the
single Combat. For the sight of the Altar, upon this occasion putting him in
mind that he had grieviously offended the Gods, may with a great deal of Reason
be believed to cause that Paleness and Dejection which appears in his
Countenance.

-- Incessu tacito progressus and aram
Suppliciter venerans demisso lumine Turnus',
Tabenresque genae and juvenali in corpore pallor.
Which some Gentlemen, who are avowed Abhorrers of Thinking, have taken to
proceed from his Fear of the single Combat. Immediately afterward Turnus
appears to be perfectly convinced of the Truth of what Latinus predicted in the
Seventh Book.

-- Te, Turn, nefas, te triste manebit
Supplicium, votisque Deos venerabere seri.
And that now it was too late to invoke the Gods; and that he had nothing to
expect, but the very last dreadful Effect of the Divine Displeasure. And
therefore he invokes the infernal Powers.

-- Vos O mihi manes
Este boni: quoniam superis aversa voluntas.
Lib. 12. v. 546.

Here was enough already to bring a Man to Relent, even a Man of the most
undaunted Temper, if he had any thing of Belief or Fear of the Gods in him. But
immediately upon this the Terrors of Jove were upon him, who sent down one of
his Furies on purpose to astonish and to confound him.

-- turni se pestis ad ora,
Fertque refertque sonans, clipeumque everberat alis.
Illi membra novus solvit formidine torpor:
Arrectaeque horrore comae and vox faucibus baesit.
Lib. 12. v. 865.

But then as soon as ever he comes to himself, he discovers in one Expression
to Aenea^ both the Fear and the Greatness of his Mind.

-- Non me tua turbida torrent
Dicta, ferox, Dei me torrent, and Jupiter hostis.
So that here we find a Man who is brought by a long Train of Calamities to a
sense of his Crime, by which he had grievously offended the Gods; yet of a
Crime which proceeded from no irreligious Principle, but from the Violence of a
Rage which transported and clouded his Mind, and hurried him on to his Ruin.
But though Turnus discovers Considerateness, he yet awhile shows no Fear: He was
by Nature intrepid and furious, and incapable of Fear. But here see the
admirable Address of the Poet. For whom cannot Jupiter terrify? Jupiter takes
care to plague him with a Passion, whose Motions are quite contrary to those of
his natural Fury. For Fear and Rage are inconsistent Affections. See then the
Terrors of Jove upon him, which dispell the Remains of his Rage, and bring him
perfectly to a sense of the greatness of his Crime, which flashes full in his
Conscience. He feels the amazing Effects of the Gods displeasure for going
against their Commands, for audaciously endeavoring to oppose their Supreme
Decrees, and for wageing an unjust and an impious War against the Man who was
under their immediate Protection. Now can any thing in the World be more
reasonable, than for a Man even of his Character, when he lies under such
circumstances, and is not without a sense of Religion, and his miserable
Condition; Can any thing be more reasonable, than for such a Man to confess his
Crime, and the Wrong that he has done, to disclaim his Pretension, which was
the cause of his Crime, and to be apprehensive of going out of the World,
before he had by Prayer and Sacrifice atoned the Powers, which he had so
grievously offended? Can any thing be more according to Reason and Nature than
this? And consequently, can any thing be more regular? We see every Day that
People, who by the Violence of their Passions have been transported to great
Offenses; when those Passions are dispelled by the approach of Death, become
sensible of their Faults, and confess their Injustice.

I have now one word to say of the different Behavior of Mezentius at his
Death. But first I desire the Reader's leave, to show how the Supplication of
Turnus, which is so very reasonable, and so very natural, and consequently so
very regular; I desire leave, I say, to show how admirably it serves the design
of the Poet. For though I know very well, that this is not exactly to my purpose,
yet it will serve at least to Illustrate the Divine Conduct of Virgil. This
Supplication then is perfectly necessary for the Integrity of the Action. For
if Turnus had died without speaking a word, and the Poem had ended so, we might
have been in a reasonable Doubt of the Event; and might have cause to believe,
that the Latins and Rutilians, who broke the League once before to avoid the
exposing of Turnus, would break it yet once more to revenge him. But by this
Supplication we are perfectly satisfied, that upon the Death of Turnus all
things were calm and sedate, who acknowledged in the Presence both of the
Latins and his Rutilians, that by his Proceedings he had wronged Aeneas, and
that he had deserved his Fate.

Equidem merui, nec deprecor inquit.
For it is impossible that any of the Captains, who were Spectators of the
single Combat, could be so very unjust and so very unreasonable, as to
endeavor to revenge a Man who confessed he deserved his Fate. But now let us
come to Mezentius. He behaves himself quite at a different rate. He neither
begs his Life, nor confesses that he had done any Wrong. He is so far from
fearing Death, that he resolves to die; yet he too descends to Entreaties. But
those Entreaties are only, that he may be buried in the same Grave with his
much lamented Lausus. All which is extremely natural. For Mezentius was
intrepid by Nature, and a confirmed Atheist. And that lovely Son was for ever
snatched from him, who was the only Person, and the only Thing of all the World
in which he could take delight.

Now a Man must of necessity despise Death, who is fierce and valiant by
Nature, and who has lost the only Object that made him in love with Life; and
who, besides all this, contemned the Gods, and laughed at Futurity. We have
said above, that Men who are transported by Passions to great Offenses; when
those Passions come to be calmed by the approach of Death, acknowledge their
Faults, and repent of the Wrongs they have done. But nothing is more common
than for one who has lived an Atheist, to go out of the World remorseless and
insensible. Mezentius then speaks as one of his Character, and in his
Circumstances would probably speak, when he cries out,

Nec mortem horremus, nec divum parcimus ulli,
Desine jam venio moriturus. Lib. 10. v. 879.
And a little afterward, when Aeneas had him at his Mercy,

Host is amare, quid increpitas, mortemque miner is?
Nullum in caede nefas, nec sic ad praelia veni,
Nec tecum meus haec pepigit mihi foedera Lausus.
Yet in the midst of this obstinate Intrepidity, Virgil finds a way, to make
him descend to Entreaty. For he desires that his Body may be preserved from the
Rage of his Subjects, and be buried by that of his dear Lausus.

Unum hoc, per siqua est victis venia hostibus oro,
Corpus humo patiare tegi; scio acerba meorum,
Circumst are odia, hunc, oro, defend furorem,
Et me consortem nati concede sepulchro.
Lib. 10. v. 903.

Where we may observe by the way, that he takes notice of the Wrongs which he
has done his Subjects without the least Remorse. Now the Concern that he shows
for his Funeral, and his Request to be buried with his Lausus, seems to be
extremely natural, even in one of his undaunted and unrelenting Temper. And
there is something seen every day in the World that is very like it. For
nothing is more common than to find an expiring Person, who, because he knows
himself very stupid, believes he has no Soul, seem very sollicitous for his
Carcass. For it is impossible for any Man so far to stifle Eternal Truths, and
the Dictates of Common Nature, but that there will be always some Remains of
them; and the departing Soul of the most obstinate and invincible Atheist, by a
glimmering Consciousness of its Immortality, will provide for something at
least to come.

And thus we have plainly proved, that Virgil has made the principal Quality of
his Hero's Character shine even in the opposite Characters, and that without
the least Violation of the fourth Condition of the Manners. Now since Virgil
has done nothing, even by varying the Manners in these opposite Characters, but
what the strictest Reason requires; I think it will be needless to prove that
one of his admirable Judgment has maintained the Manners in the rest of the
Characters, with the severest Constancy.

I have shown that Mr. Blackmore has been so very far from maintaining this
scrupulous Unity, or from observing this exact Regularity, or from preserving a
Unity of Character in his Hero, through his Poem, that he has neither marked
any predominant or distinguishing Quality in his Hero, nor preserved the
Qualities in them which he has marked; which being ill maintained, are
consequently ill expressed: Upon which account they can neither be resembling
nor convenient.

Thus much we have said of the Characters; in which, if we appear to have been
tedious, I hope the Reader will excuse it: Since we have already demonstrated
of what importance they are to the Moral; and since we shall show by the Sequel
of this Discourse, in what an extraordinary Manner they influence, not only the
Passions, but all the Incidents.

CHAP. V. That the Incidents in Prince Arthur, are not of a delightful Nature.
WE now come to the ^econd thing, which makes the Narration delightful, and
that is the things included in it. In the former part of this Treatise, we
spoke of the Episodes, as they are necessary parts of the Action. We shall now
speak of the Incidents which compose those Episodes; or of those probable
Circumstances which extend each part of the Action to the length of a just
Episode. We shall now show, that these Incidents in Mr. Blackmore are not
delightful: I mean, that they are not very delightful to Readers of the best
Taste, and that they who are acquainted with Virgil, cannot be pleased to a
height with them. The Incidents in Prince Arthur are not delightful, for the
following Reasons. First, Because they are not in their Natures agreeable.
Secondly, Because there is not a sufficient number of them. Thirdly, Because
they want Variety. Fourthly, Because they have not (...) true Disposition.
Fifthly, Because they are not surprising. And Sixthly, Because they are not
Pathetick. We shall speak to all these as succinctly as possibly we can. First,
The Incidents are not in their Natures agreeable. The things included in Mr.
Blackmore's Narration are chiefly four: Voyages, Wars, Councils, Machines. Now
there are three things that make a Voyage delightful to the Reader. 1. The
interest that he has in the Person that takes it, and the concern he lies under
for him. 2. The Adventures that happen to that Person; And, 3. the Countries
through which he passes. A Man who has a Friend in a foreign Country, receives
ten times the Pleasure from the account which he has of his Travels, that he
would from a relation of the same Journeys or Voyages taken and made by an
indifferent Person; unless there should be a very great disproportion in the
manner of making it: This experience confirms. From whence it follows, that if
a Poet would very much please us by a relation of the Voyages of his Hero, he
must take care to give him such Qualities, as may oblige us to wish him well.
And the Qualities which oblige us to wish any one well, are such as we either
have our selves, or believe we have, or such as we desire, and consequently, in
some measure endeavor to have. For the concern which we have for others, is
grounded upon the love of our selves. And the same likeness of Humors and
Qualities, which obliges us to make a Friend, causes us to affect a Poetical
Person. Now, as I cannot possibly be a Friend to any one, with whose Humors
and Qualities I am unacquained; so I cannot affect any Poetical Person, whose
Character I do not know. But I have proved very plainly above, that we are not
acquainted with Prince Arthur's Character. For the Manners being ill-maintain'd
in him, are consequently ill-express'd. At one time he appears brave and
religious, at another time, impious and fearful: so that the Reader knows not
what to make of him. For they are not particular Acts, but confirmed Habits and
permanent Qualities, which denominate Men good or bad. Since then the Reader
cannot be assured of any resemblance between this Hero and himself, he cannot
appear concerned for him, and consequently, sees him between Normandy and
England with a great deal the less delight: Nor are the Adventures which happen
to Arthur, compared to those which Aeneas meets with either delightful or
wonderful. The two most considerable, are his meeting with Hoel, and his
conversing with Uter in a Dream. Now I am pretty confident, that there is no
Man so fond of Prince Arthur, as to make the least Comparison between those and
what happened to Aeneas in the Court of Dido, and in his descent to Hell. Nor
are the Travels of Artuhr to be compared in the least, to those of the
Virgilian Hero. To sail from Normandy to Wales is a very Trifle, in comparison
of the immense Voyages of Ulysses and of Aeneas. Thrace and the fabulous
Aegaean Isles, the most delicious Countries on Earth, and famous for the Births
of their Gods and Heroes, and renowned for so many wonders that were done
before and since in them: Crete, Epirus, Calabria, Sicily, where there was
Aetna, Polyphemus, Scilla, Charibdis, all amazing Wonders of Nature, are quite
other Countries to give delight, than the Valleys of England, or than the
Mountains of Wales. For that which is wonderful, is at the same time
delightful, says Aristotle, which experience confirms, for we are very intent
upon any thing at which we wonder, though it does not concern us, which we could
never be, if it did not delight us. For which reason, in speaking of the
delightful, we shall likewise speak of the admirable, before we come to treat
peculiarly of the latter.

The Wars in Prince Arthur are to be considered next by us, which are not in
themselves delightful; because I am not acquainted with any one person engaged
in them. For no Man has any Character, as we shall prove anon, and
consequently, I am concerned for nobody. Besides, they are very little
important, in comparison of Virgil's, upon the event of which, the Empire of
the World depended, and from which the Poet's immediate Readers, derived their
greatness, and deduced their Glory. But I cannot see how we, who derive our
selves from the Normans and Saxons, can be concerned in Prince Arthur's
Success, unless it be on the account of Religion, and we are the less concerned
upon that account, because Ethelina being a Christian, would, in all
likelihood, upon the Death of her Father, have propagated her own Religion,
though Arthur had remained contented in Normandy.

But Thirdly, The Councils in Prince Arthur are not in their Nature
delightful, because they are heavy and phlegmatic. Whereas every thing in
Poetry ought to be animated. Now nothing can be more spiritless, than the
debate in the sixth Book, between Passentius and Cissa. Indeed, Mr. Blackmore
tells us, that Crida, in the Council of the ninth, is very angry: But if it be
so, he is politic^ly angry. For by what he says, he by no means appears to be
angry: Whereas all the Concils in Virgil are warm and pathetick. That in the
ninth is animated, by the enterprise of the two Friends, that of the tenth by
the Anger of Juno, and that of the eleventh by the violence of Turnus. Besides,
that the very Persons in these Councils, Ascanius, Nisus, Eurialus, the King
and Queen of the Gods, and the Queen of Love and Turnus are quite other sort of
Persons to to give delight, than five dull dogmatizing Politicians.

Fourthly, The Machines in Prince Arthur are not delightful. By Machines, I
mean the divine and infernal Persons, for we have treated of the humane above.
I have often, indeed, wondered why I could never be pleased with the Machines
in a Christian Poem. At length, I believe I have found out the reason. Poetry
pleases by an imitation of Nature. Now the Christian Machines are quite out of
Nature, and consequently cannot delight. The Heathen Machines are enough out of
Nature to be admirable, and enough in Nature to delight. That which brings them
nearer to Nature than the Christian Machines, is the distinction of Sexes,
human Passions, and human Inclinations: But however they are so far out of
Nature, that Virgil has seldom ventured to describe any of his Machines, and
when he has done it, it has been in order to move Terror and not to move
Delight. For he knew very well, that a thing may the rather move Terror for
being out of the ordinary course of Nature, but that any Imitation which
excites Joy, must be an Imitation of something in Nature. For Imitation, says
Aristotle, is therefore pleasing, because we are instructed by it without Pain.
Now to be instructed by Imitation, I must be a Judge of that Imitation, which I
can never be, if I have not a clear and distinct Idea of its Object; now Virgil
knowing very well, that he had no clear and distinct Idea of his Gods and
Goddesses saw very well, that for that reason he must not venture to paint
them. And therefore in the first Book of the Aeneis, neither Juno nor Eolus,
nor the Winds, nor Neptune, nor Jupiter, nor Cupid, nor Venus, are any of them
personally described. Indeed the Queen of Love seems to come by her Office
nearer to Nature than the rest of the Divinities, and therefore Virgil in the
first Book has said something of her. But he has described her chiefly by
Action and the Effect of Action. For when he describes her Habit, he describes
her in the disguise of a Mortal, and so far he is safe within the Compass of
Nature. But when he speaks of her as confessing the Goddess; he only says, that
she discovered her self at the taking leave of her Son by her Celestial Hue, by
the Ambrosial Fragrancy that was diffused from her Hair, and by the Divinity of
her Mien.

Dixit and avertens Rosea cervice refulsit
Ambrosiaeque comae divinum vertice odorem
Spiravere.
Where I desire the Reader's leave to observe, though it be not directly to my
purpose, that Virgil, when he speaks of her Person, mentions only her Hair, and
the hinder part of her Neck. A Poet, without Judgment, would certainly have
described her Face. But Virgil had discernment enough to see, that what he had
said of her Hair, and of her Neck, and her Mien, would set her Face before the
Reader in a more ravishing Form, than all the most beautiful Colors in
Poetry, and the most delicate exquisite Strokes of the greatest of Masters
could paint it.

But to return from whence we digress'd. Virgil has seldom described any of his
Machines; and in those which he has described, he has been very short; and even
in those short Descriptions, he has described Actions, and not Persons. For
which he is to be commended upon three Accounts. First, Because by describing
his Machines by their Actions, he seems not so much to have gone out of Nature,
for Motion in Matter is Nature. Secondly, Because all Poetry is Imitation, and
nothing represents or imitates like Action; which is Aristotle's Reason, in the
Third Book of his Rhetoric, Chapter the Seventh. And Thirdly, Because all
Poetry ought to animate, and the describing of Action animates. It being
impossible for a Reader to conceive vigorous Motion without Agitation of Mind.
Whereas the description of Persons is, for the most part, languishing, even
when it is in Nature. Nay, I think I may venture to affirm, that Descriptions
of Persons are always languishing, unless they touch a Passion. When, I say,
the Virgil describes his Machines succinctly, if he describes them at all; and
rather chooses to say what they do, than what they are: I think my self obliged
to put the Reader in mind, that in the Fourth Aeneid there is a very Signal
Exception; And that is the Description of Fame, who is drawn in fifteen Lines
at length; three of which Number describe her Person. But then we are to
consider the importance of that Machine; which causes the Departure of Aeneas,
and the Death of Dido; which are two of the most considerable Events of the
Poem. Now this Description of Fame, which is one of the longest of the Aeneis,
is absolutely necessary, as the Reader will find by having recourse to it, for
the making us understand how she brought these Events about.

Now since Virgil rarely described his Machines, though they are more in Nature
than ours; and since he was very short when he did describe them, rather
Painting their Actions than Drawing their Persons: I think we may venture to
affirm, that they do not appear to be the most Judicious of Writers, who are
seen to be luxuriant in their Descriptions of Angels or Devils, in a Christian
Poem: Since the first of these are Beings, of which no Man can have clear and
distinct Idea's, because they have nothing which is common to us, neither
distinction of Sexes, nor variety of Passions, nor diversity of Inclinations;
and since the last, though Passions and Inclinations are ascribed to them; yet by
reason that they have no good Qualities, do not come so near to humane Nature
as the infernal Gods of the Heathens; and since by reason that they have all of
them infernal Rage and diabolical Malice, and bear an immortal Hatred to Man,
the good as well as the bad, which the infernal Powers of the Heathens, no, not
even the Furies do not; they rather appear to be horrible and odious, than they
seem to be terrible.

It Is true indeed, I am not ignorant that the most delightful and most
admirable Part of the sublimest of all our Poets, is that which relates the
Rebellion and Fall of these Evil Angels, and their dismal Condition upon their
Fall, and their Consult for the recovery of their native Mansions, and their
Original Glory. But then we are to consider, that these Angels, according to
the System of Milton; which an English Poet, who treats of those Matters after
him, is certainly obliged to follow, were very different just upon their Fall,
from what they are believed to be at present, or to have been in Prince
Arthur's time. That this was Milton's Hypothesis, is apparent from several
Passages. For God the Father, in the Sixth Book of Paradise Lost, speaking of
the good and bad Angels, says to his Son:

Equal in their Creation they were formed,
Save what Sin has impaired, which yet has wrought
Insensibly, for I suspend their doom.
And Milton, in the First Book, describes Lucifer, as one whose Glory was not
quite extinguished. The Verses deserve to be read everywhere.

-- He above the rest
In shape; and gesture, proudly eminent,
Stood like a Tower, his Form had yet not lost
All her original brightness, nor appeared
Less than Archangel ruined, and the excess
Of Glory obscured: As when the Sun new risen
Looks through the Horizontal misty Air
Shorn of his Beams, or from behind the Moon
In dim Eclipse disastrous Twilight sheds
On half the Nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes Monarchs: Darkened so, yet shone
Above them all the Archangel: but his Face
Deep Scars of Thunder had entrenched, and Care
Sat on his faded Cheek, but under Brows
Of dauntless Courage and considerate Pride
Waiting revenge: cruel his Eye, but cast
Signs of Remorse and Passion to behold
The fellows of his Crime, the followers rather
(Far other once beheld in bliss) condemned
For ever now to have their Lot in pain,
Millions of spirits for his fault amerc'd
Of Heaven, and from eternal Splendours flung
For his revolt, yet faithful how they stood
Their Glory withered. As when Heavens fire
Has seath'd the Forest-Oaks, or Mountain-Pines,
With singed top their stately growth, though bare,
Stands on the blasted Heath. He now prepared
To speak, whereat their doubled Ranks they bend
From wing to wing, and half enclose him round
With all his Peers. Attention held them mute:
Thrice he assayed, and thrice in spite of scorn
Tears such as Angels weep burst forth. At last
Words interwove with Sighs found out their way.
Here we may behold in Lucifer some Remains of Glory, and some Resemblance of
Goodness; and consequently the Devils, according to Milton, were different
then, from what they are believed to be now. Nor had they yet a while ruined
Mankind, nor conceived that unrelenting Hate against the whole Species, which
now they are believed to have.

They had not resolved upon their design against Man till about the middle of
the Second Book. And even afterward, when Lucifer took his flight to the
new-made World, in order to the executing what they had contrived; he shows
Remorse upon the top of Niphates, in the Speech which is found in the Third
Book, and which begins with that wonderful Apostrophe to the Sun.

O Thou who with surpassing Glory crowned,
Look from thy sole Dominion like the God
Of this new World, at whose sight all the Stars
Hide their diminished Heads; to thee I call,
But with no friendly Voice, and add thy Name,
O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy Beams
That bring to my remembrance from what State
I sell; how glorious once above thy sphere,
Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down,
Warring in Heaven against Heavens Matchless King.
Ah wherefore! he deserved no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright Eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard, etc.
And in the Eighth Book the Devil is made to relent, nay to be pleased upon the
sight of Eve.

Such pleasure took the Serpent to behold
This flowery Spot, the sweet Recess of Eve
Thus early, thus alone; her heavenly Form
Angelick, but more soft and feminine,
Her graceful Innocence, her every Air
Of Gesture or least Action over-a'd
His Malice, and with Rapine sweet bereaved
His sierceness of the fierce intent it brought.
That space the evil one abstracted stood
From his own evil, and for the time remained
Stupidly good, of Enmity disarmed
Of Guile, of Hate, of Envy, of Revenge.
By all which we may see, that Milton, to introduce his Devils with success,
saw that it was necessary to give them something that was allied to Goodness.
Upon which he very dexterously feigned, that the Change which was caused by
their Fall, was not wrought in them all at once; and that there was not an
entire Alteration worked in them, till they had a second time provoked their
Creator by succeeding in their attempt upon Man. From whence it seems very
apparent to me, that a Pcet, who introduces Devils into a Poem writ on any more
Modern Subject, cannot use them with the same success that Milton did, and
ought certainly never to describe them, as Mr. Blackmore has done. For which
reason I laid the Scene of the Court of Death between the Surface of the Earth
and Hell, which is commonly believed to be at the Center, and endeavored to
make what difference I could between those who composed it, and mere infernal
Spirits.

Thus we have endeavored to show, that the things included in Mr. Blackmore's
Narration, are not in themselves delightful. In the next Chapter I propound to
treat of their Number, of their Variety, and of their Disposition.

CHAP. VI. Of the Number, Variety and Disposition of the Incidents.
THE more numerous the Incidents are in any Narration, the more that Narration
delights, provided they neither corrupt the Unity of the Action, nor the
Perspicuity, the Brevity and Simplicity of the Narration. For the Mind does not
care for dwelling too long upon an Object, but loves to pass from one thing to
another; because such a Transition keeps it from languishing, and gives it more
Agitation. Now Agitation only can give it Delight. For Agitation not only keeps
it from mortifying Reflections, which it naturally has when it is not shaken,
but gives it a Force which it had not before, and the Consciousness of its own
Force delights it. Besides, that every large Incident gives a fresh Surprise.

The Number of Incidents in Mr. Blackmore's Poem is very small, considering the
Length of the Narration: For there are no Incidents at all in the second and
third Books of the Poem, unless a Man could be so extravagant as to call the
Creation, and Redemption, and last Judgment Incidents. Now the second and third
Books make a fifth Part of the Poem; and we have Reason to believe, that above
a third of the other eight Books consists of needless and trisling
Descriptions, dogmatical Reflections, supersluous Characters and Harangues that
are foreign from the Purpose. Monsieur Segr^ris has observed, in the Beginning
of his Remarks upon his Virgil, that the Poets Proposition and Invocation, the
Causes of the Anger, and the ha^red of Juno; the ^pressions of her Resentment,
her Compla^nt, and her ^ndignation; her Conversation with (...) the Q^lities
and Answer of that God, the wonde^ful Tempest, the (...) of (...), the Wrath of
Neptune, his rebuking the Winds, their Flight, and the succeeding Ca^m, are all
in the Compass of an (...) and fifty Verses. If a Man considers this, says
(...), rien n'est plu^ capable de fair voir la richesse et la Grandeur de (...)
de Virg^le, et les qualites les plus souvent contraire, de queques uns qui on
crun^ sur sas pas. Nothing is more capable, says he, of showing the Richness of
Virgil's Invention, and the Sublimity of his Wit, and the contrary Qualities of
some who have thought they have followed his Model.

In the Beginning of Mr. Blackmore's Poem, we have the Proposition, the
Invocation, the Causes of Lucifer's persecuting Arthur; the Expressions of his
R^ge and Malice, his Flight to Thor, and his Reqnest to him. Thor's Qualities
and his Answer, the outrageous Storm, the Descent of Uriel, and the Calm that
succeeds it, in the Compass of between thre^ and four hundred Verses. From
whence it appears, that either Virgil has not said so much as he ought to have
done, o^ that Mr. Blackmore has said almost as much again as in Reason he ought
to have said. Which I hope is a very fair Calculation upon the making a just
Abatement for the Succinctness of the Latin Tongue. Now a Poet that has such a
Number of Words, does not ^nly cause us to languish, by making (...) dwell too
long upon an Object, but he (...) and retards his Action, and very often raises
the Indignation of his Reader. For though Instruction be the chief End of a
Poet, yet Diversion is the principal Aim of the Reader; and the Generality of
Readers have Recourse to Poems, as they have to Company, more for their
Pleasure than for their Benefit. Now the Pleasure that we propound to our
selves by conversing, is not only the hearing what others can say; but the
speaking our selves in our Turns, and the springing of new Ideas, and the
starting of new Notions, upon the Hints which we have from others: Upon which
Account nothing is found to be more troublesome to Company, than a Fellow who
talks all: For he not only deprives us of the forementioned Pleasure of
starting and delivering our own Notions, but mortifies our Vanity another Way
too, and that is by telling us, that he values himself upon his own
Sufficiency, and mistrusts our Capacities.

The same thing happens to us when we are engaged in the reading a Poet who
exhausts his Subject; he deprives us of the Pleasure of thinking our selves,
which is the greatest in the World, and treats us like People who are not able
to think.

But now, as to pass from one thing to another agitates; so the more those
Objects are different one from another, the more their Variety shakes and
surprises us: Which Reflection dictated the following Verses to Boileau.

Voulez vous du public meriter les amo^rs?
Sans cesse en ecrivant variez vos discourse.
Un style trop egal et toujours uniforme,
En vain brille a nos yeux, il faut qu' il nous endorme
On lit peu ces auteurs nes pour nous ennuyer
Qui toujours sur un ton semble psalmodier
Heureux qui dans ses verse sca^t d'une voix legere
Passer du graueau doux, du plaisant au se^ere,
Son Liver aim du ciel, et cheri des lecteurs
Est souvent chez Barbin entoure d'achepteurs.
Which in English is thus; Would you deserve the Approbation of the Public? In
writing diversifie your Style incessantly: Too equal and too uniform a manner,
shines to no purpose, and inclines us to sleep. Rarely are those Authors. read
who are born to plague us, and who appear always whineing in the same
ungrateful Tone. Happy the Man who can so command his Voice, as to pass,
without any Constraint, from that which is grave, to that which is moving, and
from that which is pleasant, to tha^ which is severe and solemn.

Thus has Boileau prescribed Variety; both for the Style and Subject. I must
confess, the Question here is not concerning Style. But it will not be amiss to
give the Reader a Hint, that if it appears that Mr. Blackmore has not Variety
of Matter; and that the Style perpetually ought to be suited to the Subject; it
must of necessity follow, that either Mr. Blackmore has not suited his Manner
of writing to his Subject, or that his Style is not enough diversified. But to
show that Mr. Blackmore has not Variety of things, which is our Business here,
we need only put the Reader in mind, that since we have shown, that this Author
has no Plenty, it evidently follows, that he has no Variety. For, though there
may be Plenty without Variety, yet I cannot see how the latter can be without
the former; but we will still go a little further, and show that Mr. Blackmore
has not Variety even in Proportion to his little Substance.

As Virgil has, with an admirable Simplicity, diversified his Style incessantly
and inimitably, whereas Mr. Blackmore, with a forbidding Affectation, has a
wearisome Uniformity, so it is extr^mly remarkable, that Virgil, with exact
Regularity, and a perfect Unity, has Variety, as well as Plenty of Matter;
whereas Mr. Blackmore, in the irregular Constitution of a double Action does
not only want a sufficient Variety of Incidents, but a Variety proportioned
even to his little Number.

Virgil, aft^r he has terrified his Reader with the Description of that
wonderful Tempest which we find in the Beginning of his Poem, takes care to
refresh him, by the pleasing Landscape of the Place where Aeneas landed. Mr.
Blackmore, who in the Beginning of his Poem, has servilely followed Virgil, has
made a like Description. But this is in an extraordinary manner remarkable,
that Virgil's Description is not only necessary, but exceedingly beautiful;
nay, the very Beauty of it makes the Necessity, whereas Mr. Blackmore's is
without Necessity, as it is absolutely without Beauty.

After this Description, we have an Account of the future Greatness of Rome
from the Mouth of the King of the Gods; we have in the same first Aeneid, Venus
disguised in an enchanting manner, and appearing in the hunting Dress of a
Tyrian Virgin; which Machine is absolutely necessary to prepare the Passion of
Dido; and then we have the Metamorphosis of the God of Love to Ascanius, and
see him in the Lap of a beautiful Queen, and not only see, but feel her
Caresses, which is certainly one of the most charming Images that ever was
shown in Poetry.

Ille ubi complexu Ae^eae colloque pependit
Et magnum falsi implevit genitoris amorem;
Reginam petit; haec oculis, haec pectore toto
Haeret, and interdum g^emio fovet, inscia Dido
Insidet, quantus miserae Deus --
Thus Virgil is apparently entitled to the Benediction of the French Critics.
For he passes from than which is pleasant, and from that which is terrible, to
that which is soft and moving.

But Mr. Blackmore, after he has wearied us with the Description of a Tempest,
which is mortally tedious, gives us the solemn Entertainment of a sententious
Harangue, and anon proceeds to des^ribe Persecution, after such a Manner, that
as Longi^ says of the Goddess Discord of Hesiod, he has rendered the Image
nauseous which he designed terrible. Indeed, he continues to be so grave and so
solemn for the whole first four Books, excepting in Places where he is tri^ing
and childish, that I appeal to any impartial Reader, whether Boileau's
Expression ^ay not be applied to him, and whether he does not all that while
appear Toujours sur un (...) psalmodier, to be continually setting a Psalm.

But to make this Want of Variety in Mr. Blackmore still more manifest, the
Reader is desired to consider, that Virgil, though he has scarce one thing in
his whole Poem which is absolutely foreign from his Action, yet his Narration
is every where moving, and he always speaks to the Heart; whereas the Pathetick
in Mr. Blackmo^e's Narration is scarce any where to be found; though in that
Narration there are several things which are wholly foreign from the Subject:
So that in the one we have only Action, and yet that Action very often stands
still; in the other we have always both Action and Passion, and yet the Action
by the Passion is never obstructed, any further than is requisite for the
forming one of those just Difficulties, without which the Intrigue would be
altogether insipid.

Let us now examine, with as much Succinctness as we can, the Travels, the
Machins, the Councils, the Battles in Mr. Blackmore and Virgil, and consider
the Variety of one and the other in Relation to these.

For the first, Virgil, in his first Book, shows his Hero in Europe and Africa.
The Scene of the second Book lies in Asia, and Aeneas in the third is seen in
all the three Parts of the then known World. He sets Sail from the lesser Asia,
he lands both in the Isles and Continent of Europe, and is thrown upon the
African Coasts. Whereas, Mr. Blackmore's Hero sails only from little to great
Britain.

In Virgil the Machins are as well distinguished as the Men; Jupiter, Juno,
Mercury, Venus, Minerva, Diana, Apollo, are not only more generally
distinguished by Sexes, but each by a singular Complication of their several
Passions and Inclinations. Nay, the in^ernal Persons, Charo^, Pluto,
Rhadamanthus, Alecto, Atropos, are as fairly distinguished as the celestial
Persons. Whereas, in Mr. Blackmore, the Angels are distinguished only by their
Ranks and their Offices, which cannot characteristically mark the Persons.
Their Inclinations are the same: For Love and Zeal are found to predominate in
all; so that their Characters are all a-like, and Gabriel, Raphael, and Uriel,
are as it were but one Person. The Devils have likewise the same Qualities,
Rage and Envy, Hatred and Malice tyrannizing in all.

Virgil has a great deal of Variety in his Councils, not only because there is
Passion in all of them, which we have said above; but because the Characters in
them are admirably well distinguished. In the Council of the Gods in the tenth
Book, Venus appears zealous for her Offspring, and supplicating. Juno shows
Wrath, and Severity, and Enmity, and Hate to the Trojans. Jupiter shows a
Majesty and Impartiality becoming the King of the Gods. In the Council in the
eleventh Book, Venalus discovers the Opinion and Resolution of Diomedes, which
appear to be his own, not only by his Affirmation, but by his way of Delivering
them. The Speech which he makes is grave and sensible, and by a moving Relation
of the Misfortunes of the Grecians, excites a gentle Compassion; which shows a
Tenderness of Nature in him who raises it, and an Inclination to Peace.

The next who declares his Opinion is Drances who discovers a great deal of
Malice and Rancour, and disguises his Envy, and the Hate which he bears to
Turnu^, under a pr^tended Concern for the State. The fir^ delivers himself with
Tenderness and Concern for the State. The Harangue of the second is a bitter
Invective; an undaunted Courage, and a generous Rage appears in the Answer of
Turnus.

In Mr. Blackmore's Poem are two Councils, the first in the sixth, and the
second in the ninth Book. The Speakers in the first are Pascentius and Cissa,
and those in the second are Osroed, Pascentius, and Crida. I suppose Mr.
Blackmore does not pretend to distinguish Pascentius and Cissa. I am sure, by
what they say, they do not distinguish themselves. For I defy any Man to
determine what sort of Persons they are. Pascentius and Osroed are as little
distinguishable: Indeed Crida appears to be different from the other two; but
he does by no means appear to have the Distinction which Mr. Blackmore designed
for him. Before he begins his Speech we are told that he burns withCholer.

Pascentius ceased, Crida with Choler burned,
And with an Air disturbed, these Words returned.
Let us a little examine the Person, and see if we can justly conclude from his
Expressions, that the Man is in Passion, or speaks with an Air disturbed.

We all well know, Pascentius 's Tongue was made
Smooth, soft, and fluent, fitted to persuade.
For C^rtly Arts, and fine Intrigues of State
No Saxon Genius can Pascentius mate:
All to his Eloquence at home must yield
As he to all for Courage in the Field.
Men of the Cabinet take no Delight
In bloody War, they are too wise to fight.
The Britons Strength, and Arthur 's Arms I find,
Stri^e fiercely on a prudent timorous Mind.
A brave Heroic Spirit cannot despair
Who minds the Turns, and doubtful Chance of War.
Is this the Language of a Man in Fury? Can these Expressions agree with an Air
disturbed? I appeal to any sensible Reader, whether, if any one should talk at
this rate upon the Stage, with an angry Voice and Air, he should not conclude
it to be excellent Comedy? There does indeed appear to be Malice in the
forementioned Speech. But Cold does not di^er more from Heat, than Malice does
from Fury.

Let us next inquire whether Turnus, in the Council of the eleventh Aeneid,
does not deliver himself at a very different rate. Drances had provoked him by
the following Expressions.

Nulla salus bello, pacem te poscimus omnes
Turn; simul Pacis solum inviolabile pignus. --
Pone animos, and pulsus abi -- Et jam tu si qua tibi viri
Si Patrii quid Martis ha^es, illum aspice co^tra
Qui vocet.
The Reader may easily discover, that what Turnus answers, Nature would dictate
upon the like Occasion to one of his violent Temper.

Imus in adversas? Quid cessas? An tibi Mavors
Ventosa in lingu^ pedibusque fug acibus istis
Semper ^rit?
Pulsus ego? Aut quisquam merito, faedissime, pulsum
Arguet, Iliaco tumidam qui crescere Thybrim
Sanguine, and Evandri totam cum stirpe videbit
Procubuisti domum, atque ex^tos Arcadas armis?
Nulla salus bello? Capiti cane talia demens
Dardanio, rebusque tuis.
I would fain ask the Reader if any thing but Nature could dictate this; and if
the Motions of a Mind that is truly enraged are not discernible in every Line
of it?

But it is time to show, that there is not that Variety in the Wars of Mr.
Blackmore, that a Reader may reasonably expect. There is neither Variety of
Action, nor Variety of Agents in them. In Virgil one while we behold the
sacking of a Town, by and by a Skirmish, and anon a Siege; then a daring
Enterprise, then a nocturnal Combat of Horse, after which a Battle, and to
crown all, an Assault, and a terrible and admirable single Combat. Whereas, all
the Variety that we have in Mr. Blackmore, is a Sea Fight, a Land-Fight, and a
single Combat. And as for the last, I hope no Reader can be so partial to Mr.
Blackmore as to affirm, that there is one Quarter of the Variety in the Combat
between Arthur and Tollo, that there is in that between Turnus and the Trojan
Hero.

But then the Agents in Mr. Blackmore's Wars appear to be all of a Piece. Every
Man is a Turnus; every one acts with Fury; so that all their Characters are
alike, or rather, none of them can be said to have any Character: For a
Character is that which distinguishes one Man from another. In the fourth Book,
Page 109. the Author says of King Uter,

Observing his disordered Troops retired
His boiling Soul distracting Passion fired.
By the way, what can Mr. Blackmore mean by a boiling Soul? A Metaphor is a
Comparison in little, and things that are compared ought to be ejusdem generis:
Now boiling implies Extension, and a Soul supposes thinking, and thinking and
Extension have nothing at all in common.

Let us now take a View of Octa, and we shall find that his Valor is not at
all different from Uter's, lib. 4. p. 111.

As when a Lion that with Fury ra^
To seize by Night some weary Caravan,
That lay encamped on an Arabian Wild,
Repulsed by Fires, and of his Prey beguiled.
With hideous Roar he raves at his Defeat.
Often stands, looks back, and makes a sour Retreat
King Octa's Soul li^ Indignation fired
Who raving ^ith his vanquished Men retired.
It Is a hard case that I must be obliged to transoribe such Lines as these;
which I cannot for my Life reconcile either to Sense or Grammar. For what is
the Verb that answers to Lion? It Is plain there is none, and consequently the
Sense is imperfect: For a Man who mentions any thing, affirms something of the
thing which is mentioned, or else he says nothing. Now nothing can affirm but a
Verb. However, these Verses show us that Octa is as outrageous as Uter, and I
am willing to believe, for Mr. Blackmore's sake, that he, when he indicted them,
was not altogether serene.

In the Beginning of the Battle of the eighth Book, we find the same Octa in
the very same Condition, lib. 8. p. 221.

Octa enraged to see the numerous Spoils
Round Cadwall spread, sprung through the thronging Files.
Rushing with Fury on, and threatening high.
Let us now see if the Hero has a Valor that is different from that of the
other two. In the same Beginning of the forementioned Battle Mr. Blackmore
tells us, that,

The Prince enraged, caught up his Spear in have,
Which he at Ciss^ with such Fury cast.
By which we may see, that the Valor of Arthur is not at all distinguished
from the Valor of Uter, or from the Courage of Octa.

In the very third Line of the tenth Book we find, that,

Boiling with Martial Rage King Tollo stands.
And in the 272d. Page of the same Book.

First furious Tollo springs out from the Lines.
And at the very Bottom of the same Page.

Thus Tollo boasts, thus did his Fury rise.
And Streaks of Fire flashed from his raging Eyes.
In the 281st. Page of the same Book it is said of Arthur,

He made his Way like an impetuous Flood
Or furious burning raging through the Wood.
And in the 293d. Page of the same Book.

So Arthur boiling with Heroic Rage,
Springs with a full Career, etc.
Thus have I shown, that the Character of Mr. Blackmore's Warriers are all
confounded; and that Uter has nothing in Fight, but in Name to distinguish him
from Arthur, or Arthur from Octa, or Octa from Tollo; whereas Virgil has made
the Valor of Turnus quite different from that of his Hero, and has
distinguished that of Mezentius from both.

The first time that Turnus appears in the Field, is in the Beginning of the
ninth Book, bringing up his Men to the Siege of Aeneas his Camp. Now in that
Place the Poet takes a particular care to show a Valor in him that is joined
with Fury. For he wants Patience to attend the heavy Motions of his Men, and
with twenty Horsemen, rides upon a Stretch up to the very Trenches of the
Camp. When he comes there, he is for beginning the Assault before his Body
comes up to him. He excites his Men by asking them who dares second him. And
the very Question shows, that Fury had made him impotent.

Ecquis erit, mecum, Juvenes, qui primus in ^ostem?
En ait, and jaculum adtorquens emittit in auras
Principium pugnae.
And immediately upon it.

Huc turbidus atque huc
Lustrat equo muros, aditumque per avia quaerit.
Ac veluti pleno iupus insidiat us ovili,
Cum fremit ad caulas, ^culos perpessus and imbres
Nocte super media, tuti sub matribus agni
Baletum exercent: Ille asper and improbus ir a
Saevit in absentes: Collecta fatig at cdendi
Ex longo rabies, and siccaesanguine fauces
Haud aliter Rutulo muros and castra tuenti
Ignescunt irae, duris dolor ossibus ardet.
Where we find, that, in the Compass of ten Verses, the Poet uses no less than
seven different Expressions to mark the extraordinary Fury of Turnus. Virgil
had prepared the Reader for this in the sixth Book by the Mouth of the Sybill.

Alius Latio jam partus Achilles
Natus and ipse Dea.
And likewise, in the seventh Book, as we have observed in another Place. And
he constantly and admirably maintains so outrageous a Courage in him, till
Reason obliges him to keep it up no longer.

But now let us show, that this furious Valor of Turnus, is directly opposite
to that of the Trojan Hero.

The first time that Aeneas appears in the Field, is in the tenth Book, v. 310.
where, for a long time, he shows a sedate and a temperate Valor, becoming of
that Excellence of Nature which is the fundamental Quality of his Character.
And here it will be necessary to show what we promised above, that Virgil has
admirably preserved the Unity of Character in his Hero, and that the
fundamental Quality of this Character shines even in those Episodes that are of
a contrary Nature.

It may be ojected indeed to the Poet, that the Hero in this very tenth Book
does several things, which are, in Appearance, destructive of this fundamental
Quality. He designs to sacrifice eight noble Italians, v. 520. He refuses to
give Magus his Life when he begs it of him; and afterward treats Liger with
the same Severity; and lastly, he is seen to destroy, with a Fury, surpassing
even that of Turnus. lib. 10. v. 602.

Talia per campos edebat funera Ductor
Dardaneus, torrentis aquae vel turbinis atri
More furens:
For the clearer answering of these Objections, it will be necessary to show
what thisExcellence of Nature is, by which the Reader will see, first, that it
is very consistent with Anger. Secondly, that the Anger of a good natured Man,
when it is once raised, is greater than that of another. Thirdly, that a Man of
an excellent Nature can command his Anger when it is at the Height. And lastly,
that as he takes it up, he lays it down with Reason. And the Reader being
convinced of these four things, will easily confess, that Aeneas, by his
Proceedings in this tenth Book, has rather maintained than forseited the
Character of a Man of an admirable Goodness of Nature.

I know that there are several People in the World, who mistake a soft easy
Creature, a Wretch that is never to be provoked, for one who has Goodness of
Nature. But since a Man, who has Goodness of Nature, is much more perfect, and
more what he should be, than one who is not good natured, as he certainly is,
or he could never engage the Affections of a Man of Sense, which yet he never
fails to do, and since Anger being a natural Quality, necessary for Action, and
assistent to Virtue, the Want of it must be a Defect, I cannot possibly
comprehend how any one who is not capable of Anger, can have Goodness of Nature.

By Goodness of Nature I never could comprehend any thing but a Force and
Rectitude of Reason (which is partly the Result of the Happiness of the
Constitution) which, like an excellent Prince, commands the Passions that it
rules without oppressing them; and wisely governs them by the same Laws by
which it is guided it self. A Man therefore who has Goodness of Nature never
shows himself peevish or morose, because Peevishness is a Weakness, and
Moroseness a Vice; nor does he ever appear to be angry without a very just
Occasion, because a groundless Anger shows the Infirmity of Reason rather than
proves the Force of it. But when Anger comes to be necessary, as it frequently
does, either for the exciting a Man to his Duty, or for the avoiding a vicious
Compassion, then it being a Weakness not to be angry; a Man who has any
Goodness of Nature will let loose the Reins to Rage: And that Rage being raised
by a great Occasion, and raised to a suitable Height, is often, for that
reason, found to be more vehement in a good natured Man than it appears in
another. Yet in the very midst of its greatest Fury, by Virtue of his
extraordinary Force of Mind, a good natured Man can, by an Effort, restrain it.
But nothing but Reason can oblige him to make that Effort, as nothing but
Reason could raise his Passion at first.

Excellence of Nature is the Force and Rightness of Reason, and a Love of the
like in others. For Self-love, which prevails in all, obliges us to be fond of
our own Resemblance. Therefore a Man of an excellent Nature has a Concern and a
Tenderness for Mankind. For no Man, who can justly be called a Man, can be said
to have h^ Reason entirely perverted. But the foresaid Concern is greater or
less in Proportion to the greater or less Corruption of its Object. A Man of an
excellent Nature of himself is calm and sedate, not because his Mind is
determined by a contingent regular Motion of Spirits, but because that Motion
is regulated by the commanding Force of his Reason, which tells that this
Sedateness of Temper is due to those with whom he converses, whose Peace he is
obliged to maintain, and whose Happiness he is engaged to promote, not only as
they partake of the same common Nature with him, but as they are Members of
that Community, on whose well-doing depends his own.

Reason tells him yet further, that this Serenity is due to himself, and to the
Preservation of his own Happiness, which to maintain is as much his Duty as it
is his Interest. But the same Reason assures him, that sometimes a short
Disturbance is necessary for the securing a long Serenity, and that Rage may
grow necessary for repelling the Violence of those who would injuriously
destroy his Happiness.

Aeneas, at his first coming into the Field, appears in a perfect Tranquillity;
and the Poet, for the space of two hundred Lines, uses not so much as a Word
that can show the least Commotion in his Hero. So loath was Aeneas to be
enraged at his Enemies, because they were shortly to become his Subjects. But
when Turnus had slain his Friend, and insulted upon that Action, then his
Reflection upon the Obligation which he had to Evander, and upon the Worth of
Pallas, and the Consideration of his own Security, and of the Malice and Rage
of his Enemies, who had not only broken their League with him contrary to the
Command of their Gods and their King, but appeared obstinately bent to his
Ruin, and had struck at his Life through that of his dearest Friend: These
Considerations obliged him at last to let loose the Reins to Fury. And he saw
nothing extaordinary enough in Magus, or in Lucagus, or in Liger, to oblige him
to check that Fury. But when Lausus lay extended at his Feet, a Son who died
for his Father, the Consideration of his Merit and Virtue, a Virtue so like his
own, prevailed upon Aeneas to descend to Compassion, by bringing to his Mind
the sad Remembrance of his own filial Affection.

And thus I hope it has been clearly shown, that the Valor of Aeneas is in its
Nature a debonair and a temperate Valor, and that there is nothing done by him
in the tenth Aeneid, that may be said to be contradictory of this, but that
every thing there is very consistent with that transcendent Goodness of Nature
which is the fundamental Quality of his Character, and that this Quality at the
Death of Lausus shines out in all its Luster.

I had almost forgot the Sacrifice of the Captives, but that being a customary
religious Duty, is very consonant to the Piety of the Hero; and is by no means
contrary to his Goodness of Nature; which, as we have shown above, is nothing
but a Habit of right Reason, which can never be contrary to a Religious Duty.

In the twelfth Book, though Horror and Distraction reign almost throughout
it, Aeneas does nothing that is inconsistent with his natural Sedateness of
Valor, and with his excellent Goodness of Nature. When Virgil speaks of the
Preparatives for the single Combat, he tells you of Turnus, that he is merely
possessed by Fury. His agitur furiis. But when he speaks of Aeneas, he tells you
that he rowzes the Sedateness of his natural Valor by Anger, se suscitat ird;
but it is an Anger that is perfectly obedient to Reason. He is angry with
Turnus alone: For after the Latins had broke the second League with him, he
does what he can to restrain his Trojans, and endeavors to spare his Enemies
whom he regarded now as his Subjects. Lib. 12. v. 311.

At pius Aeneas dextram tendebat inermem,
Nudato capite, atque suos clamore vocabat.
Quo ruit is? quaeve ista repens discordia surgit?
O cohibete iras! ictum jam foedus, and omnes
Compositae leges: mihi jus concurrere soli.
Me sinite, atque auferte metus, ego foedora faxo
Firma manu: Turnum jam debent haec mihi sacra.
And upon his Return to the Field after the Cure of the dangerous Wound he had
received, he is not yet provoked, either to attack the fighting Italians, or to
pursue the flying. ibid. v. 464.

Ipse neque adversos dignatur sternere morti:
Nec pede congressos, nec equo, nec tela ferentes
Insequitur: solum densa in caligine Turnum
Vestigat lustrans, solum in certamina poscit.
But when he saw that Turnus avoided him, and that the rest assaulted him, some
by Treachery, and some by Violence, and that he had like to have been wounded a
second time by Messapus, after he had called the Gods to witness that he was
compelled to this, he thought it fitting to give up the Reins to Fury, and made
havoc of the Latins, and the Rutilians with undistinguishing Slaughter. Ibid.
v. 494.

Tum vero' assurgunt ir ae, insidiisque subactus
Diversos ubi sensit equos, currumque referri,
Multa Jovem, and laesitestatus foederis aras
Jam tandem invadit medios, and Mart secundo
Terribilis, saevam nullo discrimine caedem
Suscitat, irarumque omnes effundit habenas.
So that it is plain, that in all this there is nothing contrary, either to his
natural Sedateness of Valor, or to his admirable Goodness of Nature.

But it is objected to him, that he kills Turnus after he had submitted himself
to him, and begged his Life. It Is true, indeed, say the Critics, the Death of
Turnus was absolutely necessary for the Integrity of the Action. But the Poet
should have brought it about by a Way, that would not have corrupted the Unity
of Aeneas his Character, nor have destroyed his Goodness of Nature.

This, say the Critics; but yet upon Enquiry, I hope to find that the Poet has
done what they with Reason exact of him. For if it appears that Aeneas had
Reason to kill the Rutilian, not withstanding his Submission, then he showed no
ill Nature in doing it. For Goodness of Nature is nothing but Rightness of
Reason. Turnus indeed, with all his ill Qualities, had a great deal of Merit.
And therefore it was but reasonable that Aeneas should be seen to relent upon
his Submission. He does relent, but kills him notwithstanding.

Stetir acer in armis
Aeneas, volvens oculos, dextramque repressit,
Et jam jamque magis cunctantem flectere sermo
Caeperat;
Aeneas kills him for his own Security, because he could not confide in him.
For he had broken two Leagues already. This has been urged in the Defense of
Virgil, but this can never defend him. For Turnus never gave his Consent,
either to the making the first League, which was never perfected, or to the
breaking the second. And further, if Aeneas had given Turnus his Life, the
Rutilian would have had an Obligation upon him which he had not before. But
supposing Aeneas could not confide in him: That Consideration had not been
altogether becoming of the Magnanimity of a Hero. Virgil saw this very well,
and therefore he makes his Hero kill him to revenge the Death of Pallas. But
here lay two Difficulties in the Way. For first, the Hero at such a Conjuncture
might be reasonably thought to be too much concerned to think of the Death of
Pallas. Secondly, the Question might be very well asked, Where the
indispensable Obligation lay to revenge the Death of Pallas by the Death of
Turnus? Virgil has removed both these Difficulties with incomparable Address.
He has provided for the putting his Hero in mind in the Middle of his tenth
Book, by making Turnus wear the Spoils of Pallas. Lib. 10. v. 495.

-- Et laevo pressit pede, talia fatus,
Exanimem; rapiens immani^ ponder a baltei,
Quo nunc Turnus ovat spolio, gaudetque potitus
And the Poet gives you a Hint of his Design, even in that very Place, and
gives us Cause to reflect that he does not make Turnus wear the Belt of Pallas
for nothing. For the Time, says he, is coming, when Turnus shall curse both the
Day and the Spoils, and the Action. Ibid. v. 503.

Turno tempus erit, magno cum optaver at emptum.
Intactum Pallanta, and cum spolia ista, diemque
Oderit.
And accordingly we see, at the latter End of the twelfth Book, that the
wearing of this very Belt is the Cause of the Death of Turnus. lib. 12. v. 940.

Et jam jamque magis cunctantem flectere sermo
Coeperat, inselix humero cum apparuit alto,
Balteus, and notis fulserunt cingula bullis
^llantis pueri, victum quem vulnere Turnus
Straverat, atque humeris inimicum insigne gerebat
Ille occulis postquam saevi monumenta doloris
Exuviasque hausit, furiis accensus, and ira
Terribilis: Tune hinc spoliis indute meorum
Eripiare mihi? Pallas te hoc vulnere, Pallas
Immolat, and poenam scelerato ex sanguine sumit.
But let us come to the second Difficulty, where lay the indispensable
Obligation of revenging the Death of Pallas, by the Death of Turnus? And here,
in Excuse of Virgil, I could urge his own Expression, Immolat. By which he
seems to hint, that his Hero looked upon the killing Turnus as a religious
Duty, and thought himself obliged to sacrifice him to the Manes of Pallas. But
there is still a more just and unexceptionable Answer. And here see the
admirable Address of Virgil, who, as we have observed in so many Places always,
makes his Religion contribute to the working up of his Design. For the funeral
Pomp of Pallas, in the Beginning of the eleventh Book, by reason of the Message
which Evander sends back by the Mourners, not only prepares, but justifies the
Death of Turnus. lib. 11. v. 175. Vadite, and haec memores regi mandate referte:
Quod vitam moror, invisam, Pallante perempto,
Dextera causa tua est, Turnum gnatoque patrique
Quam debere vides: meritis vacat hic tibisolus
Fortunaeque locus:
The Sight of the Belt which put Aeneas in mind of the Death of Pallas, could
not but remind him of the Message too of Evander. And consequently, he had
Reason to think, that if after the Receipt of such a Message, he suffered Turnus
to live after he had him in his Power, he should not only save a Man, of whom
he could not be secure, but disoblige Evander, to whom he had great
Obligations, and make the Arcadians his Enemies, and give sufficient Cause to
the Etrurians to look upon him as an ungrateful Person. So that Duty and
Interest both conspired in Aeneas, to animate and determine him to the Death of
Turnus.

And thus I have endeavored to show that the Valor of Aeneas is of it self
sedate, and always consistent with right Reason, that is, with good Nature: And
consequently, that it very much differs from that of Turnus, which is always
outrageous and ungovernable. We are now to show that the Valor of Mezentius is
clearly distinguished from the Valor of the Rutilian, and from that of the
Trojan Hero.

Aeneas had a Valor, that of it self was sedate and temperate, and was always
attended with good Nature. The Courage of Turnus was joined with Fury, yet
accompanied with Generosity and with Greatness of Mind. Mezentius has a savage
and a cruel Courage. He has no Fury, but then he has Fierceness which is a
Habit and not a Passion, and nothing but the Effect of Fury cooled into a very
keen Hatred, and an inveterate Malice. Turnus seems to fight to appease his
Anger, Mezentius to satisfy his Revenge, and his Malice, and his barbarous
Thirst of Blood. Mezentius is mentioned once in the Seventh, and twice in the
ninth Book, without so much as a Word that may serve to express Anger in him.
It is true, when Evander mentions him in the eighth; he does use the Word
furens. lib. 8. v. 489.

At fessi tandem cives infanda furentem
Armati circumsistunt.
But there it is plainly used in a metaphorical Sense. Turnus goes into the
Field with Grief.

-- Duris dolor ossibus ardet.
Which, as Aristotle says in his Rhetoric, always accompanies Anger, (...),
whereas Mezentius destroys with a barbarous Joy. lib. 10. v. 721.

Impastus stabula alta leo ceu saepe peragrans
(Suadet enim vesana fames) si fortefugacem
Conspexit capream, aut surgentem in cornua cervum,
Gaudet hians immane, comasque arrexit, and haere^
Visceribus super incumbens: lavit improba teter
Ora cruor.
Sic ruit in densos alacer Mezentius hosts.
He is so far from being subject to Fury, that he is hardly to be provoked to a
common Anger.

He calmly kills Orodes, who, when he threatens him with a like Fate, from a
more powerful Hand, makes him but half angry. Ibid. v. 742.

Ad quem subridens mista Mezentius ir a.
Thus it is plain, that he has not the Fury of Turnus; and the Poet takes care,
in the Beginning of this Episode, to tell you, that he has Barbarity, which is
peculiar to himself. For he gives us an Image of him, than which, nothing could
more discover a Savage Fierceness. lib. 10. v. 707.

Ac velut ille canum morsu de montibus altis
Actus aper (multos Vesulus quem pinifer annos
Defendit, multosque palus Laurentia) sylva
Pastus arundine^, post quam inter retia ventum est,
Substitit, infremuitque ferox, and inhorruit armos:
Nec cuiquam irasci, propiusve accedere virtus,
Sed jaculis, tutisque procul clamoribus instant:
Ille autem impavidus parts cunctatur in omnes,
Dentibus infrendens, and tergo, decutit hastas.
Haud aliter, etc.
From all which it is plain, that the Valor of this Tuscan, is as different
from that of the Trojan, as from that of the Rutilian Hero, which is the thing
we propounded to prove.

And thus we have endeavored to show, that Virgil has infinitely a greater
Variety than Mr. Blackmore, both in his Travels, and Machines, and Councils,
and Battles. It remains, that we prove that his Incidents are better disposed.
But because we have been already tedious, we shall speak but a Word of this.

There is certainly something very tender in the meeting of Aeneas and
Andromache, in the third Book, but if that had come immediately after the
Passion of Dido, where the Pity is beyond Comparison stronger, it would have
appeared to be downright insipid, whereas in the Place where it is, it
admirably prepares us for that Passion. For the very same Reason, if the
funeral Games had imediately succeeded the Destruction of Troy, they would have
been very flat. For those Games being Contentions for Victory, and
consequently, mere Imitations of War, would have made but a very faint
Impression upon us, if they had immediately succeeded the more forcible Images
of the thing which they imitate. Whereas, succeeding the Passion of Dido, they
prove both diverting and admimirable. From what I have said, I hope the Reader
will be convinced that Mr. Blackmore's Horse-race, in the ninth Book, comes
something indiscreetly after the Battle of the eighth. But if any one shall
urge, that it immediately succeeds the pathetick Lamentation of Cador for the
Death of Macor; to that I answer, that neither Macor nor Cador having any
Characters, the Lamentation of the latter can excite but a weak Compassion, as
shall be shown anon. Whereas the funeral Games of Virgil coming immediately
after our Minds have been for a long time shaken by the wonderful Passion of
Dido, are absolutely necessary to recreate and to divert us. But now let us
show that the Incidents contained in Mr. Blackmore's Narration to discerning
Readers are not at all surprising.

CHAP. VII. That the Incidents in Prince Arthur are not surprising.
IT is impossible that any Pleasure can be very great that is not at the same
time surprising. I speak of the Pleasures of the Mind: Though what is said of
them may be truly affirmed of the rest too. If any one doubts of this, let him
but have Patience till the next time that he is very much pleased, and upon
Reflection he will be obliged to confess it. And therefore, if we could prove
that Mr. Black-more's Narration is not at all surprising, it would follow, by
manifest Consequence, that it is not at all delightful. We shall here endeavor
to show, that the Incidents are not surprising, but whether the Thoughts and
Expressions are so, must be determined in another Place. Now, that the
Incidents are not surprising, may be easily demonstrated. First, that they are
not surprising to those who are acquainted with Virgil, I take to be
self-evident, because they are acquainted with the most considerable of them
beforehand. But secondly, they cannot be surprising to any other Reader of
good Sense, because no Man is left in Suspense, either as to the Certainty, or
as to the time of the very last Event. For we find, in the Relation which
Lucius makes to Hoel in the fourth Book of the Poem, that the Archangel
Gabriel speaks these Words to Prince Arthur, which we have cited in another
Place. lib. 4. p. 115.

After ten times the revolving Sun
His crooked Race has through the Zodiac run,
The Clouds dispelled, propitious Heaven shall smile
On Uter s House, and this reviving Isle.
Octa shall feel just Heaven's avenging Stroke,
And Albion 's Youth shall break the Saxon Yoke.
And not long after we are informed by the same Lucius, that this Term of Time
was expired.

And Raphael, in the very first Book of the Poem tells Arthur, that as soon as
he goes from Armorica, he shall be exalted to the British Throne.

Since therefore two Angels have said it, it must be done. For each of them
brings it in a Message from God, who cannot deceive us, and whose Decrees are
irreversible. Now, since we are left in no manner of Suspense, either as to the
Certainty of the last Event, or as to the Time of its happening, I cannot see how
the Incidents which preceed it, can be very surprising. For since the Incidents
ought naturally to produce one another, and the preceding ought to be the
necessary, or at least the probable Cause of the subsequent, I cannot imagine
how any thing can be very surprising to us, which has a necessary or probable
Tendency to something which we are sure, must very suddenly happen. But now, if
any one shall say, that Mr. Blackmore's Episodes do not naturally produce one
another, and that therefore they may be surprising, though we are acquainted
with the last Event: If any one shall urge this in his Behalf, which is a
pleasant Way of excusing him, I must needs confess, that this Champion is in
the right. And I think my self obliged to declare that I was extremly surpised
to find, that, in the second and third Books there was not a Line to the
purpose. But the Result of the Matter is this. The Episodes in Prince Arthur,
which have a necessary or probable Tendency to the final Event, cannot be
surprising, for the Reason which we have mentioned above. And they which are
foreign from the Business, cannot give a Surprise which is Proper to Epick
Poetry. Now, that Surprise alone which is admirable, may be said to be proper
to Epick Poetry. And Aristotle has formally declared, in the ninth Chapter of
his Treatise of Poetry, that that Surprise is the most admirable, which flows
from Incidents that spring from one another contrary to our Expectations.

But it is objected, that this Accusation lies against Virgil, as well as
against Mr. Blackmore. For neither has he left the Reader in any Suspense as to
the Certainty of the very last Event. For Jupiter says thus to Venus in the
very first of the Aeneids. lib. 1. v. 261.

Parce metu, Cytherea; manent immota tuorum
Fata tibi; cernes urbem, and promissa Lavini
Moenia, sublimemque feres ad sider a coeli
Magnanimum Aenean: neque me sententia vertit.
After which he descends to give her an Account of the Hero's Posterity. In the
second Book, the Ghosts of Hector and Creusa give him Assurance of his
succeeding in Italy, which Assurance is repeated by Helenus in the third Book,
and by Anchises in the sixth.

To this I answer, that though they assure the thing, they do not assure the
Time. Nay, Helenus, who gives him Instructions about the Place of his
Settlement, seems plainly to hint to him, that he cannot inform him of the
Time. lib. 3. v. 380.

Prohibent nam caetera Parcae
Scire Helenum, farique vetat Saturnia Juno.
And a little below he says to the same purpose. ibid. v. 461.

H^c sunt, quae nostr a liceat te voce moneri.
Now the time being undetermined, there is a great deal of Room left for
Surprise. But to make this Address of Virgil yet more conspicuous, let us
consider the Difference between the Systems of Stoical and Poetical
Predestination.

The Stoical is the same with the Calvinical Predestination which comprehends
the following Points. First, That every thing which befalls us is preordained.
Secondly, That every thing which is preordained, is preordained by God alone.
Thirdly, That every thing which is preordain'd, is preordained, not only as to
the Event, but as to the Point of Time. That every thing which is preordain'd,
is eternally irreversible.

Now we shall show that the poetical System is different from this in every
Point of it: Which, when we have shown, it must needs be granted to the
Advantage of Virgil; not only, that the Time of Aeneas his Settlement being
unlimited, there is a great deal of Room for Surprise, but that the
preordaining Aeneas his Settlement, cannot give us a full, Certainty of it, and
consequently, that Virgil had as free Scope to make his Incidents very
suprizing as if the Establishment of his Hero had not been at all predestined.

The first Point of the Poetical System is, that whatever befalls us, is not
preordain'd. For the Poets allow Fortune to have the sole Administration of
some Affairs. And Dido says in her dying Speech, that she had lived as long as
Fortune had suffered her, and had finished the Course which she had allotted
her. lib. 4. v. 653:

Vixi, and quem dederat cursum Fortuna, peregi;
And Virgil seems to attribute her Death to Fortune. lib. 4. v. 696.

Nam quia nec fato, merita nec morte peribat,
Sed misera ante diem, subitoque accensa furore, etc.
Fortune and Fate in the eighth Aeneid, are made to act in Consort. For Evander
says to Aeneas: lib. 8. v. 333.

Mepulsum patria, pelagique extrema sequentem,
Fortuna omnipotens, and ineluctabile fatum
His posuere locis:
The second Point of the poetical System is, that whatever is preordain'd, is
done by Jove and the Fates in Consort. lib. 4. v. 438.

Sed nullis ille movetur
Fletibus, ant voces ullas tractabilis audit.
Fata obstant, placidasque viri deus obstruit aures.
And Dido says in her Execration

Si tangere portus
Infandum caput ac terris adnare ne^esse est
Et sic fata Jovis poscunt, hic terminus haeret.
That if Jove and the Fates had ordained, that Aeneas should land in Italy, she
could not expect to alter their supreme Decrees.

The third Point of the poetical System is, that whatever is preordain'd by
Jupiter, and by the Fates, is unlimited as to the Time.

For Juno says in the seventh Book, v. 313.

Non dabitur regnis (esto) prohibere Latinis,
Atque immota manet fatis Lavinia conjux:
At trahere, atque moras tantis licet addere rebus.
And Vulcan tells Venus in the eighth Book, v. 398.

Nec pater omnipotens Trojam, nec Fata vetabant
Stare, decemque alios Priamum superesse per annos.
Turnus his Death seems to be at hand, by what Jupiter says to Hercules in the
tenth v. 471.

Etiam sua Turnum
Fata vocant, metasque dati pervenit ad aevi.
And yet his Life afterward is prolonged at the Instance of Juno. To whom
Jupiter,

Si mora praesentis leti, tempusque caduco
Oratur Juveni, meque hoc it a ponere sentis,
Toll fuga Turnum, atque instantibus eripe fatis.
The fourth and last Point is, that if Jupiter has not sworn by Styx; what he
and the Fates have decreed, is not irreversible. Which may be gathered from
what Jupiter says to Venus in the Verses which he cited above.

Parce metu Cytherea: manent immota tuorum
Fata tibi: cernes urbem and promissa Lavini
Menia, sublimemque fere, ad sidera coeli
Magnanimum Aenean, neque me sententia vertit.
And from what Juno says to Jupiter in the tenth Book, v. 632.

Et in melius tua qui potes orsa reflectas.
And from the Sequel of the Words of Jupiter which we have cited above.

Toll fuge Turnum, atque instantibus eripe Fatis
Hactenus indulsisse vacat: sin altior istis
Sub precibus venia ulla latet, totumque moveri
Mutarive putas bellum, spes pascis inanes.
Which certainly implies, that the Decrees of Jupiter were sometimes
reversible. For what he says to Venus in the firstBook, and what he says here,
would both be Impertinencies, if it were otherwise. Nay, notwithstanding what
Jupiter has said to her, Juno seems yet to be in Suspense, and not wholly to
despair of preserving Turnus. For thus she replies to Jupiter,

Quid si quod voce gravaris
Mente dares? atque h^c Turno rata vita maneret?
Nunc manet insontem gravis exitus, aut ego very
Vana feror, quod at O potius formidine falsa
Ludar, and in melius tua qui potes orsa reflect^!
Nay, in the twelfth Book, she appears to be still in Suspense, when she
exhorts Juturna to assist her Brother. lib. 12. v. 152.

Tu, pro germano si quid praesentius audes,
Perge, decet; forsan miseros meliora sequentur.
And a little lower.

Non lachrymis hoc tempus, ait Saturnia Juno
Accelara, and fratrem, si quis modus, eripe morti.
And as long as the Queen of the Gods is in Suspense, the Reader may very well
be so too.

And thus we have shown, that Virgil, by his System of Fate, has left all
imaginable Room for Surprise in his Incidents, which Mr. Blackmore has not done.

CHAP. VIII. That the Episodes are not Pathetick.
AS no Pleasure can be very great, if it is not surprising, so no Surprise can
be very great if it is not pathetick; from whence it follows by manifest
Consequence, that if Mr. Blackmore's Narration is not pathetick, it cannot be
very delightful. Indeed, a Poet ought always to speak to the Heart. And the
greatest Wit in the World, when he ceases to do that, is a Rhimer and not a
Poet. For a Poet, that he may be sure to instruct, is obliged to give all the
Delight that he can, as we have proved above. Now nothing that is not pathetick
in Poetry, can very much delight: For he who is very much pleased, is at the
same time very much moved; and Poetical Genius, as we shall prove in another
Place, is it self a Passion. A Poet then is obliged always to speak to the
Heart. And it is for this reason, that Point and Conceit, and all that they
call Wit, is to be for ever banished from true Poetry; because he who uses it,
speaks to the Head alone. For nothing but what is simple and natural, can go to
the Heart; and Nature (humanly speaking) can be touched by it self alone.

A Poet is so indispensably obliged to speak to the Heart, that the epick Poets
have for that very reason, made Admiration their predominant Passion; because
it is not so violent but that it may be lasting, and may be consequently
diffused through the whole Poem. But as that Passion is not violent, it is not
alone sufficient to give full Delight: For Admiration can only move and raise
the Reader, whereas to give him the last Pleasure, he must have the last
Transport.

We shall take another Time to enquire whether the Narration of Prince Arthur
is admirable. Let us at present examine whether it is tender and terrible: For
Compassion charms us, and Terror shakes us, and both of them very much please
us: And we the rather enquire after those two Affections; because one of them
ought, next to Admiration, to be the principal Passion in a Poem that is formed
after the Model of the Aeneis; and both of them being Tragical Passions, to
treat of them may prove of some little Advantage to the Stage.

The terrible and tender are every where in the Aeneis; but the last of them is
never to be seen in Prince Arthur, and the first but very rarely, though it is
exceeding proper for epick Poetry, as being in its own Nature sublime, and
grave, and majestic.

To prove this, we shall examine what Characters, what Incidents, what
Sentiments, and what Expressions are proper for the exciting those two
Affections.

The Characters which may be proper for the raising those two Passions, must
above all things be very fairly distinguished: For, if the Manners are ill
expressed in them, we can never become acquainted with them, and consequently,
can never be terrified by foreseeing their Dangers, and never be melted by
feeling their Sufferings.

When we hear of any grievous Calamity which has happened to a Stranger, we are
no further concerned for it, than we are obliged by Humanity. But if any thing
disastrous happens to a Man whom we know, we are sure to be afflicted at it if
we have a Kindness for the Man.

For it is not a bare Knowledge that can create this Concern in us: Since the
Knowledge of the Man may make his Affliction delightful to us, if it proves one
whom we either despise or hate. The Concern which we speak of, can only be
produced by a Resemblance of Humors and Qualities in the Person who suffers,
or who is like to suffer; and in him who is terrified, or who commiserates.

For, no Man commiserates what another Man suffers, unless he is apprehensive
of enduring the like. Now no Reason can be given why one Man should be
apprehensive of enduring what another Man suffers, but a Resemblance in
Circumstances, and the greater the Resemblance is, the greater will the
Apprehension certainly be. This exactly agrees with the Doctrine of Aristole in
the tenth Chapter of the second Book of his Rhetoric. (...) (...). Let
Compassion then be defined to be a Trouble of Mind, which is caused by an
Opinion of something grievous, which has happened to another, which he who
commiserates, expects that ^e, or some of his should suffer. And he tells us
afterward in the same Chapter. (...). Men have Compassion of those who are
their Equals in Age, in Humor, in Manner, in Birth, in Dignity: For what they
be^old these suffer, they the rather fear may befall themselves. And it is taken
for granted, that whatever we are apprehensive of suffering our selves, that we
are certain to pity in others.

But, as we said before, the greater the Resemblance is between him who
suffers, and him who commiserates, the stronger will the Apprehension, and
consequently, the Compassion be. And therefore a Poet, who forms a Character,
by whose Calamities he designs to melt or terrify his Audience or his Readers,
ought to make that poetical Person resemble them as much as he can. Now the way
to give him a general Likeness, is neither to make him guilty of great Crimes,
nor to make him sovereignly virtuous, but to compound him of Virtues and
Faults; for so the Generality of Mankind is composed, and consequently the
Generality of the Readers of an epick Poem, or the major Part of Audience. But
a Poet ought not only to give this general Likeness, he ought further to make
his poetical Person unhappy for the very thing or things by which he resembles
those who are designed to commiserate him. And therefore he ought to give him
either such Defects as are to be found in most Men, or such to which the major
Part are obnoxious. Nay, further, these Defects are to be of such a Nature, as
that not only they may be found in the Generality of Men, or to which the
Generality may at least be liable; but that also the Generality may believe
that they have them, or that they are at least obnoxious to them. And therefore
a Poet is not to make any Person, whom he would have commiserated, unhappy,
either for great Crimes, because, as we have said above, the Generality of Men
are exempt from those, or for scandalous Weaknesses: Because this latter is not
only unjust, since no Man can help his Weakness, but destructive of the Poet's
Design. For though scandalous Weaknesses are to be found in most Men, or most
men at least are liable to them, yet no Man believes that he is so: And
therefore a Poet is by no means to give any scandalous Weakness to any of his
Persons, by which he designs to excite Compassion or ^errour, though he makes
those Persons unhappy for something else. Because that Weakness, as soon as
ever the Readers or Audience discern it, will not fail to make the Person who
has it, contemptible, and so restrain them from making any Comparison.

Now those Defects, which either are to be found in most Men, and which they
believe that they have, or to which most Men at least are liable, and believe
themselves liable, are violent Passions. And of these Passions, to make the
Pity and Terror surer and stronger, such in my Mind ought to be chosen, as are
the most universal, and such as though they are not the least guilty, are the
most creditable in the Eyes of the World.

Now, of all the Passions, the most universal is Love, as Nature has wisely
contrived it for the Propagation of Mankind; and Love, of all the Passions, is
that, whose Excess we most willingly own: And therefore, Mr. Rymer, who would
have banished it from the English Stage, would have deprived our Poets of the
surest Means of going to the Hearts of an Audience. For upon Reflection, we
shall certainly find, that the Characters in our Tragedies, which melt us most,
are those whose Misfortunes are brought about by the extraordinary Force of
Love.

Thus far we have spoken of the Characters. Let us now say something succinctly
of the Incidents, and more succinctly of the Thoughts and Expressions, because
the Consideration of these last belongs to another Place.

Whatever happens, says Aristotle, in the fifteenth Chapter of his Treatise of
Poetry, happens either amongst Friends, or amongst Enemies, or amongst
indifferent Persons. An Enemy who kills, or is about to kill his Enemy, excites
no other Compassion than that which springs from the Evil it self. That is,
than that which Humanity obliges us to take. The Case is the same, when any
thing like it happens amongst indifferent Persons. But when the like Calamities
happen amongst Friends; when a Brother kills, or is about to kill his Brother,
a Son his Father, a Mother her Son, or a Son his Mother, that is what a Poet
ought to lay hold of. The most terrible, and the most melting Calamities are
those which are caused by a Friend. Aristotle has given the Reason for this in
his Rhetoric, as we have cited the Passage above. For what we most fear should
happen to our selves, that we most commiserate in others. Now, the Thought of
being injured or ruined by a Friend, is a great deal more terrible than the
Apprehension of a like Calamity, from a Stranger or Enemy. For there is
something of Baseness in fearing this last, whereas the bravest Man for his
Friends Sake, may be allowed to fear the first.

There are three Ways, says Aristotle, by which a Friend may oppress or destroy
a Friend. The first is when,

Actions are represented which are done by Persons who act with a perfect
Knowledge, and that was the Practice of the ancient Poets. Euripides followed
it when he represented Medea killing her Children. The second Way is when,

Persons are made to act, who do not know the Blackness of the Fact they
commit; but who, after the committing it, come to know the Relation and the
Friendship which was between themselves and the Persons whom they, through
Revenge, destroy, as the Sophoclean Oedipus. It is true in Sophocles, that
Action of Oedipus is out of the Tragedy. Behold one that is in the Action of
the Tragedy, and that is the Death of Eriphyle killed by Alcmeon in the Poet
Astydamas; and another is the wounding of Ulysses by his Son Telegonus.

A third Way is, when,

A Person is about to commit a black Action by Ignorance, and comes to discover
it before the committing it. Of these, says Aristotle, the first is the worst.

The second, says he, is good: Because the Action has nothing that is villainous
in it, and the Discovery is very pathetick.

But the last is incomparably the best of the three, which Euripides has
followed in his Cresphontes, where Merope discovers her Son in the very Moment
that she was about to kill him; and in Iphigenia, where that Princess comes to
know her Brother in the very Instant that she was about to sacrifice him: And
so in Hell, Phyxus comes to know his Mother, just as he was about to deliver
her to his Enemies.

These are the Precepts which Aristotle has given for the moving Compassion and
Terror by Incidents. But these are directed to tragic Poets; and do not
exactly square with heroic Poetry. For in all the epick Poems that ever we
knew, there being two different numerous Parties which proceed against one
another by open Force, and Friends in them acting most commonly on the same
Side, they cannot be easily ignorant one of another; or if they were, the
attempting one upon another would in all Probability, make the Fable Episodick,
and the Action double. To do otherwise it must certainly be managed with an
extreme Address. Tasso indeed provides Tancredi an Amazonian Mistress, who was
of the contrary side, and whom he kills in her VVarrior's Accoutrements, and
immediately after it, upon lifting up her Helmet, knows her. This is according
to the second Precept of Aristotle which we have cited above, and the Discovery
is very pathetick. Gier. Cant. 12. St. 67.

La vide, e la connobbe, and resto senza
E voce, e moto, ahi vista, ahi conoscenza!
He saw her, and he knew her, and was struck speechless and motionless: What a
Sight was there! And what a Discovery!

This Tasso has done, but the Character of Clorinda being liable to Censure,
because it has not all the Probability which might be required, for that very
Reason the Incident cannot be justified. From what has been said, we may very
well conclude, that it is very difficult, if not impossible to contrive the
Incidents in an epick Poem as they are framed in a Tragedy.

This Virgil saw very well; and therefore, since it was not in his Power to
make his Incidents tragical, he did his Endeavor to bring them as near as he
possibly could to the Nature of tragical Incidents. And since he could not
bring it about that a Friend should be the Cause of the Death of his Friend;
which, with a little Address, may be compassed in Tragedy; he at least
contrived, that a Friend should occasion the Death of a Friend, which too is
very pathetick. Now, in the Term Friend, Aristotle includes Relations, as
Dacier has observed in his Remarks upon that Place: In Virgil then, to mention
no more, we have three very pathetick Episodes. In the tenth Book, we see a Son
dying for his Father; in the ninth we have a Friend who dies for his Friend.
And in the fourth, we find a Mistress who kills her self for her Lover: So that
in that admirable Poet we have three Calamities occasioned by three of the
dearest Ties, that ever were known to Man. And we shall find the Characters in
those Places admirably contrived for the exciting Terror and Pity.

Lausus, in the tenth Book, is a young Prince of extraordinary Hopes;
conspicuous for his Courage, and for his filial Affection. But his Faults were
Presumption and Obstinacy

He attacks Aeneas to save his Father, and so far he is pardonable. But after
his Father had, by his Assistance, escaped; he ought to have desisted, and to
have taken the Warning which the Trojan, with so much Generosity gave him, lib.
10. v. 811.

Quo moriture ruis? majoraque viribus audes?
Fallit te incautum pietas tua, nec minus ille
Exultat demens.
But instead of that, he perseveres to his Ruin.

In the eighth Book Nisus shows Courage, Friendship, and Loyalty, and Concern
for his Prince, and a great deal of Zeal for the common Cause, lib. 9. v. 176.

Nisus erat portae custos, acerrimus armis,
Hyrtacides, -- --
Lib. 9. v. 192.

Aenean acciri omnes populusque patresque
Exposcunt, mittique viros qui certa reportent.
Si tibi quae posco, promittunt, (nam mihi facti
Fama sat est.)
Euryalus appears to have the same Qualities.

Mean igitur socium summis adjungere rebus,
Nise, fugis? solum te, in tanta pericula mittam?
Non it a me genitor bellis assuetus Opheltes
Argolicum terrorem inter, Trojaeque labores
Sublatum erudiit: nec tecum talia gessi,
Magnanimum Aenean, and fata extrema secutus.
For though Virgil has every where else admirably distinguished his Characters,
he has with a great deal of Judgment, in this Episode, made his two Friends
resembling: And as their Virtues are the same, their Fault is the same, which
is a headstrong Ambition. lib. 9. v. 184.

Nisus ait: Diine hunc ardorem mentibus addunt
Euryale? an sua cuique deus fit dira cupido?
Aut pugnam, aut aliquid jamdudum invadere magnum
Men's agitat mihi, nec placid a contenta quiet est.
Euryalus says in his Answer to him.

Est hic, est animus lucis contemptor, and istum
Qui vit a been credet emi, quo tendis, honorem.
From all which we may observe, that though they were concerned for their
Prince and their fellow-countrymen, yet Ambition was the first Motive to their
Action, and it accordingly proved unfortunate; and this vicious Passion that
was the Motive to the Action, caused it to miscarry. For that engaged them in
the Slaughter of their Enemies, till the Arrival of Volscens, though they knew
that the Fate of their Country depended on the Success of their Voyage, as that
depended upon the Expedition of their Passage. Nisus seems to be sensible of
this, as Virgil who loves to instruct by Action, and who hates to moralize, has
artfully contrived it to hint his Instruction to the Reader. Lib. 9. v. 353.

Brevitcr cum talia Nisus,
(Sensit enim nimi a caede atque cupidine ferri)
Absistamus, ait.
In the fourth Book we see the Separation of Aeneas and Dido, which alone is
productive of Compassion; as Aristotle has observed in the tenth Chapter of his
Rhetoric.

(...), To be torn from ones Friends, and those with whom we have a long time
conversed, excites Compassion.

But that is not all, the Vehemence of her Passion constrains her to lay
violent Hands upon her self: And such a Catastrophe from such a Cause, must of
necessity be very deplorable, as we have shown above.

Let us now consider the Character of Dido, as we shall find it in Bossu; and
we shall easily see that it is not only compounded of Virtues and Faults, which
Composition is proper for the exciting Terror and Pity; but that, by the
Opposition it has to that of Aeneas, it is contrived to give the last
Satisfaction to all who are acquainted with the Carthaginian and Roman States.

Dido (says Bossu) is the first Person whom the Poet presents to us, and is
(after the Hero) the most considerable one of the first Part of the Aeneis. She
is the Foundress of the Carthaginian State, as Aeneas is the Founder of the
Roman Empire; and she represents the Obstacle which that Commonwealth opposed
to the victorious Progress which at last exalted Rome to the World's Empire. As
then the Poet has stamped the Character of the Roman State on his Hero, she
ought to have that of Carthage imprinted on her. Behold her then passionate,
violent, bold, undertaking, ambitious and false to her Word: And all these
Qualities are set in Motion by Trick, which is the Character and the Soul of
them all. It Is by Trick that she makes all her great Undertakings succeed, that
she revenges her Husband, chastises her Brother, deceives Jarbas. It Is by the
same Quality that she resolves to stop Aeneas, and not being able to bring it
about, she deceives her Sister who was her only Confident.

As ill and as odious as this Character appears to the Reader, Virgil was
forced upon it by the first Plan of his Fable. But, as far as the Necessity of
that Fable permitted him, he has taken care, according to the Maxim of
Aristotle, to bestow on this Character, all the softning which would consist
with his Subject, and to exalt it by all the Beauties of which he found it
capable. Dido, in the Action of the Poem at least, does not make an ill use of
her Wit, unless with Intention to stop Aeneas at Carthage. And she is compelled
to it by the Violence of a Passion, which takes from the Odium of the Action,
and leaves a Place for the Readers Tears, and for his Compassion of the Pains
which she suffers, and of the Death to which she condemns her self. Besides, he
makes her exercise her Cunning on legitimate, illustrious, and glorious
Occasions. He bestows on her, Qualities that are truly imperial. She discovers,
with Bounty, and with Magnificence, an uncommon Esteem for Virtue. All this is
shown in the obliging manner, with which she receives the Trojans, even before
she had seen Aeneas.

From all which it appears, that this Character is taken by Bossu, to be very
capable of raising Compassion; as containing a Mixture of good and bad in it.
And we have shown above, that the Cause of her Calamity, which is the
extraordinary Force of Love, is above all things, proper for the exciting of
that Affection. And the Presumption which we have found in Lausus, and the
Ambition which we have discovered in Nisus are neither great Crimes, nor
shameful Infirmities, but are rather creditable, though ungovernable Passions.

But to come to Mr. Blackmore, there are but three Passages in all his Poem, by
which he can pretend to excite Compassion. The first is the Death of Macor in
the eighth Book. The second is the Supplication of Elda for her Husband's Life,
in the same Book. The third is the Death of Uter related by Lucius to Hoel King
of Armorica. First, for Macor, his Character does not seem to be rightly
composed, nor to have the requisite Mixture of good and bad in it; nor does it
appear, that his Death was occasioned by his Fault; nor was it occasioned by a
Friend, but caused by an Enemy, which makes the Compassion so much the weaker.
And then for Elda, the Passion which Mr. Blackmore designs to raise by her, is
not in the least prepared. First, we never so much as heard of her before her
Supplication begins; and we ought to have been acquainted with her Character
before, that it might have made the deeper Impression on us. But secondly, she
has no Character. For no Quality appears in her but the Love of her Husband,
and no one Quality can form a Character. Thirdly, she is never in any Danger of
what she pretends to fear. For the Reader knows upon the very Beginning of her
Petition, that Arthur will spare her Husband, and consequently, cannot be in
the least concerned for her. And fourthly, this Petition rather shows a foolish
Fondness than a very violent Passion. For though nothing is more proper for the
exciting Compassion than a disastrous Love, yet I think I may venture to
affirm, that to compass the End designed by it, it ought always to be joined,
not only with good Sense, but likewise with Greatness of Mind.

But to come to Uter, his Calamity is caused by an Enemy, and not occasioned by
a Friend. Nor is his Character framed for the exciting Compassion. Let us
consider what Lucius says of him in his Relation to Hoel in the fourth Book.

Won by the potent Charms of Saxon Gold
Carvil his Prince and Native Country sold.
He in indulgent Uter 's Bosom lay
And did the Secrets of his Breast betray.
He on his Conduct and his Faith relied,
In Peace and War alike his treacherous Guide.
He held the most important Trusts of State,
Nor could his Treasons Uter 's Love abate.
Unhappy Prince that still his Foes believed
Only by Ruin to be undeceived.
To Friends ingrate his Foes he entertained,
Thus lost the one, but not the other gained.
Wisely undone he knew his Friends too late,
By his own Prudence managed to his Fate
Our Prayers and Warnings tired his Ears inVain,
Perfidious Councils only could obtain:
Rough Truth and loyal Bluntness galled his Ear,
That only soft melodious Sounds could bear.
His firm and loyal Friends, tho hardly used,
Looked on enraged, to see their Prince abused.
Tho some grown cold ceased to lament his Fate,
For Will and choice Compassion still abate.
Thus is this Uter sottishly easy and credulous. But that is a small Matter,
compared to his other Fault. For Uter is ungrateful likewise, and he who says
that, has said all. This wretch of a Monarch, even by Mr. Blackmore's
Confession, lost his Crown and Life unpitied by those who saw it.

And thus I have endeavored to show, that the Characters and Incidents in Mr.
Blackmore's Poem, are not rightly framed for the exciting Compassion. For the
same Reasons they are very improper for the exciting Terror. I want Time to
speak of the rest of the Affections, as Anger, Indignation, and the like, which
are seldom truly moved through the whole Poem. I will now speak but one Word
concerning the two other Sources of the Pathetick, which are the Sentiments and
the Expressions, because the Consideration of those belongs to another Place.

The Sentiments ought to be disordered in the violent Passions, and the
Language ought to be bold and figurative; and the more violent the Passions
are, the bolder may the Language be. First, because the Nature of violent
Passion requires this, which troubles the Functions of the Soul, so that it
cannot suit Thoughts to things, nor Words to Thoughts. Secondly, because the
Hearers, who partake of the Transport, are too much shaken to find out Faults.
This is the Doctrine of Aristotle in the seventh Chapter of the third Book of
his Rhetoric. And therefore, says Aristotle, a bold and a figurative
Expression is exceeding proper for Poetry, because all Poety is extremely
pathetick. (...). The Interpreters have translated these Words thus. Because
there is something divine in Poetry. But I am pretty confident that (...) is
used metaphorically here, and signifies something extremely pathetick. For
otherwise nothing can be made of Aristotle's Argument, notwithstanding that he
is one of the justest of Thinkers, whereas, if that Word is used
metaphorically, and signifies something pathetick, the Philosophers arguing is
certainly just. A bold and a figurative Expression is proper for Passion, and
therefore it is proper for Poetry, because Poetry is pathetick. Which arguing
is consistent with the p^ripatetick Philosophy, and with the Nature of Poetry.
For, I am pretty confident that I can make it appear that Genius is nothing but
Passion.

If I had proceeded to the third thing, which makes a Narration delightful, I
had then examined Mr. Blackmore's Thoughts and Expressions, and had afterward
proceeded to consider what is probable and admirable in his Narration. But I
have now just gone through half my Method, and I am so thoroughly tired my self,
that it would be unreasonable to believe that I have not wearied my Reader.

FINIS.
Annotations.
But one Man who was greatly good, and was not, etc. Page the 6th.
THE immediate moral Cause of the Destruction of Troy was the unjust Detension
of Helen. To which all the noble Trojans consented, unless Antenor and Aeneas,
who consequently were the only two who were not involved in the Destruction of
their Country. All the rest were either slain or carried away Captives. Now,
though Virgil had nothing directly to do with Antenor, yet he thought fit, for
the enforcing the Excellence of the Moral to insinuate that he had escaped;
which he has told us, with a great deal of Address, by the Mouth of Venus in
the first Ae^eid. But as for his Hero, he thought it necessary to show us that
the Cause of his not being involved in the general Ruin, was his refusing to
consent to the foresaid Detension of Helen. Which he has shown us by Action, by
which alone an epick Poet ought chiefly to instruct. For the Hero is shown in
the second Book, relating how he had expostulated with himself, whether he
should kill Helen: Which implies that he had been all along averse from the
Detension of her, or else the Expostulation would be r^diculous, as well as it
would be unjust. But here it will be convenient to vindicate Virgil, from an
Imputation that is laid to his Charge. And that is, that by this Passage he has
very much derogated from that Valor which ought to be in a sovereign degree in
his Hero. But a Man like Virgil, is never to be accused rashly. For here I
doubt not but I shall manifestly show, first, that this Passage does not
derogate from the Valor of the Hero, and secondly, that the very same Passage
was absolutely necessary to show that this Valor was perfect. For the proving
of the first, I shall not urge the extraordinary Disturbance, into which Aeneas
at that time, had been thrown by the Sight of so deplorable a Calamity, and the
Loss of so many Friends that were dear to him, with which Commotion he makes
Dido acquainted, when he relates the Passage to her.

Talia jactabam, and furiata mente ferebar.
This I say, I will not urge (though it would certainly be some Excuse for
Aeneas) since something may be said that will carry a great^r Weight with it,
which is this. That the Courage of the Hero was designed a subordinate Quality
to his Piety, and so was always to consent with that. Now Aeneas looked upon
the killing of Helen, as a religious Duty, and a sort of infernal Sacrifice,
due to, and expected by the Manes of his Friends.

Sumsisse merentes
Laudabor poenas, animumque explesse juvabit
Ultricis slammae, and cineres satiasse meorum.
And here we may take notice of an admirable Observation of Bossu, which is,
That Aeneas was not only become King by the Death of Priam, but that he was
likewise become high Priest by the Death of Panthus: And consequently, it was
very clear to him, that if such a Sacrifice would be acceptable, it could be
offered by none but himself. And thus the Resolution of Aeneas to kill Helen,
is proved to derogate no more from his Valor, than the Sacrisice of Iphigenia,
or of Polixena, derogated from the Courage of the Grecian Chiefs.

But secondly, this Resolution of the Hero to kill Helen, was absolutely
necessary to carry on the Action, and show that the Valor of Aeneas was
without Blemish.

Aeneas, when he assumed this Resolution, was on the Battlements of the Palace
of Priam employed in its Defense, from whence he had seen, not only the King,
but the rest of the Royal Family, either slain or made Captives. Nevertheless,
he could not tell, but that the Trojans might have rallied in some other Place,
and might have been more successful.

Now, it is the Duty of every one to prefer his Country to his own Family, and
to defend it to the very last. At the same time there was a Necessity for the
Hero's returning to his own House; without which, the preserving Ascanius from
the Grecian Power any longer, would have offended Probability, and he not being
preserved, the Design of the Hero had been destroyed, which was the
re-establishing the Family of Priam in a foreign Country. What then had the
Poet to do in this Case? Why, he was obliged to find out some Method, to
satisfy Aeneas, and to convince his Readers, that the former had done his
Duty. And this he has extremely well brought about by the Resolution of Aeneas
to kill Helen. For that gives an Occasion for the Introduction of Venus, who
had Helen under her Protection, and who satisfies her Son, tha^ ^t was not so
much Paris, or the invidious Beauty of Helen, as it was the Inclemency of the
Gods that destroyed Ilium.

Non tibi Tyndaridis facies invisa Lacaenae,
Culpatusve Paris, Divom inclementia Divom
Has evertit opes, sternitque a culmine Trojam.
And it was not only a Faction of Divinities, which was the Case during the
Siege, but the most considerable of them all, and even the King of the Gods
himself; who, till then, had always been neutral.

Ipse Pater Danais animos viresque secundas
Sufficit, ipse Deos in Dardana suscitat arma.
And she does not only tell him this, she makes him behold it. He sees the
majestic Figures of the Gods employed in the raising the City, and knows that
it would be impious to fight against those. Thus the Poet makes the rest of the
Trojans yield to the Grecians, but his Hero submits to the Gods alone.

It Is true indeed, after all Venus might have been made to descend, without the
Resolution of the Hero to kill Helen; but how very little artful that would
have been, the judicious Reader will easily discern.

ANNOTATION.
Fracti Bello fatisque repulsi;
Ductores Danaum, etc.
Page 24.
THAT this is the very Beginning of the Action, is apparent from the Request
that Dido makes to Aeneas in the latter End of the first Book.

Imo age, and a prima dic hospes origin notis
Insidias inquit Danaum casusque tuorum.
And here we may see another End, to which the Hero's Design upon Helen,
conduces. For it serves to make the Beginning of the Action probable. For
notwithstanding the artful Speech of Sinon, and the extreme Address of the
Poet, we should have been very much shocked at the Credulity of the Trojans who
were no Strangers to the Craft of Ulysses, if they had received the wooden
Horse into their City only upon Sinon's Word. This the Poet saw very well, and
therefore made use of the Prodigy which follows, of the two Serpents that swum
from Tenedos, and killed Laocoon and his two Sons, and afterward went and lay
under the Image of Pallas, to whom Sinon had pretended that the Horse was
consecrated, which Laocoon had violated by the Cast of his Spear. Now the
Resolution of Aeneas to kill Helen, by bringing down Venus, makes this Prodigy
probable; for Venus shows her Son the Figures of the Gods employed in rasing
the City, and Pallas among the rest of them.

Jam summas arces, Tritonia (respice) Pallas
Insedit, nimbo effulgens and Gorgone saeva.
Since therefore it is plain, that this Goddess was concerned in the
Destruction of the City, we may very well believe that she was likewise
concerned in the carrying on the Design of it, and directed the Serpents: and
it is the more reasonable to believe this, because the Grecians, after their
Stratagem had taken effect, could have destroyed the City without her, whereas
her Assistance appears to have been absolutely necessary for the carrying on
the Design.

ANNOTATION.
Which has made me almost inclined to think. Page 24.
NOT having Time to go through my intended Method, I design to give my Reasons
in this Place, why I believe Mr. Blackmore writ the second and third Books of
his Poem, before he had any Thoughts of writing the whole Poem; the Verses in
these two Books are of a different Character from those of the rest of the
Poem. For there are more good Verses in these two than in any four of the rest;
and there is more of the Pathetick in them, than there is in all the rest of
the Poem. For in some Places of them, there appears to be something terrible,
whereas that Passion is but very faintly moved, throughout the rest of the Poem.

Secondly, these two Books have nothing to do with the rest of the Poem. They
are entire without that, as that is without them, as entire as it is with them.

Thirdly, there are several things in this pretended Relation of Prince Arthur
to Hoel, of which Prince Arthur could have no Knowledge, as the Cartesian
System, Illuminations, Fireworks, etc. and consequently, they could not be
designed for the Mouth of this British Hero.

It will be objected to this, that Prince Arthur had this Account of Chaos, and
the Creation, by Vision and Revelation, as he assures Hoel, at the End of the
first Book, and that therefore he might be informed by those, of what he could
not know of himself.

To this I answer, that this still confirms what I endeavor to prove, and
makes the pretended Relation more extravagant. For never has there been such a
Vision, or such a Revelation known. It is a Vision of something a long time
past, and a Revelation of something reasonable. Now every Vision is either of
something but just past, which cannot be otherwise known, by reason of the
Distance of Place, or of something to come. For every Vision, is to acquaint
the Person who has that Vision with something which could not be conveyed to
him by a natural Way. For a Vision is a Miracle, and God never does that by a
Miracle, which he can do by the ordinary course of Nature; because that would
be to argue him changeable, and to derogate from his infinite Wisdom. Now the
Knowledge of any thing which has been a long time past, can be conveyed, if God
sees it necessary by a natural Way, and that is by History or Tradition. The
Account of the Creation was delivered down to Moses by Tradition, and
transmitted by History from him to us. If it had not been conveyed to us thus,
what Occasion was there for a Revelation to acquaint Arthur or Hoel that God
created the World when every Man sees it by the Light of Nature? To make God
have Recourse to a Miracle for the revealing that which every Man knows
already, or which every Man at least may know without a Miracle, is to be
impious, and to make him act absurdly. But if Mr. Blackmore answers, that this
Revelation was not to inform Arthur or Hoel of the thing, but to instruct them
in the Manner how; I answer, that this Manner how, was not at all necessary to
Mr. Blackmore's Design, which is the making Hoel a Christian. For a Man may be
a very good Christian, and yet a very bad natural Philosopher. I would fain
know which of the Apostles understood the Cartesian System. And I cannot, for
my Life, comprehend, why God, who did not think it necessary to reveal it,
either to St. Peter, or to St. Paul, should reveal it to Arthur and Hoel. Since
therefore this Vision and this Revelation, are so improbable on every side, and
so absurd on most, we ought to conclude, that Mr. Blackmore had Recourse to
them, as very bad, yet the only Means to tack the pretended Relation of Arthur
to the rest of the Work. But,

Fourthly, No Man ever writ an Epick Poem, without writing Verses preluding to
it. No one can doubt of that. Since then Mr. Blackmore did write Verses before
he thought of Prince Arthur, and since we never saw any Verses of his before
the Heroic Poem appeared, and we have shown that the pretended Relation of
Arthur is of a different Character from the rest of the Poem; and a thing
entire by it self, and that there are several things in it which are very
absurd, as they are tacked to the rest of the Work; and which would be
reasonable enough if the pretended Relation had been published by it self, we
have very good probable Grounds to conclude, that the Verses included in that
Relation, are some of those which were writ before Mr. Blackmore thought of
writing Prince Arthur.

ANNOTATION.
But he was afraid of missing the Rites of Funeral. Page 24.
THAT which is so often said to excuse Aeneas his Fear in the first of the
Aeneis, which is, that he was afraid of missing the Rites of Funeral, without
which there was no ferrying over the Stygian Lake, seems to me to be invalid.
For Aeneas, in the Relation that he makes to Dido of the Destruction of Troy,
makes Anchises, when they urged him to depart, advise his Son and
Daughter-in-law to make their Escape, but that for his own part, he was
resolved to dye upon the Place; As for the want of a Funeral, says he, that is
but a Trifle.

-- Facilis jactura sepulcri.
Which he speaks as if he designed to obviate an Objection that he believed his
Son might make; which looks as if A^chises thought it without Consequence, and
Aeneas, by repeating it, as his Father's Opinion, appears to be of the same
Mind too. What shall we say then, that Aeneas did not know that Souls, whose
Bodies were unburied, were denied the Passage of the infernal River, till the
Sybill, upon his Descent to Hell, showed him the Ghosts that were hovering upon
the hithermost Banks of Styx, and amongst the rest, some of his own Friends, as
Leucaspis, Orontes, and Palinurus. Indeed, she speaks as if she made a
Discovery to him.

Hi, quos vehit unda, sepulti.
Nec ripas datur horrendas, and rauca fluent a
Transport are prius quam sedibus ossa quierunt;
Centum errant annos, volitanque haec littor a circum.
But then we meet with a terrible Difficulty at the latter End of the fifth
Book. For when Aeneas saw that Palinurus was lost, after fetching a deep Sigh,
and appearing very much disturbed at the deplorable Accident, he ends the Book
with the two following Verses which are so admirable for the Pathetick.

Heu nimium Coelo and Pelago consise sereno
Nudus in ignot a Palinure jacebis aren a.
Where we may observe that Aeneas does not lament the Death of Palinurus, but
only his want of Funeral.

Nudus in ignot a, etc.
From whence it is plain, that Aeneas knew the Consequence of it: For else
these Verses which are now so extremely pathetick, would show a very great
Weakness in the Hero, and consequently, a very great Absurdity in the Poet, and
would neither be consonant to good Sense, nor the Nature of true Compassion: It
being undeniable, that the want of a Funeral, considered in it self, and
without any Consequence, is but a Trifle, compared to the Calamity of a sudden
untimely Death. Aeneas therefore, as was said above, knew the Consequence of
this want of Funeral before his Descent to Hell; and the Sybill only told him
this, to remind him, upon the Sight of the Ghosts that were slocking to the
Banks of Styx: What then can be said to the Passage in the second Book,

-- Facilis jactura sepulcri.
The only reasonable Answer that I can make to it is this, That Aeneas and
Anchises both knew and believed that all, who had any Excellence above the rest
of Mankind, and were of divine Extraction, were exempted from the common Fate.
When Aeneas desires the Sybill, in the sixth Book, to be his Guide to the
infernal Regions, he tells her, that he might undoubtedly take this Journey,
since there had been Persons who had done it before him, and that he had the
same Qualification that they had.

Si potuit manes, accessere conjugis Orpheus,
Threicia fretus cithara fidibusque canoris.
Si fratrem Pollux alterna Morte redemit,
Itque reditque viam toties, quid Thesea, magnum
Quid memorem Alciden? and mi genus ab Jove summo.
Where we see that all, whom he mentioned, were Persons who had some Excellence
above the rest of his Contemporaries, and were of divine Extraction. The Sybill
makes answer to him, that very few had been able to do what he desired.

Pauci quos aequus amavit
Jupiter, aut ardens evexit and Ether a virtus
Diis geniti potuere.
And those few had been Persons of extraordinary Virtucs, and of divine
Original.

And afterward, when Aeneas and the Sybil approached the Banks of the River,
Ch^ron says to them,

Nec vero Alciden me sum laetatus cuntem
Accepisse lacu, nec Thesea Perithoumque
Diis quamquam geniti atque invicti viribus essent.
I was not well pleased with carrying over Hercules, nor the two Friends,
though they were Heroes all, and all of divine Extraction.

From whence it appears, that since Aeneas knew, that Persons of extraordinary
Virtue, and of divine Extraction, had passed and repassed the River of Hell
without so much as dying, which was denied to others; he might very well
believe, that they might pass it once for all, without the Rites of Funeral,
though it was denied to others.

ANNOTATION.
Consists of needless and trifling Descriptions. Of Descriptions. Page 146.
IN speaking of Descriptions, I shall endeavor to explain Bossu, whose
Instructions concerning this matter, are neither so full nor clear as to be
understood by every one.

Descriptions in Heroic Poetry are either of Action, and that if it is long,
is called Narration, if it be short painting; or of the Circumstances of
Action, as Time, Place, etc. or of Persons. It is necessary to declare, that by
Description here we do not mean Narration, of which we have treated apart: The
Descriptions which we speak of here, are but Parts of that which we call
Narration. Nothing requires more Judgment than to write them as they should be.
He who writes an Heroic Poem, is not to make Descriptions, only because he has
a mind to it, or to indulge the Wantonness of an extravagant Fancy.
Descriptions in an epick Poem are only for the Action, and the Action is only
for the Moral. The Poet is to make all the Haste that he possibly can with good
speed, to the End of his Action, which is the Praise that Horace has given to
Homer; because till we come to the End, we can never have the main Instruction.
He ought indeed to make his Narration as pleasing as he can, because Pleasure
serves to the making us attentive to the Action, and tends to the imprinting it
upon our Minds more strongly; For we always remember a long time, that which
has very much pleased us. But he is to consider at the same time, that the
Pleasure which he gives us, is only for the Instruction, and therefore he ought
to give us such a Sort of a Pleasure, as may not hinder or divert the
Instruction, either by digressing from the Action, or by confining our
Attentions too long to a Part of it. From whence it follows, that Descriptions
in an Epick Poem, are never to be made, unless they appear to be necessary, and
they can never be necessary only upon two Accounts. First, when they are
requisite to give us a reasonable account of some Part of the Action, in order
to the making it probable. Secondly, when they serve to imprint some important
Circumstance upon our Minds more strongly. But when they are thus necessary,
they ought to be short, not only for the Reasons which we have mentioned above,
but because otherwise they would have a quite contrary Effect to that for which
they are designed. For if they grow tedious and cloy us, instead of imprinting
what they describe more strongly on us, they infallibly serve to make us forget
it. For a great Man has observed, that we are never so likely to forget things,
as when we are weary of hearing them. Thus it appears from what we have said,
that Descriptions are never to be made, but when they are necessary, and then
too they are to be short. But besides all this, they are to be accommodated to
the Character of an Epick Poem in general, and of the Place where they are set
in particular.

First, They are to be accommodated to the Character of an Epick Poem in
general. Now the Character of an Epick Poem in general, is Gravity, Elevation,
and Majesty. For the first of these creates an Aw in us, and is therefore
absolutely necessary to a Lawgiver, and such is the Writer of every lawful
Poem; and as the first of these three causes a Reverence in us, so the two last
produce Admiration, which ought to reign every where in an Epick Poem, for
Reasons which we have mentioned above. The Descriptions then in an Epick Poem,
ought to be grave, majestic, and elevated. Indeed, they ought not all to be
exalted alike; but yet not one of them is to be cold and creeping, they are all
of them to have Fire in a greater or less Degree, and they are all to have a
great and a noble Air. From whence it follows, that they ought all of them to
be above Point, and that which we call Conceit, which are always cold, and
little and low and wanton, and infinitely below the Gravity and Majesty of the
greater Poetry. Now, as Descriptions ought to be free from these, so they ought
never to describe any trifling Circumstances of the Objects which they present
to us. Every thing that they mention, ought to be great and important; not only
that they may be adapted to the grave and majestic Character of the Poem; but
that they may be subservient to one of the two Ends, for which Descriptions are
necessary. And as the Circumstances which they mention, ought to be great, so
they are still to proceed from a great to a more important Circumstance, or
else the Reader finds an Anticlimax, than which nothing can be more injudicious
in Poetry. For that which is great and strong in it self, may appear to be
little and weak, when it comes after something which is greater and stronger.
From whence it is evident, that it is ill managed when it is thus out of its
Place, and shows an apparent Defect in Judgment.

But Descriptions are not only to be accommodated to the Character of the Epick
Poem in General, they are to be adapted to the Character of the Place where
they are in particular; and if that Place is pathetick, they are to exalt the
very same Passion that reigns there. As for Example, if the Place where the
Description is, appears to be designed for the exciting Terror, the
Description is to tend to the raising that Passion, for which it is very
proper, as that Passion is extremely proper for Epick Poetry. For Terror
always includes Admiration; since we always, in some Measure, admire that, with
which we are very much terrified. Now, if a Poet would heighthen Terror by
Description, he is to examine all the terrible Circumstances of the Object
which he describes, of which he is to choose the most terrible, and those which
are most capable of imprinting that Cbject very strongly in our Minds, and of
these he is to present first to us that which is least dreadful, and so to
proceed gradually if the Subject will allow it, to something which is
altogether astonishing and amazing.

ANNOTATION.
Latinus remained in Power and Place after the single Combat. But first he had
never. Page 33.
VIrgil takes several Occasions to mark the Inclination that Latinus had to
Aeneas, and his Aversion to the Proceedings of Turnus. The Reader may consult
the seventh Aeneid, from the 250. Verse, to the two hundred and eighty fifth.
And afterward in the same Book he remains a long time deaf to the Clamours of
those who urge him to declare War. And when he is able to hold out no longer,
he protests against the Proceedings of Amata and Turnus, and lets go the Reins
of the Government. All which the Reader may see from the 575. to the 600th
Verse. And afterward, in the eleventh Book, he feels Remorse of Conscience for
not having made a stronger Effort to marry his Daughter to Aeneas, in spigh^ of
his Wise and Turnus, v. 470.

Multasque se incusat qui non acceperit ultro.
Dardanium Aeneam generumque asciverit urbi.
And in the 12. he feels this Remorse again, and makes the same Accusation
against himself. v. 650.

ANNOTATION.
The pious Prince is afraid for his People. Page the 70.
THAT is not the best Excuse that can be made for Prince Arthur, but is a
Mistake that slipped from me in the Hurry of writing this Treatise.

ANNOTATION.
Secondly, that supposing Aeneas was afraid. Page the 79.
HEre was something left out in the Copy through the Hurry of writing. All
this, to the Bottom of the next Page, is spoken by those who endeavor to
defend the Fear of Aeneas (of which the Reader is not advised soon enough.) It
is my Opinion, that a better Excuse may be made for the Fear of Prince Arthur,
than for that of Aeneas, supposing them both afraid. A Man who considers the
Differences of their Religions must easiiy consent to that, hut then it is my
Opinion, that the Trojan was not afraid.

ANNOTATION.
A Man must affirm something, or else he says nothing. Page 158.
Every Negative includes an Affirmative.

ANNOTATION.
Which can never be contrary to a religious Duty. Page 166.
RIght Reason may be contrary to the Doctrine of some Religions, but when a Man
once is convinced of that, it is certainly most reasonable to do the Duties
that are taught by it.

ANNOTATION.
That neither Macor nor Cador having any Characters. Page 175.
THIS was a Mistake occasioned by my Dispatch. Macor seems to be better
distinguished than most of Mr. Blackmore's po^tical Persons; but it is not a
Character proper for the exciting Compassion.

FINIS.

