The CASE of Richard Stafford humbly offered to the Consideration of both
Houses of Parliament.
WHereas Richard Stafford has been, and stands yet indicted at Common Law, and
has suffered a Weeks Imprisonment in Newgate for certain Papers, entitled, A
Supplemental Tract of Government, etc. which he delivered in to the late
Parliament on January 4. 1689. to which he made an Appearance at the last
Sessions at the Old-Bayley, and had Oyer of his Indictment, which did run in
these words, viz. That the said Richard Stafford did intend to raise difference
and discord between the King and Queen, and their Peers and Great Men, and the
Commons of this Kingdom of England in Parliament lately assembled, etc. He the
said Richard Stafford did offer to this by way of Answer and Plea, That what he
did was in full Parliament, and that he was introduced according to Form and
Order into the House of Lords, the House then sitting; and the Substance and
Matter of the said Paper, was referred to the Consideration of the Lords and
Commons; And if it did tend to breed difference and discord between the King
and Queen and Them, Themselves were the more proper Judges of what lay in their
own breast, and whereof a Jury of 12 inferior Men were not so fit to judge and
determine. And further it was alleged, That this Case did come within the
reason of Stat. 1o. Gulielmi and Marie, for declaring the Rights and Liberties
of the Subject, and settling the Succession of the Crown; wherein amongst the
several instances of mal-administration of the late Reign there recited, one
was, By Prosecutions in the Court of the King's Bench for Matters and Causes
cognizable only in Parliament: And it was a like Error there to proceed in a
more inferior Court for what belongs to their Conusance. Though this Clause
was inserted in as to the Case of Mr. Williams, who was illegally proceeded
against in the King's Bench, for what he did as Speaker in the House of Commons;
yet no public Statute expressed in general words, is made to reach only one
single and particular Case, but it takes in all others of the like Nature and
Reason. It is agreeable both to the Statute and Common Laws of this Kingdom,
and to right Practice and Usage, That things should be heard where they are
done: And that great and weighty matters (whereof the present, according to the
Indictment, is the greatest that can be, and may be styled a Case of many
Generations) should be determined in the highest Courts of Judicatory. The
reason why some things of this nature have been tried at Common Law, is because
sometimes of the long interval and space of time between Parliaments, (and with
this, if I mistake not, they did palliate the proceedings against Mr. Williams)
and so the Offender might escape Justice in the mean while, which would be a
great inconvenience: Or if he lie only under suspicion and doubt, his Trial
would be deferred; or if he be falsely accused and charged, he is delayed from
clearing and vindicating his own innocence in the mean while, which is a very
great prejudice and trouble to himself.

But here by a strange Art and most wicked Corruption, of calling evil good,
and good evil; of justifying the wicked for reward, and taking away the
righteousness of the righteous from him, Isa. 5.20.23. by turning of things
upside down, Isa. 29.16. the aforesaid Richard Stafford is charged to do a
thing unlawfully, unjustly, and wickedly, when he does only lay the Laws of God
before Men; He does endeavor (according to his Duty and the Grace committed
unto him) to turn them from Iniquity unto Righteousness. He does say and
affirm, That all the Words mentioned in the aforesaid Papers are True,
Significative, and will be certainly fulfilled. He does come in the Name of
Almighty God, and will make evident his Commission, that he is really sent, and
has more words to speak out in Person viva voce, unto the Honorable Houses of
Parliament; Hoping that they will not be like their Forefathers, a Rebellious
and Stubborn Generation, which refuse to hear the Law of their God. It is Gods
constant Method to speak unto the World by those of the same likeness with our
selves; and he does, commonly raise up mean Persons to convey forth his Truth
unto Men, That the excellency should be of God, and not of us. I dare not abuse
nor trifle with his Name, but am ready to explain the nature and meaning
thereof, if I may be heard out thoroughly without any interruption. And so
likewise, ye ought to take heed how ye reject it, for you will admit of things
of lesser moment. If another should come from an Earthly Prince, or discover
some new thing, or in a matter of Peace and War, of Rights or Privileges, him
will ye hear: But ye are apt to refuse or disregard, what has relation to the
immediate Government of him who is the Great King over all the Earth, and in
subordination to that, is not only for the real Peace and Security of this
whole Nation, but of the Kingdoms round about. If I speak falsehood or folly, as
I should then be liable unto the Wrath and Judgment of the great God for taking
his Name in vain, and making vile his Majesty; so in the mean while, I
contentedly submit to be made an Example of your utmost Severity and
Punishment, for disturbing and interrupting your Counsels. But if I speak
Wisdom and Truth, I ought to be hearkened unto.


