The CASE of many Thousands of His Majesty's Subjects, who for Valuable
Consid^rations are Entitled, under the Letters Patents of King Charles the
Second, to Annual Sums out of the Hereditary Revenue of Excise.
IN the Nineteenth Year of the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles the
Second, passed an Act of Parliament for Assigning Orders in the Exchequer,
without Revocation, made, as is therein expressed, for the Advantage of the
Trade of this Kingdom; and for Seven Years to give Credit to His Majesty's
Exchequer; also for payment of Moneys that should be Charged on any Branch of
His Majesty's Revenue, etc. The said Act encouraged several Goldsmiths and
Others to Advance great Sums to serve public Occasions, which had not been
advanced, but upon the Reputation of that Act. But notwithstanding the
Encouragement given in that Act, His said Majesty in Council, on the Second of
January 1671/72,

By the said unusual stop upon Payments in the Exchequer, the said Goldsmiths
were unable to pay their Debts: Whereupon His Majesty, to Remove the great
Difficulties which very many of His Subjects lay under by the said stop of
Payments; And for want of a more effectual Relief, was pleased in April 1676,
to direct the then Lord High Treasurer to cause the Accounts of those persons
whose Payments in the Exchequer were so stopped to be truly Examined, and
exactly Stated; which Matter his Lordship referred to the Consideration of Sir
John Ernle, Sir Robert Howard, Charles Bertie Esquire Sir George Downeing, Sir
Charles Harbord and Mr. Auditor Aldworth, (then Members of the House of
Commons;) who having frequently debated, and seriously considered thereof,
declared to his Lordship, That they were fully satisfied in each respective
person's Account, and had nothing further to Offer or Object in relation
thereto; And then, by his Lordship's Order, the said Auditor made up those
several Accounts, with the Interest due thereon, to the First of January 1676,
after the Rate of Six Pounds per Cent. per Annum; and each of the persons
concerned, having Sworn to the Truth of his Account before One of the Barons of
the Court of Exchequer, they were approved of and signed by the said Sir John
Ernle, as he was Under-Treasurer and Chancellor of the Exchequer; as also by
the said Lord-Treasurer, who then were His Majesty's proper Officers for
passing Accounts, and under Oath faithfully to discharge those Offices of
Trust: So they having in due Form passed those several Accounts, the Lord High
Treasurer in February 1676, Reported them to His Majesty in Council.

And in lieu and satisfaction of the Moneys due upon those Accounts to each
Respective person, his said Majesty, by his Letters Patents under the Great
Seal of England, did about April and May 1677, Grant to them, their Heirs and
Assigns, and for the benefit of their Creditors, a yearly Rent or Sum for ever,
payable out of the Hereditary Revenue of Excise, equal in Value to the Interest
of each Respective Debt, after the Rate of Six Pounds per cent. per Annum, with
a Clause of Redemption upon his Majesty's paying the Principal-Money, with the
Arrears of Rent: The said Rent or Annual Sums to be paid Quarterly upon Talleys
to be struck in the Receipt of the Exchequer upon the Commissioners, etc. of
the Excise; And his said Majesty, by the said Patents, Directs and Commands the
Treasurer, etc. Barons and Officers of the Exchequer of the King, his Heirs and
Successors, That they do from Time to Time perform all Acts necessary for the
constant payment of the Money; and from time to time Levy and Strike Talleys
without any further Warrant; so that those Yearly Sums may be constantly paid
without any further or other Warrant, to be sued for from the King, his Heirs
or Successors: And if the Money should happen to be paid into the Receipt of
the Exchequer, that then the High-Treasurer, and Commissioners of the Treasury,
Under-Treasurer, Chamberlains and Barons of the Exchequer for the Time being,
and all other Officers and Ministers of the Exchequer, and of the Receipt
thereof, are authorized and required to pay out of such Moneys as shall be so
paid into the Exchequer, or elsewhere, so much as shall be in Arrear, without
any further or other Warrant; and the said Payments to be preferred before any
other Payment out of the same, by Virtue or Color of any Warrant, Order or
Directions whatsoever, of any After-date, excepting for the Management of the
said Revenue, and about 36209 l. 15 s. 4 a Year to the then Queen-Consort and
the Duke of York. Also his Majesty thereby Granted, That those Letters Patents
should be Expounded and taken most favorably and beneficially for the
Patentees, and their Assigns; also Covenanted to make further Assurance, if
required: And on the 23d of May 1677, Ordered in Council, That the said Letters
Patents should be printed, and made public for the Information and
Satisfaction of the Creditors of the said Goldsmiths.

And pursuant thereto, the said Patentees, and their Assigns, were paid in the
Reigns of King Charles the Second and King James the Second, to Lady Day 1683;
but not any part since that time, notwithstanding all due Applications to that
purpose. Which Occasioned the Proprietors to have many Thoughts which way to be
Relieved: And upon their applying to the Members of the Honorable House of
Commons, to know if it was not proper for them to Offer their Case to their
Committee of Agrievances; They advised first to prosecute their Legal Remedy,
which through great Difficulties has been Effected by Ten Years Labor, and
great Charge: Their Titles under the said Patents have been solemnly allowed to
be good, by the several Judgments given in the Court ot Exchequer, for the
Patentees and their Assigns. And although by Writs of Error the said Barons
Judgments were brought before the then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal in the
Exchequer-Chamber, where the Judges of the King's Bench and Common Pleas all
agreed, That those Patentees, and their Assigns, have a Legal Title: Also all
the Judges but One agreed, That the Jurisdiction of the Court of Exchequer
(according to ancient Presidents) is sufficient, and ought to direct Payments
Williamson's Cause against the said Judgment of Reversal, the last Session of
Parliament, the House of Lords had the Records of the said Proceedings brought
before Liberate or Warrant, to the Commissioners of the Treasury, and
Chamberlains of the Receipt, to pay the Arrears to Christmas 1699; and that for
the Quarterly payments after the said time, (...) upon the Commissioners, etc.
of the Excise, to the said Williamson, as they grow due, pursuant to the said
Letters Patents; and accordingly Demands have been made by the said Williamson
of the Commissioners of the Treasury, and Chamberlains of the Receipt, who have
made payment thereon.

If Demanded, What does these Proprietors expect from the Parliament, now they
are to provide for Deficiencies, and the Nation's Safety etc.?

It is Answered, They neither design to hinder other Business, nor expect any
new Fund; but pray, that they may enjoy the Fruits of their Legal Estates,
according to the Relief which the Law has given them; and not be obstructed
therein, by a Scruple made by the King's Counsel in the Court of Exchequer,
when the Barons Awarded the said Writ of Execution: Viz.

That there is not any Saving for these Proprietors Estates out of the
Hereditary Excise, which is one of the Revenues in the Act, for Granting to His
Majesty a further Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, toward Raising the Yearly
Sum of Seven hundred thousand Pounds, for the Service of His Majesty's
Household, and other Uses, etc. And the Overplus is not to be disposed of
without Authority of Parliament: So from thence they infer, That these
Proprietors are thereby debarred the Payment of their Annual Rents or Sums,
from Christmas 1699, when that Act Commenced, during His Majesty's Life; And
the said Barons refusing to give their Opinions of the said Act as to this
Matter, unless it were with the Rest of the Judges, they Awarded the said
Execution for Payment out of the Money arising from the Hereditary Excise; Not
otherwise disposed or applied by Authority of Parliament; nor forbid or
restrained to be disposed or applied without Authority of Parliament.

Upon a Petition in the Honorable House of Commons (at the Passing that Act)
for a Saving of these Proprietors Legal Rights, it was there debated, and
agreed to be needless, because that Bill no ways affected their Estates, nor
any Saving made therein for any other Persons, who are also Entitled unto
several Estates from the Crown: However, to satisfy them it should not Injure
them, was put in the word hereafter in the Sentence, That all Grants and
Dispositions whatsoever hereafter to be made of such Overplus, etc. (shall be
void; which their Counsel also took to be an Allowance of their Patents.

His Majesty having the Four and Twenty Thousand Pounds a Year, which is
Excepted in their said Patents for the Duke of York; and also the Remainder of
the Hereditary Excise, which was King Charles the Second's, after Payment of
the said Patentees and their Assigns what due to them, they could not have been
part of the Provision for His Majesty's Household, etc. unless the Act for
Raising that Duty had been mentioned in the Preamble amongst the other
Revenues, out of which His Majesty's said Seven Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year
should arise; but all those Branches were His Majesty's Revenues, excepting the
Customs therein mentioned, before that Act was made; so they neither needed
Granting, or was thereby Granted to His Majesty, but stood in all respects
betwixt the King and private Persons, in the same Condition as they were in,
before the Passing of that Act.

The said Act did not Commence, until near Two years after it was Enacted, that
the Talleys therein mentioned might first be paid; but there is not therein any
word tending to a Resumption of any Grants or Annual Payments; nor a Saving for
any persons Rights or Titles out of any of those Revenues, not so much as for
Charges in Collecting; And in the Enacting-part is only an Appropriating of the
King's Clear Money out of all those Branches of Revenue. But the said Scruple
tends to the Ruin of Thousands of the Subjects of this Kingdom, by depriving
them of the Fruits of their said Estates in Fee, unless they shall be Redeemed
by Payment of the Principal-Money, and the Arrears thereof; Although in the
said Act, neither their Persons nor Titles are so much as mentioned, nor any
Reason therein given, for doing these proprietors such an Injury, whose Titles
being purchased for valuable Considerations, they are in no particular inferior
to the best of Titles from the Crown.

Considerations on the Premises as follows:
I. That these Patentees Moneys which were advanced by Encouragement of the
said Act of Parliament of the 19 Car. 2 di, were in an unusual manner stopped
in the Exchequer; and that they were forced for their Relief, to deliver up
their former Orders and Securities; and in lieu thereof, to accept of Patents
for Annual Sums payable out of the Hereditary Revenue of Excise. II. That the
said Excise is neither part of the ancient Demesnes, nor came to the Crown by
the Expense of either Subjects Blood or their Money; but it is an Estate in
Fee, which was Granted by the Parliament to King Charles the Second, in lieu of
the Court of Wards and Liveries, and Tenures in Capite, and by Knight's Service
and Purveyance, which were Prerogatives thought grievous to the Subjects; and
by the same Act released and discharged; so that Revenue was no ways
appropriated to public Uses. III. That these Patentees and their Assigns
Titles to the said Annual Sums, and to the Arrears thereof, were approved of by
Payments in the two last Reigns, and also since by the most Solemn Prosecution
that could be at Law, and payment has been made pursuant thereto: So these
Proprietors have reason to expect the Fruits thereof, which they ought to have
Annually, with preference in Payment, unless their Respective principal Sums,
with the Arrears then due, shall be paid to the Owners thereof. And by the Act
for Provision for His Majesty's Household, etc. the same is to arise out of the
Clear Money, from those Branches of Revenue therein mentioned: But until the
Queen-Dowager's 12209 l. a Year, and the 24000 l. a Year to the then Duke of
York; as also the said Proprietors Annual Rents and Arrears thereof, shall be
satisfied, there cannot arise any Clear Money out of the Hereditary Revenue of
Excise.
These Proprietors having laid before the Honorable House of Commons their
Just and Legal Titles, depend upon the Preservers of their Properties, that
when the Act for Provision for His Majesty's Household, etc. shall be
considered, their said Estates may be preserved to the Owners thereof. And the
many Persons distressed for want thereof, Delivered from Hospitals, Gaols, and
Beggary.


