LETTERS Upon several OCCASIONS: Written by and between Mr. Dryden, Mr.
Wycherly, Mr. -- Mr. Congreve, and Mr. Dennis.


Published by Mr. DENNIS.

With a New Translation of Select LETTERS of Monsieur Voiture.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Briscoe, at the Corner-Shop of Charles-Street in
Russel Street in Covent Garden. 1696.

To the Right Honorable Charles Montague, Esquire;. One of the Lords of the
Treasury, Chancellor of the Exchequer; and one of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
SIR,
AS soon as I had resolved to make this Address to you, that the Present might
not be altogether unworthy of you, I took care to obtain the Consent of my
Friends to publish some Letters, which they had writ as Answers to mine.

When I look upon my self, I find I have reason to beg pardon for my
Presumption: But when I consider those Gentlemen, I am encouraged to hope that
you will not be offended to find your self at the Head of no Vulgar Company, a
Company, whose Names and Desert are universally known, a Company raised far
above the level of Mankind by their own extraordinary Merit, and yet proud to
do Homage to yours. They are Gentlemen, it is true, who are divided in their
Interests, and who differ in their Politic Principles, but they agree in their
Judgments of Things, which all the World admires, and they always consent when
they speak of you.

In presenting this little Book to you, I only designed to show my Zeal and my
Gratitude; but they assure me unanimously, that I have likewise shown my
Judgment. Tho indeed, Sir, the number of the Great, who cast a favorable Eye
upon Human Learning, is not so considerable, but that a Man who would Address
any thing of this nature to one of them, may soon determine his choice.
Proficients in other Arts are encouraged by Profit, which is their main Design,
but he who bestows all his time upon Human Studies is incited by Glory alone,
and the World takes care that he should have no more than he seeks for. The
Enthusiast, the Quack, the Pettifogger, are rewarded for Torturing, and for
deluding Men; but Humanity has met with very barbarous Usage, only for
pleasing, and for instructing them. The very Court, which draws most of its
Ornament from it, has but too often neglected it; there Learning in general has
been disregarded: For none but great Souls are capable of great Designs, and
few Courtiers have had Greatness of Mind enough to procure the Promotion of
Science, which is the Exaltation of Human Nature, and the Enlargement of the
Empire of Reason. Our Ministers of State have formerly behaved themselves with
so much indifference, as if it would have lessened them to have taken any care
of Letters. They have shown themselves as perfectly unconcerned, as if not one
had discovered, that at a time when our Neighbors are grown so knowing, the
Public Safety depends on the Progress of Learning, and that to Patronize
Science, is to take care of the State. Besides, too many of our Statesmen have
been engaged in unjust Designs. Most of our Politicians have done their
endeavor to encroach on the Crown, or to attempt on the People. Few have had
Capacity and Integrity enough to keep the Balance so steady, as to maintain
Prerogative at once, and assert Privilege; to serve the King Zealously, and
their Country Faithfully; to possess at the same time the Favor of the one,
and the Hearts of the other, to such a degree as to be courted by the People to
serve as their Representative, at the very time that they are employed by the
King in Matters of the highest Importance. Instead of that, most of them have
had reason to be afraid of the King or the Commons; and Men who have been
sollicitous for their own Safety have seldom appeared concerned for the good of
others. Few then have been and are in a Condition to be Protectors of Learning,
and therefore those happy few deserve all the Honors which we are able to pay
them. Of those, Sir, you appear in the foremost Rank, and are to the
Commonwealth of Learning what you are to the State, a great Defense and a
shining Ornament. You have warmly encouraged all sorts of Studies, but have
been justly and nobly partial to those, for which the State has made no
Provision: Which is enough to gain you the Esteem of all who have any regard
for Learning, and to win the very Souls of all who, like me, are charmed with
the softer Studies of Humanity. For which your Zeal has been so diffusive, that
it has extended it self even to me, though a bare Inclination to cultivate
Eloquence and Poetry, was the only thing which could recommend me to ^ou* Yet
even this has been encouraged by the promise of your Protection and by the
Humanity of your receiving me. The access which I have had to you, has been the
greatest Obligation that you could lay upon a Man who has still valued Merit
above all the World, and who has sought his Improvement more than he has his
Advancement. When I have at any time approached you, I have found in you none
of those forbidding Qualities, of which they accuse the Great. Instead of
those, I have found an attractive and a human Greatness, the generous Sincerity
of the Man of Honor joined with the Grace and Complaisance of the Courtier,
and a Deportment noble without Pride, and Modest without descending. Nature has
made me something averse from making my Court to Fortune. But I am proud to
attend upon real Greatness, and to wait upon you since first you encouraged me,
has been at once my Duty and my Ambition.

The Permission which you gave me to approach you, was so great an Incitement
to me, that I believe it might have brought me to write well if I had not a
very just reason to resolve to attempt it no more. You had given me one great
Encouragement before I had the Honor to see you, and that was, by leaving off
Writing your self. For Vanity is a greater Incitement to Poets than Pensions,
and even Want depresses the Spirits less than the thought of being surpassed.
Therefore while Mr. Montague Sung, he Sung alone. We admired indeed our
Conquering Monarch, but we admired in silence. We revered the Greatness of your
Genius, and neglected our Talents. Indeed the strength and sweetness of your
Voice was fit to charm us alone, and we who followed, were only fit for the
Chorus. But you have left a Province, which you have made your own, to the
Adminstration of those who are under you, and are gone on in your victorious
Progress to the Acquisition of new Glory. From which I am sensible that I
detract by detaining you. For your Actions are your best Encomiums, and the
loud consent of the Nation your best Panegyric. It was a glorious one that was
spoken to you by the People of Westminster in the request that they made to you
to serve as their Member in the present Parliament; at a time when they were
Caballing all over the Kingdom, and Gentlemen were depriving Peasants of their
little Reason, in order to obtain their Voices, Mr. Montague's Merit, while he
was silent, solicited for him so importunately, that it prevailed upon a
number of considerable Inhabitants of the Politer parts of the Town, to come
and make it their humble Request to you, to Honor them by Representing them,
which puts me in mind of a Saying of De la Bruiere, That the People are then at
their height of Happiness, when their King makes Choice for his Con^idents, and
for his Ministers, of the very same Persons that the People would have chosen,
if the Choice had been in their power. This, at present, is our own Case; for
doubtless the same People, who, without any Brigue or the least Corruption,
came voluntarily to entreat you to suffer them to place you in the Great
Council of the Kingdom, would, if the Choice had been in their power, have
placed you in the Privy Council; and they who frankly offered to trust you with
the disposal of the Money which is in their Houses, would have trusted you, had
it been in their power, with the Intendency of that in the Treasury. So that
the Peoples proffer to Choose you, seems to me to be a loud Approbation of the
Choice, which the King had made before of you, and of your Ministration upon
that Choice. But I injure the Public while I detain you. Yet give me leave to
end with my Zealous Wishes for you, that the Happiness may be multiplied on
you, which you so nobly seek to communicate, that you may increase in Riches
and Honors faster than you advance in Years, till you arrive at that height of
Prosperity which may be answerable to your high Desert, and till Fortune may be
said to pour down her Gifts upon you, in Emulation of Art and Nature: Yet Envy
after all shall be forced to declare, that Mr. Montague sprung from an
Illustrious Stock, and loaded with Plenty and Honors, is yet nobler by Desert,
than he is by Descent, and greater by Virtue than he is by Fortune;

I am Sir, Your most Humble And most Obedient Servant, John Dennis.

To the READER.
I Once resolved to have a long Preface before this little Book; but the
Impression has been so long retarded by the Fault of those who had the care of
it, that I have now neither Time nor Humor to execute what I intended. I shall
therefore only give a Compendious Account of what I proposed to have treated of
more at large. I designed in the first place to have said something of the
Nature and of the end of a Letter, and thought to have proved that the
Invention of it was to supply Conversation, and not to imitate it, for that
nothing but the Dialogue was capable of doing that; from whence I had drawn
this Conclusion, that the Style of a Letter was neither to come quite up to
that of Conversation, nor yet to keep at too great a distance from it. After
that, I determined to show that all Conversation is not familiar; that it may
be Ceremonious, that it may be Grave, nay, that it may be Sublime, or that
Tragedy must be allowed to be out of Nature: That if the Sublime were easy and
unconstrained, it might be as consistent with the Epistolary Style, as it was
with the Didactique, that Voiture had admirably joined it with one of them, and
Longinus with both. After this, I resolved to have said something of th^se who
had most succeeded in Letters amongst the Ancients and Moderns, and to have
treated of their Excellencies and their Defects: To have spoken more
particularly of Cicero and Pliny amongst the Ancients, and amongst the Moderns
of Balzac and Voiture; to have sh^wn that Cicero is too simple, and too dry,
and that Pliny is too affected, and too refined, that one of them has too much
of Art in him, and that both of them have too little of Nature. That the
Elevation of Balzac was frequently forced and his Sublime affected; that his
Thoughts were often above his Subject, and his Expression almost always above
his Thoughts; and that whatsoever his Subjects were, his Style was seldom
altered; that Voiture was easiy and unconstrained, and natural when he was most
exalted, that he seldom endeavored to be witty at the expense of right Reason:
But that as his Thoughts were for the most part true and just, his Expression
was often defective, and that his Style was too little diversifyed. That for my
own part, as I came infinitely short of the extraordinary Qualities of these
great Men, I thought my self obliged to endeavor the rather to avoid their
Faults; and that consequently I had taken all the care that I could, not to
think out of Nature and good Sense, and neither to force nor neglect my
Expression; and that I had always taken care to suit my Style to my Subject,
whether it was Familiar or Sublime, or Di^ctique; and and that I had more or
less varied it in every Letter. All this and more I designed to have said at
large; which I have only hinted now in a hurry. I have nothing to add but to
desire the Reader to excuse my bad Performance, upon the account of my good
Endeavor, and for striving to do well in a manner of Writing, which is at all
times useful, and at this Time necessary; a manner in which the English would
surpass both the Ancients and Moderns, if they would but cultivate it, for the
very same Reasons that they have surpassed them in Comedy. But methinks, I have
a Title to the Readers Favor, for I have more than made amends for the defects
of my own Letters, by entertaining him with those of my Friends.

A COLLECTION OF LETTERS, Written by several Eminent Hands.
To Walter Moyle, Esquire;
Dear Sir,
YOU know that a Grave Fellow assures us, that upon the Cessation of Oracles,
Lamentable Cries were heard in the Air, proclaiming along the Coasts the Death
of the Great Pan: And have not you upon this dearth of good Sense, and this
Cessation of Wit? tell me truly; have not you heard These sounds upon the
Cornish Shore,
The Sage, Will E -- is no more.
^one is the Universal Lord of Wit! He to whom all the Wits paid Homage; For
whom his Subjects set a Tax upon Words, and laid exorbitant Customs on
Thoughts. He Is Dead, alas, He Is Dead!

Dead I mean, Sir, in a Legal Capacity, that is, Out-lawed and gone into the
Friars; to go into which is once more to Outlaw himself. He has done it Sir,
and and ill Fortune has brought him to be a Felo* de se that way. For since the
Law thought it but Just to put Will out of its Protection, Will thought it but
prudent to put himself out of its Power. And since the Law could use him with
so much C^ntempt, as to declare to all the World that it does not care for Will
E --, Will, who is extremely stout in Advers^ty, has declared by his Actions
that he does not care for the Law. Virgil tells us in his Sixth Book, that the
Souls in Hell were busied about the same things in which they were employed
upon Earth; Even so does Sage Will use the same Nutmeg-^rater, and the same
Tea-Pot in the Friars, that he handled before in Bowstreet. Thus has he left
the Wits, without any sorrow, tho he loves them, and without taking any leave
of them. For Will thinks they cannot be long from him, and he says, he expects
that in a very little time his Old Company should be constant at his New House.
And do not thou think that they too have reason to expect the very same
thing. For as the Death of any Man ought to put ^ll his Friends in mind, that
he went before but to lead them the way; so Will's departure from this
Miserable Life, this lewd Covent-Garden-Life, and his Ferrying from
Somerset-stai^s to the Infernal Shore of A^satia, should be a M^mento to the
rest of the Wits, that he is but gone whither they all must follow.

To leave off Poetical Similies, this Body-Politick is in a Cursed Condition;
and cannot keep long together without a Head. The Members are at present in a
Grave Debate how to get one. To morrow the Whole House will resolve it self
into a Grand Committee, to consult about Ways and Means of making Provision for
the Common Necessities. Some talk of an Excise upon May-D^w, and
Rasberry-Brandy: That there will be a Poll is strongly asserted, in which every
Man is to pay according to his respective condition. To morrow it will be known
to how much each Man's Quota amounts. As for Example; How much a Poet is to
Pay, how much a Wit, how much a Politician, and how much a Critic. A Critic
did I say? I beg your pardon. They have voted Nemine Contra^ dicente, that they
will cess no Critic till Mr. Moyle returns.

I have given them my Sentiments upon the forementioned Poll, which were, That
it was something hard to make a Man pay for being called, Wit, Poet, or
Critic; That they saw by Experience lately in the State, that Poor Dogs
grumbled to pay for their Titles. How then could they think that People would
be contented to be Taxed for their Nicknames? That in settling this Tax they
were to take a quite contrary Method, to that which was taken upon Settling a
Tax in the State. That in the State, sometimes a Man paid for what he really
had; As for Example, when a Country Squire paid for his Land or his Money; and
sometimes for what he really had not, as when a Cit that is twice dubbed, Knight
by the King, and Cuckold by his Wife, pays for his Honor, and for his
Children. The first of which is but as it were his, for it is really the Kings;
and the Second of which are but as it were his, for they are really the
Courtiers who helped him to his Title. In the State too a Man is made to pay
for something which he does, or for something which he does not. As a Iacobite
pays so much for Swearing when he is Drunk, and so much more for not Swearing
when he is Sober. But that in our case, if we would be exactly Just, we should
make People pay neither for what they have, nor for what they have not; nor for
what they do, nor for what they do not; But should oblige them to Pay only for
pretending to have what they really have not, or for offering to do, what they
are utterly incapable of doing. That thus the Tax would certainly fall upon the
most Solvent Part of the Body. For how ridiculous would it be to Tax a Man for
having Poetry and Wit, when they are almost always signs, that he has not a
Farthing to Pay? On the other side how absurd would it be to Tax him for a bare
want of those Qualities? since when a Man is Dull without pretending, it is ten
to one but he is Poor, for Riches make Men Vain, and Vanity makes them
Affected. But he who is not much at his Ease, is hardly at leisure for
Affectation, and I have often seen, that when Vanity has thrown a Fop out of
Nature, necessity has brought him back again: But a Rich Rogue will be sure to
be always pretending. Fortune takes pleasure in making those Vain, whom Nature
before made Impotent, and both of them often conspire to finish a Coxcomb. Thus
I would have none Pay, but they who put Gravity upon us for Wisdom, Visions for
Politics, and Q^ibbles for Wit; and I would have no Man at any Expense for
being called a Poet, a Wit, or a Critic, unless i^ be by himself. It would be
equally hard to lay a Tax upon any one, for his Ill Fortune, or for his Ill
Nature, since they are things of which no Man is Master. But what? A Sot cannot
help his Vanity. Agreed. But then it makes him so much happier than he deserves
to be, that he may well be contented to Pay for it.

From Wills that was* Nov. 5. 1695. I am Your most humble Servant, John Dennis.


To Mr. Wycherly at Cleve near Shrewsbury.
Sir,
WHile I venture to write these Lines to you, I take it to be my Interest not
to consider you, as I hitherto always have done* and as for the future I always
shall viz. as Mr. Wycherly, as the greatest Comic Wit that ever Engl^nd bred,
as a Man sent purposely into the World, to Charm the Ears of the Wittiest Men,
and to Ravish the Hearts of the most Beautiful Women: No, Sir, that in wri^ing
to you I may assume some Spirit, I shall at present only consider you as the
Humble Hermit at Cleve; Humble even in the full Possession of all those
extraordinary Qualities, the knowledge of which has made me Proud. I must
confess, that I have no great Opinion of that which Men generally call
Humility. Humility in most Men is want of Heat; it is Phlegm, it is Impotence,
it is a Wretched Necessity, of which, they who lie under it, vainly endeavor to
make a Virtue. But in a Man of Mr. Wycherly's make, it is Choice, it is Force of
Mind, it is a Good, it is a Generous Condescension. And what Force of Mind is
there not requisite to bend back a Soul by perpetual Reflection, which would be
always Rising, and eternally Aspiring by virtue of its in-born Fire? Yet yours,
notwithstanding all its Power, cannot wholly depress its self, nor descend in
every part of it. At the time that your Will vouchsafes to stoop, your
Understanding soars, your Writings are as bold as your Converastion is Modest,
(though those are bold, as this is Modest with Judgment) and he who would do
you Justice, must needs confess that you are a very Ambitious Writer, though a
very Humble Man. Yet your very Ambition has obliged Mankind: It has exalted
Humane Nature, in raising your own by its most noble Efforts; and that without
boasting Pre-eminence. And surely it must be for this very reason that we feel
a Secret Pride, when we but read the Discoveries which you have made. Thus I
cannot say that you are without Vanity, for never was Man exempt from it; but I
can say, that you have made use even of Vanity to humble you by way of
Re^lection, and that you have avoided that dangerous Effect of it, Vainglory,
the R^^k upon which seseveral great Wits before you have been seen to split.
For you have always wisely considered, that Vainglory in the Vulgar may be
Supportable, nay may be Diverting; but that in great Men it must be
Intolerable. That whereas in the First it is want of Discernment, it is Folly,
it is the Extravagant Blindness of Self-Love; in the Last, it is Crime, it is
Malice, it is a Secret and Proud Design to Mortify and Insult over the rest of
Men, over whom they have so much advantage; That it is for this very reason,
that we so deeply resent and so severely revenge the Mortal Affronts we receive
from it. Great Wits were by Heaven predestined to rule, to rule the Minds of
others, the Noblest Empire; but when they grow outwardly Vain they grow
Tyrants, and then their discontented Subjects rebel, and then they depose
those Kings as Usurpers, whom before they Obeyed as their Lawful Monarchs. But
a Moderate, a Good, and a Gracious Prince, like you, commands their Hearts as
well as their Understandings, and under one whom they love so well, they grow
as Proud, as they are pleased to Obey. Our violent Inclinations make us belong
to you, and therefore it is the Interest ^ven of our Pride, that you should long
continue in the place which your extraordinary desert has attained. Did we
nothing but esteem you as much as we do, we should certainly envy you; if we
did not hate you; for bare esteem is always forced upon us, whereas Inclination
is much* more Voluntary; Besides, as a Judicious Frenchman observes, Esteem is
Foreign, and comes from Abroad, and is therefore received with Grumbling; but
Inclination is our own and born in our Breasts, and is therefore Caressed and
Cherished. I might add, that upon this account, it is hard to wish well to
those whom we very much esteem, if they have not likewise the Skill to make
themselves be beloved; because barely to esteem depresses the Spirits, as much
as to love very much exalts them, it brings the Soul to a Languid Temper, and
gives it at once too horrid Views of another Excellencies, and of its own
Infirmities; but Affection gives it Agitation and Warmth; and in the View of a
Friend's d^sert, it takes too much pleasure, and too much pride to consider its
own Defects. It Is true, that you are esteemed at this high rate, you owe to
your Wit and your ^enetration; but that you are esteemed without Envy, that you
are with Joy and Gladness esteemed, you owe to this, that while the force of
your Fancy and Judgment makes all the World admire you, you remain your self
unmovd by it; that while your Excellence fills all mouths but yours, you alone
appear to be unacquainted with it. Thus while by the Merit of your
extraordinary Q^alities, you are known to surpass all others, it plainly
appears that you have beyond all this a Greatness of Soul, from whence you look
down on your own Merit. An infallible s^gn that the Talents which we admire in
you are no Illusions, but real things, things that were born with you, and have
been improved by you, and which you have not acquired: For Men are found to be
Vainer, upon the account of those Qualities which they fondly believe they
have, than of those which they really have; and Hereditary Greatness gives Men
leave to be humble, whereas Pre^erment occasions Pride. None but such real
Greatness as yours can Capacitate a Man to be truly humble; for the Soul which
by Nature is not seated High, can hardly be said to Descend. If I have insisted
too long on this shining Subject, a Subject which is so conspicuous in you; if
you look upon this tedious Letter, as one of those various Persecutions which
every eminent Virtue provokes; I desire you to consider, that I have so many
obligations to this very Humility, that I looked upon my self as obliged by
gratitude to say as much as I have done. For to that I owe the happiness which
I have frequently received in your Conversation; to that I owe the present
Satisfaction which your Permission to write to you gives me; and to that I am
indebted for the Hopes of your Answers; when I have received them I shall then
believe what you were pleased to tell me when I saw you last, that you are much
more Humble in the Clear Air on your Mountain at Cleve, than when you are in
Fog and Sulphurous Smoke in Bowstreet. But at the same time, the Satisfaction
of thinking that Distance does not make you forget me, will render him very
proud, who is at present,

London, Ian. 19. 1693/4. Sir, Your very Humble Servant. John Dennis.


Mr. Wycherly's Answer to Mr. Dennis.
Dear Sir,
YOU have found a way to make me satisfied with my absence from London, nay,
what is more, with the distance which is now betwixt you and me. That indeed
uses to lessen Friendship, but give^ me the greater Mark of yours by your kind
Letter, which I had missed if I had been nearer to you: So that I, who receive
no Rents here, yet must own if I did, I could not receive greater Satisfaction
than I had from yours, worth even a Letter of Exchange, or Letters Pattents;
For I value your Friendship more than Money, and am Prouder of your Approbation
than I should be of Titles; For the having the good opinion of one who knows
mankind so well, argues some merit in me, upon which every man ought to
consider himself more, than upon the goods of Fortune. I had rather be thought
your Friend in proof of my Judgment and good Sense, than a Friend to the Muses;
and ^ad rather have you than them thought mine. If I am as you say, at once
Proud and Humble, it is since I have known I have had the honor to please you;
tho your praise rather humbles than makes me (tho a damned P^et) more vain. For
it is so great, that it rather seems the Railery of a witty Man, than the
Sincerity of a Friend; and rather proves the Copiousness of your own Invention,
than justifies the Fertility of mine. But I fear I am forfeiting the Character
of the Plaindealer with you; and seem like vain Women or vainer Men, to refuse
praise, but to get more; and so by returning your Compliments, show my self
grateful out of Interest, as Knaves are pu^ctual in some payments, ^ut^ to
augment their Credit. And for your Praise of my Humility, (the only mark of my
Knowledge, since it is a mark of my knowing my self) you have praised that to
its Destruction, and have given me so much, you have left me none. ^ike those
Admirers who praise a young Maids Modesty till they deprive her of it. But let
me tell you, it is not to my humility that you owe my Friendship, bu^ to my
Ambition, since I can have no g^eater than to be esteemed by you, and the
World, your Friend, and to be known to all Mankind for,

Dear Sir, Your humble Servant, W. Wycherley.
Postscript.
My Dear Friend, I have no way to show my Love to you in my Ababsence, but by
my jealousy. I would not have my Rivals in your Friendship the C -- s, the D
-- s, the W -- s, and the rest of your Tavern Friends enjoy your conversation
while I cannot; Tho I confess, it is to their interest to make you dumb with
Wine, that they may be heard in your company; though it were more the
Demonstration of their wit to hear you, than to be heard by you. For my own
part, I am Ambitious of your Company alone in some Solitude, where you and I
might be all one.

For I am sure if I can pretend to any Sense, I can have no Instruction or
Satisfaction of Life, better than your example and your Society.

My Service pray, to all my Friends, that is, to all yours whom I know, and be
charitable (as often as you can) to the absent; which you good Wits seldom are;
I mean be charitable with your Letters to

Your humble Servants.


Postscript.
Pray let me have more of your Letters, tho they should rally me with
Compliments undeserved as your last has done; for like a Country Esquire I am
in love with a Town Wit's Conversation, tho it be but at a Distance that I am
forced to have it, and tho it abuses me while I enjoy it.

From Cleve near Srewsbu^y February the 4th 1693/4.



To Mr. Wycherly.
Dear Sir,
NOT long after I writ my last to you, I was hurried up to Town by a kind of a
Cholick, which has ended in a Defluction upon one of my Feet. You know Sir, a
Defluction is a general name which some pleasant Frenchmen have given an infant
Gout, too young to be yet Baptized. But tho the distemper rag^d in each hand, I
would in spite of it, answer your admirable Letter, a Letter which I had
certainly known to be yours, tho it had been sent me without a name, nay and
transcribed by a Chancery Cle^k in his own hideous manner of Copying. But I
must confess I was surpised to hear you say in it, that you took the sincerity
of a man who so much esteems you for Railery, yet tho you declare it, you can
never believe it. I am willing to beli^ve you exceeding humble; but you can
never be humble to that Degree, unless your Mind which resembles your Eye, in
its Clearness, its Liveliness, and in its piercing Views, should be also like
it in this, that plainly discerning all things else, it wants a sight of it
self; but in this it does not resemble it: For it beholds it self by
Reflections, and like a lovely Maid at her Glass, is Charmed with the sight of
its own Beauty. This is a sight in which you take Pride as well as Pleasure;
but yours I must confess is a guiltless Pride, it being nothing but first
motion, which it is impossible for Man to avoid. You have both the Force to
subdue it immediately, and the Art and Goodness to Conceal it from us. Thus it
plainly appears from what I have said, that you do not believe I had any design
to rally you. I am confident that through all my Letter there appears an Air of
Sincerity. But that is a Virtue which has been so long and so peculiarly yours,
that you may perhaps be jealous of it in your Friends, and disclaim some
Virtues which they commend in you only to Monopolise that. You had given me, at
least an occasion to think so, if the Railery in yours had not been so very
apparent, that even I had Eyes to discern that you have been to blame in it,
tho I am doubly blinded with Love of you and my self. Yet if you writ it with a
design to Mortify me, assure your self that I shall fortify my Vanity with
that very Artillery with which you have begun to attack it. If Mr. Wycherly
rallies, me it is certain that I have my defects; but it is full as certain,
that he would never condescend to abuse me at such a distance if he wholly
despised me. Thus, Sir, you see I am as reasonable with my Friend* as a Russian
spouse is with her Husband, and take his very Railery for a mark of Esteem, as
she does a Beating for a proof of Affection. The very worst of your Qualities
gain our Affections. Even your Jealousy is very obliging, which it could never
be unless it were very groundless. But since your very Suspicion is obliging,
what influence must your kindness have on our Souls? The wish that I were with
you in some Retirement, is engaging to that degree, that I almost repent that I
so eagerly desired your Conversation before. For if it were possible I would
augment that desire as a grateful return to yours. To be with you in Solitude
would make me perfectly happy. Tho it were in the Orcades, I would not wish my
self removed to any happier Climate; no, not even to that which contained my
absent Mistress; all that I could do for her on that occasion, would be to wish
her with me. In that Retiremen^* what should I not^ enjoy? Where I should be
admirably instructed without trouble, and infinitely delighted without Vice,
where I should be glorious at once with Envy and Quiet. For what could be more
glorious, than to be the Companion of your retreat; My very Ambition instructs
me to love such Solitude. Tho properly speaking, there can be no Solitude where
you reside. Immortal Company still attends you, and the Virtues, the Graces,
and the Charming Nine who love the Groves, and are fond of you, follow you to
remotest Retirements. The comic Muse is more particularly yours; and it is
your peculiar praise to allure the most ravishing of all the Sisters after you
into Retirement. To make that Goddess forsake the crowd with you, who loves it
most of the Nine. You have been constantly her Darling, her best beloved. Thus
in Retirement with her and you, I should have the Conversation of Mankind; I
should enjoy it with all its Advantages, without its least inconveniences. In
the Philosophy of your Actions and Words, I should see the Wise, the Good, and
the truly Great; in your observations, and in your rai^ery, the Men of Sense,
and the Men of Wit; and in your Satyr severely p^easant, the Fools and Rascals
exposed by it. In the Postscript to my last, I made an Apology for usurping a
Style so Foreign from this way of writing. I have once more run into the same
fault in this, but the very thought of Mr. Wycherly spreads a generous warmth
through me, and raises my Soul to rapture. And when a Man writes, his Soul and
his Style of necessity rise together. In my next I have something with which I
must trouble you, that will require another manner of writing.

I am etc.
London, Feb. 17.

To Mr. Wycherly.
Dear Sir,
I Have been very ill ever since I took my leave of you, so that I parted in
one Night from all that I value most, that is, from my Health and You. However,
Nature was kind in not failing to supply me with Vigor, till Fortune had
deprived me of your Conversation, and I was got amongst People with whom I have
small occasion for Vigor. Yet even here in spite of Sickness and Absence I
have made a shift to converse with you: ^or I thought that your Works were the
only things that could make me full amends for the loss of your Company. By
them you have been able to give me Joy even in the midst of my Pain. For, the
Country Wife, and the Plain Dealer are stores of Delight, which you have laid
up by a Noble Charity, to supply the Poor in Spirit through all Posterity. So that
I bel^eve that to be one of the Reasons of Fortune's Pique to you, that you
have put it out of her power for the time to come, to prosecute her Quarrel to
Men ^f Sense effectually. For by having recourse to you in your Works, they are
sure to become more happy than Fools, even at the time when they are less
successful. But I can hold up my Head no longer at present, as soon as I am
better you may expect a longer Letter from me.

I am Yours, etc.


To Mr. Dennis.
Dear Sir,
I Have received yours of the 20th of November, and am glad to find by it, that
however your Friends are losers by your Absence from the Town, you are a Gainer
by it; of your Health, which every one you have left behind you, (but Ch --)
may be thought a Friend to; and the more each Man is your Friend, the more he
is satisfied with your Absence, which tho it makes us Ill for want of you,
makes you well for want of us: your taking no leave of me (which you would
excuse) I take to be one of the greatest Kindnesses you ever showed me; for I
could no more see a Departing Friend from the Town, than a Departing Friend
from this Life; and sure it is as much kindness and good breeding to steal from
our Friend's Society unknown to 'em, (when we must leave 'em to their Trouble)
as it is to steal out of a Room, after a Ceremonious Visit, to prevent trouble
to him, whom we would Oblige and Respect; so that your last Fault (as you call
it) is like the rest of your Faults, rather an Obligation than an Offense, tho
the greatest Injury indeed you can do your Friends, is to leave 'em against
their Will, which you must needs do. You tell me you converse with me in my
Writings* I must confess then you suffer a great deal for me in my Absence,
which (tho I would have you love me) I would not have you do; but for your
truer Diversion, pray change my Country-Wife for a better of your own in the
Country, and exercise your own Plain-Dealing there, then you will make your
Country Squire better Company, and your Parson more sincere in in your Company
than his Pulpit, or in his Cups: But when you talk of Store of Delights you
find in my Plain-Dealer, you cease to be one; and when you commend my
Country-Wife, you never were more a Courtier; and I doubt not but you will like
your next Neighbor's Country Wife better than you do mine, that you may pass
your time, better than you can do with my Country-Wife; and like her Innocence
more than her Wit, since Innocence is the better Bawd to Love; but enjoy my
Wife and welcome in my Absence, I shall take it as civilly as a City Cuckold; I
was sorry to find by you that your head ak'd whilst you writ me your Letter.
Since I fear 'twas from reading my Works (as you call them) not from your own
Writing, which never gave you Pain, tho it would to others to imitate it, I Have
given your Service to your Friends at the Rose, who since your absence own they
ought not to go for the Witty Club, nor is Wills the Wits Coffee-House any
more, since you left it, whose Society for want of yours is grown as
Melancholy, that is as dull as when you left 'em a Nights, to their own
Mother-Wit, their Puns, Couplets, or Quibbles; therefore expect not a Witty
Letter from any of them, no more than from me, since they, nor I have conversed
with you these three Weeks. I have no News worth sending you, but my next shall
bring you what we have; in the mean time let me tell you (what I hope is no
News to you) that your Absence is more tedious to me, than a Quibbler's Company
to you; so that I being sick yesterday, as I thought without any cause,
reflected you were Forty or Fifty Miles off, and then found the reason of my
Indisposition, for I cannot be well so far from you, who am

My Dear Mr. Dennis Your obliged humble Servant, W. Wycherly.
London, Dec. 1. 94. Postscript.
Pray pardon me that I have not sooner answered your Letter, for I have been
very busy this last Week about Law Affairs, that is, very Dull and Idle, tho
very Active. Your Friends of the Coffee-House and the Rose, whether Drunk or
Sober, Good Fellows or Good Wits, show at least their Sense, by valuing you and
yours, and send you all their Service; and never are more Wits, and less Poets*
that is, less Liars, than when they profess themselves your Servants.

For News, W -- lives Soberly, Ch -- goes to bed Early; D'Vrfy sings now like a
Poet, that is, without being asked: And all the Poets or Wits-at-Wills, since
your departure, speak well of the Absent. Bal -- says his ill Looks proceed
rather for want of your Company, than for having had that of this Mistress;
even the Quibblers and Politicians, have no Double-meaning when they speak well
of you.




To Mr. Wycherly.
Dear Sir,
THE sight of your Letter revived me. It appeared like the Rays of the New Sun,
to one who has Wintered under the Pole, and brought with it Light, Warmth, and
Spirit. The Raillery in it was very obliging; for the Lust of Praise is as
Powerful with Men, as the Itch of Enjoyment is with Women; and it is as hard
for us to think that our Friends ridicule us when they commend our Wit, as it
is for them to believe that their Gallants abuse them when they extol their
Beauty. Yet generally in both cases, whatever is said, is said for the
satisfaction of him that speaks it. But then, as he delights in Deceiving, the
Person to whom he speaks is deceived with Pleasure, and both Parties are
satisfied. But Mr. Wycherly is to be excepted from this general Rule, who
commends his Friend for his Friend's sake. You never are Witty to please your
self, to whom Wit has so long been habitual, that you are often hardly moved
your self when you say those admirable things with which we are transported.
Not that I am so far betrayed by Vanity, as to take your Compliments at the
Foot of the Letter, or to suppose that you believed all that you said; but I am
willing for your sake to believe that you meant something of it, and that not
being without kindness for me, (which is only owing to the Sweetness of your
Nature, that is to your Merit, and not to mine;) your Reason, as the Duke De la
Rochefoucaut says, has been bubbled by your Affection. And here, Sir, I have
much the Advantage of you; for when I declare that I have the greatest Opinion
in the World of you, none will mistrust my Sincerity, and all will applaud my
Discernment; but you cannot express your Zeal at so high a Rate for any Friend,
but it must considerably lessen the World's Opinion of your Judgment. But it is
Mr. Wycherly's peculiar Praise, never to have shown want of Judgment in any
thing, unless in that only thing in which Error is Honorable. How few are they
who are capable of Erring at your Rate!

Vellem in amicitia sic erraremus, and isti
Errori virtus nomen posuisset honestum.
And how happy is the Man who has a Friend so accomplished, that Error in him
is Virtue. I am that Happy Man, and am so far exalted by my Happiness, that I
am never less humble, than when I Subscribe my self,

Dear Sir, You most Humble and Faithful Servant.


Mr. Wycherly's to Mr. --
Dear Sir,
I Have had yours of the 31st of March, to which I should sooner have returned
an Answer, had I not been forced to take a little turn out of Town; but your
Letter to me, brought me not more satisfaction than your last to Mr. Moyle gave
me disquiet for you. Since by that I find how uneasy you are. Yet know my
Friend from one sufficiently experienced in love disasters, that Love is often
a kind of losing Loadam, in which the loser is most often the gainer. If you
have been deprived of a Mistress, consider you have lost a Wife, and tho you
are disappointed of a short satisfaction, you have likewise escaped a tedious
vexation, which Matrimony infallibly comes to be, one way or another; so that
your Misfortune is an accident which your true Friends should rather Felicitate
than Commiserate. You told me in your last, that you were no more Master of
your self. Then how should I help rejoicing at the restoration of your Liberty?
A Man might as reasonably be sorry for his Friend's recovery from Madness, as
for his recovery from Love, (tho for the time a pleasant Frenzy;) so that, your
Mistress's Father, has rather been your Doctor than your Enemy. And you should
not be angry with him, if he cures you of your love distemper, the by a means a
little too violent, for next to his Daughters cure of love, his may prove the
best; well, pray be not angry, that I can be pleased with any thing that can so
much displease you. I own my Friendship for you has a little Selfishness in it,
for now you cannot be so happy as you would in the Country, I hope you will
make us as happy as we can be in Town, which we shall be as soon as we have
your company: For know, my Friend, change of Air after a love distemper, may be
as good as it is after a Fever; and therefore make have to Town, where a great
many Doctors have engaged to complete your Cure. Your Friends will do any thing
to root out the remains of your Passion. The witty Club will grow grave to
instruct you, and the grave Club will grow gay to delight you. Wh. will turn a
Philosopher, and I will grow a good fellow, and venture my own health, for the
recovery of your good Humor; for I had rather be sick in your Company, than
for want of it (who am,

Dear Sir, Your most unalterable Friend and humble Servant, W. Wycherly.
Postscript.
Pray pardon me for not writing to you before, or rather for writing to you so
dully now, which I hope will be my best excuse for my not writing sooner. All
your Friends of the Coffee-house are well, and what is no news to you, are in
spite of your Absence your constant humble Servants.

London, April 11. 1695.



To Mr. Wycherly.
I have a colorable excuse for my Silence, ^or when you went out of Town, you
gave me the hopes of receiving a Letter from you, as soon as you arrived at
Cleve. Besides, since that, I have been a month in Northamptonshire. But the
Inclination which I have to converse with Mr. Wycherly, is too violent to
receive any check from Punctillo's. But, alas, I was restrained by too just an
Impediment. For ever since I saw you, I have been so rackt by a cruel Passion,
that I have had no power to do any thing but to complain. And your portion of
Melancholy is not so small, that you have need to be troubled with another
Man's Spleen. I would be sure to communicate my happiness to my Friend, nay I
could be but half happy if I did not communicate it. As in love I never could
be pleased to a height with my own pleasure, if I did not find that it added to
that of my Mistress. But I should impart my ill humor to my Friend, if I found
that it were not in his power to ease me, and that it were much in his
inclination, with as much Regret, as I should acquaint him with his own ill
Fortune, if I were clearly convinced that it were not in my power to assist
him. You would not advise me to stifle this passion. You are too well
acquainted with Love and me to do that. You know that that would be to persuade
me to a thing which you are already sensible, that I am very willing and very
unable to do. I blush while I show this weakness, but sure there is some force
of Mind required to show some sorts of weakness. You remember the Maxim of the
wise Duke; La meme fermete qui sert a resister al'amour, Sertaussi queque fois
a le render violent et durable. If that be true, I beseech you to believe that
this obstinate Lover is a constant Friend too, and unalterably,

Dear Sir, Your most Humble Servant.


Mr. Wycherly's Letter.
Dear Sir,
I Lately received from you so kind, and so witty a Reproach for my not writing
to you, that I can hardly repent me of my fault, since it has been the occasion
of my receiving so much satisfaction: But you have had a reasonable excuse for
your silence, since you say I promised to write to you first, which is very
true; and I had kept my promise, but for my Conjecture that you could not stay
so long out of Northamptonshire; nor was I it seems, mistaken in that. But be
assured, Dear Sir, I think there can be no better End, or Design of my writing,
than in its procuring me the satisfaction of receiving something of yours;
especially, since I have no other way left me now of conversing with you. But
it seems, you forbear to relieve me out of Charity, since you say your trouble
was so great, that you were unwilling to communicate it to me to mine. I see
your Wit can do any thing, make an omission of a kindness a greater obligation,
and if you complain but to your Mistress, as wittily as you do to your Friend,
I wonder not at her Cruelty, nor that she should take pleasure to hear you
complain so long. But, my Friend have a care of complaining to her, with so
much true Sense, lest it should disparage your true Love; and indeed, that I
fear is the only cause you are suffered to complain so long, without the
success which is due to your Merit, Love, and Wit, from one who; you say has
her self so much, which with your Pardon, I shall hardly believe, tho you are
her Voucher, if she does not do what you would have her, that is, do you and
her self Reason as fast as she can; since she must need believe you a warm and
sincere Lover, as much as I believe you a Zealous and a true Friend. And I am
so well acquainted with Love and you, that I believe no body is able to alter
your Love, or advise your Reason; the one being as Unalterable as the other
infallible, and you (for ought I know) are the only Man, who at once can Love
and be Wise. And to the Wise, you know, a word is enough, especially since you
gave me a caution against opposing your passion; because it would be in vain.
If Love be in you as in other Men, a violent Passion, it is therefore a short
Frenzy, and should be cured like other Distempers of that kind, by your
Friend's humouring it, rather than opposing it. Yet pardon me, if I prescribe
the common remedy of curing one Love with another. But whether you will let me
be your Doctor or no, I must at least wish you well, who am,

(Dear Sir,) Your most Obliged Affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, W.
Wicherly.
Postscript.
Pray thank my Friend Mr. W -- for putting his Surtout of a Letter over yours of
a finer Stuff, as the lining of a Garment is often finer than the outside. Pray
give all the honest Gentlemen of the Coffee-house, of my acquaintance and
yours, my humble Service, whom with you, I hope to see again, within these
three weeks, at London.

Cleve near Shrewsbury, August the 31st 1695.



Mr. Dennis to Mr. Wycherly.
Dear Sir,
A Man who has the Vanity of pretending to write, must certainly love you
extremely well, if he does not hate you after he has received from you such a
Letter as yours: And he must undoubtedly show a great deal of Friendship, when
he assures you he does not envy you the very Lines by which you commend him. A
Man had need be very well acquainted with the goodness of your Nature, to be
satisfied that you do not praise with a Wicked Design to mortify. There are
few Writers so humble, whom Mr. Wycherly's Commendation would not render vain;
but then there are few Writers so Proud, whom the Wit that Mr. Wycherly shows
in commending them would not humble. So that a Man who did not know you, would
be apt to believe that whenever you write to Praise, you do but like a Wrestler
who lifts People up on purpose to throw them down, and the Higher he raises
them, makes their fall the Greater. Your Commendation is to a Modest Man, what
the Second Bottle is to a Sober Man; it raises his Vigor while he is
swallowing it; but the Wit is as sure to make the one Melancholy upon mature
Reflection, as the Wine is certain to leave the other Spiritless after the
third Concoction: But our Infirmity cannot be your fault; to whom we are
obliged for your generous Intentions, which give you such a peculiar
Distinction from ordinary Men of Wit. Indeed, by a Just, and a Noble
Confidence, which you may repose in your self, you may always very safely
commend; because you may be always sure to surpass. It Is Prudent and Noble at
once in a Conqueror to extol the Conquered. To praise the Excellence which he
o'ercomes, is but to commend himself. Besides, it wins the very Heart and Soul
of him that is overcome, if he has but Virtue enough to be so subdued; and
makes him willing to leave his last Retrenchment. It would long since have had
that Effect upon me, if the rest of your good Qualities had not prevented it;
which have so Closely and so Entirely tied me to you, that whenever I receive a
Letter from you, my Vanity is sure to gain on the one side, what it is certain
to lose on the other: For if I am mortified as to my own Wit, I do not fail to
value my self upon yours.

London, Sept. 10. 95. I am, etc.


To Mr. Wycherly.
Dear Sir,
THE last time I was at Wills, I had the Mortification to hear, that our Friend
Mr. -- had met with a Disappointment in --; at which, some who were present
were glad, affirming, that Success would have thrown him out of his Element;
For that a Man of Wit is not qualified for Business so well as a Block-head: I
have since had some Thoughts concerning that matter which I here send you, and
of which I desire your Opinion.

Upon Reflection I have found out the following Reasons, why Block-heads are
thought to be fittest for Business, and why they really succeed in it.

First, As their Brains are a great deal colder, than those are of Men of Wit,
they must have but very strait Imaginations, and very barren Inventions; from
whence it follows that they have but few thoughts, and that a few Objects fill
their Capacities.

Secondly, It is reasonable enough to believe, that since they are incapable of
many Thoughts, those few which they have, are determined by their Necessities,
their Appetites, and their Desires, to what they call their Fortunes and their
Establishments.

Thirdly, It is not very hard to conceive, that since a Block-head has but a
few Thoughts, and perhaps but one all his Lifetime, which is his Interest, he
should have it more perfect, and better digested, then Men of Wit have the same
thought, who perhaps have a thousand every hour.

Fourthly, It is easy to comprehend, that since such a one has but a few
thoughts, or perhaps but one, which by often revolving in his Mind, he has
digested, and brought to Perfection, he should readily pass from Thought to
Action. For he must grow weary of thinking so often of one and the same thing;
and since the Nature of the Soul requires Agitation, as soon as his little
Speculation ceases, he must of necessity act to divert himself.

Fifthly, It will be certainly found, that as a little Thought often makes a
Man active in Business, so a little Judgment often makes him Diligent; for he
may well be eager in the Pursui^ of those things, on which, seduced by Passion
and Vulgar Opinion, he sets an exorbitant Value; and concerning whose Natures
and Incertainty he is not very capable of making solid Reflections. For tho
Prudence may oblige a Man to secure a Competency, yet never was any one by
right Reason induced to seek Superfluities.

Sixthly, Penury of thought supposes Littleness of Soul, which is often
requisite for the Succeeding in Business: For a Block-head is Sordid enough to
descend to Trick and Artifice, which in Business are often necessary to procure
Success, unless they are more than supplied, by a Prudence derived from a
Consummate Experience, or from a great Capacity.

Thus have I endeavored to give the reason, why a Fool succeeds better in
Business than a Man of Wit, who has a Multitude of thoughts, and which fly at
the Noblest Objects; and who finds that there is something of pleasing, and so
noble, in thinking rightly, and more especially in the sublime Speculations of
exalted Reason, that he finds it intollerably irksome to descend to Action, and
abhors the very thought of being diligent in things, for which he has an
extreme Contempt.

Thus you see, that in some measure a Fool may be said to be better fitted out
for Business, than a Man of Wit. But it is high time to distinguish. For first,
when I say that a Block-head is fitted for Business, I mean only for little
Business: For to affirm, that he is qualified for Affairs that require Extent
of Capacity, would be a Contradiction in Terms. Secondly, when I affirm, that a
Man of Wit is less capacitated for Business, I mean that he is less so, as long
as he keeps in his Natural Temper, and remains in a State of Tranquillity. But
if once he comes to be thrown out of that by the Force of a Violent Passion,
and fired with Zeal for his Country's Service, or enflamed by Ambition, and
Business can be made subservient to the gratifying of those Passions, then I
dare boldly affirm, that one Man of Wit will go further than a Thousand of
those who want it. Of which it would be easy to give more than one Instance
amongst our present Ministers. But I will be contented with putting you in mind
that none of the Romans had more Wit than Caesar, and none of the French than
Richelieu.

Before I conclude, I must give you a Caution: Which is, that by the Word
Blockhead, I do not mean one that is stupid, but that I apply that word
according to the Language of you Men of Wit, to one who thinks but a little:
And that on the other side, by a Man of Wit, I do not mean every Coxcomb whose
Imagination has got the Ascendant of his little Reason; but a Man like you,
Sir, or our most Ingenious Friend, in whom Fancy and Judgment are like a
well-match'd Pair; the first like an extraordinary Wife, that appears always
Beautiful, and always Charming, yet is at all times Decent, and at all times
Chaste; the Second like a Prudent and wellbred Husband, whose very Sway shows
his Complaisance, and whose very Indulgence shows his Authority.

October. 30. I am, Dear Sir, Your most Humble Servant, John Dennis.


To Mr. Dryden.
Sir,
THo no Man writes to his Friends with greater Ease, or with more Cheerfulness,
than my self; and tho I have lately had the Presumption to place you at the
Head of that small Party, nevertheless I have experienced with Grief, that in
writing to you I have not found my old Facility.

Since I came to this place I have taken up my Pen several times in order to
write to you, but have constantly at the very Beginning found my self Damped
and Disabled; upon which I have been apt to believe that extraordinary Esteem
may sometimes make the Mind as Impotent as a Violent Love does the Body, and
that the vehement Desire we have to exert it, extremely decays our Ability. I
have heard of more than one lusty Gallant, who, tho he could at any time with
Readiness and Vigor* possess the Woman whom he loved but moderately, yet when
he has been about to give his darling Mistress, whom he has vehemently and long
desired, the first last Proof of his Passion, has found on a sudden that his
Body has Jaded and grown resty under his Soul, and gone backward the faster,
the more he has spurred it forward. Esteem has wrought a like effect upon my
Mind. My extraordinary inclination to show that I honor you at an
extraordinary rate, and to show it in words that might not be altogether
unworthy Mr. Dryden's Perusal, incapacitates me to perform the very action to
which it incites me, and Nature sinks in me under the fierce Effort: But I hope
you will have the Goodness to pardon a Weakness that proceds from a Cause like
this, and to consider that I had pleased you more if I had honored you less.
Who knows but that yet I may please you, if you encourage me to mend my Fault?
to which if you knew but the Place I am in, Charity would engage you, tho
Justice could not oblige you. For I am here in a Desert, deprived of Company,
and deprived of News; in a Place where I can hear nothing at all of the
Public, and what proves it ten times more a Desert, nothing at all of you: For
all who are at present concerned for their Countrey's Honor, hearken more
after your Preparatives, than those for the next Campaigne. These last may
possibly turn to our Confusion, so uncertain are the Events of War; but we know
that whatever you undertake must prove Glorious to England, and tho the French
may meet with Success in the Field, by you we are sure to Conquer them. In War
there are a thousand unlooked for accidents which happen every day, and Fortune
appears no where more like her self; but in a Combat of Wit, the more Humane
Contention, and the more Glorious Quarrel, Merit will be always sure to
prevail: And therefore, tho I can but hope that the Confederate Forces will
give chase to De Lorges and Luxemburgh, I am very confident that Boileau and
Racine will be forced to submit to you. Judge therefore if I, who very much
love my Country, and who so much esteem you, must not with a great deal of
Impatience expect to hear from you.

Bushy-Health, Ian. 1693/4. I am, Sir, Your most humble Servant.


To Mr. Dryden.
Dear Sir,
YOU may see already by this Presumptuous greeting, that Encouragement gives as
much Assurance to Friendship, as it imparts to Love. You may see too, that a
Friend may sometimes proceed to acknowledge Affection, by the very same Degrees
by which a Lover declares his Passion. This last-at first confesses Esteem, yet
owns no Passion but Admiration. But as soon as he is Animated by one kind
Expression, his Look, his Style, and his very Soul are altered, But as
Sovereign Beauties know very well, that he who confesses he Esteems and Admires
them, implies that he Loves them, or is inclined to Love them; a Person of Mr.
Dryden's Exalted Genius, can discern very well, that when we esteem him highly,
it is Respect restrains us if we say no more. For where great Esteem is without
Affection. it is often attended with Envy, if not with Hate; which Passions
Detract even when they Commend, and Silence is their hig^est Panegyric. It Is
indeed impossible, that I should refuse to Love a Man, who has so often gi^en
me all the pleasure that the most Insatiable Mind can desire; when at any time
I have been Dejected by Disapointments, or Tormented by cruel Passions, the
recourse to your Verses has Calmed my Soul, or raised it to Transports which
made it contemn Tranquillity. But tho you have so often given me all the
pleasure I was able to bear, I have reason to complain of you on this account,
that you have confined my Delight to a narrower compass. Suckling, Cowley and
Denham, who formerly Ravished me in every part of them, now appear tastless to
me in most, and Waller himself, with all his Gallantry, and all that Admirable
Art of his ^urns, appears three quarters Prose to me. Thus it is plain that your
Muse has done me an injury; but she has made me amends for it. For she is like
those Extraordinary Women, who, besides the Regularity of their Charming
Features, besides their engaging Wit, have Secret, Unaccountable, Enchanting
Graces, which tho they have been long and often Enjoyed, make them always new
and always desirable. I return you my hearty thanks for your most obliging
Letter. I had been very unreasonable if I had Repined that the Favor arrived
no sooner. It Is allowable to grumble at the delaying a payment, but to murmur
at the deferring a Benefit, is to be impudently ungrateful beforehand. The
Commendations which you give me, exceedingly sooth my Vanity. For you with a
breath can bestow or confirm Reputation; a whole Numberless People Proclaims
the praise which you give, and the Judgments of three mighty Kingdoms appear to
depend upon yours. The People gave me some little applause before, but to whom,
when they are in humor will they not give it, and to whom when they are
froward will they not refuse it? Reputation with them depends upon Chance,
unless they are guided by those above them. They are but the keepers as it were
of the Lottery which Fortune sets up for Renown; upon which Fame is bound to
attend with her Trumpet, and Sound when Men draw the Prizes. Thus I had rather
have your Approbation than the applause of Fame. Her commendation argues good
luck, but Mr. Dryden's implies desert. Whatever low opinion I have hitherto had
of my self, I have so great a value for your Judgment, that, for the sake of
that, I shall be willing hence-forward to believe that I am not wholly
desertless; but that you may find me still more Supportable, I shall endeavor
to compensate whatever I want in those glittering Qualities, by which the World
is dazzled, with Truth, with Faith, and with Zeal to serve you; qualities which
for their rarity, might be objects of wonder, but that Men dare not appear to
admire them, because their Admiration would manifestly declare their want of
them. Thus Sir, let me assure you, that tho you are acquainted with several
Gentlemen, whose Eloquence and Wit may capacitate them to offer their service
with more Address to you, yet no one can declare himself, with greater
Cheerfulness, or with greater* Fidelity, or with more profound Respect than my
self.

Sir, Your most, etc.
March 3. 1693.

Mr. Dryden to Mr. Dennis.
My Dear Mr. Dennis,
WHen I read a Letter so full of my Commendations as your last, I cannot but
consider you as the Master of a vast Treasure, who having more than enough for
your self, are forced to ebb out upon your Friends. You have indeed the best
right to give them, since you have them in Propriety; but they are no more mine
when I receive them, than the Light of the Moon can be allowed to be her own,
who shines but by the Reflection of her Brother. Your own Poetry is a more
Powerful Example, to prove that the Modern Writers may enter into comparison
with the Ancients, than any which Perrault could produce in France; yet neither
he, nor you who are a better Critic, can persuade me that there is any room
left for a Solid Commendation at this time of day, at least for me. If I
undertake the Translation of Virgil, the little which I can perform will show
at least, that no Man is fit to write after him, in a barbarous Modern Tongue.
Neither will his Machines be of any service to a Christian Poet. We see how
ineffectually they have been tried by Tasso, and by Ariosto. It Is using them
too dully if we only make Devils of his Gods: As if, for Example, I would raise
a Storm, and make use of Aeolus, with this only difference of calling him
Prince of the Air. What invention of mine would there be in this; or who would
not see Virgil thorough me; only the same trick played over again by a Bungling
Juggler? Boileau has well observed, that it is an easy matter in a Christian
Poem, for God to bring the Devil to reason. I think I have given a better hint
for New Machines in my Preface to Iuvenal; where I have particularly
recommended two Subjects, one of King Arthur's Conquest of the Saxons, and the
other of the Black Prince in his Conquest of Spain. But the Guardian Angels of
Monarchys and Kingdoms, are not to be touched by every hand. A Man must be
deeply conversant in the Platonic Philosophy to deal with them: And therefore
I may reasonably expect that no Poet of our Age will presume to handle those
Machines, for fear of discovering his own Ignorance; or if he should, he might
perhaps be Ungrateful enough not to own me for his Benefactour. After I have
confessed thus much of our Modern Heroic Poetry, I cannot but conclude with
Mr. Rym -- that our English Comedy is far beyond any thing of the Ancients. And
notwithstanding our irregularities, so is our Tragedy. Shakespeare had a Genius
for it; and we know, in spite of Mr. R -- that Genius alone is a greater Virtue
(if I may so call it) than all other Qualifications put together. You see what
success this Learned Critic has found in the World, after his Blaspheming
Shakespeare. Almost all the Faults which he has discovered are truly there; yet
who will read Mr. Rym -- or not read Shakespeare? For my own part I reverence
Mr. Rym -- s Learning, but I detest his Ill Nature and his Arrogance. I indeed,
and such as I, have reason to be afraid of him, but Shakespeare has not. There
(...) another part of Poetry in which the English stand almost upon an equal
foot with the Ancients; and it is that which we call Pindarique; introduced but
not perfected by our Famous Mr. Cowley: and of this, Sir, you are certainly one
of the greatest Masters. You have the Sublimity of Sense as well as Sound, and
know how far the Boldness of a Poet may lawfully extend. I could wish you would
cultivate this kind of O^e; and reduce it either to the same Measures which
Pinder used, or give new Measures of your own. For, as it is, it looks like a
vast Tract of Land newly discovered. The Soil is wonderfully Fruitful, but
Unma^ur'd, overstock'd with Inhabitants; but almost all Salvages, without Laws,
Arts, Arms, or Policy. I remember Poor Not. Lee, who was then upon the Verge of
Madness, yet made a Sober, and a Witty Answer to a B^d Poet, who told him, It
was an easy thing to write like a Madman: No, said he, it is a very difficult
to write like a Madman, but it is a very easy matter to write like a Fool.
Otway and He are safe by Death from all Attacks, but we poor Poets Militant (to
use Mr. Cowley's Expression) are at the Mercy of Wretched Scri^b^ers: And when
they cannot fasten upon our Verses, they fall upon our Morals, our Principles
of State and Religion. For my Principles of Religion, I will not justify them
to you. I know yours are far di^ferent. For the same Reason I shall say nothing
of my Principles of State. I believe you in yours follow the Dictates of your
Reason, as I in mine do those of my Conscience. If I thought my self in an
Error I would retract it; I am sure that I suffer for them; and Milton makes
even the Devil say, That no Creature is in love with Pain. For my Morals,
betwixt Man and Man, I am not to be my own Judge. I appeal to the World if I
have Deceived or Defrauded any Man: And for my private Conversation, they who
see me every day can be the best Witnesses, whether or no it be Blameless and
Inoffensive. Hitherto I have no reason to complain that Men of either Party
shun my Company. I have never been an Impudent Beggar at the Doors of Noblemen:
My Visits have indeed been too rare to be unacceptable; and but just enough to
testify my Gratitude for their Bounty, which I have frequently received, but
always unasked, as themselves will Witness. I have written more than I needed
to you on this Subject: for I dare say you justify me to your self. As for
that which I first intended for the Principal Subject of this Letter, which is
my Friend's Passion and his Design of Marriage, on better consideration I have
changed my Mind: For having had the Honor to see my Dear Friend Wycherly's
Letter to him on that occasion, I find nothing to be added or amended. But as
well as I love Mr. Wycherly, I confess I love my self so well, that I will not
show how much I am inferior to him in Wit and Judgment; by undertaking any
thing after him. There is Moses and the Prophets in his Counsel. Jupiter and
Juno, as the Poets tell us, made Tiresias their Umpire, in a certain Merry
Dispute, which fell out in Heaven betwixt them. Tiresias you know had been of
both Sexes, and therefore was a Proper Judge; our Friend Mr. Wycherly is full
as competent an Arbitrator. He has been a Bachelor, and Married Man, and is
now a Widower. Virgil says of Ceneus, Nunc Vir nunc Faemina Ceneus,
Rursus and in veterem fato revoluta figuram.


Yet I suppose he will not give any large commendations to his middle State:
Nor as the Sailer said, will be fond after a Shipwreck to put to Sea again. If
my Friend will Adventure after this, I can but wish him a good Wind, as being
his and

My Dear Mr. Dennis, Your most Affectionate and most Faithful Servant John
Dryden.


Written for My Lady C. to her Cousin R --. of the Temple. By Mr. Dennis.
After she had received from him a Copy of Verses on her Beauty.
Cousin,
I Received yours with the Verses enclosed, and here return you my hearty
thanks, for the Face, the Shape, the Mien, which you have so generously
bestowed upon me. From looking upon your Verses I went to my Glass. But, Jesu!
The difference! Tho I bought it to Flatter me, yet Compared to you, I found it
a Plain-Dealer. It showed me immediately that I have been a great deal more
beholding to you, than I have been to Nature. For she only formed me not
Frightful, but you have made me Divine. But as you have been a great dealkinder
than Nature has been to me, I think my self obliged in Requital, to be a good
deal more Liberal than Heaven has been to you, and to allow you as large a
Stock of Wit as you have given me of Beauty. Since so Honest a Gentleman as
your self, has Stretched his Conscience to commend my Person, I am bound in
Gratitude to do Violence to my Reason, to Extol your Verses. When I left the
Town, I desired you to furnish me with the News of the Place, and the first
thing I have received from you, is a Copy of Verses on my Beauty. By which you
Dext^rously infer, that the most extraordinary piece of News you can send me,
is to tell me that I am Hansome. By which ingenious Inference, you had
Infallibly brought the Scandal of a Wit upon you, if your Verses had not stood
up in your Justification. But tell me truly Cousin, could you think that I
should prove so easy a Creature as to believe all that you have said of me? How
could you find in your heart to make such a Fool of me, and such a Cheat of
your self? To Intoxicate me with Flattery, and draw me in to Truck my little
Stock of Wit and Judgment, for a mere Imagination of Beauty; when the Real
thing too, falls so infinitely short of what you would make me exchange for the
very Fancy of it. For, Cousin, there is this considerable Difference between
the Merit of Wit and Beauty; that Men are never Violently Influenced by Beauty,
unless it has weakened their Reason. And never feel half the force of Wit,
unless their Judgments are Sound. The principal time in which those of your Sex
admire Beauty in ours, is between Seventeen and Thirty, that is, after they are
past their Innocence, and before they are come to their Judgments. And now
Cousin, have not you been Commending a pretty Quality in me, to Admire which,
as I have just shown you, supposes not only a Corrupted Will, but a raw
Understanding. Besides, how Frail, how Transitory is it! Nature deprives us of
it at Thirty, if Diseases spare it till then. By which constant proceeding, she
seems to Imply, that she gives it us as a Gugaw to please us in the Childhood
of our Reasons; and takes it from us as a thing below us, when we come to years
of Discretion. Thus Cousin, have you been commending a Quality in me, which has
nothing of true Merit in it, and of which I have no greater a share, than to
keep me from being scandalous. So that all I could have got by your kindness,
if I had parted with my Judgment, in order to reap the benefit of it, had been
nothing but wretched Conceit, and ridiculous Affectation. If I thought you had
enough of the Gallant Man in you, to take what ^say in good part, I would
advise you to engage no further in Poetry. Be ruled by a Woman for once, and
mind your Cook upon Littleton. Rather Pettifog than Flatter. For if you are
resolved to be a Cheat, you will show at least some Conscience, in resolving
rather to chouse People of their Money, than to Bubbl^ them of their
Understandings. Besides, Cousin, you have not a Genius which will make a great
Poet, and be pleased to consider, that a small Poet is a scandalous Wight, that
indifferent Verses are very bad ones, and that an Insipid Panegyric upon
another is a severe Libel upon your self. Besides, there will start up a Satyr
one day, and then woe be to Cold Rimers. Old England is not yet so Barren, but
there will arise some generous Spirit, who, besides a Stock of Wit and good
Sense, which are no very common Qualities, will not only be furnished with a
sound Judgment, which is an Extraordinary Talent; but with a true taste for
Eloquence and Wit, which is scarce any where to be found, and which Comprehends
not only a just Discernment, but a fine Penetration, and a delicate Criticism.
Such a Satyrist as this, Cousin, must arise, and therefore you had best take
care, by a Judicious Silence, that whenever he appears, he may be sure to
divert you, and not afflict you.

I am etc.


To Mr -- at Will's Coffee-house in Covent Garden.
I Received your Panegyric upon Pun's* which I* so approve of, that I am
resolved to get it Printed, and bound up with Erasmus his praise of Folly. Yet
to confess a Truth, I was something dissatisfied to see Quibbling commended
with so much Wit. For nothing can be writ with more Wit, than your Letter to
the Reserve of the Quibbles; which I suppose you inserted amongst so many
things which are so finely said, lest these should have rendered you too Vain,
or too much have Mortified me^ But pray, after this Panegyric upon Quibbles,
give me leave to ask you the same Question that the Lacedaemonians asked the
Sophister, who harangu'd in the Praise of Hercules. By the way, did you ever
expect to hear a Quibble compared to Hercules? There Is a Simile for you. I
think, as Novel says, that is New. You, who are cried up for so great a Wit,
tell me, without Envy, could you ever have thought upon that? But to return to
my Question. Here you have spent a great deal of time in the Defense of
Quibbles. Who said a Word against them? The Devil a Syllable did I mention of
them in mine. It is true, I cited honest Mr. Sw -- but it is a hard Case, if
the Quoting an Author must be construed the Condemning his Works. I have a
great Respect and Kindness for Mr. Sw -- as I have for all who have any
Excellence. And truly, I think that for the Management of Quibbles and Dice,
there is no Man alive comes near him. And let me tell you, Sir, for all your
new Emulation, he is a better Quibbler than you. But it is high time to give
over Rai^lery: For if you were my Father a Thousand times, let me die if I
would not rigorously examine that part of your Letter which pretends to defend
Quibbling. You say that I am too Nice, and that my Aversion has something it
in, that is very like Affectation: But here you must give me leave to turn your
own Simile upon you. Can a Man be justly accused of Niceness or Affectation,
because he appears offended at a Stink? When I tell you that Quibbling is
extremely Foolish; You know it is Foolish enough, you reply; but it is a
Foolish thing that diverts. And do you think this knowledge of it will excuse
the Folly? Give me leave to resume the aforementioned Simile. Suppose a Fellow
who breaks Wind, should say to the Company, while they are cajoling their
offended Noses with Snuff, Look you Gentlemen, I know I am a Brutal Dog for
this, this is very Nasty, but Begad it is very Diverting* Would the Excuse
think you be currant^ A Quibble diverts: Right; and so does ^ Hobbyhorse,
which in my mind, for those who can be diverted without reason, is the better
Bawble of the two. A Quibble diverts! Jesu! That this should be spoken at
Will's? Can there be a more Damnabl^ Satyr upon Wit, than that so many
Gentlemen who have so very much of it, should be forced to play the Fool to
divert one another? But for God's sake, what do yo^ mean when you say a Quibble
diverts yo^^ It makes you Laugh, I warrant? Why (...) greatest Coxcomb about
the Town sha^^ outdo you in Laughing at any time. N^^ture who has dealt
Impartially with he^ Children, and who has given them (...) two distinctions
from Beasts, reason an^ Laughter, has, where she has bestowed the more of the
One, conferred the less of the Other: And therefore a Coxcomb will Laug^^ at
nothing. Ay, that indeed, say you, ^ a sign of a Fool. Well! My Dear Frien^ I
have so much kindness for thee, that (...) out of thy own Mouth, thou shall not
be Judged: For if a Quibble is not Wit, it is nothing. But it is at as great a
Distance from Wit, as an Idol is from the Deity; and I will no more believe
nauseous Equivocals to be Wit, because some Sots have admired them, than I will
believe Garlic to be God, because the Egyptians adored it. Nay, it is a more
Damnable sign of Stupidity in an Englishman, to make Wit of a Quibble, than it
was in the Egyptians, to make a God of their Garlic. But to return from
whence I digressed; I have never appeared so much a Stoic, but that I have
been as much for Diversion as any of you. But then am I for the Diversion of
Reasonable Men and of Gentlemen. If there be any Diversion in Quibbling, it is
a Diversion of which a Fool and a Porter is as capable as is the best of you.
And therefore Ben. Johnson, who writ every thing with Judgment, and who knew
the Scum of the People, whenever he brings in a Porter or Tankard-Bearer, is
sure to introduce him Quibbling. But if Punning be a Diversion, it is a very
strange one. There is as much difference between the silly Satisfaction which
we have from a Quibble, and the ravishing Pleasure which we receive from a
Beautiful Thought, as there is betwixt a Faint Salute and Fruition. But what
would you have us do, you cry. Men of the greatest Parts are no more to be
found with Wit always about them, than rich Rogues with always the Ready. Why,
look you, Sir, as the first Step to Wisdom is to be freed from Folly, so the
first Approach to Wit is a Contempt of Quibbling. If it happens at any time
that you have not your Wit about you, we will either have Patience such time as
you have, or take good sense in the lieu of it; If you are not in a Condition
to Delight us, we will be contented to be instructed; we will make your
Instruction nourish our Vanity, so turn even that to Delight. Nay there is
something Noble in right Reason, and consequently something Delightful. Truth
is so divinely Beautiful, that it must please Eternally; but falsehood is base,
and must shock all generous Minds, and every Equivocal is but ambiguous
Falsehood, that is the Pittiful'st, the Bafest of Falsehoods.


To Walter Moyle, Esquire
Dear Sir,
THo you are already indebted a Letter to me, yet I think fit to give you
credit for another; tho perhaps you may little desire to run into Debt this
way: But it is for two Reasons that I give you the trouble of this. For, in the
first place, I am taking a turn for a little time into the Country, and I
design that the Prevention of this should make some amends for the Delay of my
next. In the Second place, I have made some provision of Scandal, which I am
willing to make use of, before it grows stale upon my hands. Just after I writ
my last, I thre^ my self into a Detached Party, which marched from Wills to
Namur; with the same Design that the Volunteers went to Breast, to keep out of
the Fray, and be Spectators of the Action. However, before they were come to
Blows* I went amongst the Tents, and had some discourse with Major General R --
whom I found to be Father to Mr. Bays his Parthenope. For the Major General is
a very Honest Fellow, who sells Ale by the Town Wall: We had the Satisfaction
to see that the Town was taken, and the whole Siege was carried on as Sieges
generally are* with a great deal more Noise than Mischief. On Monday last which
was the Second of September, I traveled into the City, where I had the
Satisfaction to see two very ridiculous Sights. The First was a Bawd carted for
an action which had some relation to that memorable Day. For she was convicted
of being an Accomplice in setting Fire to an Ancient and Venerable Pile of the
City, that is, she was found Guilty of being instrumental in the Clapping an
Alderman. I stood in a Bookseller's Shop to see her pass, which Bookseller was
packing up some Scoundrel Authors to send them away to the Plantations. These
Authors are Criminals, which being se^enc'd to be burnt here, have at last
found Grace and got off with Transportation. You remember the terrible News
that we heard at P -- which, as it sprung from a ridiculous Occasion, that is,
my Lady Mayoresses Gossipping, has had a Comical Consequence. For the
Common Council have made an Order, by which my Lady Mayoress is dispensed
during the Wars, from seeing those Children born in the City, which are got in
the Suburbs; that is from being present at one of their Wive's Labors. But
it is time to return to the Fair. Last Night I took a turn in the Cloisters,
where I was entertained with a great many Dialogues between Vizour and Vallancy
Wig, upon which I leave you to be Judge, whether my Eyes or my Ears were the
better Entertained of the two. For I heard a great deal of Unintelligible
Language, addressed to a great many Invisible Faces. As if because the Women
had resolved not to be Seen, the Men had determined not to be Understood; and
had in revenge Eclipsed the Light of their Understanding by Fustian, as the
others had obscured the Luster of their Eyes by Velvet. Formerly the Ladies
made use of White and Red to atract, but within these Thirty Years black has
succeeded, and the Devil is found more tempting in his proper Color. I have
neither time nor place for any more. You shall have the rest by the first
Opportunity.

Yours, etc.


To Mr. Congreve.
Dear Sir,
I Have now read over the Fox, in which tho I admire the strength of Ben.
Iohnson's Judgment, yet I did not find it so accurate as I expected. For first
the very thing upon which the whole Plot turns, and that is the Discovery which
Mosca makes to Bonario; seems to me, to be very unreasonable. For I can see no
Reason, why he should make that Discovery which introduces Bonorio into his
Masters House. For the Reason which the Poet makes Mosca give in the Ninth
Scene of the third Act, appears to be a very Absurd one. Secondly, Corbaccio
the Father of Bonario is exposed for his Deafness, a Personal defect; which is
contrary to the end of Comedy Instruction. For Personal Defects cannot be
amended; and the exposing such, can never Divert any but half-witted Men. It
cannot fail to bring a thinking Man to reflect upon the Misery of Human Nature;
and into what he may fall himself without any fault of his own. Thirdly, the
play has two Characters, which have nothing to do with the design of it, which
are to be looked upon as Excrescencies. Lastly, the Character of Volpone is
Inconsistent with it self. Volpone is like Catiline, alieni appetens, sui
profusus; but that is only a double in his Nature, and not an Inconsistence.
The Inconsistence of the Character appears in this, that Volpone in the fifth
Act behaves himself like a Giddy Coxcombe, in the Conduct of that very Affair
which he managed so Craftily in the first four. In which the Poet offends first
against that Famed rule which Horace gives for the Characters.

Servetur ad imum,
Qualis ab incepto processerit, et sibi constet.
And Secondly, against Nature, upon which, all the rules are grounded. For so
strange an Alteration, in so little a time, is not in Nature, unless it happens
by the Accident of some violent passion; which is not the case here. Volpone on
the sudden behaves himself without common Discretion, in the Conduct of that
very Affair which he had managed with so much Dexterity, for the space of three
Years together. For why does he disguise himself? or why does he repose the
last Confidence in Mosca? Why does he cause it to be given out that he is Dead?
Why, only to Plague his Bubbles. To Plague them, for what? Why only for having
been his Bubbles. So that here is the greatest alteration in the World, in the
space of twenty-four hours, without any apparent cause. The design of Volpone
is to Cheat, he has carried on a Cheat for three years together, with Cunning
and with Success. And yet he on a sudden in cold blood does a thing, which he
cannot but know must Endanger the ruining all.

I am, Dear Sir, Your most Humble Servant.


To Mr. Congreve.
Dear Sir,
I will not augment the Trouble which I give you by making an Apology for not
giving it you sooner. Tho I am heartily sorry that I kept such a trifle as the
enclosed, and a trifle writ Extempore, long enough to make you expect a
labored Letter. But because in the Enclosed, I have spoken particularly of
Ben. Iohnson's Fox, I desire to say three or four words of some of his Plays
more generally. The Plots of the Fox, the silent Woman, the Alchimist, are all
of them very Artful. But the Intrigues of the Fox, and the Alchimist, seem to
me to be more dexterously perplexed, than to be happily disentangled. But the
Gordian knot in the Silent Woman is untyed with so much Felicity, that that
alone, may Suffice to show Ben Johnson no ordinary Hero. But, then perhaps,
the Silent Woman may want the very Foundation of a good Comedy, which the other
two cannot be said to want. For it seems to me, to be without a Moral. Upon
which Absurdity, Ben Johnson was driven by the Singularity of Moroses
Character, which is too extravagant for Instruction, and fit, in my opinion,
only for Farce. For this seems to me, to Constitute the most Essential
Difference, betwixt Farce and Comedy, that the Follies which are exposed in
Farce are Singular; and those are particular, which are exposed in Comedy.
These last are those, with which some part of an Audience may be supposed
Infected, and to which all may be supposed Obnoxious. But the first are so very
odd, that by Reason of their Monstrous Extravagance, they cannot be thought to
concern an Audience; and cannot be supposed to instruct them. For the rest of
the Characters in these Plays, they are for the most part true, and Most of the
Humorous Characters Masterpieces. For Ben Iohnson's Fools, seem to show his
Wit a great deal more then his Men of Sense. I Admire his Fops, and but barely
Esteem his Gentlemen. Ben seems to draw Deformity more to the Life than Beauty.
He is often so eager to pursue Folly, that he forgets to take Wit along with
him. For the Dialogue, it seems to want very often that Spirit, that Grace, and
that Noble Railery, which are to be found in more Modern Plays, and which are
Virtues that ought to be Inseparable from a finished Comedy. But there seems to
be one thing more wanting than all the rest, and that is Passion, I mean that
fine and that delicate Passion, by which the Soul shows its Politeness, even in
the midst of its trouble. Now to touch a Passion is the surest way to Delight.
For nothing agitates like it. Agitation is the Health and Joy of the Soul, of
which it is so entirely fond, that even then, when we imagine we seek Repose,
we only seek Agitation. You know what a Famous Modern Critic has said of
Comedy.

It faut que ses acteurs badinent noblement,
Que son Noeud bien form se denoue aisement;
Que l'action Merchant ou la raison la guide,
Ne se perd^ Iamma dans une Scens vuide,
Que son Style humble et doux se releue a propos,
Q^e ses discourse par tout fertiles en bons mots,
Soient pleins de passions finement maniees,
Et les Scenes toujours l'une al'autre liees,
I leave you to make the Aplication to Johnson -- Whatever I have said my self
of his Comedies, I submit to your better Judgment. ^ For you who, after Mr.
Wicherly, are incomparably the best Writer of it living; ought to be allowed to
be the best Judge, too,

I am, Yours, etc.


Mr. Congreve, to Mr. Dennis.
Concerning Humor in Comedy.
Dear Sir,
YOU write to me, that you have Entertained your self two or three days, with
reading several Comedies, of several Authors; and your Observation is, that
there is more of Humor in our English Writers, than in any of the other Comic
Poets, Ancient or Modern. You desire to know my Opinion, and at the same time
my Thought; of that which is generally called Humor in Comedy.

I agree with you, in an Impartial Preference of our English Writers, in that
Particular. But if I tell you my Thoughts of Humor, I must at the same time
confess, that what I take for true Humor, has not been so often written even
by them, as is generally believed: And some who have valued themselves, and
have been esteemed by others, for that kind of Writing, have seldom touched
upon it. To make this appear to the World, would require a long and labored
Discourse, and such as I neither am able nor willing to undertake. But such
little Remarks, as may be continued within the Compass of a Letter, and such
unpremediated Thoughts, as may be Communicated between Friend and Friend,
without incurring the Censure of the World, or setting up for a Dictator, you
shall have from me, since you have enjoined it.

To Define Humor, perhaps, were as difficult, as to Define Wit; for like that,
it is of infinite variety. To Enumerate the several Humors of Men, were a Work
as endless, as to sum up their several Opinions. And in my mind the Quot
homines tot Sententiae, might have been more properly interpreted of Humor;
since there are many Men, of the same Opinion in many things, who are yet quite
different in Humors. But tho we cannot certainly tell what Wit is, or, what
Humor, is yet we may go near to show something, which is not Wit or not
Humor; and yet often mistaken for both. And since I have mentioned Wit and
Humor together, let me make the first Distinction between them, and observe to
you that Wit (...) often mistaken for Humor.

I have observed, that when a few things have been Wittily and Pleasantly
spoken by any Character in a Comedy; it has been very usual for those, who make
their Remarks on a Play, while it is acting, to say, Such a thing is very
Humorously spoken: There is a great Deal of Humor in that Part. Thus the
Character of the Person speaking, may be, Surprizingly and Pleasantly, is
mistaken for a Character of Humor; which indeed is a Character of Wit. But
there is a great Difference between a Comedy, wherein there are many things
Humorously, as they call it, which is Pleasantly spoken; and one, where there
are several Characters of Humor, distinguished by the Particular and Different
Humors, appropriated to the several Persons represented, and which naturally
arise, from the different Constitutions, Complexions, and Dispositions of Men.
The saying of Humorous Things, does not distinguish Characters; For every
Person in a Comedy may be allowed to speak them. From a Witty Man they are
expected; and even a Fool may be permitted to stumble on 'em by chance. Tho I
make a Difference betwixt Wit and Humor; yet I do not think that Humorous
Characters exclude Wit: No, but the Manner of Wit should be adapted to the
Humor. As for Instance, a Character of a Splenetick and Peevish Humor, should
have a Satirical Wit. A Jolly and Sanguine Humor, should have a Facetious Wit.
The Former should speak Positively; the Latter, Carelessly: For the former
Observes, and shows things as they are; the latter, rather overlooks Nature,
and speaks things as he would have them; and his Wit and Humor have both of
them a less Alloy of Judgment than the others.

As Wit, so, its opposite, Folly, is sometimes mistaken for Humor.

When a Poet brings a Character on the Stage, committing a thousand
Absurdities, and talking Impertinencies, roaring Aloud, and Laughing
immoderately, on every, or rather upon no occasion; this is a Character of
Humor.

Is any thing more common, than to have a pretended Comedy, stuffed with such
Grotesques, Figures, and Farce ^ools? Things, that either are not in Nature, or
if they are, are Monsters, and Births of Mischance; and consequently as such,
should be stifled, and huddled out of the way, like Sooterkins; that Mankind
may not be shocked wi^h an appearing Possibility of the Degeneration of a
God-like Species* For my part, I am as willing to Laugh* as any body, and as
easily diverted with an Object truly ridiculous: but at the same time, I can
never care for seeing things, that force me to entertain low thoughts of my
Nature. I don't know how it is with others, but I confess freely to you, I could
never look long upon a Monkey, without very Mortifying Reflections; tho I never
heard any thing to the Contrary, why that Creature is not Originally of a
Distinct Species. As I don't think Humor exclusive of Wit, neither do I think
it inconsistent with Folly; but I think the Follies should be only such, as
Men's Humors may incline 'em to; and not Follies entirely abstracted from both
Humor and Nature.

Sometimes, Personal Defects are misrepresented for Humors.

I mean, sometimes Characters are barbarously exposed on the Stage, ridiculing
Natural Deformities, Casual Defects in the Senses, and Infirmities of Age. Sure
the Poet must both be very Ill-natured himself, and think his Audience so, when
he proposes by showing a Man Deformed, or Deaf, or Blind, to give them an
agreeable Entertainment; and hopes to raise their Mirth, by what is truly an
object of Compassion. But much need not be said upon this Head to any body,
especially to you, who in one of your Letters to me concerning Mr. Iohnson's
Fox, have justly excepted against this Immoral part of Ridicule in Corbaccio's
Character; and there I must agree with you to blame him, whom otherwise I
cannot enough admire, for his great Mastery of true Humor in Comedy.

External Habit of Body is often mistaken for Humor.

By External Habit, I do not mean the Ridiculous Dress or Clothing of a
Character, tho that goes a good way in some received Characters. (But
undoubtedly a Man's Humor may incline him to dress differently from other
People) But I mean a Singularity of Manners, Speech, and Behavior, peculiar to
all, or most of the same Country, Trade, Profession, or Education. I cannot
think, that a Humor, which is only a Habit, or Disposition contracted by Use
or Custom; for by a Disuse, or Compliance with other Customs, it may be worn
off, or diversified.

Affectation is generally mistaken for Humor.

These are indeed so much alike, that at a Distance, they may be mistaken one
for the other. For what is Humou^ in one, may be Affectation in another; and
nothing is more common, than for some to affect particular ways of saying, and
doing things, peculiar to others, whom they admire and would imitate. Humor is
the Life, Affectation the Picture. He that draws a Character of Affectation,
shows Humor at the Second Hand; he at best but publishes a Translation, and
his Pictures are but Copies.

But as these two last distinctions are the Nicest, so it may be most proper to
Explain them* by Particular Instances from some Author of Reputation. Humor I
take, either to be born with us, and so of a Natural Growth; or else to be
grafted into us, by some accidental change in the Constitution. or revolution
of the Internal Habit of Body; by which it becomes, if I may so call it,
Naturalized.

Humor is from Nature, Habit from Custom; and Affectation from Industry.

Humor, shows us as we are.

Habit, shows us, as we appear, under a forcible Impr^ssion.

Affectation, shows what we would be, under a Voluntary Disguise.

Tho here I would observe by the way, that a continued Affectation, may in time
become a Habit.

The Character of Moro^e in the Silent Woman, I take to be a Character of
Humor. And I choose to Instance this Character to you, from many others of the
same Author, because I know it has been Condemned by many as Unnatural and
Farce: And you have your self hinted some dislike of it, for the same Reason,
in a Letter to me, concerning some of Iohnson's Plays.

Let us suppose Morose to be a Man Naturally Splenetick and Melancholy; is
there any thing more offensive to one of such a Disposition, than Noise and
Clamor? Let any Man that has the Spleen (and there are enough in England) be
Judge. We see common Examples of this Humor in little every day. It Is ten to
one, but three parts in four of the Company that you dine with, are Discomposed
and Startled at the Cutting of a Cork, or Scratching a Plate with a Knife: It
is a Proportion of the same Humor, that makes such or any other Noise
offensive to the Person that hears it; for there are others who will not be
disturbed at all by it. Well; But Morose you will say, is so Extravagant, he
cannot bear any Discourse or Conversation, above a Whisper. Why, It is his
excess of this Humor, that makes him become Ridiculous, and qualifies his
Character for Comedy. If the Poet had given him, but a Moderate proportion of
that Humor, it is odds but half the Audience, would have sided with the
Character, and have Condemned the Author, for Exposing a Humor which was
neither Remarkable nor Ridiculous. Besides, the distance of the Stage requires
the Figure represented, to be something larger than the Life; and sure a
Picture may have Features larger in Proportion, and yet be very like the
Original. If this Exactness of Quantity, were to be observed in Wit, as some
would have it in Humor; what would become of those Characters that are
designed for Men of Wit? I believe if a Poet should steal a D^alogue of any
length, from the Extempo^e Discourse of the two Wittiest Men upon Earth, he
would find the Scene but coldly received by the Town. But to the purpose.

The Character of Sir John Daw in the same Play, is a Character of Affectation.
He every where discovers an Affectation of Learning; when he is not only
Conscious to himself, but the Audience also plainly perceives that he is
Ignorant. Of this kind are the Characters of Thraso in the Eunuch of Terence,
and Py^gopolinices in the Miles Gloriosus of Pla^tus. They affect to be thought
Valiant, when both themselves and the Audience know they are not. Now such a
boasting of Valor in Men who were really Valiant, would undoubtedly be a
Humor; for a Fiery Disposition might naturally throw a Man into the same
Extravagance, which is only affected in the Characters I have mentioned.

The Character of Cob in Every Man in his Humor, and most of the under
Characters in Bartholomew-Fair, discover only a Singularity of Manners,
appropriated to the several Educations and Professions of the Persons
represented. They are not Humors but Habits contracted by Custom. Under this
Head may be ranged all Country-Clowns, Sailers, Tradesmen, Jockeys, Gamesters
and such like, who make use of Cants or peculiar Dialects in their several Arts
and Vocations. One may almost give a Receipt for the Composition of such a
Character: For the Poet has nothing to do, but to collect a few proper Phrases
and terms of Art, and to make the Person apply them by ridiculous Metaphors in
his Conversation, with Characters of different Natures. Some late Characters of
this kind have been very successful; but in my mind they may be Painted without
much Art or Labor; since they require little more, than a good Memory and
Superficial Observation. But true Humor cannot be shown, without a Dissection
of Nature, and a Narrow Search, to discover the first Seeds, from whenc^ it has
its Root and growth.

If I were to write to the World, I should be obliged to dwell longer, upon
each of these Distinctions and Examples; for I know that they would not be
plain enough to all Readers. But a bare hint is sufficient to inform you of the
Notions which I have on this Subject: And I hope by this time you are of my
Opinion, that Humor is neither Wit, nor Folly, nor Personal defect; nor
Affectation, nor Habit; and yet, that each, and all of these, have been both
writ and received for Humor.

I should be unwilling to venture even on a bare Description of Humor, much
more, to make a Definition of it, but now my hand is in, I Will tell you what
serves me instead of either. I take it to be, A singular and unavoidable manner
of doing, or saying any thing, Peculiar and Natural to one Man only; by which
his Speech and Actions are distinguished from those of other Men.

Our Humor has relation to us, and to what proceeds from us, as the Accidents
have to a Substance; it is a Color, Taste, and Smell, Diffused through all;
tho our Actions are never so many, and different in Form, they are all
Splinters of the same Wood, and have Naturally one Complexion; which tho it may
be disguised by Art, yet cannot be wholly changed: We may Paint it with other
Colors, but we cannot change the Grain. So the Natural sound of an Instrument
will be distinguished, tho the Notes expressed by it, are never so various, and
the Divisions never so many. Dissimulation, may by Degrees, become more easy to
our practice; but it can never absolutely Transubstantiate us into what we
would seem: It will always be in some proportion a Violence upon Nature.

A Man may change his Opinion, but I believe he will find it a Difficulty, to
part with his Humor, and there is nothing more provoking, than the being made
sensible of that difficulty. Sometimes, one shall meet with those, who perhaps,
Innocently enough, but at the same time impertinently, will ask the Question;
Why are you not Merry? Why are you not Gay, Pleasant, and Cheerful? then
instead of answering, could I ask such one; Why are you not handsome? Why have
you not Black Eyes, and a better Complexion? Nature abhors to be forced.

The two Famous Philosophers of Ephesus and Abdera, have their different Sects
at this day. Some Weep, and others Laugh at one and the same thing.

I don't doubt, but you have observed several Men Laugh when they are Angry*
others who are Silent; some that are Loud* Yet I cannot suppose that it is the
passion of Anger which is in it self different, (...) more or less in one than
the other; but tha^ it is the Humor of the Man that is Predominant, and urges
him to express it in that manner. Demonstrations of pleasure are as Various;
one Man has a Humor of retiring from all Company, when any thing has happened
to please him beyond expectation; he hugs himself alone, and think^ it an
Addition to the pleasure to keep it Se^cret. Another is upon Thorns till he has
made Proclamation of it; and must make other people sensible of his happiness,
before he can be so himself. So it is in Grief* and other Passions.
Demonstrations of Lov^ and the Effects of that Passion upon several Humors,
are infinitely different; but here the Ladies who abound in Servants are the
best Judges. Talking of the Ladies, methinks something should be observed of
the Humor of the Fair Sex; since they are sometimes so kind as to furnish out
a Character for Comedy. But I must confess I have never made any observation of
what I Apprehend to be true Humor in Women. Perhaps Passions are too powerful
in that Sex, to let Humor have its Course; or may be by Reason of their
Natural Coldness, Humor cannot Exert it self to that extravagant Degree, which
it often does in the Male Sex. For if ever any thing does appear Comical or
Ridiculous in a Woman, I think it is little more than an acquired Folly, or an
Affectation. We may call them the weaker Sex, but I think the true Reason is,
because our Follies are Sronger, and our Faults are more prevailing.

One might think that the Diversity of Humor, which must be allowed to be
diffused throughout Mankind, might afford endless matter, for the support of
Comedies. But when we come closely to consider that point, and nicely to
distinguish the Difference of Humors, I believe we shall find the contrary.
For tho we allow every Man something of his own, and a peculiar Humor; yet
every Man has it not in quantity, to become Remarkable by it: Or, if many do
become Remarkable by their Humors; yet all those Humors may not be Diverting.
Nor is it only requisite to distinguish what Humor will be diverting, but also
how much of it, what part of it to show in Light, and what to cast in Shades;
how to set it off by preparatory Scenes, and by opposing other humors to it in
the same Scene. Through a wrong Judgmen, sometimes, Men's Humors may be opposed
when there is really no specific Difference between them; only a greater
proportion of the same, in one than the other; occasioned by his having more
Phlegm, or Choler, or whatever the Constitution is, from, whence their Humors
derive their Source.

There is infinitely more to be said on this Subject; tho perhaps I have
already said to much; but I have said it to a Friend, who I am sure will not
expose it, if he does not approve of it. I believe the Subject is entirely new,
and was never touched upon before; and if I would have any one to see this
private Essay, it should be some one, who might be provoked by my Errors in it,
to Publish a more Judicious Treatise on the Subject. Indeed I wish it were
done, that the World being a little acquainted with the scarcity of true
Humor, and the difficulty of finding and showing it, might look a little more
favorably on the Labors of them, who endeavor to search into Nature for it,
and lay it open to the Public View.

I don't say but that very entertaining and useful Characters, and proper for
Comedy, may be drawn from Affectations, and those other Qualities, which I have
endeavored to distinguish from Humor: but I would not have such imposed on
the World, for Humor, nor esteemed of Equal value with it. It were perhaps,
the Work of a long Life to make one Comedy true in all its Parts, and to give
every Character in it a True and Distinct Humor. Therefore, every Poet must be
beholding to other helps, to make out his Number of ridiculous Characters. But
I think such a One deserves to be broke, who makes all false Musters; who does
not show one true Humor in a Comedy, but entertains his Audience to the end of
the Play with every thing out of Nature.

I will make but one Observation to you more, and have done; and that is
grounded upon an Observation of your own, and which I mentioned at the
beginning of my Letter, viz, That there is more of Humor in our English Comic
Writers than in any others. I do not at all wonder at it, for I look upon
Humor to be almost of English Growth; at least, it does not seem to have found
such Increase on any other Soil. And what appears to me to be the reason of it,
is the great Freedom, Privilege, and Liberty which the Common People of England
enjoy. Any Man that has a Humor, is under no restraint, or fear of giving it
Vent; they have a Proverb among them, which, may be, will show the Bent and
Genius of the People, as well as a longer Discourse: He that will have a
May Pole, shall have a May Pole. This is a Maxim with them, and their Practice
is agreeable to it. I believe something Considerable too may be ascribed to
their feeding so much on Flesh, and the Grossness of their Diet in general. But
I have done, let the Physicians agree that. Thus you have my Thoughts of
Humor, to my Power of Expressing them in so little Time and Compass. You will
be kind to show me wherein I have Erred; and as you are very Capable of giving
me Instruction, so, I think I have a very Just title to demand it from you;
being without Reserve,

July 10. 1695. Your real Friend, and humble Servant, W. Congreve.


To Mr. Congreve, at TUNBRIDGE.
Dear Sir,
MR. Moyle and I have impatiently expected to hear from you. But if the Well
which you Drink of had sprung up from Lethe, you could not have been more
forgetful of us. Indeed, as the Tunbridge-Water is good for the Spleen, it may
be said in some manner to cause Oblivion. But I will yet a while hope that Mr.
Moyle and I are not of the Number of things that plague you. However I am so
sensible of your being mindful of me in Town, that I should be Ungrateful, if I
should complain that you do not remember me where you you are. Mr. Moyle tells
me that you have made a Favorable mention of me, to a certain Lady of your
Acquaintance, whom he calls -- But then to mortify the Old Man in me, or
indeed rather the Young, he assured me, that you had given a much better
Character of him. However, for that which you gave of me I cannot but own my
self obliged to you, and I look upon your Kindness as so much the greater,
because I am sensible that I do not deserve it. And I could almost wish that
your good Qualities, were not quite so numerous, that I might be able to make
you some Return in specie. For commending you now, I do you but Justice, which
a Man of Honor will do to his Enemy; whereas you, by partial Praise, have
treated me like a Friend. I make no doubt, but that you do me the Justice to
believe that I am perfectly yours; and that your Merit has engaged me, and your
Favors obliged me to be all my Life time,

London, August 8. 95. Dear Sir, You most Humble Servant, John Dennis.


Mr. Congreve, to Mr. Dennis.
Dear Sir,
IT is not more to keep my Word, than to gratify my Inclination, that I write
to you; and tho I have thus long deferred it, I was never forgetful of you, nor
of my Promise. Indeed I waited in Expectation of something that might enable me
to return the Entertainment I received from your Letters: but you represent the
Town so agreeable (...) me, that you quite put me out of Conceit with the
Country; and my Designs of making Observations from it.

Before I came to Tunbridge, I proposed to my self the Satisfaction of
Communicating the Pleasures of the Place to you: But if I keep my Resolution, I
must transcribe, and return you your own Letters; since I must own I have met
with nothing else so truly Delightful. When you suppose the Country agreeable
to me, you suppose such Reason^ why it should be so, that while I read your
Letter, I am of your Mind; but when I look off, I find I am only Charmed with
the Landscape which you have drawn. So that if I would see a fine Prospect of
the Country, I must desire you to send it me from the Town; as if I would eat
good Fruit here* Perhaps the best way were, to beg a Basket from my Friends in
Covent Garden. After all this, I must tell you, there is ^ great deal of
Company at Tunbridge; and some very agreeable; but the greater part^ is of that
sort, who at home converse onl^^ with their own Relations; and consequently
when they come abroad, have few Acquaintance, but such as they bring with them.
But were the Company better, or worse, I would have you expect no Characters
from me; for I profess my self (...) Enemy to Detraction; and who is there*
that can justly merit Commendation? I have a mind to write to you, without the
pretense of any manner of News, as I might drink to you without naming a
Health^ for I intend only my Service to you. I wis^ for you very often, that I
might recommend you to some new Acquaintance that I have made here, and think
very well worth the keeping; I mean Idleness and a good Stomach. You would not
think how People Eat here; every Body has the Appetite of an O^strich, and as
they Drink Steel in the Morning, so I believe at Noon they could d^gest Iron.
But sure you will laugh at me for calling Idleness a New Acquaintance; when, to
your Knowledge, the greatest part of my Business, is little better. Ay, But
here is the Comfort of the Change; I am Idle now, without taking pains to be so,
or to make other People so; for Poetry is neither in my Head, nor in my Heart.
I know not whether these Waters may have any Communication with Lethe, but sure
I am, they have none with the Streams of Helicon. I have often wondered how
those wicked Writers of Lampoons, could crowd together such quantities of
Execrable Ver^es, tag'd with bad Rhimes, as I have formerly ^een sent from this
place: but I am half of Opinion now, that this Well is an Anti-Hypocrene. What
if we should get a Quantity of the Water privately conveyed into the Cistern at
Will's Coffee-House, for an Experiment? But I am Extravagant -- Tho I remember
Ben. Johnson in his Comedy of Cynthia's Revels, makes a Well, which he there
calls the Fountain of Self-Love, to be the Source of many Entertaining and
Ridiculous Humors. I am of Opinion, tha^ something very Comical and New, might
be brought upon the Stage, from a Fiction of the like Nature. But now I talk of
the Stage, pray if any thing New should appear there, let me have an Account of
it: for tho Plays are a kind of Winter-Fruit, ye^ I know there are now and
then, some Windfalls at this time of Year, which must be presently served up,
lest they should not keep till the proper Season of Entertainment. It Is now the
time, when the Sun breeds Insects; and you must expect to have the Hum and Buz
about your Ears, of Summer Flies and small Poets. Cuckows have this time
allowed 'em to Sing, tho they are damned to Silence all the rest of the Year.
Besides, the approaching Feast of St. Bartholomew both creates an Expectation
and bespeaks an Allowance of unnatural Productions and Monstrous Births.
Methinks the Days of Bartholom^w-Fa^r are like so many Sabbaths, or Days o^
Privilege, wherein Criminals and Malefactors in Poetry, are permitted to Creep
abroad. They put me in mind (tho at a different time of year) of the Roman
Saturnalia, when all the Scum, and Rabble, and Slaves of Rome, by a kind of
Annual and limited Manumission, were suffered to make Abominable Mirth, and
Profane the Days of Iubilee, with Vile Buffoonry, by Authority. But I forget
that I am writing a Post Letter, and run into length like a Poet in a
Dedication, when he forgets his Patron to talk of himself. But I will take care
to make no Apology for it, lest my Excuse (as Excuses generally do) should add
to the Fault. Besides, I would have no appearance of Formality, when I am to
tell you, that

Tunbridge-Wells, Aug. 11. 95. I am, Your real Friend, and Humble Servant, W.
Congreve.


LETTERS OF LOVE, Written by --
Dear Madam,
NOT believe that I love you? You cannot pretend to be so incredulous. If you
do not believe my Tongue, consult my Eyes, consult your own. You will find by
yours, that they have Charms; by mine, that I have a heart which feels them.
Re-call to mind what happened last Night. That at least was a Lover's Kiss. Its
Eagerness, its Fierceness, its Warmth, expressed the God its Parent. But oh!
Its Sweetness, and its melting Softness expressed him more. With Trembling in
my Limbs, and Fevers in in my Soul I Ravished it. Convulsions, Pantings,
Murmurings showed the mighty Disorder within me. The mighty Disorder increased
by it. For those Dear Lips sh^^ through my Heart, and through my bleed^ing
Vitals, Delicious Poison, and an avoidless but yet a Charming Ruin. What
cannot a day produce? The Night before, I thought my self a Happy Man. In want
of nothing, and in fairest expectation of Fortune; Approved of by Men of Wit,
and Applauded by others; Pleased, nay Charmed with my Friends, my then Dearest
Friends; Sensible of e^'ry Delicate pleasure, and in their turns possessing
all. But Love, Almighty Love, seems in a moment to have removed me to a
Prodigious distance from every Object but you alone. In the midst of Crowds I
remain in Solitude. Nothing but you can lay hold of my Mind, and that can lay
hold of nothing but you. I appear Transported to some Foreign Desert with you,
( Oh that I were really thus Transported,) where abundantly supplied with every
thing in thee, I might live out an Age of uninterrupted Extacy. The Scene of
the World's great Stage, seems suddenly and sadly changed. Unlovely Objects are
all around me, excepting thee. The Charms of all the World appear to be
Translated to thee. Thus in this sad, but Oh too pleasing State, my Soul can
fix upon nothing but thee. Thee it Contemplates, Admires, Adores, nay, depends
on; trusts in you alone. If you and Hope forsake it, Despair and endless Misery
attend it.


Dear Madam,
THIS I send by the Permission of a Severe Father, I will not say a Cruel one,
since he is yours. What is it that he has taken so Mortally ill of me? That I
die for his Daughter is my only Offense. And yet he has refused, to let me take
even my Farewell of you. Thrice happy be the Omen! May I never take my Farewell
of thee, till my Soul takes leave of my Body. At least, he cannot restrain me
from Loving. No, I will Love thee in spite of all opposition. Tho your Friends
and mine prove equally Averse, yet I will Love thee with a Constancy that shall
appear to all the World, to have something so Noble in it, that all the World
shall confess, that it deserved not to be unfortunate. I will forsake even my
Friends for thee. My Honest, my Witty, my Brave Friends; who had always been
till I had seen thee, the Dearest part of Mankind to me. Thou shall supply the
place of them all with me. Thou shall be my Bosom my Best-Lov'd Friend, and at
the same time, my only Mistress, and my Dearest Wife. Have the goodness to
pardon this Familiarity. It Is the tenderest leave of the Faithfulest Lover; and
here to show an over Respectfulness would be to wrong my Passion. That I Love
thee more than Life, nay, even than Glory, which I courted once with a burnning
Desire, bear Witness all my unquiet Days, and every restless Night, and that
Terrible Agitation of Mind and Body, which proceed from my fear of losing thee.
To lose thee is to lose all Happiness: Tormenting Reflection to a Sensible
Soul! How often has my Reason been going upon it? But the loss of Reason would
be but too happy upon the loss of thee. Since all the advantage that I could
draw from its presence, would be to know my self Miserable. But the time calls
upon me. I am obliged to take an Odious Journey and leave thee behind with my
Enemies. But thine shall never do thee harm with me. Adieu thou Dearest, thou
Loveliest of Creatures! No change of Time of Place, or the remonstrances of the
best of Friends, shall ever be able to alter my Passion for thee. Be but one
quarter so Kind, so Just to me, and the Sun will not shine on a happier Man
than my self.


Dear Madam,
MAY I presume to Beg pardon for the Fault I committed? So Foolish a Fault,
that it was below not only a Man of Sense, but a Man; and of which nothing
could ever have made me Guilty, but the Fury of a Passion with which none but
your lovely self could inspire me. May I presume to beg Pardon for a Fault
which I can never forgive my self? To purchase, that Pardon what would I not
endure? You shall see me prostrate before you, and use me like a Slave, while I
kiss the Dear Fee^ that Trample upon me. But if my Crime be too great for
Forgiveness, as indeed it is very great, deny me not one dear parting Look; Let
me see you once before I must never see you more. Christ! I want Patience to
support that accursed Thought. I have nothing in the World that is Dear to me,
but you. You have made every thing else indifferent. And can I resolve never to
see you more? In spite of my self I must always see you. Your form is fixed by
Fate in my Mind, and is never to be removed. I see those lovely piercing Eyes
continually, I see each Moment those ravishing Lips, which I have gazed on
still with desire, and still have touched with Transport; and at which I have
so often flown with all the Fury of the most Violent Love. Jesus! From whence,
and whither am I fallen* From the hopes of Blissful Ecstasies to black Despair.
From the Expectation of Immortal Transports, which none but your Dea^ self can
give me, and which none but he who loves like me, could ever so much (...)
think of, to a Complication of Cruel Passions, and the most Dreadful Condition
of Humane Life. My Fault, indeed, has bee^ very great, and cries aloud for the
Severe^^ Vengeance. See it inflicted on me. See (...) Despair and Die for that
Fault. But let me (...) die Vnpardon'd. Madam I Die for you, but Die in the
most Cruel and Dreadful manner* The Wretch that lies broken on the Wheel alive,
feels not a Quarter of what I endure* Yet Boundless Love has been all my Crime*
Unjust, Ungrateful, Barbarous return of it* Suffer me to take my Eternal leave
of you* When I have done that, how easy will it be to bid all the rest of the
World Adie^.


Dear Madam,
THis is the Third Letter that I have sent you since I came hither. Those which
went before it were all the Overflowings of a Heart more full of Passion than
ever was Man's before. It is impossible for me to be distant from you, but I
must send to you by every Occasion. And yet you can resolve to take no Notice
of all my Tenderness. Yes, my Dearest, Inhumane Creature, you can. You have
been Sick, nay dangerously Sick, and have never sent to me. Have I left all the
World for you, and could you resolve to leave the World without me; Nay,
without so much as giving me the least Notice of it? Christ! Could you resolve
to leave me to Despair and to endless Misery, without expressing the least
concern for me! And can I persist in loving one so Ungrateful! Is there such
another Ungrateful Creature alive! No, there lives not so Ungrateful a
Creature, but the^e l^v^s not one ^o Charming.


Dear Madam,
CAN you be angry still with yo^^ Poor Penitent? You cannot have the Ill-N^ture
sure. Yes, but you can, you say, since he could have the Presumption to be
angry with you. But, My Dearest, there (...) this Difference betwixt your Anger
and (...) Mine was caused by the Cruelty of your supposed Infidelity, and Yours
by the Kindness of your Lover's Resentment: For if I had not been Fond of thee
to the last degree, I had not been so Incensed against you* Yet even when I was
most so* I could sooner have plucked out an Eye, than have resolved to have
Parted with thee. Nay, I could sooner have torn out both Eyes, if the Loss of
both would not have for ever deprived me of the Dear, the Ravishing sight of
thee. But if you still think that my Anger had Guilt in it, and that I ought to
suffer for it, the means to punish me with utmost Severity, and to make me my
own Tormentor, is to tell me, you Love me* Then I shall Curse my self and my
Rage, and feel all the Plague of Remorse for having offended thee. I shall look
upon my self as the Basest, the most Ungrateful of Men for abusing thy
Goodness, and thy Charming Tenderness. I shall believe that I can never humble
my self enough, and never suffer enough to deserve Forgiveness. Thus, Madam,
you have your Revenge in your Power. It is a False Modesty which restrains you
from taking it. In order to it, you have nothing to do, but to prove your self
tender, and to show your self Grateful. If you must be ashamed, blush at your
Cruelty; blush at your Inhumanity: But Gratitude is Reason, and Love is Nature,
never be ashamed of those. Do but consider, there was a time, when I was happy
in your Esteem; yes there has been a time, in which I was thought not
altogether void of Reason by you. How then can you Blush at the owning a
Passion, which you Command with an absolute Sway, at the very t^me that it
Tyranniz^s over me.


Dear Madam,
MY Friend's stratagem gave me an oppor^unity of seeing you by finding Fault
with you. It must proceed from Design or Madness if I find fault with thee* Thy
Lovely Face is the very same that set all my Blood in a Flame; and I am sure my
Heart can never be altered. How it trembled in my Breast when I saw you last,
and by its trouble confessed its Conqueror! How it has burnt ever since with
redoubled Fury! When I shall be free from this Flame^ Heaven only knows, for
the Hour of my Death Heaven only knows. It Is a Flame that h^s incorporated with
that of my Life, and both will go out together. In vain I invoke my Reason to
resist my Senses. My Reason finds you more Lovely than my Eyes did before;
shows me all the Graces of thy beauteous Mind, and grows pleased and prides it
self in its own Captivity. You accuse me, they say, of some extraordinary
Crime. A Crime against whom? Against you whom I love! Against you, for whom I
could die! Strange Accusation! Yet at the same time you refuse to see me, you
refuse to receive my Letters: And must I be condemned Vnhe^rd? Robber^ are
allowed to speak before they are sentenced: Murderers have the Privilege to
plead for their Live^: And shall the Tenderest Love be denied the Privilege
which is granted to the Blackest Malice? I have been guilty of nothing but too
much Love if too much Love, be a Fault. Why have you given credit to my
Enemies, before you have heard me? I may indeed be convinced of an Error, but I
can never be convicted of a Crime against you. The Man must be Mad, nay,
desperately, Mad, who can design to injure himself, and Thou art, by much the
Better, the Dearer part of me. Give me leave to see you once more before I
depart. Let me see once more that Face which has Undone me, yet Charms me even
in Ruin.

O Face industriously contrived by Heaven,
To fix my Eyes, and captivate my Soul!
Nay, I will see you, if it be but to upbraid you with your barbarous Wish. If
at the time that you made it, you had struck a Dagger in my Heart, you had
given it a Gentler wound.

The only Wish that I have to make is to be happy in thee; if that succeeds
not, I have another, and that is, to lie at rest in my Grave.


The End of the Love Letters.
To Mr. --
Sir,
I Received yours, which was the more Welcome, because it came without
Invitation. I take it very kindly that you would write to me, more kindly than
if you had made me a Present: For we certainly show most Kindness for any one,
in that which we do for him contrary to the Bent of our Natural Tempers. Now I
have observed that you have been constantly less inclined to show your Parts
than your Generosity. At the very time that you have been Prodigal of Pelf, you
have been a Niggard of Wit. By a Greatness of Mind you have squandered the
first, as a very worthless thing; and by a just Discernment been thrifty of the
last, as a very valuable Treasure. But your Letter has given me some hopes,
that you begin to take the Advice which I have so often given you; and that is,
that for the Convenience of Life, you would grow a little more frugal of Gold,
and a little more free of your Sense. And I begin to imagine that you have till
now been covetous of the Latter, only because you were laying in a Stock, that
for the time to come you may be never without the Ready. I was sorry to hear my
Friend -- Quibble, tho, to give the Devil his Due, it was not the worst that
ever I heard. But I was in hopes that Quibbles and Puns, might have been cried
down with the White Farthings. And I have been credibly informed that Will
Erwin has refused to take Cannudrums of S -- for Vsquebaugh any longer; tho one
would Swear that Irish Wit might go for Irish Liquor. I wish you had sent me
some more News, tho I can make you but small Return in spi^ie. My humble
Service to Mr. Congreve, tell him that I wish him good Luck, and expect that he
should reconcile Fortune to Merit.

Dec. 6. 1694. I am, Yours, etc.


To Mr. --
Dear --,
THou it seems have a mind to pass for a Wit, by the very same means that
Aes^p^ Iack-Dam thought fit to set up for a Beaux. (By the way I must tell you,
that the Transformation of Beau to Wit, has something more of the Miracle in
it* than the change of Iack-daw to Beau) Yes, B --, with borrowed plumes have
thou imp'd thy wings. But I took more particular notice of a couple, that were
plucked from a certain Bird of night; which if we give Credit to W -- the
knower is a very filthy obscene Animal; from which ominous Creature, may Heaven
def^nd us. Mortals, that is, we in the Country here, call him Bell, but the
Gods, that is, those in Covent Garden, have named him Break-a-day. But it is
time to begin to speak plain English, for you, if I am not mistaken, pretend to
no other Language. But then, as you have writ for the Witty Club, the Witty
Club may understand for you. I look upon your last to be the Act and Deed of
them all. And you shall henceforward be Secretary to them, as Julian was to
their Mistresses. Tho I must tell you by the way, that the Affection which some
of them show for the Muses, is not unlike th^^ merry passion, which put the
little French Parson into an Amourous Fit for the Queen. Return them all thankt
in my name, for the Hono^r they have done me, in offering to admit me in my
absence, a Member of their Noble Society. But, Domine, non sum Dignus. However,
I think my self obliged to make them as extraordinary a Compliment, as the
Morocco Ambassador would have thought himself engaged to return the University
of Oxford, if in the midst of their extreme civility, they had offered to make
him D. D. But to speak to that part of your Letter which concerns your self. I
do not wonder, that you go to the Playhouse only for the sake of your
Mistress; but methinks, at the Musick-meeting the Italians Voice might have
Charms for you. But as you go thither too, you say, only for the sake of your
Mistress, I will believe to oblige you, that she does not go for the Eunuch's.
Now I go to your Comedy here, purely for the Comedy sake, which is a politic
Country Club; and partly for the Music sake I go to our Musick-meeting, which
is a pack of Shrill mouthed Beagles for Treebles, and a pack of deep mouthed
Bumkins for Bases. And whenever our Consort begins, half the Men in Bucks, in
spite of their Souls, are our Audience. Once more I salute the Witty Club.
Tell them, that they little deserve that name, if they have not more Wit, than
to take any thing ill I have said. Assure them, that I know how to respect
their Good Qualities, and that I shall endeavor to set of their Bad, which is
a Friends part.

I am Dear -- Yours, etc.
Postscript.
In your first Letter you ga^e me notice of some Gentlemen who designed to
write to me. The Post before that, I had a very very Witty Letter from one of
them. It is no hard matter to guess that it was from Mr. Wycherly. But Ch --
Wit, if he sent any, either went astray or came short. Who should wonder at
either;




To Walter Moyle, Esquire at Bake in Cornwall.
Dear Sir,
YOUR long silence made me Conjecture, that you are so intent upon being
Burgess of Bodmyn, that you had forgot the Citizens of Covent Garden. At last I
received an agreeable Letter from you. You had best have a care of talking in
Cornwall, at the rate that you write to your Friends. If you do, the
Cornish-men may not think you rightly Qualified to Represent them. When you
left the Town, you talked of a Critical Correspondence between us. But Idleness
on your side, and ill Humor on mine, have baulked a very ^opeful design. But
an accident has late^y happened, which obliges me to pro^oke you. For there has
just been a Play Acted, called The Mock-Marriage, the Author of which, whose
name I have forgot, asserts Dogmatically in his Preface, that he who writes by
rule shall only have his Labor for his Pains. I know not what this Author can
mean by this. For, whom does he pretend to persuade by this fine assertion? Not
Mr. Moyle, and me at least. We know indeed very well, that a Man may write
regularly, and yet fail of pleasing; and that a Poet may please in a play that
is not regular. But this is Eternally true, that he who writes regularly cete^^
paribus, must always please more, than he who transgresses the rules. Nothing
can please in a Play but Nature, no not in a Play which is written against the
Rules, and the more there is of Nature in any Play, the more that Play must
Deligh^* Now the Rules are nothing but an observation of Nature. For Nature is
Rule and Order it self. There is not one of the Rule^ but what might be used to
evince this. But But I shall be contented with showing some instances of it,
even in the Mechanical Rules of the Unities. And first for that of place; it is
certain that it is in Nature impossible, for a Man who is in the Squa^^ in
Covent Garden, ^o see the things, that at the same time are transacted at
Westm^nst^^* And then for that of Time, a Reasonable Man may delude himself so
far, as to fancy that he sits for the space of twelve hours, without removing,
Eating or Sleeping, but he must be a Devil that can Fancy he does it for a
Week. What I have said may evince a necessity of observing the Unities of Time
and of Place, if a Poet would thoroughly write up to Nature. And then the Unity
of Action follows on course. For, that two Actions that are Entire, and
Independent, should happen in the same short space of time, in the same little
compass of Place, begin together, go on together, and end together, without
Obstructing or Confounding one another, this indeed may be done upon the Stage,
but in Nature it is highly improbabl^^ Well then, since the Rules are nothing
but Nature it self, and and nothing but Nature can please, and and since the
more that any Play has of Nature, the more that Play must Delight, it follows,
that a Play which is regularly Written, ceteris Paribus, must please more than
a Play which is written against the Rules, which is a Demonstration. Rule may
be said to be a Play; what Symme^^y of parts is known to be to a Face? The
Features may be Regular, and yet a Great or a Delicate air may be wanting. And
there may be a Commanding or Engaging air, in a Face whose Features are not
Regular. But this all the World must allow of, that there can never be seen any
Sovereign Beauty, where air and Regularity of Features are not United. Thus is
Reason against this Author, but the mischief is, that experience is against him
too. For all your Dramatick Poets must confess (...) the Plays which they have
writ with (...) have been they which (...) most. I must trouble you (...)
Dramatical Criticism, but not (...) next opportunity.

I am Yours, etc.
London, Oct* 26. ^5.

Mr. -- to Mr. Congreve.
Dear Sir,
I Came home from the Lands-End Yesterday, where I found Three Letters from Mr.
Dennis, and one from you with a humerous Description of John Abassus, A Country
Poet.
since the dubbing of Don Quixote; and the Coronation of Petrarch in the
Capitol, there has not been so great a Solemnity as the Consecration of John
Abassus. In all the Pagan Ritual, I never met with the Form of Poetical Orders;
but I believe the Ceremony of Consecrating a Man to Apollo, is the same with
devoting a Man to the Dii Manes, for both are Martyrs to Fame. I believe not a
Man of the Grave-Club durst assist at this ridiculous Scene, for fear of
laughing outright. W. was in his Kingdom, and for my part I would ^ave rathe^
sat there than in the House of Commons. Would to God I could ^augh with you
for one hour or two at all the ridiculous things that have happened at Wills
Coffee-House since I left it, it is the merriest place in the World. Like
Africa, every day it produces a Monster; and they are got there just as Pliny
says the^ are in Africa, Beasts of different kind^ come to drink, mingle with
one another and beget Monsters. Present my humble Duty to my new Lord, and tell
him, that I am preparing an Address to Congratulate his Accession to the Throne
of the Rabble. Tell the Lady who was the Author of the Hue and Cry after me,
she might have sent out a hundred Hues and Cries before she would ha^^ found a
Poet. I took an effectual Cou^^ not to be apprehended for a Poet, for ^ went
down clad like a Soldier, with ^ new Suit of Clothes on, and, I think there
could not have been a better Disguise for a Poet, unless I had stolen (...) B
-- 's Coat. Mr. Dennis sent (...) down P -- M -- Parodie. I can say very little
of the Poem, but as for the Di^logue, I think, 'twas the first time tha^ M --
suffered any body to talk with him, though indeed here he inertupt^^ Mr.
Boileau in the midst of the first word My humble Service to Mr. Wych^rly, ^
desire you would write me some News (...) the Stage, and what Progress you have
made in your Tragedy.

October 7. 95. I am, Your affectio^ate Friend and Servant,


Mr. Congreve to Mr. --
Dear Sir,
I Cannot but think, that a Letter from me in London, to you in C -- is like
some ancient Correspondence between an Inhabitant of Rome and a Cimmerian. May
be, my way of Writing may not be so modestly compared with Roman Epistles; but
the resemblance of the Place will justify the other part of the Parallel. The
Subterraneous Habitations of the Miners, and the Proximity of the Bajae help a
little and while you are at B-let B-be Cumae, and do you supply the Place of
Sybilla. You may look on this as raillery, but I can assure you, nothing less
than Oracles are expected from you, in the next Parliment, if you succeed in
your Election, as we are pretty well assured you will. You wish your self, with
us at Wills Coffee-house; and all here wish for you, from the president of the
Grave Club, to the most puny Member of the Rabble; they who can think, think of
you, and the rest talk of you. There is no such Monster in this Africa, that is
not sensible of your absence, even the worst natured People, and those of least
Wit lament it, I mean, Half Critics and Quiblers. To tell you all that want
you, I should name all the Creatures of Covent Garden, which like those of
Eden-garden would want some Adam to be a Godfather and give them Names. I cannot
tell whether I may justly compare our Covent Garden, to that of Eden, or no;
for though I believe we may have variety of Strange Animals equal to Paradise,
yet I fear we have not amongst us, the Tree of Knowledge. It had been much to
the disadvantage of Pliny, had the Coffee-house been in his days; for sure he
would have described some who frequent it; which would have given him, the
reputation of a more fabulous Writer then he has now. But being in our age it
does him a Service, for we who know it, can give faith to all his Monsters. You
who took care to go down into the Country unlike a Poet, I hope will take care
not to come up again like a Politician; for then, you will add a new Monster to
the Coffee-house, that was never seen there before. So you may come back again,
in your Soldiers Coat, for in that you will no more be suspected for a
Politician, than a Poet. Pray come upon any terms, for you are wished for by
every body, but most wanted by your

(...) Coff^^-house, August 13. 95. Affectionate Friend and Servant, W.
Congreve.


Mr. R --. to Mr. C --.
Dear Tom*
I Received your Letter, and give you thanks for your News. In requital I shall
send you some concerning our Friend: In doing which, I comply both with his
desire and yours. He has been sick almost ever since he came hither, tho,
excepting once, he has lived with exact Regularity. He says, he believes the
Devil restrained his Surfeit from breaking out till he was reconciled to
Sobriety, to render it odious, and set them afresh at varience. I remember when
I was at Paris* there was a Young-Nun, whose Circumstances in some measure
resembled our Friends. She had a Pox broke out upon her immediate after she had
taken her Vow of Chastity. He bids me tell you, that he has been once Drunk
since he came to this place, and once witty, and a damnable Sot ever since. Our
Friend, I suppose, rallies. But one thing is certain; that Wine is as sure to
exalt Wit, as Paint is to heighten Beauty, but then as the Devil will have it
(hearken to this and tremble Tom) they both decay the very things they
embellish, even while they are giving them Luster. But Tom, he bids me tell
you, (...) must not believe him vain because he say^ he was witty. For he says
it was among^^ such prodigious' Squires, that none but a (...) would have been
witty in such Company^ Our Friend, methinks, has reason. For (...) is as much
more scandalous to be witt^ with Fools, than it is to be dull among^ Men of
wit, as an Error in Judgment (...) more ridiculous than a Defect in Fancy. H^
says, he has a hundred times since he cam^ to this place regretted the Rabble,
nay, he has regretted the Grave Club; Nay, he has wished himself even in the
Witty Club, which he believes is by this time erected. He begins to look upon
Ball -- as a great Man, upon Jack G. -- as a Prodigy, and upon W -- as a
Demi-god. Indeed a days we do well enough here. For a days we converse with the
living dead; that is, with those who being dead yet speak: but the Night, Tom,
the Night, in which we are doomed to the dead living, that is, to those who
being alive, say nothing, is insupportably irksome, Darkness in Greenland is
not more grievous to the Wretch that is left there, than it is dismal to us in
Bucks.

Ian. 10. 93. I am yours.


To Mr. Gabriel B --
Dear Gabriel,
WHen thy last was written, thou had put on the Lions Skin, and* made a
wonderful Comical Figure in it. But I did not think to incense thee, nor the
rest of the Rabble, quite contrary I thought to divert you. You say, you take
it ill, that I should upbraid you with Understanding no Language but English.
Why, what a Pagan Apprehension have thou Gabriel? The Devil a jot did I upbraid
thee. Quite contrary, I commended thee for being willing to understand no
Language but plain English. And that as I take it, has quite a different
meaning. With what unreasonable Wights have I had to do? Who are offended at my
endeavor to please them, and take my Commendations for Injuries. I am accused,
you say, of ill Breeding for that Letter. Why, Prithee, Gabriel, every Man has
not had the Breeding that thou have. I wish you had sent me the Names of the
Sparks who would reconcile Punctilio to Satyr. It has been a damned inveterate
Quarrel, and requires wise Mediators. But now I talk of Satyr, that you say is
the Disease of some Peoples Minds. Alas, poor Devil, thou do not know that
it is a Maxim in Physic, that some Diseases show the Health and Strength, and
Vigor of the Party affected. If we believe Hyppocrates, Hunger is a Disease;
nay reason tells us the same thing. For like other Distempers, it shows a
defect in Nature. But where it shows a defect it shows a force too, and when
that Disease is pretty acute, the Patient is sure to do well, I will let the
Application alone. For in writing to one of thy Communicative Spirit, a Man is
sure to write to some body who can understand. But this I will say, that if
Satyr be a Disease, the acuter it is, the better. But why do I talk of Diseases
to thee? For indeed Gabriel (without Satyr) thou art no Physician.

I am, etc.


To Mr. Congreve at Tunbridge.
Dear Sir.
MY Business and my Thanks for your Kindness, you will find in the enclosed,
which I had sent by the last Post, had not an Accident hindered it. All the
Return that I can make you at present is, to acquaint you with such News as we
have. Our Friend, Mr. -- went last Friday to the Bath. He promised to write to
me from that place, but it would be unreasonable indeed to expect it. For W --
takes up his Afternoons, and his Mornings, I suppose, are spent in
Contemplation at the Cross Bath. Most of your Friends of the Coffee-House are
disper'd; Some are retreated into the Country in hopes of some Favors, which
they expect from the Muses: Two or Three of them are retired in Town to
ruminate on some Favors, which they have received from their Mistresses.

So that the Coffee-House is like to grow into Reputation again. For if any one
gives it the scandalous Denomination of the Wits Coffee-House, he must call it
so by Antiphrasis, because there comes no Wit there. Here are two or three
indeed, who set up for Wits at home, and endeavor to pass for wise at the
Coffee-House. For they hold their Tongues there. Indeed the Coffee-House is
generally the Exchange for Wit, where the Merchants meet without bringing the
Commodity with them, which they leave at home in their Warehouses, alias their
Closets, while they go abroad to take a prudent care for the vending it. But
you are of the number of those happy few, who so abound in Hereditary
Possessions and in rich returns from Greece and from Italy* that you always
carry some of it about you to be liberal to your Friends of that which you sell
to Strangers. Mr. -- babbles eternally according to his old rate, and as
extravagantly as if he talked to himself, which he certainly does, if no body
minds him any more than I do. He has been just now enquiring of me, what sort
of Distemper the Spleen is; an infallible sign that he is the only Man in
Covent Garden, who does not know he is an Ass. To make him sensible what the
Spleen is, I could find in my heart to show him himself and give it him. If any
thing restrains me from being revenged of his Impertinence this way, it is the
Consideration that it will make him wiser. This Coxcomb naturally puts me in
mind of the Stage, where they have lately acted some new Plays; but had there
been more of them, I would not scruple to affirm, that the Stage is at present
a Desert and a barren place, as some part of Africa is said to be, though it
abounds in Monsters. And yet those prodigious Things have met with Success. For
a Fool is naturally fond of a Monster, because he is incapable of knowing a
Man. While you drink Steel for your Spleen at Tunbridge, I partake of the
benefit of the Course. For the gaiety of your Letters relieves me considerably.
Then what must your Conversation do? Come up and make the Experiment; and
impart that Vigor to me which Tunbridge has restored to you.

I am your most humble Servant, John Dennis.


Mr. -- to Mr. Dennis.
NAmur taken, and a Letter from Mr* Dennis, were two of the most agreeable
Surprises I 'ever met with. And nothing but the Reflection, how dear the
Conquest will cost us, I mean, the innumerable ill ^oems it will produce, could
allay the Pleasure. A -- has watched for a Victory a long time, and will not
miss this Oppertunity to mortify the Day of Thanksgiving, and Scribble a way
the public Joy. The Devil take Wills Coffe-house. I could be the easiest Man
in the World under my Calamity, if it were not for some of the Company there;
who are now the greatest Enemies I have in the World, worse than the Company
from which I am just now Stolen to write this Letter. Among the rest is a
Country Gentleman who dictates Politics abundantly, for with us as well, as at
Old Rome we take Dictators from the Plow, but ours are such as ought never to
remove their Hands from it.

I am yours, etc.


Mr. -- to Mr. -- Dennis,
WHile you are happy in the Politics of the Grave Club, Two Covent Garden
Clubs.
and the Puns of the Rabble, you have no regard to the forlorn State of your
poor Friend. Before I left London, I fained an hundred agreeable Melancholy
Pleasures, with which I might Fool away a Retirement, but now I destest being
alone, and question whither Mankind or Solitude be the fitter Subject for a
Satyr. Of this, I am sure, that God Allmighty rather than be alone Created the
Devil, and Man rather than be alone chose a Wife. Whatever advantage I have
lost by my Country Life, I believe, I have gained the gift of Prophesy in the
Wilderness, for I foretold the Poem with which A -- has visited us.

I am yours, etc.


Mr. -- to Mr. Dennis.
TO your Business hereafter, Note, That whereas in some of the last Letters,
there is found this Mark A's, the Letter A is not set for the first Letter of
the Man's own Name, but of his Nom de Guerre, which is remarked to prevent a
Mistake, because a very Ingenious Gentleman, whose Name begins with A has
lately written a Poem upon the Taking of Namur.
but first lets have a Dance, as Mr. Bays says. When I came home from the West,
where I had passed a Fortnight, I found your three Letters full of Wit and
Humor. I was charmed with the Scandal you writ in the first, and enclosed in
the last, viz. A's Poem. I found the Preamble before the Poem to be like a
Suterkin before a Dutch Child. I read it over in great haste, in hopes to be
pleased at last with the end of it, but this is the first time I ever disliked
his Conclusion. For he threatens strange things. I hope, it is only in terrorem,
if not, I hope God in his goodness will send us a Peace, and prevent his Songs
of Triumph. Certainly, since the Devil was Dumb there never was such a Poet.


A Dedication designed to the Volunteers. By Mrs. Shadwell.
To the QUEEN. Written By Mr. Dennis.
Madam,
I Presume to lay at your Majesty's Feet this last Poem, which was written by
my deceas^d Husband. The Obligations which he had to the King and Your Majesty
are of that high Nature, that all I can do, is to take this Occasion of Humbly
acknowledging the Mighty Debt. My Husband so truly Honored You living, that if
he has now any Sense of what is done here below, I cannot do a more grateful
thing for him, than in giving him an opportunity of appearing before You after
his Death, and entertaining you in a Form, which I hope will not seem frightful
to you. I have often heard him say in his life time, that Wit, wherever it
grows in your Majesty's Dominions, ought, no less than Silver or Gold to be a
Royal Mine, unless as it happened lately in Wales, the Noble Ore has too great
a mixture of baser Meta^^ That Wit, which is nothing but Gay Wisdom, is no less
than Gold Subservient to Government, and when it is made current by the Royal
Stamp, contributes no less to the Public Prosperity. That the end of the Drama
was to reform mankind, which as Tragedy attained by purging the passions,
Comedy arrived at by Correcting the Humors, which tho they may no^ lead Men
into great Crimes immediately, yet when they are irregular, they most
ce^^tainly prepare the way to them. Tha^ Comedy never fails to make a good
Subject* whenever it makes a good Man. That more particularly, the Humors
which are ex^pos'd in this Comedy, were at this Conjuncture utterly
inconsistent with the Duty of a good Subject. That the Vicious Follies of these
times were very prejudicial to your Majesty's Service. That the Affecta^ions of
F^ance, had done England more harm than all its Matchivillian Principles. That
where these last had made ten bad Subjects, by rendering them Interested or
Discontented, the former had made a Hundred by making them Fops and Beaus.
English Gentlemen he used to say, in the times of our Brave Ancestors; were
always the Flower of English Armies, in ^imes, when to die bravely in the
Service of King and Country, was esteemed a desirable Fate, and more than
Recompensed with Eternal Fame. But now said he, our Gentlemen either go not to
the Wars, or if they go, they very often make us heartily wish that they had
stand at home. What indeed can be expected from a degenerate Race, whose
worthiest Ambition is either to be Wicked with a good Grace, or to be
dexterously Foppish? Who emulating one another spend their live times in
dressing, to see who shall run away with the Immortal Reputation of having the
profoundest Capacity for a Valet de Chamber. He has often told me, that the
design of this Comedy was to reclaim them, if they were not incorrigible, and
that what was writ with such an immediate regard to your Majesty's Service,
should be Dedicated to none but your Majesty. According to his intention, I
here with all Humility Present it to you. You, Madam, who have so much of
Heaven in you, will, like that, accept this offering from me, tho it was yours
before* and tho it is made by a Disconsolate Widow. Yes, Madam, your Universal
goodness, your Clemency and Compassion on all in Affliction give me Assurance
that you will accept it. Qualities, for which you are so Renowned, that I have
often heard these Noble Verses of Waller very justly applied to your Majesty.

All her Affections are to one inclined,
Her Bounty and Compassion to Mank^nd;
To whom while she so far extends her Grace,
She makes but good the promise of her Face.
For M^rcy has (could Mercy's self be seen)
No Sweeter look than this Propitious Queen.
So the fair Tree, on which the Eagle builds,
Poor Sheep from Tempests, and their Shepherd Shields.
The Royal Bird possesses all the Boughs,
But Shade and Shelter to the Flock allows.
This, Madam, is the language of the Gods, applied to so Divine a Subject, that
nothing but the Language of Gods, can express it with Dignity. And therefore
your Majesty will have no Patience to hear me speak, after one who can speak so
well.

I am, Your Majesty's Most Humble and Dev^ted Subject and Servant, A. Shadwell.


Select Letters OF VOITURE.

The First, Translated By Mr. DRYDEN. And the rest By Mr. DENNIS.

To my Lord Cardinal de la VALETTE.
My Lord,
I Am satisfied, that you Old Cardinals take more Authority upon you, than
those of the last Promotion; because, having written many Letters to you,
without receiving one from you, yet you complain of my Neglect. In the mean
time, seeing so many well-bred Men, who assure me that you do me too much
Honor to think of me at all; and that I am bound to write to you, and to give
my Acknowledgments, I am resolved to take their Counsel, and to pass over all
sorts of Difficulties and Considerations of my own Interest. This then will
give you to understand, that six days after the Eclipse, and a Fortnight after
my Decease, Madam the Princess, Mademoisell^ de Bourbon, Madam du Vigean, Madam
Aubry, Mademoiselle de Rambouill^^, M^demoiselle Paulet, Monsieur de
Cha^^e^onne, and my self, left Paris about six in the Evening, and went to La
Bar, where Madam du Vigean was to give a Collation to the Princess. In our
way thither we found nothing worth our Observation; but only that at Ormesson,
an English Mastiff came up to the Boot of the Coach, to make his Compliment to
me. Be pleased to take this along with you, My Lord, that as often as I express
my self in the Plural Number, as for Example, We went, we found, or We beheld,
it is always to be Understood, that I speak in the Quality of a Cardinal. From
thence we happily arrived at La Bar; and entered a Hall, where we trod upon
nothing but Roses and Orange-Flowers. Madam the Princess, after she had
sufficiently admired this Magnificence, had a mind to see the Walks before
Supper: The Sun was then just setting in a Cloud of Gold and Azure, and gave us
no larger a share of his Beams, than to supply a Soft and Pleasing Light. The
Air was not disturbed either with Wind o^ Heat; and it seemed that Heaven and
Earth were conspiring with Madam d^ Vigean, in her Treating the Fairest
Princess upon Earth. After she had passed through a great Parterre, and Gardens
full of Orange Trees, she arrived at the Entrance of an Enchanted Wood, so
thick and shady, that Authors conclude the Sun, since the Day of his Birth,
never entered it, till now that he waited on her Highness thither. At the end
of an Alley, which carried the sight out of distance, we found a Fountain,
which alone cast up a greater Quantity of Water, than all those of Tivoli
together. About it were placed four and twenty Violins, which had much ado to
make themselves be heard, for the rumbling of the Streams in falling. When we
were got near enough, we discovered in a certain Nich, within a Pallisade, a
Diana, of about Eleven or Twelve Years of Age, and fairer than the Forests of
Greece and Thessaly had ever seen. She bore her Bow and Arrows in her Eyes, and
was encompassed with all the Glories of her Brother. In another Nich, not far
distant, was another Nymph, Fair and Gentile enough to pass for one of her
Train: Those who are not given to believe Fables, took them for Mademoiselles
de Bourbon and la Priande; and to confess the Truth, they resembled them
exactly. All the Company was in a profound Silence* admiring so many different
Objects, which at once astonished their Eyes and Ears, when on a Sudden the
Goddess leapt down from her Nich; and with a Grace, impossible to be described,
began a Ball, which lasted for some time about the Fountain. 'Twas somewhat
strange, My Lord, that in the midst of so many pleasures, which were*
sufficient to engage the whole attention of their Spirits, who enjoyed them,
yet we could not forbear to think of you; and it was generally concluded, that
something was wanting to our Happiness, since neither you, nor Madam de
Rambouillet were present. Then I took up a Harp and Sung this Spanish Stanza;
Pues quiso mi suerte dura,
Que faltando mi sennor
Tambie^ faltasse mi Dama.
And continued the rest of the Song so very Melodiously* and with such an Air
of Sadness, that there was not one of the Company, but the Tears came into
their Eyes, and they wept abundantly. Their sorrow had endured much longer, had
not the Violins struck up a Sarabrand, with great speed and presence of Mind*
Upon which the Company got upon their Feet, with as much Gayety* as if nothing
in the World had happened, and fell into the Dance; thus Leaping, Capring,
turning Round, and Hopping, we returned to the House, where we found a Table
already Spread, and served as if it had been served by Fairies. This, My Lord,
is one passage (...) the Adventure, which is so stupendous tha^ no words are
capable of expressing it* (...) there are neither colors of Speech, nor
Figures in the Art of Rhetoric, which (...) describe six several sorts of
Po^ages, which were at once presented to the Sight. And what was particularly
remarkable, that there being none but Goddesses, and (...) Demigods at the
Table, ( viz.) Mons^e^^ Ohandebnonne and I, yet every one eat as heartily, and
with as good Appetites, as if we had been neither more nor less, than plain
Mortals. And to con^ess the Truth, a better Treat could not have been provided.
Amongst other things, there were twelve Dishes, besides other Eatables in
disguise, which were never seen before on any Humane Table: and whose very
names have never been so much as mentioned in any History. This Circumstance,
My Lord, by some disastrous accident, has been related to Madam La Ma^eschalle
-- And though immediately upon it, she ^ook twelve Drams of Opi^m, beyond her
ordinary Dose; yet she has never been able to close her Eyes, from that fatal
Moment. During the first Course, there was not so much as one single Cup went
round to your Health; the Company was so intent upon the present Affair; and at
the Deser^, we quite forgot it. I beg your permission* My Lord, to relate all
things as they passed, like a Faithful Historian as I am, and without Flattery:
For I would no^ for the World, that Posterity should mistake one thing for
another; and that at the end of two thousand years hence, or thereabouts,
Posterity should imagine your Health was drunk, when really there was no such
thing in Nature. Yet I must give this testimony to Truth, that it was not for
want of Memory. For, during all Supper time, you were often mentioned. All the
Ladies wished you there, and some of them very heartily, or I am much mistaken*
As we rose from Table, the Sound of the Violins summoned us up Stairs, where we
found a Chamber so gloriously lighted up, that it looked as if the Day, which
was now below the Earth, had retired hither, and was assembled in one body of
Light. Here the Ball began again, in better order and with more grace, than it
had been danced about the Fountain. And the most Magnificent Part of it, my
Lord, was, that I footed it there in Person. Mademoiselle de Bourbon, I must
confess, was of opinion, that I Danced aukwardly; but she concluded, to my
advantage, that I must be allowed to Fenc^ well; because, that at the end of
every Cadence, I put my self upon my Guard. The Ball continued with much
Pleasure till all of a sudden a great Noise which was heard without Doors,
caused the Company to look out at the Windows. Where from a great Wood, which
was about three hundred Paces from the House, we beheld so vas^ a Number of
Fireworks issuing out, that we verily believed all the Branches and Trunks of
the Trees had been Metamo^phos'd into Guns. That all the Stars were falling
from the Firmament, and that the Element of Fire, was descending into the
Middle Region of the Air. Here, My Lord, are three Hyperboles tacked together,
which being valued at a moderate Price, are worth three dozen of Fusees at the
least. After we were recovered out of this great fit of Ecstasy, into which so
many Miracles had plunged us, we resolved on our Departure; and took the way to
Paris by the Light of twenty Flambeaux. We passed through all the Ormessonnois,
and the wide Plains of Espinay, without resistance, and went through the middle
of St. Dennis. Being placed in the Coach by the side of Madam -- I said a whole
Miserere to her, on your behalf; to which she replied, with much Gallantry, and
no less Civility. We sung in our Journey a World of Songs, Roundeaux,
Roundelays, Lampoons, and Ballads; and were now half a League beyond St.
Dennis, it being two a Clock in the Morning precisely; the Fatigue of the
Journey, Watching, Walking, and the painful Exercise of the Ball, having made
me somewhat heavy, when there happened an Accident, which I verily believed
would have been my total Ruin* There is a certain little Village, situate, say
the Geographers, betwixt Paris and St. Dennis, and Vulgarly called, La Valette:
At our going out of this Place, we overtook three Coaches, in which were those
Numerical Violins which had been Playing to us* Hereupon, Satan entering into
the Spirit of Mademoiselle, she commanded them to follow us, and to give
Serenades all Night long to the Poor innocent People of Paris who were asleep
and dreamt not of her Malice. This Diabolical Proposition, made my Hair rise an
end upon my Head: Yet all the Company passed a Vote in Favor of it; and the
word was just ready to be given, but by a Signal Providence, they had left
their Violins behind them at la Bar; for which the Lord reward them. From
hence, my Lord, you may reasonably conclude, that Mademo^^selle is a dangerous
Person in the Night, if ever there was any in the World: and that I had great
reason at Madam -- (...) House to say, that the Violins ought to be turned out
of doors, when that Pestilent Lady was in Company. Well, we continued our way
happily enough, but only that as we entered the Fauxbourgh, we met six Lusty
Fellows, as Naked as ever they were Born, who passed directly by the Coach, to
the terror of the Ladies. In fine, we arrived at Paris; and what I am now going
to relate, is indeed Prodigious. Could you imagine it, My Lord? the Obscurity
was so great, that it covered all that Vast City. And instead of what we left
it, no^ full seven hours before, filled with Noise, and with a Crowd of Men,
Women, Horses, and Coaches; we now found nothing but a deep Silence, a dismal
Desert, a frightf^l Solitude, dispeoled Streets, not meeting with any Mortal
Man; but only certain Animals, who fled from the Luster of our Torches. But the
remaining part of the Adventure, you shall have, My Lord, another time. As
Boyando tells you, Qui' e il fin del Canto; e torno ad Orlando,
Ad^o Signor, a voi me raccomando.



To Mademoiselle* Paulet.
Madam,
SO great a Misfortune as mine, wanted no less Consplation than that which I
lately received from you, and I looked on your Letter, as a Pardon which Heaven
granted me after my Sentence. I can call by no other name, the News which
obliged me to return to this Place, and I can assure you that ^entence of Death
is oftentimes less rigorous. But since in the midst of all my Misfortunes, I
have the honor to be remembered by you, to complain would be ill-becoming of
me: For methinks he may dispense with the Favors of Fortune, who is happy
enough to obtain yours. This is the Reason that I shall make use of to comfort
my self, for the Necessity of remaining here, and not that which you urged in
yours, That it is better to be an Exile in a Foreign Land, than to be a
Prisoner in one's own Country: For alas! you know (...) one half of my Misery,
if you are (...) convinced that I am both together; and (...) you judge of the
Matter rightly, you (...) find that a thing, which seems very inconsistent, is
to be be found in me, which (...) be banished from the same Person by wh^^ I am
kept a Prisoner. You will find (...) difficult to interpret this Riddle, (...)
you call to mind, that I have always (...) used to mingle a Dram of Love in my
(...). For, if as you say I am allowed (...) Liberty here, of which I should be
depri^^^ in France, I beseech you let it be that (...) assuring you, that there
is a great deal of Passion mixed with the Affection which I express for your
Service. I should indeed be ungrateful, if I should discover but an Ordinary
Friendship for a Person who doe^ such Extraordinary Things for me, and (...) am
obliged to fall in love at least with you^ Generosity. I have been acquainted
what care a Gentleman and a Lady has taken to enquire of my Welfare, which is
an additional Obligation to one whom they ha^ extremely obliged before. For all
the rest* they have seemed buried in so profound a Silence, that for six Months
together I have heard not the least mention of them. Whether this comes from
their Forgetfulness (...) from their Prudence, I am unable to determine. Yet
Forgetfulness may be allowed an Excuse for Silence, but a dumb remembrance is
without Defense. I leave you to conclude, Madam, how much Luster this reflects
upon what you have done for me, and how much I am obliged to you for a (...)
Letter at a time, when others have (...) afraid to send me their Service.
Therefore let me assure you, that tho I am unable to make suitable returns to
such Good^ess, I esteem it at least, and extol it as it deserves, and that I am
as much as a Man ^an possibly be,

Madam, Yours, etc.


To Monsieur de Chaudebonne.
I Writ to you ten or twelve days age, and returned you thanks for the (...)
Letters, which I have at ^ength received from you. If you were but sensible of
the Satisfaction they brought with them, you would be sorry for not having writ
to me oftener, and for not frequently repeating the Consolation, of which I had
so much need. Madrid which is the agreeablest Place in the World, for those who
at once are Lustly and Libertines, is the most Disconsolate, for those who are
Regular, or those who are Indisposed. And in Lent, which is the Players
Vacation, I do not know so much as one Pleasure that a Man can enjoy with
Conscience. My Melancholy here and my want of Company have produced a good
Effect in me; For they have reconciled me to Books, which I had for a time
forsaken; and being able to meet with no other Pleasures, I have been ^orc'd
(...) has studied, or has been sick: For if one of the Chief Things that
Philosophy aims at, is a Contempt of Life; the Stone Colic is certainly the
best of Masters, and Plato and Socrates persuade us less efficaciously. It has
lately re^d me a Lecture, that lasted seventeen Days, and which I shall not
quickly forget: and which has often made me consider how very feeble we are,
since three Grains of Sand, are sufficient to cast us down. But if it
determines me to any Sect, it shall not at least be that which maintains that
Pain is not an Evil; and that he who is Wi^e is at all times happy. But
whatever befalls me, I can neither be Happy nor Wise, without being near to you,
and nothing can make me one or the other, so much as your Presence, or your
Example. Yet am I very uncertain when I shall be able to leave this place, and
expecting both Money and Men, which are coming by Sea, and which are two things
that do not always keep touch with us, I apprehend my remaining here longer
than I could wish: Therefore I make it my humble Request to you, that you would
not forget me so long as you have done, and that you would testify by doing me
the Honor of Writing to me, that you are convinced of the real Affection with
which

I am Yours, etc.

To Monsieur de Gordeau.
Sir,
YOU ought to give me time to recover our Tongue, before you oblige me to write
to you. For it appears to me to be something absurd, that I, who have been now
so long a Foreigner, and but just come from breathing the Air of Barbary,
should presume to expose my Letters, to one of the most Eloquent Men in France.
This consideration has kept me silent till now. But tho I forbear to answer
your Challenges, I cannot refuse to return your Civilities. By these you have
found a way to vanquish me, in spite of all my Evasions: In my present
condition it is more reputable to you, to Conquer me this way, than to overcome
me by Force. You would have acquired but small Glory by Vig^rusly Attacking a
Man, who is already dr^ven to Extremity, and to whom Fortune has given so many
Blows, that the least may satisfy to over-whelm him. Amidst the Darkness in
which ^he has placed us, we can have no defense; but here all our Art and o^r
Skill in parring are useless. The case perhaps might be otherwise; if you h^d
set before my Eyes the Sun of which you make mention; and as Dejected as you
see me now, I should grow daring enough to enter the Lists against you, if the
Light of that were divided between us Equally* It Is more to have that alone on
your side, than all the rest of Heaven. The Beauties which Sparkle in all that
you do, are only derived from hers, and it is the Influence of her Rays on you,
which produces so many Flowers. Nothing can ever a^pear more Lively, than those
which you scatte^ o^ every thing that comes from you. I have seen them upon the
Ocean's extremest Shores, and in places where Nature cannot produce, no, not
one Blade of Grass. I have received Nosegays of them, which made me meet in
Deserts, with the choicest Delicacies of Gre^^e and of Fruitf^l Italy. And tho
they had been carried (...) Hundred Leagues, neither the length of way, nor of
time had in the least diminished their Luster. They are indeed Immortal and
cannot Decay, and so vastly different from all Terrestrial Productions, that
that it is with a great deal of Justice, that you have offered them up to
Heaven* for Altars alone are worthy of them. Believe me, Sir, in what I am
saying, I speak but my real Sentiments; when my Curiosity, as you say, had
obliged me to pass the Bounds of the Ancient World, to find out Rare and
Surprising Objects, your Works were the wonderfullest things that I saw, and
Africa could show me nothing more New, and no more Extraordinary sight. Reading
them under the Shade of its Palms, I wished you Crowned with them all, and at
the very time that I saw, that I had gone beyond Hercules, I found I came short
of you. All this, which was capable of producing Envy in any Man's Soul but
mine, filled mine with so much Esteem and Affection, that you then took the
place there, which you are now desiring, and perfectly finished what you think
you are still to begin. After the knowledge which I have had of you, how can I
form such an Image of you, as you are willing to give me? How can I Fancy you
to be that little Creature you say you are? How could I Comprehend that Heaven
could place, such mighty things in so small a space? When I give my Imagination
a loose, it gives you four yards at least, and Represents you of the Statur^ of
Men engendered by Angels. Yet I shall be very glad to find that it is as you
would have me believe. Amongst the rest of the Advantages, which I expect to
derive from you, I am in hopes that you will bring our Stature into some
Credit, and that it is ours which henceforward will be accounted the Noblest;
and that by you, we shall be Exalted above those who believe themselves higher
that we. As we pour the most exquisite Essences into the smallest Bottles,
Nature infuseth the Divinest Souls into the smallest Bodies, and mixes more or
less of matter with them, as they have more or less in them of their Almighty
Original. She seems to place the most Shining Souls, as Jewelers set the most
Sparkling Stones, who make use of as little Gold as they can with them, and no
more than just suffices to bind them. By you the World will be undeceived of
that sottish error of valuing Men by their weight, and my littleness with
which I have been so often upbraided by Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, for the
future may recommend me to her. For what remains the Affection is very just,
which you tell me, she has for you, and with her, six more of the Loveliest
Creatures that illustrate the Light. But I wonder that you should think to get
mine by such a discovery; and to gain it by the very means, which were
sufficient to make you lose it. You had need to have a high opinion of my
goodness, to believe that I can Love a Man who enjoys my Right, and who has
obtained the Confiscation of my most valued Possessions. But yet I am so just,
that even this shall be no Impediment, and I believe you to have so much
Justice on your side, that I do not Despair but that we may accommodate even
this matter between us. They may very well have given you my place without your
putting me out of it, and my room in their hearts was but very small, if it
cannot contain us both. As for my part, I shall do my utmost, that I may not
incommode you there; and shall take care to to take up my Station so that we
may not clash; since so powerful an Interest cannot make me cease to be yours,
you may believe, that in spite of the worst of Accidents, I shall be Eternally

Yours, etc.


BILLET From Madam d^ Saintot, to Monsieur De Voiture.
I Have promised to bestow you, for a Gallant, upon two Fine Women, my Friends.
I am confident that you will not find the Exploit too many for you, and do not
doubt but that you will confirm my Promise as soon as you have but see^ them.


The Answer of Monsieur De Voiture.
LET me see what I Love as soon as you can* For I die with Impatience t^ll that
happy Moment. And since at your Command I have fallen in Love, it (...) hoves
you to take some care that I am be loved too. I have thought all Night upon the
two Ladies that -- In short upon you know whom. I write this (...) to one of
them; Deliver it, I beseech you, to her, whom you believe that I love the mo^e
Passionately of the two. In acknowledgment of the Good Offices which I receive
from you, I assure you, that you shall always dispose of my Affections; and
that I will never love any one so much as your self, till I am convinced that
you have in good earnest a Mind that I should.


To his Unknown Mistress.
WAS there ever so Extraordinary a Passion, as that which I have for you? For
my part, I do not know any thing of you; and to my Knowledge I never so much as
heard of you. And yet, I Gad, I am desperately in Love with you* and it is now
a whole Day, since I have Sighed and looked Silly, and Languish'd, and Died,
and all that for you. Without having ever seen your Face, I am taken with its
Beauty; and am charmed with your Wit, tho I never have heard one Syllable of
it. I am ravished with your every Action, and I fancy in you a kind of I know
not what, that makes me passionately in Love with I know not whom. Sometimes I
fancy you Fair, and at other times Black. Now you appear Tall to me, by and by
Short; Now with a Nose of the Roman Shape, and anon with a Nose turned up. But
in whatever form I describe you, you appear the Loveliest of Creatures to me;
and though I am ignorant what sort of Beauty yours is, I am ready to pawn my
Soul, that it is the most Bewitching of all of them. If it be your Luck to know
me as little, and to Love me as much, then thanks be to Love, and the Stars.
But lest you should a little impose upon your self, in fancying me a Tall Fair
Fellow, and so be surpised at the Sight of me, I care not for once, if I
venture to send you my Picture. My Stature is three Inches below the Middle
one; My Head appears tolerable enough, and is decently set off with a large
Gray Head of Hair: Then with Eyes that languish a little, yet are something
Hagard, I have a sort of a Cudden cast of a Face. But in requital one of your
Friends will tell you, that I am the honestest Fellow in the World, and that
for Loving Faithfully in five or six Places at a time, there is no Man alive
comes near me. If you think that all this will accommodate you, it shall be at
your Service as soon as I see you. Till that long longed for time I shall think
of you; that is, of I know not whom. But if any one should chance to ask me for
whom I sigh, don't be afraid, I warrant I keep the Secret; I would fain see any
one catch me at naming you to him.


To Mademoiselle Paulet.
Madam,
THere was only one thing wanting to your Adventures, and that was to be a
Prisoner of State; I have given you here the happy Occasion of being such.
Fortune, who has omitted no Opportunity of bringing you into Play, will in all
probability, make her advantage of this. I know very well that I bring you into
danger by writing to you; Yet cannot eve^ that Reflection-restrain me. From
whe^^^ you may conclude, that there is no Ri^k which I would refuse to run, to
refresh your remembrance of me, since I can resolve to endanger even you, you
who are Dear and Valuable above all the rest of the World to me. I tell you
this, Madam, at a time; when I would not lie, no not in a Compliment: For I
would have you to know, that I am much the be^ter for the Distemper which I
have lately had. It has caused me to assume such good Resolutions, that if I
had them not, I could be contented to purchase them with all my Health* I
plainly foresee, that this will but divert you, you who are Conscious to so
much of my Weakness; and who will never believe that I can keep single
Resolutions, I who have broken so many Vows; yet nothing is more certain than
that I have hitherto beheld the Spanish Beauties with as much Indifference, as
I did the Flemish at Brussels; and I hope to grow a Convert in the very Place
of the World in which the Tempter is strongest, and where the Devil resumes as
glorious Shapes as what he put off when he fell. The Reformation is so great in
me, that I have but one Scruple remaining, which is, that I think too often of
you; and that I desire to see you again with a little too much Impatience. I
who have moderated the rest of my Passions, have been unable to reduce that
which I have for you, to the Measure with which we are permitted to love our
Neighbors; that is to say, as much as we do our selves; and I fear you have a
larger share in my Soul, than I ought to allow a Creature. Look out I beseech
you for a Remedy for this, or rather for an Excuse for it: For as for a Remedy,
I believe there is none, and that I must be always with utmost Passion,

Madam, Yours.


TO THE Marchioness of Rambouillet.
In Answer to a Letter of Thanks of hers.
Madam,
THo my Liberality should, as you tell me, surpass the Bounty of Alexander, it
would nevertheless be richly recompensed, by the Thanks which you have returned
me for it. He himself, as boundless as his Ambition was, would have confined it
to so rare a Favor. He would have set more value upon this Honor, than he did
on the Persian Diadem; and he would nev^r have envied Achilles the Praise which
^e received from Homer, if he could but himself have obtained Yours. Thus,
Madam, on this Pinnacle of G^or^ on which I stand, if I bear any Envy to his,
it is not so much ^o that which he acquired himself, as to that which you have
bestowed upon him, and he has received no Honors, which I do no^ hold Inferior
to mine, unless it be that which you did him, when you declared him your
Gallant. Neither his Vanity, nor the rest of his Flatterers, could ever
persuade him to believe any thing that was so advantageous, to him, and the
Quality of Son of Jupiter Hammon, was by much less glorious to him than this.
But if any thing comforts me for the Jelousie which it has raised in me, it is
this, Madam, that knowing you as well as I know you, I am very well assured,
that if you have done him this Honor, it is not so much upon the account of his
having been the greatest of Mankind, as of his having been now these two
thousand years no more. However, we here find cause to admire the Greatness of
his Fortune, which not being able yet to forsake him so many years after his
Death, has added to his Conquests a Person that gives them more^ustre than the
Daughters and Wife of Darius; and which has gained him a Mind more great than
the World he Conquered. I ought here to be afraid, after your Example of
Writing, in too lofty a Style. But how can the Writer be too sublime who writes
of you, and of A^exander? I humbly beseech you, Madam, to believe that I have
equal Passion for you, with that which you show for him; and that the
Admiration of your Virtues will oblige me to be always,

Madam, Yours, etc.


An Imitation of Monsieur De Voiture's Letter to Mademoiselle De Rambouillet.
Being an Answer to that by which she had informed him, who was then with
Monsieur in Exile, that the Academy designed to abolish the Particle Car. [For.]

That the Reader may be diverted with this Letter, he is desired to suppose,
that there is a Club of Wits erected in London, for the Regulation of the
Tongue, who have a Design to abolish [For.]

Madam,
FOR, being of so great Importance in our Tongue as it is, I extremely approve
of the Resentment you show for the Wrong they design to do it; and I must needs
declare, that I expect no good from this Club of Wits, which you mention, since
they are resolved to establish themselves by so great an^ Oppression. Even at
at a time like this, when Fortune is acting her Tragedies throughout all
Europe. I can behold nothing so deserving of Pity, as when I see they are ready
to Arraign and to Banish a Word, which has so faithfully served this Monarchy,
and which amidst all our English Confusions, has always been of the side of
those who were truly English. For my part, I cannot for my heart comprehend,
what reason they can allege against a Word, whose only business is to go
before Reason* and which has no other Employment than to usher it in. I cannot
imagine what Interest can oblige them, to take away that which belongs to For,
to give it to Because that, nor why they have a Mind, to say with three
Syllables, that which they say with three Letters. That which I am afraid of,
Madam, i^ this, that after they have been guilty of this one Injustice, they
will not scruple at more; perhaps they may have the Impudence to attack But,
and who knows if If may be any longer secure. So that, after they have deprived
us of all those words, whose business it is to bring others together, the Wi^^
will reduce us to the Language of Angels* or, if they cannot do that, they will
at least oblige us, to speak only by Signs: And here I must confess, that your
Observation is true, viz. That no Example can more clearly show us the
Instability of Humane Affairs. He who had told me some Years ago, that I should
have outlived For, I had thought had promised me a longer Life than the
Patriarchs. And yet we see that after he has maintained himself for some
hundreds of years, in full Force and Authority, after he has been employed in
the most Important Treaties, and has assisted in the Councils of our Kings with
Honor, he is all of a Sudden fallen into Disgrace, and threatened with a
Violent end. I now expect nothing less, than to be terrified with lamentable
Cries in the Air, declaring to the World, that the great For is Dead: For the
Death of the Great Came, or of the Great Pan, was, in my mind, less Important. I
know if we consult one of the finest Wits of the Age, and one whom I esteem
with Passion, he will tell us, that it is our Duty to condemn an Innovation like
this, that we ought to use the For of our Fathers, as well as their Sun and
their Soil, and that we should by no means banish a Word, which was in the
Mouths of our Edwards and of our Henrys. But you, Madam, are the Person, who
ar^ principally obliged to undertake his Protection. For since the Supreme
Grace, and the Sovereign Beauty of the English Tongue lies in yours, you ought
to command here with an Absolute Sway, and with a Smile or a Frown, give Life
o^ give Death to Syllables, as uncontro^l'd as you do to Men. For this, I
believe you have already secured it, from the imminent Danger which threatened
it, and by vouchsafing it a Place in your Letter, have fixed it i^ a Sanctuary
and a Mansion of Glory, to which neither Envy nor Time can reach. But here,
Madam, I beg leave to assure you, that I could not but be surpised to see how
Fantastic your Favors are, I could not but think it strange, that you, who
without Compassion could see a Thousand Lovers expire, should not have the
Heart to see a Syllable die. If you had but had half the Care of me, which you
have shown of For, I should then have been happy in spite of ill Fortune: Then
Poverty, Exile, and Grief, would scarce have had force to come near me. If you
had not delivered me from these Evils themselves, you had freed me at least
from the Sense of them. But at a Time that I expected to receive consolation
from yours, I found that your kindness was only designed to For, and that his
Banishment troubled you more than ours. I must confess, Madam, it is but just,
you should undertake his Defense; but you ought to have taken some care of me
too, that People might not Object to you, that you forsake your Friends for a
Word. You make no Answer at all to that which I writ about; You take not the
least Notice of that which so much concerns me: In three or four Pages you
scarce remember me once, and the Reason of this is For. Be pleased to consider
me a little more for the Future, and when you undertake the Defense of the
Afflicted, remember that I am of the Number. I shall always make use of him
himself to oblige you to grant me this Favor, and to convince you that it is
but my Due. For,

I am, etc.


To the Duke of Enguien, upon his Taking of DUNKIRK.
I Am so far from wondering that you have taken Dunkirk, that I believe you
could take the Moon by the Teeth, if you did but once attempt it. Nothing can
be impossible to you; I am only uneasy about what I shall say to your Highness
on this occasion, and am thinking by what extraordinary terms I may bring you
to reach my Conceptions of you. Indeed, my Lord, in that Height of Glory, to
which you have now attained, the Honor of your Favor is a singular Happiness,
but it is a troublesome thing to us Writers, who are obliged to Congratulate
you upon every good Success, to be perpetually upon the Hunt for words whose
Force may answer your Actions* and to be every day inventing of new
Panegyricks. If you would but have the Goodness to suffer your self to be beat
sometime, or to rise from before some Town, the variety of the matter might
help to support us, and we should find out some fine thing or other to say to
you, upon the inconstancy of Fortune, and the Glory that is gotten by bearing
her Malice ^bravely. But having, from the very first of your Actions, Ranked
you Equal with Alexander, and finding you rising upon us continually; upon my
word, my Lord, we are at a loss what to do, either with you or our selves.
Nothing that we can say, can come up to that which you do, and the very Flights
of our Fancy flag Below you. Eloquence, which Magnifies smallest things, cannot
reach the height of those which you do, no, not by its boldest Figures. And
that which is called Hyperbole on other occasions, is but a cold way of
speaking when it comes to be applied to you. Indeed it is different to
Comprehend, how your Highness each Summer has still found out means to Augment
that Glory, which every Winter seemed at its full Perfection; and that having
begun so greatly, and gone on more greatly, still your last Actions should
Crown the rest, and be found the most Amazing. For my own part, my Lord, I
congratulate your Success, as I am in Duty obliged, but I plainly foresee, the
very thing that Augments your Reputation with us, may prejudice that which you
expect from after Ages; and that so many Great and Important Actions, done in
so short a space, may render your life Incredible to future times, and make
your History be thought a Romance by Posterity. Be pleased then, my Lord, to
set some Bounds to your Victories, if it be only to accommodate your self to
the Capacity of Human Reason, and not to go further than Common Belief can
follow you. Be contented to be quiet and secure, at least for a time, and
suffer France which is Eternally alarmed for your safety, to enjoy Serenely,
for a few Months, the Glory which you have acquired for her. In the mean time,
I Beseech you to believe, that among so many Millions of Men who Admire you,
and who continually pray for you, there is not one who does it, with so much
Joy, with so much Zeal and Veneration, as I, who am,

My Lord, Your Highnesses, etc.


To the Duke of Enguien (Afterward the Great Prince of CONDE) Upon his gaining
the Battle of ROCROY.
My Lord,
AT a time that I am so far removed from your Highness, that you cannot
possibly lay your Commands upon me, I am fully resolved to speak freely my Mind
to you, which I have so long been obliged to disguise, lest it should bring me
into the same Inconvenience, with those, who before me, have taken the like
Liberties with you. But let me tell you, My Lord, you have done too much, to
let it pass without taking notice of it; and you are unreasonable if you think
to behave your self as you do, without being loudly told of it. If you did but
know how strangely all Paris talks of you, I am very confident that you would
be ashamed of it; and you could not without confusion hear, with how little
Respect, and how little Fear of Displeasing you, all the World presumes to
discourse of what you have done. I must confess, my Lord, I wonder what you
could mean: You have shown your self bold with a Veng^ance, and Violent to the
last Degree* in putting such an Affront upon two or three old Captains, whom
you ought to have Respected, if it had been only for their Antiquity. In
killing the poor Count de la Fountain, who was the very best Man in the
Lo^-C^untrys; In taking sixteen pieces of Cannon, the proper Goods of the
King's Unk^e* and the Queen's own Brother; and in ^onfounding the Spanish
Troops, after they had shown so much goodness in le^ting you pass. I heard
indeed, you are Obstinate as a Dev^l, and that it was not to much purpose to
Dispute about any thing with you. But yet I never thought, that your heat woudd
have transported you so far. If you go on at the R^te you have begun, you will
shortly grow Intolerable I assure you, to all Europe, and neither the Emperor
nor the King of Spain, will either of them be able to endure you. But now, my
Lord, laying the Man of Conscience aside, and Resuming the Man of State, I
Felicitate your Highness for the Victory I hear you have gained, the most
Complete, and the most Important, which has happened in our Age. France, which
you have sheltered from all the Storms that it Dreaded, is amazed to see that
you have begun your Life with an Action, with which Caesar would gladly have
Crowned his own, and which alone, reflects more Luster upon the Kings your
Progenitors, than all theirs have transferred to you. Well, my Lord, you have
Verified what has been formerly said, that Virtue comes to the Caesar's
preventing Time. For you who are a true Caesar both in Wit and in Knowledge;
Caesar in Diligence and in Vigilance; in Courage Caesar, and per omnes Casus
Caesar; you have outrun the hopes, and surpassed the Expectation of Men; you
have clearly shown that Experience is necessary to none but Ordinary Souls,
that the Virtue of Heroes comes by a more Compendious way, and that the Works
of Heaven are finished when but begun. After this I leave you to Judge, how you
are like to be Received and Carress'd by the Lords of the Court, and with what
pleasure the Ladies heard, that he whom they had seen Triumphant in Balls, had
been Victorious in Armies; and that the finest Head of all France, was likewise
the Best and the Strongest. There is not a Man, even to Monsieur Beaumont, who
does not Declaim in your Praise. They who had revolted against you, are now
reduced, and they who complained that you were always laughing, have been
forced to confess, that you have shown your self now in good earnest; and every
one's afraid of being of the Number of your Enemies* since you have defeated
such Multitudes of them. Pardon O Caesar the Liberty which I have taken;
Receive the Praise that is due to you, and permit us to Render to Caesar, that
which is due to Caesar.


To Monsieur de BALZAC.
Sir,
IF it be true that I have always kept the Rank, which you tell me I have held
in your Memory. Methinks you have shown but an indifferent concern for my
Satisfaction, in delaying so long to impart the pleasing News to me, and in
suffering me so long to be the Happiest of Men, without Dreaming I was so. But
perhaps you were of opinion that this very good Fortune, was so infinitely
above any thing that I could in reason hope for, that it was necessary you
should take time to invent Arguments, which might render it credible, and that
you had an occasion to employ all the power of Rhetoric to persuade me, that
you had not forgot me. And thus far at least I must needs confess, that you
have been very just, that resolving to let me have nothing but words for all
the Affection you owe me, the Choice which you have made of them, has been so
Rich, and so Beautiful, that let me die if I believe the thing they assure me
of would be of greater value. This at least I ^m sure of, that they would
suffice to Counterballance any Friendship but mine. I am only Discontented at
one thing, and that is, that so much Artifice and so much Eloquence, should not
be able to Disguise the Truth from me, and that in this, I should resemble your
own Shephe^desses, who are too silly to be Beguiled by a Man of Wit. But
indeed, you must excuse me if I am something inclined to suspect an Art, which
could invent commendations for a Quartan-Ague, and an Art which you have at
more Command than ever Man had before you. All those Graces, and that Air of
the Court, which I so much admire in yours, Convince me rather of the
Excellence of your Wit, then of the goodness of your Will. And from all the
fine things which you have said in my Favors, all that I can conclude, even
when I am inclined to flatter my self, is, that Fortune has been pleased to
give me a place in your Dreams. Nay, I know not if the very Extravagancies of a
Soul so Exalted as yours, are not too Serious, and too Reasonable, to Descend
so low as to me. And I shall esteem my self too obligingly used by you, if you
have but so much as Dreamt that you Love me. For to imagine, that you have
reserved a place for me amidst those Sublime thoughts, which are at present
employed, in recompensing the Virtues of all the World, and distributing Shares
of Glory to Mankind, to imagine this would be extreme presumption in me. I have
too great an opinion of your Understanding, to believe that you could be Guilty
of any thing that is so much below you, and I should be unwilling, that your
Enemies should have that to object to you. I am perfectly satisfied, that the
only Affection which you can have justly for any one, is that which you owe to
your self; and that Precept of Studying ones self, which is a Lesson of
Humility to all besides you, ought to have a contrary Effect in Relation to
you, and oblige you to Contemn, whatever you find without you. And therefore
here let me swear to you, that without pretending to any share in your
Affection, I should have been very well satisfied* if you had preserved with
never so little care, the Friendship which I have vowed Eternally to have for
you, and to have placed it if not amongst the things which you value, at least
amongst those which you are not forward to lose. But in leaving me here with
that lovely Rival, of whom you made mention of in yours, you have shown, let me
tell you, too little Jealousy, and you have suffered her to gain so much
Advantage of you, that I have Reason to suspect that you have Conspired with
her, to do me a mischie^. And therefore I have more Reason than you to
Complain, that she has enriched your self by your Losses, and that you have
suffered her to get into her power, that which I thought to have secured from
her Tyranny, by entrusting it in your hands. If you had been willing to have
made never so little defense, the better part of my self, had yet been our own,
but you by your negligence have suffered her to surprise it, and to Advance her
Conquests at such a rate over me, that tho I should surrender to you, all that
remains of me, you would not have so much as one half of that which you have
lost. Nevertheless, let me assure you, that you have gained in my Esteem, as
much as you have lost in my Affection, and that at the very time that I was
beginning to Love you less, I was forced to Honor you more. I have seen
nothing of yours since your Departure, which does not go beyond all that you
had done before. And by your last works, you have the Honor of Excelling him
who surpassed all others, It cannot therefore but appear strange, that when you
have so much Reason to be contented, you should yet be complaining, and that
you your self, should be the only great Man who remains dissatisfied with you.
At present all France is listening to you, and yuo are indifferent to no Man
who has but Learnt to Read. All who are concerned for the Honor of their
Country, are not more inquisitive, after what the Marshall de Crequi is
doing, than they are after what is doing by you. And you are the Person who can
make more Noise in your Solitude, than the most Happy and most Renowned of our
Generals, at the Head of Forty Thousand Men. Can you wonder then, that with so
much Glory, you should be Obnoxious to Envy, and that the very same Judges with
whom Scipi was Criminal, and who Condemned Aristides and Socrates, should not
unanimously do Justice to your Desert. The People can plead Prescription for
Hating the very Qualities which they Admire in any one. Every thing which
Transcends 'em, they think Affronts 'em; and they can better bear with a Common
Vice, than an Extraordinary Virtue. So that if that Law was in Force amongst
us, of Banishing the most powerful for Authority or Reputation, I make no
doubt, but that you would stand the Mark of the Public Envy, and I believe
e^nv Cardinal Richlieu would not run greater hazard. But, for God sake, have a
care of calling that your Misfortune, which is but that of the Age. And
complain no more of the Injustice of Men, since all who have worth, are of your
side, and that amongst them, you have found a Friend, whom yet perhaps, you may
lose once more* At least, I shall do my utmost to put you into a condition of
doing so. For every Man's Darling Vanity, at present, is to be accounted yours.
For my own part, I have always in so Public a manner professed my self so,
that if through ill Fortune I should not be able to Love you so much as I have
done, yet here let me Swear to you, that you shall be the only Man to whom I
will dare to declare it, and that I will always own my self to the rest of the
World, to be as much as ever,

Yours, etc.


To the Marquis of Pisani;
Who had lost all his Money and his Baggage, at the Siege of Thionville.
The Character of the Marquis of Pisani, was a Man of Honor, Generosity, and
Courage; but ^n Extravagant, Ignorant, Obstinate, Disputing Gamester.
Sir,
THE Man would be to blame, or I have been very much mis-inform'd, who should
upbraid you with having had the Mules to keep, at your Camp of Thionville. The
Devil a Mule have you kept there Sir. They tell me, that upon the weighty
Consideration, that several Armies have been formerly lost by their Baggage;
you have made all possible haste to be disencumber'd of yours. And that having
often read in the Roman Histories, (this it is to be such a Man of Reading,
look you) that the greatest Exploits that were done by their Cavalry, were done
on Foot, after having voluntarily dismounted in the Extremity of the most
doubtful Battles, you took a Resolution to dispatch away all your Horses, and
have managed matters so swimmingly, that you have not so much as one left. And
now, the Important Person stands on his own Legs.

Perhaps, you may receive some small Inconvenience from this. But let me die,
if it be not much for your honor, that you as well as Bias, honest Old Bias, I
warrant you know him so wondrous well, should be able to say, that you carry
all that is yours about you. No great Quantity I must confess of Foppish
Accoutrements, nor a long Train of Led-Horses, nor abundance of that which they
call the Ready; but Probity, Generosity, Magnanimity, Constancy in Dangers,
Obstinacy in Disputes, a Contempt of all Foreign Languages, Ignorance of False
Dice, and a surprising Tranquillity upon the Loss of Transitory Things.
Qualities, Sir, which are properly and Essentially yours; and of which neither
Time nor Fortune can ever deprive you. Now as Euripides, who was, as you know,
or as you know not, one of the Gravest Authors of Greece, writes in one of his
Tragedies, that Money was one of the Evils, and one of the most pernicious
ones, that flew from Pandora's Box, I admire as a Divine quality in you; the
incompatibility which you show for it, and look upon it to be a distinguishing
Mark, of a Great and Extraordinary Soul, that you are uneasy till you are rid
of this Corrupter of Reason, this Pois'ner of Souls, this Author of so much
Disorder, of so much Injustice, and of so many Violences. Yet, I could heartily
wish, that your Virtue were not arrived at such an extraordi-Pitch, and that
you could be brought to some accommodation with this Enemy of Humane kind, and
that you might be persuaded to make Peace with it, as we do with the Great
Turk, for Politic Reasons, and the Advantage of Commerce. Now upon
Consideration, that it is a Difficult matter to be much at one's ease without
it, and fancying that as I played for you at Narbonne, you threw for me at
Thionville; and that it is perhaps in my Name, that you have packed off your
Baggage; I here send you a Hundred Pistols at present in part of Payment; and
that these may not meet with the same Fate which befell their Predecessors, I
desire you not to defile your Hands with them, but to deliver them to the
French Gentlemen who are with you, for whose sake I chiefly remit them.

I am, etc.


This Letter ought to have been amongst the Original Letters.
Colonel D. to my Lady D.
Written in the beginning of King James his Reign.
Madam,
THo your last was extremely Obliging, yet the Praises which you so handsomely
gave me, did not so much prove my Merit, as show your own. Your praise of my
imaginary Virtues declared but my want of real ones. For the Politeness of your
Letter made me so sensible of the Defects of mine; that at the same time that
it loaded me with Praise, it covered me with Shame. And therefore, Madam, let
me tell you again, that in what I said of you, I was not Generous but Just: And
here you have driven me upon a tender Point, viz. of Derogating from my own
Praises, and detracting from that Action which you impute to me as an
extraordinary Virtue. But I hope you will be convinced, that the Air of the
Court has not yet blasted my Native sincerity, nor given me Gallantry at the
Expense of Truth, since I have the Rudeness to contradict you. The Repetition
of your invitation, more than makes amends for the Coldness of my Brothers: But
at the same time that it obliges it troubles me to think that I cannot accept
of it. I passionately love the Country; but cannot possibly come thither, tho
both the Spring and your self invite me. Methinks the Vilest Insect which
Nature has lodged in the Fields, is in a more desirable State than we are, whom
our Employment chains to the Town. The very Serpent still remains in that
Paradise out of which it has cast us: For if it had not been for the Deceit of
the First Serpent, there had been neither Soldier nor City. Thus you see,
Madam, to what a Condition my Unhappy Circumstances reduce me; viz. of envying
a Creature which Humane Nature abhors: For that about this time can leave its
Hole, to lie basking on Sunny and Flowery Banks, and throwing off its Old one
can assume a Coat as fresh and gay as the Season. But I must despair of getting
o^t of the Town, and my old Honorable Livery, (which I hate yet more) to enjoy
a free Air, and as free a Prospect: So that I almost esteem it a Blessing to be
drawn out some times to Hide-Park, for the Diversion of the King and the
Rabble. But here I am sensible I* have erred in indulging Thoughts and
Expressions, purely Poetical: Yet since my Subject required it, I am confident
you cannot but Pardon me. For to speak as one should do, who must not speak in
extraordinary terms of the Country, of the Spring, and of you,

I am Madam, Yours, etc.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
PReface, for Invention r. Intention. p. 1. for Will Er -- r. Will Vr -- p. 9.
for Extravagant blindness r. Ex^rvagance* and blindness p. 59. for after having
r. after she had. p, 108 do not close the Parenthesis till the full stop. p.
109. for Proceed r. Proceeded.

A Catalogue of Books Iately Printed for Samuel Briscoe, at the Corner of
Charles-street, Covent Garden.
1. ESSAYS and Maxims, Political, Moral, and Divine; Divided into four
Centuries. 12o.

2. The Young Lawyers Recreation; Being a Collection of several Pleasant Cases
in the Law, as for the Diversion of the Reader.

3. The Satyrs of Petronius Arbiter, a Roman Knight, with his Fragments
recovered at Belgrade: Made English by Mr. Burnaby of the Middle Temple, and
another Hand. 8o.

4. The History of Polybius the M^galapolitan; Containing a General Account of
the Transactions of the World, and principally of the Roman People, during the
First and Second Punick Wars: Whereto is prefixed a Charact^r of the Author,
and his Writings, by Mr. Dryden, 2 Vol. 8o.

5. A Moral Essay on Solitude, preferred to public Employments, and all its
Appanages, such as Fame, Riches, Command, Pleasures and Conversation; By the
Ingenious Sir G.' Mackenzie. 12o. Second Edition.


