The CASE of John Peachey Esquire Elected one of the Burgesses for Portsmouth in
the County of Southampton, to Serve in this present Parliament.
THat the said Borough of Portsmouth, is an ancient Borough, and as such has
in all ages sent Burgesses to Parliament, as appears by the most ancient
Parliament-Writs and Returns now extant in the Tower.

That very rarely or never before the time of Henry the Eight, or Henry the
Seventh, any Buroughs procured any Charters to elect Burgesses, for they were
then and before so far from desiring it, that they in respect of wages often
petitioned to be excused for poverty, many times lost it by disuse, and for
want of claim.

That the Burgesses for Parliament, have in all ages (as will be made appear,
as well by the ancient Returns by Scheduls, as also by the first Indentures
extant; and by the Indentures in all Kings Reigns since) been chosen by the
Commonalty of the said Borough, and the Election of them so is not restrained
by any Charter granted the Corporation, to a fewer number, which if it had been
done, yet would not have taken away the Commons right to such choice, which
they before had and enjoyed.

That Mr. Peachy the fifteenth of February last (while he was in London) was
unanimously chosen by the Freeholders and Commons, whereof near Eighty were
Freeholders.

Sir John Kempthorn having about fifty for him, and those for the most part of
the incorporate Burgesses, now pretends a sole right in the Corporation to
those, with exclusion of the Commons.

That if the Commons right to this choice be not asserted, no choice can be
there indifferently made, for they allow all incorporated persons to a choice,
and have made free of their Incorporation so many Garrison-Officers, viz.
Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns, etc. Ship-Officers, Captains, Lieutenants,
Pursers, Boatswains, etc. and so many Dock-Officers, Builders, etc.
Custom-house-Officers, and other persons of dependence, that those of the
Corporation which live in or near the Town as householders, are not
considerable to the other in number or boldness.

It Is pretended that for two or three times last past, the Corporation solely
has Elected and Returned.

Resp. Although the late Returns be made under the Common-seal, and by the name
of Incorporation, as for some time it has been, and as is done in other
Buroughs incorporate, where yet the Commonalty have a share in the Election,
yet the Commons at the times appointed for Elections have claimed their right,
and concurred in the Election, so long as persons fitting were proposed, but
now for considerable reasons have differed therein.

The now Major Mr. Shales being an Officer at the Dock, and so a man of
dependence, and Sir John Kempthorn being the Kings Commissioner of the Dock
there, the said Major would not, although often desired and advised, return Mr.
Peacheys Indenture.

Against which injurious dealing Mr. Peachey, on behalf, and for asserting the
Commons right, has Petitioned the Honorable House of Commons for relief.

The same Town deserves great and speedy consideration at this time of danger,
both as to its Fortifications and provisions, which have been much neglected,
as will appear by inspection, but by whose default I know not.


