A Brief Description OF NEW YORK: Formerly Called New-Netherlands.

With the Places thereunto Adjoining.

Together with the Manner of its Situation, Fertility of the Soil,
Healthfulness of the Climate, and the Commodities thence produced.

ALSO Some Directions and Advice to such as shall go thither: An Account of
what Commodities they shall take with them; The Profit and Pleasure that may
accrue to them thereby.

LIKEWISE A Brief RELATION of the Customs of the Indians there.

By DANIEL DENTON.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock, at the first Shop in Popes-Head-Alley in
Cornhil at the three Bibles, and William Bradley at the three Bibles in the
Minories. 1670.

TO THE Reader.
Reader,
I Have here thorough the Instigation of diverse Persons in England, and
elsewhere, presented you wi^h a Brief but true Relation of a known unknown part
of America. The known part which is either inhabited, or lies near the Sea, I
have described to you, and have writ nothing, but what I have been an
eyewitness to all or the greatest part of it: Neither can I safely say, was I
willing to exceed, but was rather willing the place it self should exceed my
Commendation, which I question not but will be owned by those that shall travel
thither: For the unknown part, which is either some places lying to the
Northward yet undiscovered by any English, or the Bowels of the earth not yet
opened, though the Natives tell us of Glittering Stones, Diamonds, or Pearl in
the one, and the Dutch has boasted of Gold and Silver in the other; yet I
shall not feed your expectation with any thing of that nature; but leave it
till a better discovery shall make way for such a Relation. In the mean time
accept of this from him who desires to deal impartially with every one,

DANIEL DENTON.

A Brief Relation OF NEW YORK, With the Places thereunto Adjoining, formerly
called THE NEW NETHERLANDS, etc.
THat Tract of Land formerly called The New Netherlands, does Contain all that
Land which lies in the North-parts of America, betwixt New England and
Maryland in Virginia, the length of which Northward into the Country, as it
has not been fully discovered, so it is not certainly known The breadth of it
is about two hundred miles: The principal Rivers within this Tract, are Hudsons
River, Raritan-River, and Delewerhay-River. The chief Islands are the
Manahatans-Island, Long Island, and Staten-Island.

And first to begin with the Manahatans Island, so called by the Indians, it
lies within land betwixt the degrees of 41. and 42. of North-latitude, and is
about 14 miles long, and two broad. It is bounded with Long Island on the
South, with Staten-Island on the West, on the North with the Main Land: And
with Conecticut Colony on the East Side of it; only a part of the Main Land
belonging to New York Colony, where several Towns and Villages are settled,
being about thirty miles in breadth, does intercept the Manahatans Island, and
the Colony of Conecticut before mentioned.

New York is settled upon the West End of the aforesaid Island, having that
small arm of the Sea, which divides it from Long Island on the South Side of
it, which runs away Eastward to New England, and is Navigable, though
dangerous. For about ten miles from New York is a place called Hell-Gate, which
being a narrow passage, there runs a violent stream both upon flood and ebb,
and in the middle lies some Islands of Rocks, which the Current sets so
violently upon, that it threatens present shipwreck; and upon the Flood is a
large Whirlpool, which continually sends forth a hideous roaring, enough to
affright any stranger from passing further, and to wait for some Charon to
conduct him thorough; yet to those that are well acquainted little or no
danger; yet a place of great defense against any enemy coming in that way,
which a small Fortification would absolutely prevent, and necessitate them to
come in at the West end of Long Island by Sandy Hook where Nutten-Island does
force them within Command of the Fort at New York, which is one of the best
Pieces of Defense in the North-parts of America.

New York is built most of Brick and Stone, and covered with red and black
Tile, and the Land being high, it gives at a distance a pleasing Aspect to the
spectators. The Inhabitants consist most of English and Dutch, and have a
considerable Trade with the Indians, for Bevers, Otter, Raccoon skins, with
other Furrs; As also for Bear, Deer, and Elke skins; and are supplied with
Venison and Fowl in the Winter, and Fish in the Summer by the Indians, which
they buy at an easy rate; And having the Country round about them, they are
continually furnished with all such provisions as is needful for the life of
man, not only by the English and Dutch within their own, but likewise by the
Adjacent Colonies.

The Commodities vented from thence is Furs and Skins beforementioned; As
likewise Tobacc, made within the Colony, as good as is usually made in
Maryland: Also Horses, Beef, Pork, Oil, Pease, Wheat, and the like.

Long Island, the West End of which lies Southward of New York, runs Eastward
above one hundred miles, and is in some places eight, in some twelve, in some
fourteen miles broad; it is inhabited from one end to the other. On the West
end is four or five Dutch Towns, the rest being all English to the number of
twelve, besides Villages and Farm houses. The Island is most of it of a very
good soil, and very natural for all sorts of English Grain; which they sow
and have very good increase of, besides all other Fruits and Herbs common in
England, as also Toba^c^, H^mp, Flax, Pumpkins, Melons, etc.

The Fruits natural to the Island, are Mulberries, Posimons, Grapes great and
small, Huckelberries, Cramberries, Plums of several sorts, Rosberries and
Strawberries, of which last is such abundance in June, that the Fields and
Woods are died red: Which the Countrey-people perceiving, instantly arm
themselves with bottles of Wine, Cream, and Sugar, and in stead of a Coat of
Male, every one takes a Female upon his Horse behind him, and so rushing
violently into the fields, never leave till they have disrobed them of their
red colors, and turned them into the old habit.

The greatest part of the Island is very full of Timber, as Oaks white and red,
Walnut-trees, Chesnut-trees, which yield store of Mast for Swine, and are often
therewith sufficiently fatted with Oat-Corn: as also Maples, Cedars, Saxifrage,
Beach, Birch, Holly, Hazel, with many sorts more.

The Herbs which the Country naturally afford, are Purslain, white Orage,
Egrimony, Violets, Penniroyal, Alicampane, besides Saxaparilla very common,
with many more Yea, in May you shall see the Woods and Fields so curiously
bedecke with Roses, and an innumerable multitude of delightful Flowers, not
only pleasing the eye, but smell, that you may behold Nature contending with
Art, and striving to equal, if not excel many Gardens in England: nay, did we
know the virtue of all those Plants and Herbs growing there (which time may
more discover) many are of opinion, and the Natives do affirm, that there is no
disease common to the Country, but may be cured without Materials from other
Nations.

There is several Navigable Rivers and Bays, which puts into the North-side of
Long Island, but upon the South Side which joins to the Sea, it is so fortified
with bars of sands and sholes, that it is a sufficient defense against any
enemy, yet the South Side is not without Brooks and Riverets, which empty
themselves into the Sea; yea, you shall scarce travel a mile, but you shall
meet with one of them whose Crystal streams run so swift, that they purge
themselves of such stinking mud and filth, which the standing or low-paced
streams of most brooks and rivers westward of this Colony leave lying, and are
by the Suns exhalation dissipated, the Air corrupted, and many Fevers and other
distempers occasioned, not incident to this Colony: Neither do the Brooks and
Riverets premised, give way to the Frost in Winter, or draught in Summer, but
keep their course throughout the year.

These Rivers are very well furnished with Fish, as Bosse, Sheepsheads, Place,
Perch, Trouts, Eels, Turtles, and diverse others.

The Island is plentifully stored with all sorts of English Cattle. Horses,
Hogs, Sheep, Goats, etc. no place in the North of Am^rica better, which they
can both raise and m^intain, by reason of the large and spacious Meadow, or
Marches wherewith it is furnished, the Island likewise producing excellent
English grass, the seed of which was brought out of England, which they
sometime mow twice a year.

For wild Beasts there is Deer, Bear, Wolves, Foxes, Racoons, Otters,
Musquashes and Skunks. Wild Fowl there is great store of, as Turkies,
Heath-Hens, Quails, Partridges, Pigeons, Cranes, Geese of several sorts,
Brants, Ducks, Widgeon, Teal, and diverse others: There is also the red Bird,
with diverse sorts of singing birds, whose chirping notes salute the ears of
Travelers with an harmonious discord, and in every pond and brook green silken
Frogs, who warbling forth their untuned tunes strive to bear a part in this
music.

Toward the middle of Long Island lies a plain sixteen miles long and four
broad, upon which plain grows very fine grass, that makes exceeding good Hay,
and is very good pasture for sheep or other Cattle; where you shall find
neither stick nor stone to hinder the Horse heels, or endanger them in their
Races, and once a year the best Horses in the Island are brought hither to try
their swiftness, and the swift^st rewarded with a silver Cup, two being
Annually procured for that purpose. There are two or three other small plains
of about a mile square, which are no small benefit to those Towns which enjoy
them.

Upon the South Side of Long Island in the Winter, lie store of Whales and
Crampasses, which the inhabitants begin with small boats to make a trade
Catching to their no small benefit. Also an innumerable multitude of Seals,
which make an excellent oil; they lie all the Winter upon some broken Marshes
and Beaches, or bars of sand beforementioned, and might be easily got were
there some skilful men would undertake it.

To say something of the Indians, there is now but few upon the Island, and
those few no ways hurtful but rather serviceable to the English, and it is to
be admired, how strangely they have deereast by the Hand of God, since the
English first settling of those parts; for since my time, where there were fix
towns, they are reduced to two small Villages, and it has been generally
observed, that where the English come to settle, a Divine Hand makes way for
them, by removing or cutting off the Indians, either by Wars one with the
other, or by some raging mortal Disease.

They live principally by Hunting, Fowling, and Fishing: their Wives being the
Husbandmen to till the Land, and plant their corn.

The meat they live most upon is Fish, Fowl, and Venison; they eat likewise
Polecats, Skunks, Racoon, Possum, Turtles, and the like.

They build small moveable Tents, which they remove two or three times a year,
having their principal quarters where they plant their Corn: their Hunting
quarters, and their Fishing quarters: Their Recreations are chiefly Football
and Cards, at which they will play away all they have, excepting a Flap to
cover their nakedness: They are great lovers of strong drink, yet do not care
for drinking, unless they have enough to make themselves drunk; and if there be
so many in their Company, that there is not sufficient to make them all drunk,
they usually select so many out of their Company, proportionable to the
quantity of drink, and the rest must be Spectators. And if any one chance to be
drunk before he has finished his proportion, (which is ordinarily a quart of
Brandy, Rum or Strong Water) the rest will pour the rest of his part down his
throat.

They often, kill one another at these drunken Matches, which the friends of
the murdered person, do revenge upon the Murderer unless he purchase his life
with money, which they sometimes do: Their money is made of a Periwinkle shell
of which there is black and white, made much like unto beads, and put upon
strings.

For their worship which is diabolical, it is performed usually but once or
twice a year, unless upon some extraordinary occasion, as upon making of War or
the lik^; their usual time is about Michaelmass, when their corn is first ripe,
the day being appointed by their chief priest or pawaw; most of them go a
hunting for venison: When they are all congregated, their priest tells them if
he want money, there God will accept of no other offering, which the people
believing, every one gives money according to their ability. The priest takes
the money, and putting it into some dishes, sets them upon the top of their low
flat-roofed houses, and falls to invocating their God to come and receive it,
which with a many loud hallows and outcries, knocking the ground with sticks,
and beating themselves, is performed by the priest, and seconded by the people.

After they have thus a while wearied themselves, the priest by his Conjuration
brings in a devil amongst them, in the shape sometimes of a fowl, sometimes of
a beast, and sometimes of a man, at which the people being amazed, not daring to
stir, he improves the opportunity, steps out, and makes sure of the money, and
then returns to lay the spirit, who in the mean time is sometimes gone, and
takes some of the Company along with him: but if any English at such times do
come amongst them, it puts a period to their proceeding, and they will desire
their absence, telling them their God will not come whilst they are there.

In their wars they fight no pitched fields, but when they have notice of an
enemies approach, they endeavor to secure their wives and children upon some
Island, or in some thick swamp, and then with their guns and hatchets they
way-lay their enemies, some lying behind one, some another, and it is a great
fight where seven or eight is slain.

When any Indian dies amongst them, they bury him upright, sitting upon a seat,
with his Gun, money, and such goods as he has with him, that he may be
furnished in the other world, which they conceive is Westward, where they shall
have great store of Game for Hunting and live easy lives. At his Burial his
nearest Relations attend the Hearse with their faces painted black, and do
visit the grave once or twice a day, where they send forth sad lamentations so
long, till time has wore the blackness off their faces, and afterward every
year once they view the grave, make a new mourning for him, trimming up of the
Grave, not suffering of a Grass to grow by it: they fence their graves with a
hedge, and cover the tops with Mats, to shelter them from the rain.

Any Indian being dead, his Name dies with him, no person daring ever afte^ to
mention his Name, it being not only a breach of their Law, but an abuse to his
friends and relations present, as if it were done on purpose to renew their
grief: And any other person whatsoever that is named after that name does
incontinently change his name, and takes a new one, their names are not proper
set names as amongst Christians, but every one invents a name to himself, which
he likes best. Some calling themselves Ra^tle-snake, Skunk, Bucks-horn, or the
like: And if a person die, that his name is some word which is used in speech,
they likewise change that word, and invent some new one, which makes a great
change and alteration in their language.

When any person is sick, after some means used by his friends, every one
pretending skill in Physic; that proving ineffectual, they send for a Pawaw or
Priest, who sitting down by the sick person, without the least enquiry after
the distemper, waits for a gift, which he proportions his work accordingly to:
that being received, he first begins with a low voice to call upon his God,
calling sometimes upon one, sometimes on another, raising his voice higher and
higher, beating of his naked breasts and sides, till the sweat runs down,
and his breath is almost gone, then that little which is remaining, he
evaporates upon the face of the sick person three or four times together, and
so takes his leave.

Their Marriages are performed without any Ceremony, the Match being first made
by money. The sum being agreed upon and given to the woman, it makes a
consummation of their Marriage, if I may so call it: After that, he keeps her
during his pleasure, and upon the least dislike turns her away and takes
another: It is no offense for their married women to lie with another man,
provided she acquaint her husband, or some of her nearest Relations with it,
but if not, it is accounted such a fault that they sometimes punish it with
death: An Indian may have two wives or more if he please; but it is not so much
in use as it was since the English came amongst them: they being ready* in some
measure to imitate the English in things both good and had: any Maid before she
is married does lie with whom she please for money, without any scandal, or the
least aspersion to be cast upon her, it being so customary, and their laws
tolerating of it. They are extraordinary charitable one to another, one having
nothing to spare, but he freely imparts it to his friends, and whatsoever they
get by gaming or any other way, they share one to another, leaving themselves
commonly the least share.

At their Cantica's or dancing Matches, where all persons that come are freely
entertaind, it being a Festival time: Their custom is when they dance, every
one but the Dancers to have a short stick in their hand, and to knock the
ground and sing altogether, whilst they that dance sometimes act warlike
postures, and then they come in painted for War with their faces black and red,
or some all black, some all red, with some streaks of white under their eyes,
and so jump and leap up and down without any order, uttering many expressions
of their intended valor. For other Dances they only show what Antic tricks
their ignorance will lead them to, wringing of their bodies and faces after a
strange manner, sometimes jumping into the fire, sometimes catching up a
Firebrand, and biting off a live coal, with many such tricks, that will
affright, if not please an English man to look upon them, resembling rather a
company of infernal Furies then men. When their King or Sachem sits in Council,
he has a Company of armed men to guard his Person, great respect being shown
him by the People, which is principally manifested by their silence: After he
has declared the cause of their convention, he demands their opinion, ordering
who shall begin: The person ordered to speak, after he has declared his mind,
tells them he has done: no man ever interrupting any person in his speech, nor
offering to speak, though he make never so many or long stops, till he says he
has no more to say: the Council having all declared their opinions, the King
after some pause gives the definitive sentence, which is commonly seconded with
a shout from the people, every one seeming to applaud, and manifest their
Assent to what is determined: If any person be condemned to die, which is
seldom, unless for Murder or Incest, the King himself goes out in person (for
you must understand they have no prisons, and the guilty person flies into the
Woods) where they go inquest of him, and having found him, the King shoots
first, though at never such a distance, and then happy is the man can shoot him
down, and cut off his Long, which they commonly wear, who for his pains is made
some Captain, or other military Officer.

Their Clothing is a yard and an half of broad Cloth, which is made for the
Indian Trade, which they hang upon their shoulders; and half a yard of the same
cloth, which being put betwixt their legs, and brought up before and behind,
and tied with a Girdle about their middle, hangs with a flap on each side: They
wear no Hats, but commonly wear about their Heads a Snake's skin, or a Belt of
their money, or a kind of a Ruff made with Deers hair, and died of a scarlet
color, which they esteem very rich.

They grease their bodies and hair very often, and paint their faces with
several colors, as black, white, red, yellow, blew, etc. which they take great
pride in, every one being painted in a several manner: Thus much for the
Customs of the Indians.

Within two Leagues of New York lies Staten-Island, it bears from New York
West something Southerly: It is about twenty miles long, and four or five
broad, it is most of it very good Land, full of Timber, and produces all such
commodities as Long- Island does, besides Tin and store of Iron Oar, and the
Calamine stone is said likewise to be found there: There is but one Town upon
it consi^^ing of English and French, but is capable of entertaining more
inhabitants: betwixt this and Long Island is a large Bay, and is the coming in
for all ships and vessels out of the Sea: On the North-side of this Island
After-^kull River puts into the main Land on the West Side, whereof is two or
three Towns, but on the East Side but one. There is very great Marshes or
Medows on both sides of it, excellent good Land, an^ good convenience for the
settling of several Towns; there grows black Walnut and Locust, as their does in
Virgi^ia, with mighty tall straight Timber, as good as any in the North of
Ameri^a: It produces any Commodity Long Island does.

Hudsons River runs by N^w-York Northward into the Country, toward the Head of
which is seated N^w-Al^a^^, a pl^ce of great Trade with the Indians, betwixt
which and New York, being above one hundred mi^es, is as good Corn-land as the
World affords, enough to entertain Hundreds of Families, which in the time of
the Dutch-Gove^nment of those parts could not be settled: For the Indians,
excepting one place, called the (...) which was kept by a Garrison, but since
the reducement of those parts under His Ma^esties obedience, and a Patent
granted to his Royal Highnes^ the Duke of York, which is about six years; since
by the care and diligenc^ of the Honorable Coll. Nicholls sent thither Deputy
to His Highness, such a League of Peace was made, and Friendship concluded
betwixt that Colony and the Indians, that they have not resisted or disturbed
any Christians there, in the settling or peaceable possessing of any Lands with
that Government, but every man has sat under his own Vine, and has peaceably
reapt and enjoyed the fruits of their own labors, which God continue.

Westward of After-Kull River beforementioned, about 18 or 20 miles runs in
Raritan-River Northward into the Country, some score of miles, both sides of
which River is adorned with spacious Medows, enough to maintain thousands of
Cattle, the Wood-land is likewise very good for corn, and stored with wild
Beasts, as Deer, and Elks, and an innumerable multitude of Fowl, as in other
parts of the Country: This River is thought very capable for the erecting of
several Towns and Villages on each side of it, no place in the North of America
having better convenience for the maintaining of all sorts of Cattle for Winter
and Summer-food: upon this River is no town settled, but one at the mouth of it.
Next this River Westward is a place called New-asons, where is two or three
Towns and Villages settled upon the Seaside, but none betwixt that and Delewer
Bay, which is about sixty miles, all which is a rich Champain Country, free
from stones, and indifferent level; store of excellent good timber, and very
well watered, having brooks or rivers ordinarily, one or more in every miles
travel: The Country is full of Deer, Elks, Bear, and other Creatures, as in
other parts of the Country, where you shall meet with no inhabitant in this
journey, but a few Indians, where there is stately Oaks, whose
broad-branched-tops serve for no other use, but to keep off the Suns heat from
the wild Beasts of the Wilderness, where is grass as high as a man's middle,
that serves for no other end except to maintain the Elks and Deer, who never
devour a hundredth part of it, then to be burnt every Spring to make way for
new. How many poor people in the world would think themselves happy, had they
an Acre or two of Land, whilst here is hundreds, nay thous^nds of Acres, that
would invite inhabitants.

Delewerhay the mouth of the River, lies about the Midway betwixt New-Y^^k
and the Capes of Virginia: It is a very pleasant River and Country, but very
few inhabitants, and them being mostly Swedes, Dutch and Finns: about sixty
miles up the River is the principal Town called N^w-Castle, which is about 40
miles from Maryland, and very good way to travel, either with horse or foot,
the people are settled all along the west side sixty miles above New Castle; the
land is good for all sorts of English grain, and wants nothing but a good
people to populate it, it being capable of entertaining many hundred fami^ies.

Some may admire, that these great and rich Tracts of land, lying so adjoining
to New England and Virginia, should be no better inhabited, and that the
richness of the soil, the healthfulness of the Clima^e, and the like, should
be no better a motive to induce people from both places to populate it.

To which I answer, that whilst it was under the Dutch Government, which has
been till within these six years; there was little encouragement for any
English, both in respect of their safety from the Ind^ans, the Dutch being
almost always in danger of them; and their Bever-trade not admitting of a War,
which would have been destructive to their trade, which was the main thing
prosecuted by the Dutch. And secondly, the Dutch gave such bad Titles to Lands,
together with their exacting of the Tenths of all which men produced off their
Land, that did much hinder the populating of it; together with that general
dislike the English have of living under another Government; but since the
reducement of it the^e is several Towns of a considerable g^eatness begun and
settled by people out of New England, and every day more and more come to view
and sett^e.

To give some satisfaction to people that shall be desirous to transport
themselves thither, (the Country being capabl of entertaining many thousands,)
how and after what manner people live, and how land may be procured, etc. I
shall answer, that the usual way, is for a Company of people to join
totogether, either enough to make a Town, or a lesser number; These go with the
consent of the Governor, and view a Tract of Land, there being choice enough,
and finding a place convenient for a Town, they return to the Governor, who
upon their desire admits them into the Colony, and gives them a Grant or Patent
for the said Land, for themselves and Associates. These persons being thus
qualified, settle the place, and take in what inhabitants to themselves they
shall see cause to admit of, till their Town be full; these Associates thus
taken in have equal privileges with themselves, and they make a division of
the land suitable to every m^ns occasions, no m^n being debarred of such
quantities as he has occasion for, the rest they let lie in common till they
have occasion for a new division, never dividing their Pas^ure-land at all,
which ^ie in common to the whole Town. The bes^ Commodities for any to carry
with them is Clothing, the Country being full of all sorts of Cattle, which
they may furnish themselves ^^thal at an easy rate, for any sorts of English
Goods; as likewise Instruments for Husbandry and Building, with Nails, Hinges,
Glass, and the like; For the manner how they get a livelihood, it is
principally by Corn and Cattle, which will there fetch them any Commodities;
likewise they sow store of Flax, which they make every one Cloth of for their
own wearing, as also woollen Cloth, and Linsey-woolsey, and had they more
Tradesmen amongst them, they would in a little time live without the help of
any other Conntrey for their Clothing; For Tradesmen there is none but live
happily there, as Carpenters, Blacksmiths, Masons, Tailors, Weavers,
Shoomakers, Tanners, Brickmakers, and so any other Trade; them that have no
Trade betake themselves to Husbandry, get Land of their own, and live exceeding
well.

Thus have I briefly given you a Relation of New York, with the places
thereunto ad^oyning; In which, if I have erred, it is principally in not giving
it its due commendation; for besides those earthly blessings where it is
stored, Heaven has not been wanting to open his Treasure, in sending down
seasonable showers upon the Earth, blessing it with a sweet and pleasant Air,
and a Continuation of such Influences as tend to the Health both of Man and
Beast: and the Climate has such an affinity with that of England, that it
breeds ordinarily no alteration to those which remove thither; that the name of
seasoning, which is common to some other Countries has never there been known;
That I may say, and say truly, that if there be any terrestrial happiness to be
had by people of all ranks, especially of an inferior rank, it must certainly
be here: here any one may furnish himself with land, and live rent-free, yea,
with such a quantity of land, that he may weary himself with walking over his
fields of Corn, and all so^ts of Gr^in and ^et his stock of Cattle amount to
some hundreds, he needs not fear their want of pasture in the Summer, or Fodder
in the Winter, the Woods affording sufficient supply. For the Summer-season,
where you have grass as high as a man's knees, nay, as high as his waste,
interlaced with Pea ^ines and other weeds that Cattle much delight in, as much
as a man can press thorough; and these woods also every mile or half-mile are
furnished with fresh ponds, brooks, or rivers, where all sorts of Cattle,
during the heat of the day, do quench their thirst and cool themselves; these
brooks and rivers being environed of each side with several sorts of trees and
Grape-vines, the Vines, Arbor-like, in re-changing places and crossing these
rivers, does shade and shelter them from the scorching beams of Sols fiery
influence: Here those which Fortune has frowned upon in En^land, to deny them
an inheritance amongst their Brethren, or such as by their utmost labors can
scarcely procure a living, I say such may procure here inheritances of land,
and possessions, stock themselves with all sorts of Cattle, enjoy the benefit
of them whilst they live, and leave them to the benefit of their children when
they die: Here you need no trouble the Shambles for meat, nor Bakers and
Brewers for Beer and Bread, nor run to a Linnen-Draper for a supply, every one
making their own Linen, and a great part of their woollen-cloth for their
ordinary wearing: And how prodigal, if I may so say, has Nature been to
furnish the Country with all sorts of wild Beasts and Foul, which every one
has an interest in, and may hunt at his pleasure; where besides the pleasure
in hunting, he may furnish his house with excellent fat Venison, Turkies,
Geese, Heath-Hens, Cranes, Swans, Ducks, Pigeons, and the like: and wearied
with that, he may go a Fish^ng, where the Rivers are so furnished, that he may
supply himself with Fish before he can leave off the Recreation: Where you may
travel by Land upon the same Continent hundreds of miles, and pass thorough
Towns and Villages, and never hear the least complaint for want, nor hear any
ask you for a farthing: there you may lodge in the fields and woods, travel
from one end of the Country to another, with as much security as if you were
locked within your own Chamber; And if you chance to meet with an Indian-Town,
they shall give you the best entertainment they have, and upon your desire,
direct you on your way: But that which adds happiness to all the rest, is the
Healthfulness of the place, where many people in twenty years time never know
what sickness is: where they look upon it as a great mortality if two or three
die out of a town in a years time; where besides the sweetness of the Air, the
Country it self sends forth such a fragrant smell, that it may be perceived at
Sea before they can make the Land: where no evil fog or vapor does no sooner
appear, but a North west or Westerly wind does immediately dissolve it, and
drive it away: What shall I say more? you shall scarce see a house, but the
South side is begirt with Hives of Bees, which increase after an incredible
manner: That I must needs say, that if there be any terrestrial Canaan, it is
surely here, where the Land flows with milk and honey. The inhabitants are
blessed with Peace and plenty, blessed in their Country, blessed in their
Fields, blessed in the Fruit of their bodies, in the fruit of their grounds, in
the increase of their Cattle, Horses and Sheep, blessed in their Basket, and in
their Store; In a word, blessed in whatsoever they take in hand, or go about,
the Earth yieldieg plentiful increase to all their painful labors.

Were it not to avoid prolixity I could say a great deal more, and yet say too
little, how free are those parts of the world from that pride and oppression,
with their miserable effects, which many, nay almost all parts of the world are
troubled, with being ignorant of that pomp and bravery which aspiring Humors
are servants to, and striving after almost every where: where a Wagon or Cart
gives as good content ^s a Coach; and a piece of their home made Cloth, better
then the finest Lawns or richest Silks: and though their low roofed houses may
seem to shut their doors against pride and luxury, yet how do they stand wide
open to let charity in and out, either to assist each other, or relieve a
stranger, and the distance of place from other N^tions, does secure them from
the envious frowns of ill-affected Neighbors, and the troubles which usually
arise thence.

Now to conclude, its possible some may say, what needs a Rela^ion of a place
o^ so long standing as N^w Yo^k has been? In answer to which I have said
something before, as to satisfy the desires of many that never had any
Relation of it. Secondly, though it has been long settled, ye^ but lately
reduced to his Majesty's obedience, and by that means but new or unknown to the
English; Else certainly those great number of Furs, that have been lately
transported from thence into Holland had never past the hands of our English
Furriers: Thirdly, never any Relation before was published to my knowledge, and
the place being capable of entertaining so great a number of inhabitants, where
they may with Gods blessing, and their own industry, live as happily as any
people in the world. A true Relation was necessary, not only for the
encouragement of many that have a desire to remove themselves, but for the
satisfaction of others that would make a trade thither.

FINIS.
The Accurate Accomptant or London Merchant, Containing an Analysis for
Instructions and Directions for a Methodical ke^ping Merchants Accounts, by way
of Debtor and Creditor, very useful for all Merchants or others, that desire
to learn or teach the Exact Method of keeping Merchants Accounts, by Thomas
Brown Accomptant; To be sold by John Harcock, at the first shop in Pope's Head
Alley, at the sign of the Three Bibles in Cornhil, 1670.


