THE CASE OF Pluralities and Non-Residence RIGHTLY STATED: In a Letter to the
Author of a Book called, A Defense of Pluralities, etc. showing the false
Reasonings and evil Doctrines therein contained.

By an Impartial Hand, and a Hearty Well-wisher to the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, at the Oxford Arms-Inn, in Warwick Lane.
1694.

THE CASE OF Pluralities and Non-Residence Rightly Stated.

THE CASE OF Pluralities and Non-Residence RIGHTLY STATED, etc.
SIR,
YOU have not thought fit to acquaint the World by what Name or Title you are
dignified, or distinguished, or where you dwell: and if I should know where
your Parsonage or Vicarage-House stands, your Book gives me reason to think,
that if I directed my Letter thither, it would not find you at home. And
therefore I know not how to Salute you, but from the Press.

It Is not my design to find fault with any thing in your Book which is honest,
or tolerable. I shall pass over some expressions, which will not bear a
Censure, and not call you to account for every undecent, or impertinent
passage: and if you had dealt thus with those whom you call Antipluralists, I
had had less to say to you.

You complain in your Introduction of some both of our Friends and Enemies, who
have made too violent exclamations against Pluralities in general. But I desire
you seriously to consider whether you have not been transported to the contrary
extreme, and endeavored to palliate and justify some things, which are really
blameable, and sinful: I know that upon all occasions men of your Spirit, when
you are pursued by arguments, take your selves to the Church as a sure
Sanctuary, and no man must undertake to question, or contradict what you say,
upon peril of being looked upon and treated as her Enemies. Though our Church
pretends not to Infallibility, or Perfection; yet some who would be thought her
choicest Sons, seem to affect something very much like it. They endeavor to
put the Stamp of her Authority upon their own private opinions, and even
faults, and impeach all such as will not admit them to be Current and
Authentic, for Faction and Disobedience. And I do not know that our excellent
Church has reason to be ashamed of any thing more than such Sons, who would
persuade the World that their personal faults are committed by her Authority,
and countenanced by her Indulgence.

Such men as these, thinking to make amends for failure in what is their proper
Duty, usually overdo the business in blustering and talking for her, and in a
superconformity as to lesser, and external matters; and, which looks very ugly
in Clergymen, they usually slight, and vilify those of their Brethren, who
conscientiously, and industriously discharge their duty, as a sort of popular,
and, which amongst them is scandal enough, moderate men, especially if they
upon any occasion express their dislike of enormous Pluralities, and
Non-Residence. Some of those severe things which you say of some City-Preachers
may be true. And yet I believe that most of them do more Service to the Church
than any Non-resident Pluralists, or even the Defender of them. They keep many
in her bosom, and in tolerable conformity to her, who would soon be frighted
into a Conventicle by a Minister of your temper.

But if they are to be blamed who Preach not so discretely as they ought, how
much more ought you in justice to blame those, who hardly Preach at all, at
least in such places as they should? And pray let me know by the next, what
reason you have to be so very angry with those honest Gentlemen, who whilst
they themselves faithfully perform their Office, sometimes reflect upon others
for not doing the like, as to call them Puritans, Infidels, Traditors: and to
treat those who are guilty of the greatest fault that Ministers well can be,
viz. negglect of the Souls of People committed to their charge, so very gently?
Let me know upon what grounds you deal with the former as Enemies to the
Church, and not the latter. It Is natural for men who do their own duty, and
bear the heat and burden of the day, to be moved at the negligence and laziness
of them who should be their Fellow Laborers, especially if they find
themselves rewarded by their Superiors with nothing but Scorn, and Contempt;
and the others punished for their Idleness with the best Livings, and
Preferments. It Is no wonder if some men concerned have perhaps too deeply
resented, and warmly declared against such proceedings. I am apt to think that
if so deserving a person, as your self, Sir, should have had the ill luck to
have had your merits overlooked, and gotten no Benefice at all, or a very mean
one, and had seen many inferior to your self in true worth, richly provided
for, you might thereby have been provoked to write as zealously against
Pluralities, as you now write for them: ^ 185.
If yet a Soul oppressed with poverty could ever have raised it self to attempt
any such great design.

You may wonder how I am got already almost to the end of your Book; but the
reason of my referring to these words is, because you seem plainly in that
Paragraph to inform the World how you come to be an Author, viz. by your being
a Pluralist and Non-resident. For there you would persuade us that hardly any
but such can be Writers. But if you have no excuse for your absence from, or
neglect of your Cures, but this, take my word for it, you had better be amongst
your Rusricks, as you are pleased to call your Parishioners.

Though if a man have a mind to be an Author, I do not know why he may not be so,
and yet serve his Cures too. I despair ever to see you so effectually to serve
the Church by writing, as the Blessed Richard Hooker did, who performed the
Office of a diligent Pastor, during the time of his writing those most
Excellent Books of Eccl. Polity. You are pleased to say, that to your certain
knowledge he had, Ibid.
and dyed possessed of very great Preferments: and yet one may dare say he was
no Pluralist, and Non-resident; if he had, we should have heard of that too.

And here, Sir, I must tell you, that one grievous thing I have to charge you
with, is that under a pretense of proving Plurality, and Non-residence, to be
lawful Jure Divino, you undertake to say, that a Minister has no obligation to
personal labor in his Charge, and that he may if he please be absent
altogether from them.

Sit still, O Pluralist, Eat, Drink and be Merry. Farm out your Benefices, and
make the best of them. And let the Curate look to the discharge of your
Conscience, and Duty to God and the People. You have your Quietus given you by
our Author. There will never any account be required of you for the Souls of
your People, nor your own neither. For if Ministers, and especially Incumbents
are not accountable for neglect of duty to the Souls entrusted with them, there
is no reason to think that any other men should be punished in another World
for the Nonperformance of any other obligation whatsoever. And yet that you
are guilty of doing this, appears from what you say in reference to the Spanish
Bishops in the Council of Trent, who would have had Residence of Bishops to be
declared necessary Jure Divino. Upon which if the Spanish Bishops, ^ag. 24, 25.
say you, had been asked, whether the Residence which they asserted to be of
Divine Right, included the whole year, or only part of it, they could not have
agreed in it. If Residence of the whole Year were required by the Law of God,
by what Authority did they appear in that place out of their Dioceses, etc. If
only partial Residence were required, who should define how much God would
accept, or how much might lawfully be spent out of their Dioceses? It might
have been alleged against them, that since God himself had revealed nothing as
to this matter, it was an evident Argument that he intended no such obligation:
So that according to your wise way of arguing, to reside even any the least
part of a year in ones Bishopric is not necessary Jure Divino. And you do yet
more openly assert this Doctrine, when you bring the Incumbent before the great
Tribunal at the last day, and like a trusty Advocate for the Non-resident
Pluralist, you plead thus for him. Page 33, 34.
And then as to a Proxy, if the Priest allegeth that the same Authority of the
Bishop, which committed the Care of the Parish to him, did disburden him of
that Care, and imposed it in whole, or in part upon a Substitute, there is no
reason to believe that God will not accept this plea. Here you speak out
indeed, and all at once. For if a Cure may be wholly served by a Substitute,
and if God at the day of Judgment will accept of such a Plea, then it is plain
that all personal care and labor is unnecessary. But, Sir, it is to be hoped
before that great and terrible day of the Lord's, comes, you will learn more
Seriousness and Modesty, than to think of preferring so thin and false an
excuse to so great a Judge.

A false Excuse I say. For what Statute, or Canon of the Realm, or Church of
England does authorize a Bishop to disburden an Incumbent of the Care of his
Parish, and impose it in whole upon a Substitute? I know that Dispensations may
be had for Local Non-residence. But I challenge you, or any Man else to produce
any Authority that the Bishop has, either by our Canon, or Statute Law to
transferr the Cure of Souls wholly from the Incumbent to another. Though when I
consider you as an Antiquary, I have a good mind to revoke my challenge. For
you may have Rods in Brine, and Canons perdue, which a Country Gentleman never
heard of before. And we need not despair of having any thing made out by Men
versed in such Studies, since we have had such Doctrines published as the
genuine Product of the Church of England represented in Convocation, which the
hundredth part of the Clergy themselves knew nothing of, till they had layn in
the dark about 80 years, and were at last published, either to prove some new
Doctrine, or else for nothing at all.

But let me as a Friend once more remind you of that wretched Plea which it
seems you intend to make for your self and Brethren, at the last day; consider
of it again, and tell me whether you think it can pass in that great Court: nay
whether your own Conscience, if you would let it speak out, can vouch it, or
rely upon it. I am so far from thinking that it will be accepted by him who is
greater than our Consciences, and knows all things, That a Civil or
Ecclesiastic Judge would, or at least ought to reject it. For it is certain if
any Bishop should pretend to a power beyond Law, and Canon, and the Nature of
things, all such pretensions would be vain both as to this World and another.
And I believe it is as certain and true that no Bishop of the Church of England
as now established did ever assume such a sort of Authority. If any Prelate had
a faculty of loosing Men from the obligations to their People, I doubt not but
he might have as much Custom amongst some of your Friends, as it is usually said
that Priest might have who could procure a Commission for unmarrying People.
And for ought I could ever yet learn, any Priest may as well and legally do the
latter, as a Bishop the former.

The Notion of transferring the Charge from the Incumbent to the Curate is new,
and, I hope, your own. I do believe that 'twas never heard of in General
Council, Parliament, or Convocation. And if you have no better thoughts to
communicate to that Reverend Body last mentioned, I hope you will never have
the Vote of an honest Clergyman to sit in it. But when you write again, pray
let us know by what Instruments, Letters, or Faculties a Bishop does, or can
release an Incumbent wholly from his charge, or in what Court such Letters
Dispensatory can be procured. For I believe I know some who would give money
for them: though I do not imagine any good Man would. For I do not think that any
Humane Power can take off that obligation which every Minister has upon him of
personal Labor amongst his People.

I shall reduce what I have to say on this subject, to these following
Propositions.

I. Though Plurality of Benefices be not in it self contrary to the Law of God;
yet for any one to take on himself such Charges as he cannot, or will not
perform, is.

II. Though Curates may be used for the more full, and perfect discharge of Duty;
yet the whole Care of the people is not entrusted with them.

III. Though perpetual Local Residence be not injoined by God; yet to live so
near the Cure, and to be actually resident, so far forth as effectually to
answer all the ends of the Ministry, is.

IV. Vicars by reason of their Oaths are obliged to Local Residence, unless
they be dispensed with by the Bishop

I. Though Plurality of Benefices be not in it self contrary to the Law of God;
yet for any one to take on himself such Charges, as he cannot, or will not
perform, is. It cannot indeed with any appearance of Truth be asserted, that
it is unlawful to serve or have more Benefices than one. The Scriptures do
neither in express Terms, nor by any Consequence fairly to be drawn from them,
prohibit it. And thus far we are agreed (I say) as to the Conclusion, though not
as to the Premises. For one of the arguments by which you would prove this, is
a mere Cavil: I mean that page 37 etc. where you undertake to conclude the
Lawfulness of Pluralities from the Authority, and Example of the primitive
Church; and that it is lawful to hold two Bishoprics, because some Primitive
Bishops presided over two several Cities. Now did ever any one in his right
Wits assert the Bounds, and Limits of Dioceses and Parishes to be fixed by a
Jus Divinum? Do not you frequently throughout your Book suppose them to be
constituted, and determined by Laws Humane, and Ecclesiastical? And if it be
left to men to bound out the precincts, why may they not alter, unite and
divide them as they please? The Primitive Examples you your self answer, and
prove them to be of no force by the Canon which you quote; part of which says,
Civitates praedictae nunquam proprios Episcopos habuerunt. For if those Cities
were never two distinct Dioceses, then he who held them could not be a Dualist
even according to your own argument, unless you take it for granted, That a
Christian City, qua talis, be a Bishop's See, which I am sure you will never be
able to prove. Some of our present Dioceses do indeed contain such an extent of
Land, as formerly made two: but how came they of old to be two, was it not
merely from humane Authority? and why may not things be altered by the same
Power they were at first constituted? And therefore I am ashamed to hear you
trifle and cry out Page 39. No humane Authority can make that lawful, which God
and the Nature of things have made unlawful. Whoever said that God and the
nature of things divided Dioceses, and Parishes? And what Child's play is it to
talk as you do, Page 42. where you would prove the lawfulness of Pluralities
from the lawfulness of one that is Bishop of one Diocese, to undertake the
Administration of another, during its vacancy, or the incapacity of him to whom
it belongs? I will only observe that you make the Bishop of Sarum to lead the
Van in both Cases, and look upon it not as an argument, but a Jest ad hominem.
It ill becomes one who pretends so great a Reverence and Tenderness for the
Order, as you do, always to be aiming at a Bishop, and studying to expose him;
tho hitherto, God be thanked, you have exposed your self most of all. But if
you do not take more care of your self, you will become one of the Traditors
before you are aware of it.

And yet, as I said, though I agree not with you in this medium, yet thus far I
agree with you in the Conclusion, That Plurality is not in it self against the
Divine Law: and considering the Poverty of some Churches, it is absolutely
necessary: and some men may better merit, and serve two, than others one; and
therefore in God's Name let them have 'em. Yet,

No Man ought to have more Souls committed to his Charge than he can or will
watch over. This does evidently appear, both from the Law of Nature, and the
Gospel, whatever you pretend to the contrary. For I think it will be needless
to prove that by them both we are obliged to perform our promises, and execute
the several Offices we undertake: and unless you have forgotten your Vows, and
Engagements plighted to God, and his People, at your Ordination, you cannot but
know that it is the Vow and Office of a Presbyter of the Church of England, to
watch over and instruct the People committed to his charge. And he who shall
say, that he is not obliged to serve in the Church committed to his charge,
does in effect renounce his Orders in the Church of England. And he who shall
further assert, That he is not obliged by the Vows and Promises which he has
made (if they are not unlawful) does in consequence renounce the Christian, and
even Natural Religion. And he who undertakes any Engagements which he knows he
cannot perform, or makes any Vows he resolves not to fulfill, in taking of
them, he does worse than break them. So that he who accepts so many, or great
Benefices, as he cannot or will not look after, transgresses the Law of Christ
and Nature too. But there are two things pretended in this Case. 1. The
Dispensation of the Bishop. To which I answer, That there is no Dispensation to
be had for perpetual Non-residence, and neglect of the People. Though I must
confess the Dispensations are larger than a good man would wish for; yet they
will not come up to your purpose. You often indeed call upon the Bishops to
execute the Discipline of the Church, and to make Incumbents perform the Terms
and Conditions of their Dispensation, that is, to Preach Thirteen times a Year
in each Church, and to reside two Months, which is too little in all
conscience: and yet as little as it is, I do not doubt but if the good Bishops
should take you at your word, and send you and your Brethren to labor amongst
your Rusticks, you would think your selves severely handled, and look on it as
a harder imposition, than that which the Parliament lays upon you, and be ready
to cry out of an eleventh Persecution.

I should look on that Pluralist to have something of Conscience, who having
gotten two of the best Livings in Thirty Miles distance, should do at least
what the Canon, and his Dispensation requires of him. It Is but a low pitch of
virtue to be just so good as the Law of Man would have us; and yet it were
well, if such as you defend (especially your dear self) could do but this. Your
Dispensations, which you now plead in your own defense, shall hereafter rise up
in Judgment against you. For I know many Pluralists, (and I believe, Sir, you
know one at least) who Preach not half so often, and reside not half so much
upon both their Livings, as they ought to do in each. And yet after all, if the
Dispensation were as full as you could desire, it would certainly be invalid,
as tending to the Breach of Vows, which no Christian Bishop can pretend to
without usurping a Papal Power. He who shall undertake to annull a Minister's
Vows of feeding the People committed to his charge, may by the same Authority
dispense with my Oath of Allegiance, or with those Natural duties which I owe
to my Parents or Children.

But some have answered, That these Vows and Promises are to be taken in a
legal sense, and are qualified by those words, according to the Order of this
Church of England: so that he who takes no more Liberty than the Canons of this
Church allow, cannot justly be accused for violation of his Faith.

But 1st. The Church allows no such liberty as that of perpetual Non-residence,
and neglect of labor, as is already proved.

2dly, These words do not at all affect our obligation to personal labor, and
therefore cannot in the least mitigate or abate it. And that this may appear, I
will set down the whole Question, of which these words are part. Do you think
in your heart that you be truly called, according to the will of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Order of this Church of England, to the Order, and Ministry of
Priesthood? And I need only set them down, to show that they do not at all
concern the present Controversy. And it is the only instance of modesty, which
you have given us in your whole Book, that you have not so much as mentioned
this Argument, as some miscall it. But

Further, another plea whereby you endeavor to wash off the Clergymans
obligation to labor among his People, and which seems to be the (...), the
fundamental Error of your whole Book, is, that Ministers are not ordained to
one Diocese, or Parish, but to the Catholic Church, Page 43. and passim. Though
you acknowledge so much of the truth, viz. That good order and discipline do
require that the exercise of their Office be confined to some certain limits,
and place, as will determine every good man against the Conclusion you would
draw from it. For if he who sits not down on his Cures, and will not confine
the exercise of his Office to the Church, or Churches entrusted with him, do
break discipline, and good order; it is plain that he is guilty of a great
crime. But I shall further show that this Notion of a Minister's being ordained
not to this or that Parish or Diocese, but to the Universal Church, is false.
Not but that upon occasion he may exercise his Function in any part of the
Church, and upon whatever shore he is cast, he ought not to be re-ordained: but
that when he enters into Orders, he is designed for the service of some
particular Church, or Diocese, more than of the whole.

As for the Church of England, she ordains none (except in one or two special
Cases, which cannot break a rule) fine certo Titulo. And in the Office for
ordering of Priests, Can. 33.
among other questions asked by the Bishop, this is one, Will you maintain and
set forward Quietness, Peace and Love amongst all Christian people, and
especially among them that are, or shall be committed to your charge? And your
self I presume have made answer to it in the words of the Office, I will do so,
the Lord being my Helper. Now in this question, other Christian People are
contradistinguished to those of your Cure, and in the answer you oblige your
self to prosecute your duty more especially amongst the latter.

But you that would be called the true Sons of the Church of England, write and
act as if you were so much her fondlings, as that you had a particular
privilege of contradicting her. You can be very severe upon your Brethren of
the Clergy who mutilate or disuse her Ceremonies: but think it no fault in your
selves almost, or altogether to lay aside the exercise of your Functions, at
least in such places as the Canons and Constitutions of the Church do
peculiarly require your labors. I know no laboring Clergy of our Church who
do mutilate or disuse her Ceremonies: but if I did, I should think them more
excusable who do something of their duty, than they who wholly neglect it. And,
Sir, It Is such as these that betray her Cause, that open the mouths of her
Adversaries, and give just occasion of scandal: And let me tell you, That you
are partaker of these men's sins, by pretending to justify them.

And, take my word for it, the Church is very little beholden to you for your
doing so: especially since you have made bold with her, for a little arguments
sake, so far as to contradict her Offices and Canons. But alas! Canons and
Rubricks, and such like things were not made for Authors, and Grand Pluralists.
They are so far from being obliged to obey them, that one would think they
never read, or at least remembered them. Otherwise how could any one who did not
think himself above Canons, confidently assert, That Priests are not ordained
to this or that Parish; but to serve the Church of God in general, when the
Church has solemnly decreed, That they are, or ought to be ordained to some
particular Cure, and obliges them there more especially to prosecute their
Office.

And even in the Primitive and Apostolical Churches Men were not ordained so
much for the service of the whole, as of one particular Diocese. The Apostles
themselves were indeed Catholic Bishops in the largest sense, and had a
Commission to teach all Nations, and had every one of them the care of all the
Churches. But though they did not themselves sit down, and take up their
Residence in any particular Diocese: yet they constituted distinct and settled
Governors for every Church as soon as it was raised. Thus St. Timothy was
created Bishop of Ephesus, Titus of Crete; Linus, or Cletus, or both, of Rome
even during the Apostles lives.

And as Bishops were then designed for every particular Diocese; so as the
Number of the Christians grew, 'twas absolutely necessary that they should have
Presbyters subservient to them. And it is evident that those Presbyters did not
only live in subjection to the Bishops of those distinct Dioceses to which they
were ordained, so long as themselves thought fit; but were obliged not to leave
them without the consent of the Diocesan. And when the Levity of some prompted
them to break this standing Custom of the Church, there were Canons made to
confine all Bishops and Presbyters to the Service of that Diocese to which they
were first ordained. And there is only this difference between the Primitive
Platform, and our own, viz. That in the former Presbyters were ordained not for
the Service of one particular Congregation, but of the whole Diocese, to serve
the Bishop in the more full and perfect discharge of his Office, to be sent to
such parts of the Diocese, and for such a time as the Bishop thought fit:
whereas by our Constitution every Presbyter has his particular Allotment, and
his distinct Dividend in the endowments, and labors of the Church. But they
were no more designed for the Service of the Church at large in those days,
than they are now.

If we enquire why every particular Presbyter had not his distinct Cure
allotted him in the primitive Church, we must needs allow it to be its infant
and unsettled State: So that when the Empire came into the Church, and
Christianity began to be the Religion of Rome and Greece, all Churches soon
fell into a Parochial Division. And that so early, that at the Council of
Chalcedon it seems to have been a general Establishment, for there it is
provided, that No one shall be ordained a Priest or Deacon at large ((...)) to
be at his own Liberty, but should be assigned particularly ((...)) to some
Church either in the City or in a Village, Can. 6.
or Martyrdom, or Monastery. I know you are not willing to allow
Parish Priests or Churches to have been generally constituted at this time; but
I think this is a better Authority for it, than you can produce against it. It
could not indeed be so early in our Church, which was then under a Cloud,
Barbarism and Infidelity generally prevailing in these Islands.

Now briefly to recapitulate what has been said on this Head. Since the
Ministry is an Office, and therefore duly to be executed; since the Church in
all Ages has confined the Exercise of this Office chiefly to the Diocese, or
Parish to which Ministers are ordained, or instituted; since the Church of
England in particular exacts of them whom she ordains, solemn Vows, and
promises to instruct, and teach the People committed to their charge, to give
wholesome Exhortations both to the sick and whole within their Cures, to
administer Christian Doctrines, and Sacraments to them, to drive away all
erroneous and strange Doctrine, to maintain peace and love as much as in them
lies amongst their Parishioners. Since this cannot be done without personal
care, and labor, and since the Church requires it at their hands, and neither
does nor can dispense with their Neglect; it necessarily follows, that they who
undertake such Cures as they are not able to discharge, or so many Churches as
they cannot duly watch over, do in undertaking them, grossly sin: And that they
who have promised and are able to perform, but will not, do violate their Faith
made solemnly to God and his People.

And what I have now said concludes against you in two points.

First, According to your Hypothesis there are no bounds set to Pluralities by
the Law of God (though the Church be so severe as to stint you to two) but that a
Man may have as many as he can get, and have served by Curates. Your Reason
against Pluralities being unlawful is, That there is no mention made of
Parish Priests, or Churches, in Holy Scripture, and therefore there can be no
directions concerning them, page 17. Now after this way of arguing it follows,
That he who shall procure a 100 Benefices or ten times more, does not
transgress the Divine Law. And therefore Bogo de Clare and Adam de Straton page
143. are clearly brought off from trespassing against the divine Law, though
the latter had 23 Benefices in one Province, and the other you know not how
many in both. For you tell us plainly page 141, 142. That whereas Archbishop
Pecham inveighed against Plurality of Benefices as a mortal sin, he proceeded
upon a false Principle. ('It Is pity you did not live in those days, for I verily
believe that you might have saved this honest Adam the 30000 Marks and upwards
which Edward the first fined him for Corruption in the Exchequer, (if it were
the same man, as probably it was) I am sure you might as easily have proved
that taking of Bribes was no Mortal Sin, as that such enormous Pluralities were
not so.) And page 195. having fairly reckoned up all the faults of Extravagant
and Irregular Pluralists, yet you cannot find in your heart to call them
directly sinful, but only matter of great Inconvenience to the Church, and
Scandal to Religion. And every one knows that a thing may be Inconvenient, and
Scandalous, and yet have no intrinsic evil in it. Especially if the Scandal be
only taken, and not given. O how sweetly do you treat your Brethren the
Non-Resident Pluralists. One of these may break all the Ten Commandments with
less reproof from you, than a poor industrious Clergyman omit a Ceremony. He
that does the latter is in your language a Traditor, an Infidel, or (which with
you perhaps is worse) a Puritan; but the other, though he behave himself as
though he cared not for the Souls of his People, though he think himself wholly
disburthened of the Cure of Souls (as you had already taught them to do) by
delegating it to a Curate, though he put no bounds to the desire of Pluralities,
tho he neglect Alms, and Hospitality, and suffer his houses to be dilapidated,
page 193. And though he do half a hundred more such ugly tricks, all this is only
inconvenient and offensive.

Now upon this Supposition, viz. That Pluralities, though never so numerous,
are not contrary to the Divine Law, there needs but one metropolitan Bishop in
all Christendom, (a Pope you may call him if you please) so that he maintain a
great Army of Stipendiary Suffragans, and (which is a Doctrine which I think
the World never heard of before) but one incumbent Presbyter under him
maintaining Legions of Curates in every Kingdom. For if it be not a mortal sin
to have 23 Benefices, how do you prove it so to have as many hundred, or
thousand. 'T would indeed be Scandalous, i. e. weak Brethren might take offense
at it. But you will say it is pity such a Constitution should be sinful. Oh!
what a rare Author would such a brave fellow as this Universal Presbyter make?
he might write a whole Vatican full of Books, and gratify you perhaps so far as
to enable you to continue writing little Defenses, and to make such wonderful
discoveries as you have lately, in acquainting the World how many Children
Bishop O. had, for starting the project.

But I am afraid you will be angry with me for spoiling this new invention, as
I think I have effectually done. For if every one who is instituted in a Living
be obliged personally to take care of it; then he, who undertakes more or
greater Cures than he is capable of looking after, sins in doing of it.

But another ill consequence of your Hypothesis is, That Livings may be held at
never so great a distance. So that for ought appears in your Book to the
contrary, nay by what is there asserted, it is lawful jure Divino for a Man to
hold 3 or more Benefices, whereof one we will suppose situate in Britain, the
second in Japan, and the third in Peru, (and I fancy you would choose a Golden
one) why may they not be 30 Degrees distant as well as 30 Miles according to
your way of arguing, Forasmuch as the Livings cannot personally be supplied in
any sense page 28. But if it be true which I have laid down, viz. That it is
unlawful to take two Benefices or more, which you cannot personally, and very
frequently supply; if it be necessary that he who has solemnly accepted the
charge of any people, be by his Office, and other additional obligations tied
to watch over their Souls, to deliver to them the whole Council of God, and to
be ready on all occasions to preserve them from Error, and Discord, and the
like Spiritual Evils; then it clearly follows that it is contrary to the Law of
God to take the charge of two or more livings so far distant from each other,
that it shall be morally impossible for him in any measure personally to supply
them both. The Church indeed allows of 30 Miles distance, though the Canons of
1571. permit but 26. But I do not think it an argument of an affectionate and
ingenuous Son to stretch the favors of his indulgent Mother, or to run to the
utmost bounds which she has set him. It Is as difficult for a Man to determine
the precise distance, which is lawful, as to prescribe the number of Glasses
which any Man may drink, without exceeding the rules of Temperance. And yet I
dare say you will agree with me that 30 together are too many for one who
designs to keep himself sober: And so without doubt is 30 Miles distance of
Churches too great for that Man who intends conscientiously to discharge his
Office. And this is certainly true generally speaking. But considering the
great strength of some men's Brains or Bodies; I will not determine that this
number is absolutely excessive, and unlawful in either Cases. Though I think I
may with decency enough say that the Church allows this great distance, only
for the hardness of some men's hearts.

It Is the safest way in such cases to take care that you do not make use of
that Liberty which the Church has given you for an occasion to the flesh, to
Covetousness, and filthy Lucre. But I proceed to show that,

II. Though Curates may be used, yet the whole care of the people is not
entrusted with them. I am so far from thinking it unlawful to keep a Curate,
that I rather judge it commendable, where the Living will bear one, and the
people are any thing numerous. For though a man have no greater a charge than
that he himself may serve the necessities of; yet he may not so well answer all
the conveniences, and reasonable desires of the people in his own person. There
are many Incumbents, who may fulfill their Ministry by their own labor, at
least so far as to keep themselves free from the blood of the People, and yet
might discharge their trust much more to the edification, and satisfaction of
the people, and their own Consciences by the assistance of another. And there
is no reason to think that it is more unlawful for a Clergyman than for any
other Officer, or Workman, to have an Assistant. And it would be of excellent
use to the Church, if such as are designed for Incumbents were all for some
time trained up under the care of grave and experienced Clergymen, that by
practicing under them, acting by their directions, and influenced by their
example, they might be better versed in so great a business, than young
Incumbents usually are.

But yet I am far from thinking that the whole care of the people is or ought
to be entrusted with Curates. It Is plain it is not in our Church: because no
Incumbent is or can be acquitted from that obligation, which he voluntarily
took upon himself of caring for, and feeding the Souls of his people; and
therefore is obliged to do it, notwithstanding he have a Curate to help him. I
have before showed that your Notion of transferring the obligation from the
Incumbent to the Curate is groundless. And in all the forms of Licenses to
serve a Cure which I have seen, there is not any thing contained, that implies
the Curate to have the sole Care of the people. It Is true indeed, in such
Churches as have no Ecclesiastical person incumbent on them by reason of all
the Tithes being impropriated, either the Curate must do all, or else it cannot
be done. But I know you look on this as an odious case, and lament the
condition of such Churches as much as any Clergyman in England. From anomalies
nothing can be proved, or brought into a Rule. I doubt not but there are many
learned, and pious Curates in the Church, who do as much for the People as if
they were their Rectors, or Vicars; and it is pity they are not. I do not speak
this to discourage their honest labors, but only to show the neglect of those
who employ them. And the generality of Curates cannot but know that the great,
and primary charge belongs to the Incumbent: and cannot think it reasonable
that for a third, or perhaps a sixth, or tenth part of the Profits, he is
obliged to do so much as the Rector, or Vicar, for the whole: on the contrary
the Incumbent, if we may judge of all by you, thinks that if he pay for serving
the Cure, he himself is disburdened of all obligations. And so the Parish has
the name of two Ministers, but in effect not one.

In case of Age or Sickness, or any other necessary disability to perform all
the duty required of an Incumbent, it is to be sure sufficient to do what in him
lies, as the Office of Ordination expresses it. He must then be forced to
make use of another Mouth and Hands to Preach, and pray and deliver Sacraments
to the People. And yet it will be some satisfaction to a Conscientious Pastor,
if he be able to direct his Curate, and to see that he do that which now he
himself cannot, and to take care that his people want nothing that is
necessary, or proper for their Souls health. And 'twere well if some Incumbents
would do but thus much even during their health, and strength, tho I don't
think that this is sufficient to acquit such before God.

And this brings me to the case of Deacon-Incumbents. For you say p. 136. that
to manifest more fully that 'twas never the design in the first Institution of
Parochial Cures that they should in all cases be supplied by the Incumbent in
person, I will add this observation, That from the beginning of Parochial Cures
Deacons were admitted to possess them, although it were notorious that they could
not execute the Office personally: Since they could neither absolve penitents,
nor celebrate the Sacrament of the Eucharist. I do not think you have proved
what you say, namely that from the beginning of Parochial Cures, Deacons were
admitted to possess them. The first Authority which you produce for it in the
Gallican Church, is in the year 744. Whereas this Parochial division was long
before introduced in France, namely, at furthest in the year 630, if we may
believe what you say Page 84. Corruptions may be introduced in 114 years. And
if I were disposed to be troublesome, I might very well deny either the Canon,
or Capitular which you quote, Page 137, to prove that Deacons were then allowed
of for Incumbents: but let it be so, you shall for this one time have your
will. Deacons have formerly been allowed to be Incumbents, and perhaps from the
first beginning of Parochial Churches; therefore it follows, say you, that the
Church never designed that Cures in all Cases should be supplied by the
Incumbents. But does it from thence follow, that he is not obliged to do any
thing? Because he could not absolve, and celebrate the Eucharist, does it from
thence follow, that he had no obligation to Baptize the Children, visit, and
anoint the Sick, carry the consecrated Elements to them? give them occasional
advice, Catechize them in the Principles of Religion, and do those things which
daily were required in every Parish, and what, if he made use of an Assistant
to do the rest, so long as he did not think himself disburdened of doing what
he could? A Minister disabled in his Hands by the Gout or Palsy, may without
question make use of another to administer the Sacraments to his People, and
yet by his diligence in other duties deserve a double proportion of Honor, and
Maintenance. However this case of Deacon-Incumbents does not at all serve the
purpose of the Clergy of the now Church of England. For it is plain that the
allowance of them was looked upon as a Corruption by the Church and State; and
therefore it has been reformed by the Act of Uniformity. And if the former
permission of it were an argument that the Church did not then require
Incumbents personally to supply their Cures; then the present prohibition does
as strongly prove that now she does. And to what end are all Incumbents obliged
to be in Priests Orders, but only that they may be capable of performing all
Holy Offices in their Cures, unless by natural infirmities disabled? I have
particularly considered the force of this allegation: because it looks the most
like an argument of any thing in your Book. But,

III. Though perpetual local Residence be not required by the Law of God, yet
to live so near the Cure, and to be actually resident so far forth as to answer
all the ends of the Ministry, is I am so far of your mind, as that God and
Nature have made no particular Laws to appoint on what spot of ground the
Minister's house shall stand: but yet, it is absolutely required that he should
watch over the flock; and therefore it necessarily follows, that he must be so
much amongst them, and dwell so near them, as that he may effectually perform
this duty. It Is a thing highly proper perpetually to reside, where it can be
done with any tolerable safety, or accommodation. He that does so may have more
frequent opportunities of doing good, and may more easily, and thoroughly
discharge his Conscience: and some Cures cannot be faithfully served but by
resident Ministers, by reason of the multitude of Parishioners, and their daily
occasions. And in such cases it is without doubt as necessary that the Minister
should reside, as it is that he should perform his duty, and vows. However, so
near all ought to dwell, and so often to be with their Parishioners, as that no
Soul may be in danger of perishing, no necessary duty neglected through their
absence. And indeed generally speaking, dwelling in the Parish where a man is
beneficed is so very requisite, that it were very much to be desired that those
Incumbents who have not an important excuse to the contrary, were forced to
legal, and local residence.

When I speak of residence and dwelling in the Parish, I mean it in the same
sense that any plain Englishman will take it, viz making it the place of abode,
and rambling abroad as little as may be, or as is consistent with the greater
business, which every Minister has lying upon his hands. I say this, to remind
you of your little banters, Page 26. etc. Suppose, say you, the Incumbent lives
not here, (viz. within the bounds of his Parish) but 100 yards further, etc.
and Page 27. If ten distance miles be allowed, why not 20 or 30? You might have
added 100, or 1000. For your argument is indefinite, and pleads for 10000 miles
distance as well as ten. The case of the Spanish Bishops is so remarkable, that
I must mention it again. Page 24. You ask them whether the Residence, which
they asserted to be of Divine Right, included the whole year, or only part of
it. If Residence of the whole year were required by the Law of God, by what
warrant did they appear in that place (viz. Trent) out of their Dioceses, or,
etc. If only partial residence were required, who should define how much God
would accept it, might have been alleged -- that since God himself had
revealed nothing as to this matter, it is an evident Argument he intended no
such obligation. Has God revealed nothing as to this matter? Yes he has
revealed this, that you must give an account of the people. Heb. 13.17. And no
man can give an account of all, and therefore by People must be meant those who
are peculiarly committed to your Charge: he has told you by the Apostle, that
you must take heed to the Flock, and be instant in season, and out of season;
and this you cannot do, if you live too far distant from them. God has been
pleased in this, and many other particulars, only to give you the general heads
of your duty. He commands us to be sober, to avoid Covetousness, and worldly
Cares; to pray often, etc. without prescribing the nice quantity of liquor, or
meat, that we may use; without stinting men to a certain number of hours, or
tale of Prayers: and yet there certainly are quantities and hours, which if we
do not observe, we transgress these duties. So it is in the case before us, God
has only commanded Ministers in general terms to be very instant, and urgent
to oversee, and take care of the People, without telling us how far, or how
long they may be absent from them. And yet with all your little Sophistry you
will never be able to wipe off the force of these Laws.

But you have passed, or reported a Jest in the beginning of your Book, Page 20.
which puts me in mind of a parallel Instance. A man is obliged to take care of
his own, and to dwell with his Wife, and that by the Law of God: but yet, if
you were a married man, and had caught a she Tartar, whom you would be willing
to shake off; you might according to your way of arguing, make this Dilemma: If
a man be obliged to dwell with his Wife, and reside with his Family, he is
either obliged to dwell in the same House or Room with them, and that
perpetually, and without any intermission; or else at a small distance, and
only part of his time: if the former be true, then he must never be from home,
tho upon the most necessary occasions, or even to make provision for his
Family: but if he may live the next wall to them, and be sometimes out for a
day or a week, then why not altogether? For to use your own words, since God
himself has revealed nothing as to this matter, (i. e. the precise time or
space of being without Wives) it is an evident argument, he intended no such
obligation, and so you might get rid of your Wife without the formality of a
Process, or appealing to the Ecclesiastical Consistory. Is not this pretty
Tattle, and is not yours just the same? For your argument against the necessity
of partial residence runs thus. If a Minister may be absent sometimes, as
suppose to go to Convocation, or to buy Books at London; why may he not as well
be absent the whole year? if he may dwell Ten Yards out of his Parish, why not
as many, or three times as many Miles? So that the Conventicle-Preacher when he
would have proved Residence to be Jure Divino from those words, Abraham begat
Isaac, Mat. 1.2. might not argue so much at random, as you your self do.

And pray observe that you have proved more than (I hope) you designed, if you
have proved any thing at all. For if neither Bishops nor Incumbent Presbyters
be obliged to be resident in their Charges any part of the year, pray who shall
look after them? what stipen diary Curates? Why the Scriptures make no more
mention of them, than of Parochial Constables, as you your self speak. And
therefore, according to your way of talk, there is no Provision made by the Law
of God for the Cure of Souls. You ought by all means to have showed who they
are who are Jure Divino obliged to take care of the People, before you had
dismissed the Bishops Incumbent Presbyters from that Service.

But that which you chiefly labor at, and in proof of which half your Book was
written, is to show that serving Cures by a Proxy, and leaving all (but the
Tithes) to the Curate, is not contrary to the first design of Parochial
Endowments. And, in order to this, you present us with a long History of the
first Institution of Parochial Churches, which is the best part of your Book,
and therefore least to your purpose. And to what end you tell us this Tale of
about 100 pages long I cannot Divine. For I do not believe that one single
Consequence can be drawn from this relation of yours which favors your
conceits of unlimited Plurality, and Total Non-residence. You wisely excuse
your self page 115. from framing the particular deductions, lest you should
seem to question, or injure the Judgment of your Reader. A man would rather
think that you put this task upon your Reader, because it was too hard for your
self. The chief Heads I shall mention, and show how they make for you. page 58.
You tell us 'twas long ever Parish-Churches were instituted, longer before they
were endowed. What, would you infer from hence, that when they were instituted,
and endowed, the particular persons designed, and collated to them, were not
obliged to serve, and officiate in them? Nothing else will serve your turn, and
yet no such conclusion can be drawn from these premises. What tho the office of
a Parochial Priest be new? yet an Office it is, and must faithfully be
discharged, or else those that have it conferred on them, render themselves
obnoxious both to the Laws of God and Man, especially if any supervening
obligations of vows, and promises require it of us. Any alteration in the
Circumstances of affairs, any new Commands of Superiors (if they be not
unlawful) may lay new ties upon our Consciences.

Ibid.
You tell us, that all Oblations made at these Churches were at first
transmitted to the Bishop, who generally divided them into four parts, took one
for his own maintenance, assigned another to the Clergy, a third to repair the
Edifices, and a fourth to the Poor. Now if you could prove that the Bishop
having all at his disposal, allowed him a dividend who did not Preach or
labor, this would be for your purpose; or if you had showed that tho a Priest
neglected the Business, or People to whom he was sent, and never came near the
Church to which he was commanded, had yet his share in the Dividend, this would
look your way. I am persuaded it is as easy to prove the unlawfulness of
Non-residence from the first of Genesis, as to conclude the non-necessity of it
from such premises as these.

But further you assert, page 59. that the first and general design of endowing
Parochial Churches was, that a competent number of Clergy might be maintained,
who under the Bishop should supply the whole Diocese: But if so, what need
these endowments be fixed to these Parochial Churches? why were they not rather
bestowed on the Bishop, or the Mother Cathedral Church? The end which you
pretend had been altogether as well served by this means, viz. the maintaining
a competent number of Clergy to serve the Diocese in sacred matters. It sounds
very odly and improbably, that our Ancestors endowed one particular Parochial
Church, that so by this endowment, some Clergyman might be enabled to serve in
other parts of the Diocese. Any one who had not a mind to impose on himself, or
others, would rather think, that when an Estate was settled on any particular
Church, the design of the Donor chiefly was that he who served in it should
have the profit of it: unless we imagine those Pious Men to have had such
tricks in their Heads as those in the beginning of our late Confusions, who
pretending a zeal for the Revenues of the Church, founded Lectures in the City
out of Impropriations purchased in the remotest parts of the Kingdom. But
before I dismiss this point, let me observe to you that by your own confession,
the Endowments of Parochial Churches were only designed to maintain the Clergy
who were employed in that Diocese, whereof the Church so endowed was a Member:
and therefore this (if true) would not justify those, who being Beneficed in
one Diocese, bestow their labor, or live lazily in another.

The second design, you say, was to provide for the Convenience of every
particular Parish, and you might as well have called this the first reason:
this you say was permitted to the direction of the Bishop to alter it at
discretion. And you do not tell us upon what grounds you say this, I suppose it
was only to introduce what follows, viz. page 61. if it be more for the good of
the Diocese or Church in general, That any Presbyter should retain Plurality of
Benefices, or be Non-resident at one or both of them, then it is more consonant
to the first design of Endowments, That such Plurality should be allowed, and
Non-residence dispensed with, than otherwise; but you ought to have proved that
Bishops pretended to any such power as that of Dispensations, when
Parish-Churches were first endowed, or that the Founders did dream of a thing,
which was not in use till long after. We have only your Ipse dixit for this
whole matter; beside, what you writ over Night, you contradict next Morning, as
you shall hear by and by. Farther I look upon that which you call the good of
the Diocese, or Church in general, to be no more than the enriching and easing
some few of the Clergy. It Is surely most for the good of the Diocese, and whole
Church, that such Clergymen as are most able to do good, should be dispersed
amongst the several parts, and Regions of it. And whatever was the design of
the Clergy in receiving these endowments, there is no Question to be made, but
the Thanes or great Men who were the givers of them, (and by whose intentions
we are to be determined in this matter) respected chiefly the convenience of
those Parishes, where they erected Churches. The whole Diocese was in some
measure provided for before out of the common Stock or Treasury: And therefore
the main end that Founders could propose in settling Estates upon particular
Parish-Churches, could not be any other than the constant Supply thereof in
Divine things.

And to make what I say more plain, you tell us that Bishops endowed some
parochial Churches for the convenience of their Tenants. Page 90.
Now how can it be reconciled to common Sense, viz. That Bishops had this
primary design in erecting, and endowing these Churches, not that the Parishes
so endowed might have a Priest constantly attending, so much as that the whole
Diocese might be supplied with a competent Number of Clergymen; when whatever
he gave, according to your Notion, belonged before to the common Stock of the
Diocese: and so the design of maintaining a competent Number of Clergy was as
well served before this Endowment, as afterward.

The sum of what need be said on this matter is, That whatever meaning the
Bishop and Clergy had in accepting these Endowments (which yet I believe were
very honest, and far otherwise than you would have us think) for certain those
who gave them did chiefly intend the good and convenience of that Parish, where
they settled a Maintenance. And all Rules of Gratitude and Piety oblige us to
apply all Endowments according to the Will of the Donours. And at first they
could not so much as suspect, that their designs should be eluded. Forasmuch as
in that age the Notion of serving a Cure by Proxy was not started. And that
that this was their first Intention, you your self after having made a great
stir, and bustle, do at last humbly acknowledge; For page 85, 86, 87. You tell
us that Parish Priests and Churches were not generally settled till the Bishops
consented that the whole Revenue of the Endowment were perpetually annexed to
the Church of that Clerk who received it, i. e. in plain English, till the
Incumbent might have the Estate belonging to the Church in which he served; and
not only so, but before these great Men could generally be brought to settle
their Endowments, Parish Priests were forbid to quit their Cures without the
leave of their Diocesan. page 88. Now what is the reason that these good men
would not part with their worldly goods to increase the common Treasure of the
Diocese, since as you tell us, page 59. the first and general design of these
endowments was to maintain a competent number of Clergy to serve the Diocese?
what made them so shy, and backward in their Benefactions, till they were
assured the Incumbent should have all, and that he who ministered should have
the Endowments, and that those who were at first instituted on a Benefice
should not easily be dismissed from it? Truth will out, and after all your
forced stuff and whipped Cream, you cannot forbear to contradict your self, and
in effect to give up your Cause.

Formerly, that is before the 8th Century (as you tell us) all Oblations, and
Profits were at the disposal of the Bishop, so that no one who gave any thing
to the officiating Minister, or endowed a Church, could be sure that he who
labored should have the Penny: and besides, Clergymen were light and
unconstant, and often forsook their Cures, and no one would stay at a Church
any longer than he thought fit, but page 85. Before the year 800, these two
reasons, which chiefly discouraged the Erection and Endowment of
Parish-Churches were taken away. But suppose these well-meaning Gentlemen had
foreseen any such things, as perpetual Non-residence, and serving Cures by
Substitutes, would not this have stopped their Charity? For by this means it is
again brought about, That the particular Endowments of any Parish do only
increase the Common Treasure of the Diocese, or some particular men sometimes
in, sometimes out of it; and the Church is no better served than if it had no
more than a bare Competence for the Curate. Why should not the old Thanes be as
well satisfied in haing the Revenues of the Church at the absolute disposal of
the Diocesan, as of one, who was to do little or nothing for it, and seldom see
the Parishioners, but when he came to poll them? So that those who were the
best Benefactors to the Church, and to whose Piety under God the Clergy owe
their present Subsistence, were in no one thing more abused than by the
Permission of enormous Pluralities, and idle Incumbents.

For the time to come you had better keep your Antiquities in your Common
Place-Book, than gratify your itch in vending of them, when they so little
serve your purpose, that they do the quite contrary. And I believe on reading
over what you had writ, you were sensible of it, and therefore seem willing to
compound the matter, page 152, as supposing that in 1100 years time the
circumstances of things may be altered. But then what need all this Pother
about the first Institution, and Endowment of Parochial Churches? Whether
personal l^bour were required in the old Gallick, or English-Saxonick Church,
or not? it is certain now it is.

You are indeed so inconsistent and unresolved in this whole matter, That
'twill be a very difficult thing to reconcile Anthony to Harmer. Page 73. You
tell us, in the seventh Century, there were none but Itinerant Preachers: nay,
in the 8th Century, or the year 731 there were no other but Pluralist
Clergymen, who had not the care of any particular Parish; but executed their
Office in this or that, or all the Churches of the Diocese, as the Bishop
should direct them, page 74. and yet before you had writ three Pages more, you
were quite of another mind, for you tell us that about the year 700, Oratories
and Churches were erected and endowed with peculiar Maintenance for the
Incumbent, which should there reside, and execute the holy Function. page 77.
And you say the reason why before the year 800, Parochial divisions were not
generally received was, because Incumbents through levity would often quit their
Churches. page 85. So that sometimes there were none but Itinerants, before the
8th Century; at other times you tell us there were notwithstanding this,
Incumbents too, who were constantly to reside: or when you have a mind to it
there were Incumbents: but when you think it for your purpose, you can
presently annihilate them again. Nay, do but put your two great impediments of
the Parochial Settlement together, and they will break one another in pieces.
For the first was, that the Bishop had the Disposition of all the Oblations,
and Profits. The second was, that Presbyters would leave their Churches in
hopes of getting richer. page 85, 87. But now if all were at the Bishop's
disposal, and he that officiated had not the Estate, wherefore should he desire
a richer Church? If some Churches were richer to the Presbyter than other, how
was all at the Bishop's disposal? When you have reconciled your self to your
self, and let me know, where I may find you, you may hear further from me. You
have here asserted I cannot tell what, but I am sure palpable contradictions.

However you have sufficiently cleared these two points, viz. That before
Parochial Endowments were completed, the Bishop page 85, 86. condescended to
part with his right of disposing the Ecclesiastical Revenues; because otherwise
the Laymen would not condescend to Endow any more Churches; and, That all
Parish Priests were forbid to quit their Cures without the leave of their
Diocesan, and it was ordered that at their Institution, or before their
Ordination, the Clergy should promise to remain at that place to which they
were ordained, page 88, 89, which is contrary enough to what you undertook to
prove, That Plurality (by which you mean holding any number of Benefices, though
at never so great a distance) is not contrary to the first design of Parochial
Endowments. But hitherto you have only talked like a man that wanted to be
drove to his Church, where he is Incumbent; but under the next Head you
Discourse after so lewd a manner, as that you deserve to be lasht out of it, as
shall presently appear.

IV. Vicars are by their Oaths obliged to local residence, unless they be
dispensed with. For if they be, they are obliged no more than Rectors. The Oath
of Residence injoined to be taken by Vicars at their Institution is, You shall
Swear to reside on your Vicarage of N. unless you shall be dispensed with to
the contrary; so that he who is dispensed with, is not by virtue of this Oath
tied to residence. But to be so far resident as effectually to answer all the
design, and ends of the Ministry, is a thing in it self necessary, whether this
Oath be taken or not, and therefore cannot be dispensed. The Law by residence
never means any thing else but living in the Parish where you are beneficed.
Now though this be not always absolutely necessary, yet it is necessary for that
person who having sworn thus to do, except he be dispensed with, is not
dispensed withal.

And every one who knows any thing of an Oath has therefore just cause to
wonder at that brazen, and wicked assertion of yours, page 116, 117. viz.
Vicars cannot in conscience be impleaded of Perjury against their Oath of
Residence, who being Non-resident, maintain Curates constantly residing. How!
not they guilty of Perjury, who having sworn residence do not reside! In God's
Name, who then can be guilty of that Sin? If indeed you had said that Vicars
having the Bishop's Dispensation are not forsworn if they are Non-resident, you
had said truth. But the necessity of a Dispensation you neither suppose nor
allow of. For your reason is only this, ibidem. The Law is best interpreted by
its known design, and that the known design of this Canon was that no Parochial
Church should be destitute of the presence of a Priest, which must needs have
happened, if Vicars had been permitted to be Non-resident, because they had but
just enough to maintain themselves: and the Canon makes no provision for
Vicars, able to maintain a Curate; because then there were none such. Now in
all this the necessity of the Bishop's Dispensation is not so much as intimated
or implied, which yet is the only thing that can save Non-resident Vicars from
down right Perjury. Vid. Bp. o^ and W's. Charge.
And all that you say to palliate it, is but mere stuff, and Sham.

You tell us that when this Canon was made, there were no Vicars able to
maintain Curates: but for this we have only your bare word, and many
probabilities to the contrary. It Is acknowledged that in the time of Stephen
Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, Five Marks were determined to be a competent
allowance for a Vicar. But many Vicarages had been erected long before this
time, and those who had them were ab origin obliged to Residence. And though
there may some few instances be produced of Vicarages, which were not above
this value, yet this does by no means prove that there were none which had
better maintenance.

Further, though the Law may best be interpreted by the known design of it, yet
no plain, express, literal injunctions of any Law are disannulled by pretending
that from the design of the Law no such Conclusions can be drawn. The design of
the Law may give us light in some particulars, which would otherwise be
obscure, and difficult: or may serve to explain the meaning of any Oath, by it
ordered to be taken. But this sure is the first time, that the intention of the
Law was urged as a reason, why an Oath prescribed by it, should be of no
validity. And further it is plain that the design of that Canon, by which it
was enjoined, was not only to secure the constant presence of a Priest in every
Parish, but that the Vicar himself should be constantly present. This appears
from the Oath it self. For all Incumbents whether Rectors or Vicars, if absent,
must maintain a Curate whether they will or no, and whether the Revenue be
small or great: and if this had been the only design, Rectors would have been
enjoined to take it as well as Vicars. And yet Rectors, tho their Benefices
were not above Five Marks per annum value, were never obliged to take this
Oath. And I conceive the true reason of Vicars being sworn to Residence, was
that old rule, Vicarius non habet Vicarium, a Curate (for such were all Vicars
originally) is not allowed to have a Curate. And though the reason of this
Canon now ceases, since Vicars are properly Incumbents, yet the Canon it self
remains in force, or else all our Bishops, and Vicars General are mistaken.

Some indeed are of opinion that Desuetude, and Remotio cansae when they meet
together are sufficient to abrogate any Law. But so long as it is daily
executed, no one must say that it is abolished, tho the occasion of it seems
to be taken away. You indeed seem to argue as if you thought the Canon it self
antiquated. But no Subject of any Society must take the Liberty of interpreting
away Laws, which he sees his Governors daily to exercise, upon pretense that
the reason of them ceases. That the Law was at first made to oblige Vicars to
actual Residence, you your self acknowledge, and the Law remaining the same,
it is not in the Power of any single Clergyman though he be a Pluralist, nay
though he were Universal Incumbent of all the Benefices in Christendom, to
alter the sense and first intention of it. And residence by a Curate is such a
Residence as neither Law nor common sense admits of.

Thus you see the Canon is in force, and therefore to be obeyed whether
enforced with an Oath or not. And whether the Canon be in force or otherwise,
yet I am sure the Oath is with all such as have taken it, and have any
Conscience at all. A man who has upon Oath promised to do any thing, is
obliged without all controversy to perform it, whether it were a Canonical
Oath, or not, unless the thing he promised were sinful. And indeed you act, and
talk, as if you thought Residence to be so.

Thus, Sir, I have endeavored truly to state the Case of Plurality and
Non-residence. And though I have not done it with so much Art and Cunning, as
you; yet I am satisfied that I have placed it upon a better foundation, and
used much more impartiality than you, though I have written some things with a
just resentment. But before I part with you, I must take leave to reflect on
some passages in your Book, which I have not yet touched upon.

You say, page 134. Certainly it conduces more to the Interest, Honor, and
support of Religion in general, and the good of the whole Diocese in
particular, that ten or more Prebendaries, Persons of extraordinary merit,
should constantly attend at the Cathedral Church, seated in the chief City of
the Diocese, to see the Worship of God performed with decent solemnity, to
instruct the Inhabitants of a Populous City, and to advise the Bishop upon all
occasions; than that ten little Country Villages should be supplied by the
constant personal attendance of the Incumbents of their Churches. This may all
be very well allowed, except the supposition that these extraordinary persons
must needs be Incumbents of Country Churches. For why should these excellent
men, who are capable of doing more good elsewhere encumber themselves with
Rectories, or Vicarages so far remote from the Cathedral, that they cannot
attend them both? It is very requisite that City-Churches should be supplied by
the most able, and Eminent of the Clergy: But then why do these great men
usually decline City Cures? For it is not the Dean and Chapter, but the
Incumbents of the several Parish-Churches, who are generally interested in the
Cure of Souls in Cities. By supplying the City Churches they might indeed do
great service to Religion: But this is not to be effected by only officiating,
and that rarely in the Cathedral. If you object that the Livings in lesser
Cities are usually very mean, and unworthy of such deserving men; it may be
answered that their Prebends would make good amends for that, generally
speaking. And though Country-Livings are oftentimes of greater value, yet it
must be considered that when the Curate is paid, the remainder will very little
exceed the usual allowance of a City-Minister. And I do not know any one thing
wherein the High-Court of Parliament could do a greater Benefit to the Church,
than in annexing a Church or two of the Neighboring City to every Prebend of
the Cathedral, and indispensably obliging the Clergymen who enjoyed them to
perform personal Service in them. For I cannot believe that faction could lead
Captive so great numbers of men in these populous Cities, if such deserving
men, as many Dignitaries are, did but bestir themselves, and do their best in
countermining the designs of our adversaries by their Zeal, and industry in
watching over the People. And if we look into such places, we shall find very
little sign of care and pains that has been used by the Clergy in retaining or
reducing men to the sober principles of the Church of England; for Dissenters
are scarce any where more numerous than in these Cities. And though I know
several other reasons may be given for it, yet I cannot help believing that one
great occasion of it is, that such Parish-Churches are not generally served by
the ablest men, and oftentimes by good Choristers rather than good Ministers. A
good Song or Antheme may render a man very agreeable company, and a good
neighbor; but such persons cannot usually compose themselves to that
seriousness of mind, and earnestness of Piety, and Study, as to make themselves
successful in their labors in populous and censorious Cities. I shall not take
further notice of those particular good designs, which our reformers had in
continuing these Corporations: you reckon them up well enough, and I wish you
could say that these great ends were served by them at this time. And till they
are, I am sure that they had better be doing good in their Rural Benefices, if
they have any, than spend their time in the Cathedral in doing nothing at all,
or at most, in only seeing Divine Worship performed with decent Solemnity. That
nothing can excuse them from personal labors in their Cures, but some
invincible Necessity, I have already showed, and few of them think themselves
obliged to reside in the Cathedral above two months in the year, or
thereabouts. And for the remaining part of their time I do not know where they
can better be disposed of than amongst their Parishioners.

Another passage is page 138, 139. It is more for the Interest of the Church,
and Religion in general, that men of eminent Learning should attend in the
Courts of Princes, etc. This may very well be allowed of; but does it from
thence follow that these men must undertake other charges inconsistent with
this attendance? But if you hereby mean the King's Chaplains; I do not think
that the time of their attendance will be any great impediment to the Cure of
Souls elsewhere. And if these eminent men vouchsafe to take on them the charge
of a few Rusticks, (as you in contempt call them who should be your care, and
Crown) surely they will not think it below themselves to take care of them too.
What though they may learn as much as they are capable of from the meanest
Curate? Yet it may be well supposed that such great and good men as you speak
of, may have a greater Influence over them, that what they say may make more
impression, may be received with a more attentive mind, and fall with a greater
weight; and by doing more good amongst them than a poor Curate can; they may
more effectually win and reconcile them to their Duty. And they may do this,
and yet not be wanting to their Prince at the stated times and courses of
attendance. But if they affect to be at Court, when they have no business
there, but their own, and when that is nothing else but to solicit for
preferment, to wriggle into the favor of great men, to enjoy better company,
or indulge their Genius more than they can amongst their Rusticks; it must be
acknowledged that this will be a great hinderance to the serving their Cures,
and doing their real business. And is it not pity that men should not be
dispensed with for thus prosecuting the good of the Church elsewhere?

As for Noblemen's Chaplains, who being beneficed, do actually attend, the
number of them is so small, that you might have saved your self the trouble of
apologizing for them. If they have Benefices or Cures, they are generally so
near their Lords Houses, that they may attend both together. And Noblemen
generally are unwilling to take men off from the business of their Cures, and
make more conscience of being the occasion of Ministers not residing, than
perhaps you would have them. You give us some Instances of Great Men, and
Honorable Personages, who retained Domestic Chaplains in times of old: Page
138.
but you are at a loss it seems in that which you ought to have proved, viz.
That any of these Domestics had charges elsewhere. And till you can show this,
you say nothing to the purpose.

You plead likewise for Archbishops and Bishops having Chaplains in their
Houses, page 139. And sure no good-natured man would abate them that Privilege:
But that they are so necessary to be subservient to them in the Government of
the Church is a new Notion. I believe the Prebendaries, and experienced
Clergymen of the Diocese might do the Bishops better Service in this
particular. You have found out an Office for them; which the Canons, and
Constitutions of the Church never gave them. As for the governing of the
Church, it is to be hoped that every Diocese affords men better qualified to
assist the Bishop in it than his Chaplains, who are just come from ruling Lads
in the Universities, and who themselves sometimes are hardly of age to be
Churchwardens.

But though Bishops ought to be allowed Chaplains, yet it does not necessarily
follow that they ought to continue in their attendance, after they are well
beneficed. Prelates are generally in a Capacity to confer or procure Benefices
for their Domestics so near their Houses, that they may in some measure attend
both together. And if they cannot do this, yet they have usually either
Prebends ( though the Archbishop have but three, page 18. as you seem with some
concern to observe) or sine Cures to gratify their Chaplains with, which, one
would think, might suffice, till they could with convenience dismiss them. A
little care and resolution might soon take off this objection.

Now I suppose by this time you have put me down, if you know my Name, for one
of the Traditors. And I thank you for providing me such excellent company. For
it seems Archbishop Williams was one of them, page 12. and the present Bishop,
of Salisbury is in your account a notorious one, nay, and the Archbishop
himself must come into the number for Licensing his Book, V. Bp. of S's.
Pastoral Care page 250.
and encouraging the Author to write it. But let me tell you, Sir, that I
neither understand your manners, nor wit, in fixing such an odious Character
upon so deservedly great men: Nor can I see how the compellation fits them.
For, I never heard that they, or any other of the Clergy, whom you are so
severe upon, ever resigned their Bibles, or renounced their Religion, as the
Traditors of old did: Nay, they have given greater demonstrations of their
Courage, and Zeal in maintaining them, than ever can be expected from you: So
that I cannot make Sense of the expression, unless you take it for granted that
the permission of Pluralities, and Non-residence, be as necessary to Religion,
as the old and New Testament. You say, they betray the Outguards of Religion: I
know not what you mean by the Outguards: But I am sure enormous Plurality, and
neglect of Cures cannot justly be so called. This is rather the Breach at which
Seducers enter in. For if the most Eminent of the Clergy would once in earnest
set about their proper business, I should not doubt, but that Schism and
Confusion would gradually lessen, and perhaps at last altogether disappear.

Your charity runs high, when you say, you will not lay the imputation of
Infidelity upon all Antipluralists, page 12. because some, you hope, acted upon
a mistaken zeal, and false prejudices: But it should seem as for the rest you
cannot abate them an Inch of this Charge. So that all are Infidels with you,
who do not believe the Lawfulness, and Convenience of Pluralities, and
Non-residence, unless invincible ignorance excuse them. Now this is an Article
which the Church of Rome has not yet got into her Creed, but probably they
will put it into the next Edition, especially since you have silenced the
Spanish Bishops, who were the main opposers of it.

The bitterness of your style, and your unchristian way of writing would
provoke a man to retort the accusation, and throw back the ill language upon
your self, and your Brethren: But in mere pity to you I forbear, as knowing
that Grand and Non-resident Pluralists are the most unfit men in the World to
undergo such severe Penances as were of old inflicted on the Traitors.

Your, etc.

FINIS.

