THE CASE Of many HUNDREDS OF Poor English-Captives, IN ALGIER, With some
Remedies To Prevent their Increase, Humbly Represented to Both HOUSES of
PARLIAMENT.
THat there has been taken, since their last breach with us, not less than an
Hundred and Forty Sail of Ships and other Vessels, many of them being richly
laden, besides the great Advance they make upon the persons they take, there
being at this time upwards of 1500, (besides many Hundreds who have Dyed there
of the Plague,) who suffer and undergo most miserable Slavery, put to daily
extreme and difficult Labor, but a poor supply of Bread and Water for their
Food, stripped of their Clothes and covering, and their Lodging on the cold
Stones and Bricks; but what is more, their extreme hard and savage lading them
sometimes with great burdens of Chains, and shut up in noisome places,
commonly adding some hundreds of blows on their bare feet, forcing out the very
Blood, and sometimes on the Back, sometimes on the Belly, and sometimes on them
all, insomuch that many are long decripit, some for ever, and some dying under
their hands. But above all, is their frequent forcing of Men and Boys by their
execrable Sodomy, also their inhumane abuses and force to the Bodies of Women
and Girls, frequently attempting Sodomy on them also, some of whom both Males
and Females have been so abused as hardly to escape with their Lives; All which
Usage is so notoriously known by those who have been redeemed thence, that it
needs no proof.

ANd First, It is apparent that that Promoters of all the inhumane usage of
Christians, are principally the Jews there Inhabiting, there being hardly any
one Vessel of those cruel Pirates, but the owners thereof are for a great part
Jews.

Secondly, It is apparent also, that all those ill-gotten Ships and Goods which
they so barbarously Rob and take from the English-Merchants and Mariners, (to
the great Impoverishing of this Nation) the Jews are the constant Buyers of,
and so of the English-Captives, there being few Slaves in Algier, but a Jew is
their Patroon, or else has at least a share in them.

Thirdly, It is further evident that the Jews are the chief-Instigators of the
Turks and Moors to make those poor Christian-Captives to deny their Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; and it is they who encourage such on whom they so prevail
to turn Runnagadoes, and prefer them to commands and Office in their Pyratical
ships.

Fourthly, That it is the Jews who inhaunce the price of Christian souls, by
Buying them at small Rates, and then exacting great sums for their Redemption,
quite contrary to their usage at the taking of Jerusalem, when Thirty Jews were
sold for a Groat, and possibly the Christians might now be Redeemed at much
lower Rates, were it not for the Jews who buy them, and do now exact a Thousand
pound for the Redemption of one Captive, when possibly he, nor any of his
Relations, are not worth half the value.

Fifthly, That the Jews are those who stir up the Turks and Moors, so to beat
and abuse poor Captives, they not daring to do it themselves, for fear their
Blows should be returned upon them again; so that the Natives of the place are
but mere Vassals and Slaves to the Jews, and for the Lucre of their Money do
Execute all their Cruel and Bloody Designs and projects both abroad and at
home; all which will be abundantly proved by many Witnesses, when ever they
shall be called thereunto.

Sixthly, It is much to be feared that the Jews in Algier, have too great
correspondency with and countenance from the Jews here in England, and that by
their means it is that they in Algier have always Lists of all our English
ships, especially of the Fleets coming from any of His Majesty's Plantations
abroad, and of the very time they are expected to go out or return, with a
perfect Account of the quality and condition of all Merchants and passengers
aboard, if any such there be, by which means they exact such great sums as
aforesaid.

And this may further appear when it is considered how little the Damage is,
as well to England as to all other parts of Christendom by Tripoly or Tunis,
when ever they make any breach upon us; the true reason whereof is, the paucity
and poverty of the Jews in those places: And therefore for a Remedy hereof, It
is humbly proposed to the Consideration of both Houses of Parliament, one or
both of these Two ways following.

First, By the Destruction of this Town of Algier (the Pest of Christendom) and
that with no great Force and Charge may be totally Demolished, with their Mould
and Fortifications, as may be easily Demonstrated were there but a due
Encouragement given to such as are willing to Undertake the same.

Secondly, Or to make a Law, That whatever Damage or Loss the English shall
sustain by means or procurement of the Jews in Algier or elsewhere, it shall be
required and made good to the Loosers out of the Estates of the Jews here in
England. Which is Humbly offered for these Reasons.

First, Because such a Law may save a great Expense of Treasure, and also of
Christian Blood, which this Nation has sadly felt, and may Effect that Peace
and Tranquillity to the English Traders which hitherto Force has not done.

Secondly, Because the Jews have here the full Exercise of their False and
pernicious Religion and Worship, whilst thousands of poor Protestant Christians
differing in no point from the Doctrine of the Church of England, are daily
harased and undone, to the great joy and Laughter of the Jews, seeing
Christians thus tear and molest one another, whilst themselves are projecting
to destroy us all abroad, and eating up the Trade of our English Merchants at
home.

Thirdly, The Charity of this Nation may be Employed on other Good Occasions,
which is now Collected for the Redemption of CAPTIVES, for that it is rather an
Encouragement to those JEWS of Algier Vigorously to proceed in their Rapines
and Robberies, when they shall see the Charity of a whole Nation made Use of to
raise Money for the satisfying their Inhumane Exactions on poor Christians, and
may be easily supposed rather to raise the Price of their Redemption, then to
Lessen it.

Fourthly, It is but Jus gentium when a Nation suffers by one sort of People,
That Reparation and Satisfaction be required of any others of that sort of
People wherever they may be found in our Power, for on this Principle only is
grounded all Letters of Mart and Reprisal granted by Kings and States.
Moreover, it is verily believed, That the JEWS in all places are in a
Combination and Society whereby they have Influence on the Proceedings of all
JEWS in what place soever, and shares in their Profit and Loss.

Fifthly, The very Terror of such a Law would Engage those Jews in other more
Honest Courses than this of Enriching themselves by the Ruin and Destruction
of poor Christians.

Sixthly, If this or some other Course be not Effectually taken, those Jews of
Algier will by their Robberies and Spoil so Enrich themselves, as to be able to
set forth such Fleets as shall Match or Cope with any of our Kings of
Christendom; witness, their great and Unparalleled Boldness of daring to come
not only on our Coast, but even into our very Channels, to the Ignominy of our
Nation, and in Despite and contempt of His Majesty, who is undoubtedly
Sovereign of the Narrow Seas.

Seventhly, By these means other Princes and States may by our Example take the
same Measures, and make the same Law, whereby much Treasure may be saved, which
is very often spent in maintaining Fleets in the Mediteranean Seas; witness,
that of His Majesty of Great Britain.

Eighthly, It is more than probable that by this means His Majesty may more
peaceably Enjoy his Right in Tangier, which has been so Expensive to him; for
that that War is undoubtedly promoted and Abetted by the Jews of Algier, who by
their Purse assist that Barbarous King both with Men, Money, and Ammunition; and
will be able on all Occasions still to do the same, if some effectual Course be
not taken to prevent it.

FINIS.

