THE CASE OF Disbanding the ARMY AT PRESENT, Briefly and Impartially Considered.

Published by John Nutt, near Stationer's Hall, School.

THE Case of Disbanding THE ARMY AT PRESENT, Briefly and Impartially Considered.
I Shall reduce my Thoughts about this Matter within as small a compass as may
be, and therefore shall not trouble the Reader with Histostorical Quotations
either out of Ancient or Modern Authors, as altogether foreign to the Purpose,
unless they are proved to agree with the present Conjuncture of Affairs in
every Particular; and so far it may be owned, that Men in the same
Circumstances will do the same Things; for it is a plain Case, that in taking
true Measures for the Safety of any Government, Men must Examine the present
State of Affairs both within and without it, and things that may happen
hereafter; and always to provide against the most evident and likely Dangers

I shall take it for granted, that an Army in time of Peace is consistent with
our Constitution if the Safety of the Realm require it, and that it be with the
Consent of the Parliament; And therefore if it be made appear, that the present
Government, which (under God) is the best Security we have for our Religion,
Liberty, and Property, is in evident Danger without an Army, and that in the
present State of Affairs our Liberties and Properties cannot be infringed nor
molested by one, this I hope will set this great Case in a true Light.

First, That the present Government is in evident Danger without a competent
Number of Land Forces for its Defense. The Posture of England at present is
this, in relation to Safety, that there are Princes abroad that pretend a Right
to wear its Imperial Crown, who are Protected and Supported by the most
Powerful Monarch in Christendom, who is able enough still, notwithstanding his
late Restitutions, to do what he pleases with the Empire, Spain, and Holland,
unless England joins with them for the Common Liberty, in which its own is
certainly involved. It is very well known, that this Powerful Monarch pretends
in the behalf of the Princes that are descended from him a Right to the Crown
of Spain, and all the Dominions thereunto belonging, upon the Death of the
present King, which is a fair Step to Universal Monarchy: And it is as plain,
that if this Monarch can once secure England, then he will be able to make good
his Pretensions in spite of the rest of the Allies, and Portugal too if it
joins with them. This demonstrates, that it is absolutely his Interest to have
England at his Devotion, which he can hardly expect from the present
Government: And if the Case be so, then the Question is, Whether it is Safe and
Advisable to lay our selves open to a Neighbor so Powerful both by Sea and
Land, whose Interest it is to subdue us, who wants no Pretense for it, and who
has seldom failed to prosecute his Interest when a fair Opportunity has offered
for it? But they say, that a good Fleet, and a well Trained Militia, is
sufficient to put us out of Danger. As to the first, it must be owned, that the
Honor, Glory, and Safety of the Nation does chiefly depend upon our Fleet; but
it is fit to consider at the same time, that the French King can put out all
his Fleet whenever he pleases, and that he can pursue his Designs with more
Secrecy and Expedition than the Constitution of this Government can admit: But
the King of England cannot put out a Fleet without the help of his Parliament,
which must meet together, and settle Funds for the setting out of the Fleet,
without which the King cannot have a sufficient Credit. The Case being so, it
cannot otherwise be, (or it is but too probable that it will be so) that the
French King in time of Peace will put out his whole Fleet sooner than we can
put out ours, even though His Majesty should immediately call a Parliament, and
desire Supplies for a Fleet every time the French work in their Docks at Breast,
Rochefort, and Dunkirk, as if they designed to set out their Fleet: Or the
Parliament must of course allow the King every year a Fund for the setting out
a Fleet, as in time of War: And besides, though we could be ready as soon as
they, yet it is fit to consider, whether if they should Arm in these three
Places at once, and the Hogue, we can, (considering the accidents of Weather)
hinder their Landing upon us from every one, or any one of these Places.

This seems to demonstrate, that it is very necessary to have another Defense
ready in case the first should fail, which (as it appears from what has been
said) may very well be: This Defense therefore must be a Land Force. That the
Militia is not at present a competent Defense, is owned by those who propose
Methods to render it serviceable. I would not be thought to undervalue
Militia's, no doubt they could render Service, especially the Foot, being
interlin'd with Regular Troops, or they may be put into the less exposed
Garrisons, to draw out from thence the Regular Troops to reinforce an Army: But
as for Horse, the Horse must be Trained as well as the Man, or else the Bravest
Men in the World can render no Service upon Horses that are not Trained. But if
the Militia can be rendered serviceable for our Defense against the Invasions
of Disciplined Troops, as those very Persons that would Disband the Army must
own that it is not at present, it is fit to consider, that a Militia under such
Regulations as are proper to make it Serviceable, will then enter into the very
Constitutions of the Kingdom, that it will be a very great and perpetual
Expense upon the Subject, and that it must vest as great a Military Power in
the King, as if he had an Army at his Command, or else it cannot be thought to
make it Serviceable. This is the very Case of Sweden; Puffendorf tells us, that
the King of Sweden pays no other Forces out of his Coffers but the Lifeguard
and the Foot-Guards, I mean in Sweden; the rest is the Militia of the Country,
maintained by Tenures from the Crown (which is the very Original of Militia's)
and kept in constant Duty and Discipline: But pray, has this Militia preserved
the Rights and Properties of the People? Is not the King of Sweden as Absolute
a Monarch as any in Christendom? And on the contrary we find a Country in the
World not for off, called Holland, where they maintain all the Liberty that can
be imagined in a Commonwealth, with an Army and the King at the Head of it,
without any such thing as Militia in its Constitution. But an Army, being
required only during the present State of Affairs in Christendom, which (as
Experience tells us) have never continued long in the same Posture, cannot
enter into the Constitution of the Monarchy, nor can it be made a Precedent any
longer than the Posture of Affairs is the same as it is now; It is a better
Defense than a Militia, and infinitely Cheaper, and less Vexatious and
Troublesome to the Subject; neither can a competent Number of Landforces for
our Defense, I may venture to say a good Army, attempt in the least, during the
present juncture of Affairs, to invade the Rights and Properties of the People
of England, (the second Thing to be proved) which is the common Bugbear to put
People out of conceit with what seems so necessary at present for their safety;
and when the State of Affairs alters, it will consequently be as easy then to
Disband them as it is now, and certainly much more proper.

The Author or Authors of the History of Standing Armies, have already proved
to our Hands, that no Kings of England either with or without Armies, have
hitherto made any steps toward Tyranny and Arbitrary Power, but it has proved
Fatal to them; and if this has been the success of their Attempts when they
have had no jealousy of Competitors supported by Formidable Neighbors, it
must be much more impossible for any King of England that comes in upon the
present Settlement to set up for Tyranny and Arbitrary Power: And he cannot
make any Steps toward it, as Affairs are now, without bringing evident Ruin
upon himself; because the Competitors (being supported by the most powerful
Prince in Christendom, whose Interest it is to have England at his Devotion)
will take the Advantage of that great ferment in the Nation, which such an
Attempt must produce, to assert their Claim. This is but too good a collateral
Security for our Rights and Properties under the Present Settlement; and when
it shall please God to put Affairs upon another Foot, and that we shall have no
occasion for these Fears and Apprehensions, then let the Army be Disbanded, no
True Englishman can plead for it; but whilst Affairs continue in the state they
are in at present, it is a plain Case that our Liberty and Property can be in
no Danger, but will rather be preserved by an Army ready for our Defense.

Those that have writ against an Army during the present Peace, are pleased to
Compliment His Majesty out of what seems so necessary for his and our Safety:
They say, That indeed they are under no Apprehensions of such Attempts upon the
Liberties of the People, during his Reign, and so far they are in the Right;
but they are afraid of what may come hereafter, when the having an Army at
present may serve as a Precedent for succeeding Monarchs. To which it may be
answered, First, That it cannot serve as a Precedent to succeeding Kings,
unless the State of Affairs be the same as it is now; if they have not the same
Occasion for their Defense, and that of England, they cannot draw our having an
Army at present into a Precedent. Secondly, I answer, That whenever that
unhappy Hour shall come which will deprive us of our King, (whom GOD long
preserve to Reign over us) our present Constitution will then run the greatest
Risk, if Affairs remain in the same Posture as they are in now; it will be the
most favorable conjuncture for Competitors to the Crown, and their too
powerful Protectors, to enter upon us: And therefore, since His Majesty's Life
is such an Obstacle to them, is it not very much to Expose His Majesty's
Person, and with it the Present Government, to have no Army on Foot in this
Conjuncture? It is likewise very fit to consider, That in such a Case, besides
the Danger on that Hand, we have Neighbors that need not Cross the Seas to
come upon us, and who may be rempted to make us a Visit on the other.

I may add as a collateral Argument, That those who have writ against the Army
with so much Virulency and Malice, (for none have writ with Temper) have
sufficiently discovered their ill Inclinations toward Monarchy and the Church
of England, but more openly and expressly toward the Latter; which plainly
shows, That their designs against both can hardly be compassed whilst there is
an Army on foot for the Defense of the Present Government; and therefore it is
to be hoped, that those who are Well-wishers to the Church and to the State,
will take care not to be drawn into the Snare, under the plausible Pretext of
Providing for the Liberty of the People, which, it is very Evident, cannot be
invaded by an Army, during the present Conjuncture.

FINIS.

