THE DEPORTMENT AND CARRIAGE OF THE German Princess, Immediately before her
EXECUTION: AND Her last SPEECH at TYBVRN: Being on Wednesday the 22th of
January, 1672.

London, Printed for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange. 1672.

THE DEPORTMENT AND SPEECH OF THE GERMAN PRINCESS Before her Execution at
Tyburn, January 22. MDCLXXII.
MARY CARLTON, commonly known by the Name of the German Princess, being brought
from the Marshalsey in Southwark to Justice-Hall in the Old-Bailey, in order to
her Trial for several Crimes and Misdemeanors formerly committed by her, was
accordingly Arraigned at the Bar on Thursday the Sixteenth of this instant
January, and on Friday the Seventeenth was Indicted for stealing a piece of
Plate from an Inhabitant in Chancery Lane, to which Indictment she pleaded Not
Guilty; but upon full Evidence was found Guilty, and so to avoid the Sentence
of Condemnation, pleaded her Belly. Whereupon a Jury of Women was Impannell'd,
and after long and serious Consultation and Debate they brought her in Not
quick with Child; so that she was sentenced to Dye (according to Law in such
Cases provided) on Wednesday following, which was the Two and Twentieth
instant, and accordingly went Carted to Tyburn in order to her Execution.

As to her deportment in Prison the said day of her designed Execution, she was
found in a far more quiet and calm posture than the night before, and better
fitted for Death, according to all humane conjecture; heartily desiring her
expected and deserved dissolution. And herein to be just to her, she did show
the absolute symptoms of a true Penitent; for her Ejaculations were as pious
and pathetical, as her former Life had been enormous and criminal. She did
voluntarily upon her own account, without any instigation from a second person,
confess the hainousness of her Sins; though withal she desired that the
Spectators and Auditors would be so much friends to Justice, as not to give
credit to all vain Rumors that were reported of her. A Pardon she did declare,
neither to expect, nor desire: Death she had deserved, and was very willing to
undergo that hard and heavy task; and withal that she was fully satisfied in
all particulars, and fit to taste of that bitter Cup. When she heard the Bell
at St. Sepulchers Toll, she used this Expression: This is my Passing Bell, Lord
Jesus I am coming to thee. There is no person knows what it is to be under the
terrors of the Almighty, but those that have felt them. O my Savior! I am
coming. Lord strengthen me; Lord step between me and poor weak Nature. O how
does Nature cling to me, and is unwilling to leave me! It was a trouble to me
at first to dye, but now I have overcome it, and am satisfied.

One thing she her self took notice of, and acquainted the Company withal of
her own accord, telling them it deserved their Observation, viz. This day
(being the day of Execution) was the day of my Baptism: I was Born on the 11th
of January, and Baptized on the 22th; to which she added this Zealous,
passionate and Christian like Expression; This day I was Baptized, and before
night I expect to be sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, which is a second
Baptism. It Is true, (though 'twill hardly be believed) that this vicious Woman,
guilty of such gross Immoralities, did dye well satisfied and unconcerned, with
a Resolution and Courage beyond the weakness of her frail Sex. Her Sister, (and
another Relation to whom she committed the care of her decent Burial) were
present with her immediately before she went to Execution, lamenting her sad
and deplorable condition; she desired them to be satisfied as she was, and not
to mourn and shed tears; for that did but exasperate her grief, and increase
her trouble. As to her Religion, she did declare before her departure that she
was, and would dye a Roman Catholic, as she did undoubtedly. And thus she was
committed to the Cart; and when she came to Tyburn, after she had devoutly
prayed with a cheerful and unaltered Countenance, she desired to know whether
she might speak to the People. To which a Person there present replied, Your
voice is low and will not be heard by the multitude here present, but if you
will acquaint me with your desire, I will discourse it to them afterward. Then
she began a short Speech in these words following.

YOu will make me a President for sin. I confess I have been a vain Woman; I
have had in the World Glory and Misery in abundance; and let all People beware
of ill Company. The World has condemned me, and I have much to answer; pray
God forgive me, and my Husband likewise. I beseech God lay nothing to his
charge for my fault.

Thereupon a Person that was there present asked her this question. Have you any
thing to your Husband? To which she modestly replied; Only my Recommendations;
that he would serve God and repent; for I fear he wants sober admonition; and I
beseech God lay nothing to his charge on my account. And what wrong I have done
him, I hope he will forgive me, I forgive him. To which one made answer, then
so in perfect Charity you dye with all the World? And she replied very
seriously, Yes, I do; and so with many devout Ejaculations, such as, Lord Jesus
receive my soul! Lord have mercy upon me! frequently reiterated and repeated,
she departed this life.

FINIS.
YOu may very speedily expect more at large The Memoirs of the German Princess,
with an exact Narrative of her Life and Death, etc.


