THE Detestable Designs of FRANCE EXPOSED.

Or, the True SENTIMENTS OF THE Spanish Netherlanders: The Injustice of the
King of FRANCE BY HIS DECLARATION Of War against His Catholic MAJESTY, And the
Justice of the COUNTER-DECLARATION of the Marquess of Gastannaga his Governor
General of the Low Countries.

London, Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock at the West end of St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1689.

THE TRUE SENTIMENTS OF THE SPANISH NETHERLANDERS, etc.
FRANCE sets her self against all the World; and therefore it is but just that
all the World should declare against Her. She it is that makes the first Onset,
and we can do no less than defend our selves. Since the Germans in a little
Treatise entitled the French Herald, have so successfully refell'd the
Declarations of War made by he most Christian King against the Emperor and the
Pope, the Flemings are no less obliged to their Sovereign, and the Marquess of
Gastannaga their Governor. Nor are they in a worse condition powerfully to
refute all the weak and pitiful Arguments, with which the most Christian King
endeavored to support his Pretensions. After he had declared War against the
Emperor, and at the same time against the Empire (for he seeks the utter
extirpation of the House of Austria) he has also declared War against the
Catholic King by an Act of the fifteenth of this present year 1689. and at the
same instant, has exercised all manner of Hostility upon his Dominions, as well
in Flanders and the Low Countries, as in Catalonia. It Is very true, that before
he fell to work, there was no Stone which the Court of France left unturned to
corrupt the Spanish Council, on purpose to draw them from their own Interests,
and divide them from the Emperor. For She well knows that while the House of
Austria continues firmly united in the two Branches of Spain and Germany, she
need not be afraid of any other Power: and therefore it is, that she has
attempted to divide them. So that after she had declared War against Spain by
the Exercise of most dismal Hostilities, she has labored to the utmost of her
Power, to prevent the King of Spain from sending succor to his own Blood and
his own Family. This is absolutely to tie one Arm to hinder the relief of the
other which they are maiming at the same time. But be sure that after Spain has
sat quietly to see the Empire devoured, France them will turn her Arms upon him
and perfect his destruction. It Is true, that Lewis XIV. finding himself
burdened with King James of England, who has thrown himself into his Arms, and
drawn upon him a terrible War through the Union of the Forces of England and
Holland, would fain lull Spain asleep, and cajole the Emperor with vain hopes
of peace, and by motives of Religion. His Ministers have spared no Flatteries
at the Court of Spain. He has offered the King of Spain to make him Arbitrator
and Mediator of the Peace between him and the Empire. He has caused his
Ministers to lay before the King of Spain, that it is the Interest of the
Catholic Religion before all things, to see the King of England reestablished
in his Dominions, besides that it would be a work of infinite Charity. That the
differences between the Emperor and him might be easily determined by way of
Negotiation, upon which Heaven would never fail to shed down a Blessing, so
soon as their Interests were linked together, by so pious a work, as would be
that of restoring a Catholic King, dispossessed for the sake of his Religion.
The Ministers of France at the cost of Spain made use of all their Engines which
were employed in Germany to disunite the Princes of the Empire. They laid
before them, That it was a real War for the sake of Religion; That there was a
League between the Lutheran Princes of Germany, the Hollanders and the English
revolted from their lawful Sovereign, and that they menaced no less the ruin of
all the Catholic States, than of the Catholic Religion it self.

And besides all this, they made use of all those persons who had the nearest
Access to his Catholic Majesty, to insinuate into him the great Advantages
that would accrue to Both, if he and the Emperor should join their Forces to
those of France against the Common Enemy. They farther whispered him in the
Ear, That the Hollanders were not altered in their Inclinations by the Treaties
of the Truce and Peace that had been brought to pass since their Rebellion:
That after all, they were but Rebellious Subjects, and that it always became
him to make it his business to reduce them under their former Yoke: that their
Master offered his Majesty the Assistance of his Forces to tame and bring them
under subjection and their old Obedience. That England and Holland made a Union
formidable to all such Princes who had any Territories bordering upon the Sea:
That the King of Spain had great reason to fear the loss of the Netherlands:
That the English who had been in possession of Dunkirk, not long since, would
not be wanting to make themselves Masters of Newport and Ostend, which when it
should come to pass, they should soon be Lords of Brussels and Antwerp: that
there would be no security for Spain it self. That her Coasts lay naked and
open as well upon the Ocean as the Mediterranean Sea, and that she would be
always exposed to the Invasions of the fierce and haughty English; and the
Attempts of Holland always covetous, and seeking after nothing but Gain: That
the two faithless Nations being Mistresses of the Sea, would make an Eternal
separation between the Dominions of the King of Spain in the new discovered
World, and those which he has in Europe: That his Gallions would import no
more Bullion into his Territories, but be snap'd by the way to gratify the
Luxury of the English, who never think they have enough to supply their
Debaucheries and Effeminacy: or else to assuage the Avarice of the Hollanders,
who never believe they have Gold and Silver sufficient in their Coffers: That
they would never content themselves with putting a stop to the flowing
Rivolets, but would suddenly go to the Fountain it self, and that the two
Insatiable and faithless Nations would wrest even Peru it self from the King of
Spain. But luckily for us, all these great Engines were broken to pieces by the
constancy of the Spanish Council. Thereupon the Court of France being incensed
by the ill success of their Intrigues, has declared War against the King of
Spain, and grounded their Declaration upon ridiculous Reasons, not much more
solid than those contained in their Manifesto against the Emperor, to justify
their taking Arms a second time.

Let us a little examine this Declaration, and the better to discover the vanity
of it, let us compare it with the Counter-Declaration of Monsieur the Marquess
of Gastannaga our Governor.

The sincere desire, says the Declaration, which the King has had to observe
the Truce concluded in the year 1684. has inclined his Majesty to take no
notice of the behavior of the Spanish Ministers in all the Courts of the
Princes of Europe. It is apparent, that when a Man renounces all other Virtues,
he abjures also all Shame and Modesty. Of which if France had preserved but the
least part in the World, she would never have had the Confidence to say, That
the King had a sincere desire to observe the Truce concluded in the Year 1684.
Who is it then that has broken this Truce for which France had such a profound
Regard? Was it the Emperor, who had nothing else in his thoughts, but only
vigorously to carry on his Affairs and Advantages against the common Enemy of
Christendom? Was it the King of Spain, who never stirred since, nor committed
the least Act of Hostility against France? And now at this present Juncture,
who is it that declares the War, is it France or Spain? Is it not she that
declares the War who also brake the Truce? There needs no more but to call to
mind what was said in the Fecialis Gallus; and we shall easily find with what
sincerity the Court of France could affirm, That the King had a sincere desire
to preserve the Truce of 1684. There we shall observe, after the Conclusion of
the Truce, a continued train of offered Violences, which were all of them so
many Breaches. There are no manner of wranglings, Menaces, or Intrigues which
the Court of France has not made use of, to force the States of the Empire to
consent to this Truce; that is to say, to oblige them to renounce the Provinces
of the Empire which the Violences and Invasions of France had ravished from
them, on purpose to annex them to that Crown. It is the Marquess of Gastannaga
who has most right to boast of the Fidelity of his King, and to say as he does,
That all the Treaties of Peace and Truce have been religiously observed, on the
King our Master's part, and broken upon slight occasions, and rashly violated
by France. If it were lawful at any time to violate Treaties of Peace, it would
be when the Peace was unjust, when they were made by the constraint of Force
and Violence, or that they had been obtained by fraud and circumvention.
Private Persons have a right to seek redress of the bad Contracts they have
made, when they have been losers very never the full moiety. In truth, if Spain
had not been sincere; if she had not had more respect to the Faith of Treaties
than France, she would have had just reason to seek her own relief, considering
the enormous losses which she had sustained. Being abandoned by her Allies, she
was constrained to lose and let go three large Provinces, Franche Conte,
Luxemburg, and almost all Flanders. What Claim could France lay to those
spacious Countries? She had won them by Conquest. But can right of Conquest
take place in an unjust War? He has then no more to do but to quarrel with his
Neighbors, and to seize upon all their Estates for his own use by right of
Conquest; and after all to restore them a small portion, and detain the
greatest part to himself, and then to say, That he has a just Title to what he
possesses, because he has won it by the Sword, and that he was very kind in
restoring a part of what he had Conquered. Between private Persons such sort of
dealings would be looked upon as perfect Robbery: and indeed between Kingdom
and Kingdom it is no less than absolute Highway-Felony, and mere Usurpation:
and Spain being constrained by force to submit to Treaties so unjust, might
have had grounds sufficient to look upon them as null and void.

The most Christian King says, That the Ministers of Spain in the Courts of
Europe, made it their sole business to excite them, to take up Arms against
France, and that his Majesty was not ignorant of the part which they had in the
Negotiation of the League of Auspur4gh. Once more, supposing this to be true,
it was impossible to attribute this to Spain for a Crime: She did not concede
that large and considerable Part of her Territories to France till constrained
by Force: Now Force has nothing to do with Right. She had not parted with those
spacious Provinces, but only because the Princes of Europe, being swayed by
various Motives, and carried away by other Interests and Affairs, abandoned her
Party. Was it a Crime in Spain to labor the reknitting of an Association
together, which ought never to have been broken, till they had reduced France
to Reason, and brought down her Pride?

But besides this, all that France speaks to this purpose is mere supposition.
Monsieur our Governor has much more reason to understand the conduct of Spain
in foreign Courts, than the Ministers of France. He averrs and is ready to prove
that the Catholic King has religiously observed the Treaties. The Ministers of
Spain have maintained in the Courts of Europe, that it behooves them to be
jealous of the Grandeur of France. This they could not do, without having a
design to break the Truce, but 'twas only upon the consideration of preserving
the Peace. This was that which was aimed at by the League of Auspurgh: By this
League they intended to bridle France, oblige her to live in peace; and to
preserve a Right in the Empire of re-demanding what had been dismembered from
it; when the Truce for twenty years should come to be expired. Now in the
language of the Court of France this is said to be a Violation of the Peace and
Truce: for whatever sets bounds and limits to her unruly Ambition violates all
Divine and humane Laws. Lastly, in a word, that we may understand who speaks
most Truth, whether the most Christian King, in saying, That he had a sincere
Intention to preserve the Truce, or the Marquess of Gastannaga, who asterts
hove us to consider who it was, that after the Peace of Nimeghen first began to
wrangle with his Neighbors, who issued forth his Processes concerning the
Limits; who demanded Compensations for the Territories included with in the
Spanish Flanders; who set up his Gallowses at the Gates of Namur; who asserted
his Right, by the burning and sacking of all the Country: who threw in his
Bombs into Oudenard, in a time of settled Peace; who it was that caused the
Chamber of Metz to adjudg him the two Thirds or three Fourths of the
Dependences of Luxenburgh. If the King of Spain had acted any such thing, they
had done him wrong, who said, That he had religiously observed the Treaties.
But if it were the King of France who was the Author of all those Violences, it
is a most unjust thing in him to Assert in the face of the World, That he has
always had a sincere desire to observe the Treaties.

But it is not enough for the Court of France to have accused in general all
the Ministers and Governors of the Catholic King of having violated the
Treaty, unless our Governor Monsieur the Marquess of Gastannaga be charged in
particular. His Majesty says, the Declaration has been also informed of the
part which the Governor of the Low Countries had in the Enterprise which the
Prince of Orange undertook against England.

By this it appears, that his most Christian Majesty had very good Eyes to see
what no body else but himself could discover. But I would fain understand what
part the Marquess of Gastannaga had in the Enterprise of the Prince of Orange;
Did he righ out any of his Masters Ships to join the Holland Fleet? Did he levy
any Soldiers in the Netherlands, or send any Forces aboard to land in England?
Did he lend any Money to the Prince of Orange or the Hollanders toward their
getting ready their Fleet? Did he solicit the English to revolt and favor
that pretended Invasion? In my opinion these are the only Acts, by which it may
be presumed that he had any part in the Enterprise. Now it is as clear as
Daylight, and notorious to all Europe, that the Governor of the Netherlands
was never guilty of any of these Charges, and that he cannot be upbraided with
any false step that ever he made either directly or indirectly to the ruin of
King James: but I will tell ye the truth how it was.

Some years since there was a Tribunal erected at Versailles altogether
resembling the Judgment Seat of God; where men were to answer for their
Thoughts as well as their Actions. In this Tribunal, which understood the
hearts of Men, it was, that they found that the Marquess of Gastannaga, was at
the bottom of his heart very glad, that the King of England had work enough to
do at home, since he minded so little those Affairs abroad that most concerned
him. For King James was Garrantee for the Peace of Nimeghen, for the obtaining
of which his Brother had been the Mediator. It behooved him also to be Garantee
for the Truce that followed: and yet he sat still without ever concerning
himself, while the King of France both openly broke the Truce and invaded the
Empire. It is natural not to close too far with the Interests of those, who do
not close with ours; especially when they are obliged thereto. It may be that
the Marque4ss of Gastannaga, who is deeply engaged in the Interests of the
Empire, not a little perplexed that the King of England so strangely neglected
the peace of Europe, was nothing at all troubled to see him deprived of that
Peace himself, which he would not preserve to others. This was a Thing divined
in France, as it was divined that the Emperor would make a Peace with the
Turk, to make War upon the Rhine. And this was the great Crime of the Governor
of the Low Countries. He was a Friend to the Prince of Orange before the
enterprise of England, nor has he yet abandoned his Friendship, but has always
preserved the good Correspondence which was between the Prince and Him. This
was another of his Crimes. For from this time forward the World is to be
informed, that France is not only the Arbitratour and judge of the general
conclusions of Peace, but she is also the Mistress of private and particular
ties and Obligations of Friendship: People of honesty and Integrity are no
longer to have any other Friends but those whom she will allow them. Otherwise
he must be a Criminal, a Violator of Treaties, and an Infringer of Alliances.
It may be that the Marquess of Gastannaga, at what time there was no news in
Holland of what passed in England, gave advice to the Spanish Minister residing
at the Hague of what Intelligence he had by the way of Newport, and that the
News was carried to the Princess of Orange and the States. And this was having
a part in the Enterprise of the Prince of Orange according to the
Interpretation of France: for that without this Intelligence the Prince of
Orange's Enterprise could never have succeeded: this was that which terrified
King James: this was that which caused him to abdicate his Kingdom: this was
that which had such an influence upon his Army that they refused to fight; in a
word, this was that which did the work.

Thus it is, that France derides and laughs at all the World, and takes us all
for a company of Beasts: Nevertheless these specious Pretenses are the
Ingredients of a Delcaration of War, and make up the principal Grounds and
foundations of it.

Now let us listen to the following part of the Declaration: His Majesty not
being able to believe that the conduct of the Governor of the Low Countries in
this particular Affair, was every by the Directions of Order of the King of
Spain, who by so many ties of Religion, Blood, and assurance of all Kings one
toward another, was obliged to oppose a Usurpation of that nature; His Majesty
was in hopes that he might have been able to persuade his most Christian
Majesty to a Union for the Re-establishment of the lawful King in England and
the preservation of the Catholic Religion against the Protestant League, etc.
His Majesty was informed at the same time, that the Spanish Ambassador in
England, was every day with the Prince of Orange, etc. And bad Counsels
prevailing, his Majesty had intelligence that a resolution was taken to favor
the Usurper of England, and to join with the Protestant Prince.

Behold another most pious and most Catholic Article of the Declaration: and
now after this who can ever accuse the King of France of not behaving himself
answerable to his Title of Most Christian? It is clear from hence that the King
of Spain is no longer to be accounted Catholic, since he is become a Friend
and favourer of the Protestants. He refuses to succor a Catholic Prince
dispossessed by an Usurper: he joins his Forces with those of the Enemies of
the Church. Nevertheless, the Marquess of Gastannaga does not relish this
specious Article. And therefore he finds himself obliged to tell the World in
his Counter Declaration, That that same piece of the most Christian King is
injurious to the Devotion and Piety of his Master, as being labored with all
the Art imaginable to render his Alliances wih the Princes and States his
Neighbors, scandalous to the World.

In the Declaration of the most Christian King, of which we have already
repeated the words, it appears that his Majesty seems to have a peculiar
abhorrence of Usurpers, and would by no means be thought a friend to
Usurpations, but altogether a Zealot for the Rights and Privileges of lawful
Sovereigns. For he calls the Prince of Orange a Usurper, and would have all the
World to be his Enemy. King James he calls the Lawful King of England, and
would have all the World to succor him. But it is an easy thing to look
through all these feigned shows of his good Nature; for if they be real, it is
to be hoped that the consideration of these things will bring him to look
homeward, consult his own Actions, and that then he will suddenly make
satisfaction to the Princes his Neighbors, for so many Provinces of theirs
which he himself has usurped: He will restore Franche Conte, the Duchy of
Luxenburgh, and all Flanders to the Catholic King. He will surrender
Strasburgh, Friburgh, the Palatinate, and all the Rhine to the Empire, and
Lorain to it is own natural and lawful Prince and Duke. For how is it possible
that the declared Enemy of Usurpers and Usurpations should himself continue to
be the greatest Usurper of all? King James, he says, was lawful King of
England; -- it may be so -- Neither do we concern our selves whether he were or
no. -- But was not the Catholic King as much the Lawful Sovereign of both the
Burgundies? Is it because that Flanders which was wrested from him during the
Campaignes of 1667. and the rest that followed, was not his by all manner of
Right and Title? Is it because he was not the true and lawful Duke of
Luxenburgh? which was came the Duke of Lorain to forfeit his Duchy? What right
had the French to ravish Strasburgh for the Empire?

Who shall endure the Gracchi complaining of Sedition?

In good truth it is a thing altogether insupportable, that a prince usurping
with so much Violence and Injustice the Estates of all the World, should
complain so loudly of Usurpers, and of our being so strictly united with them.
Nevertheless the Prince of Orange is a Prince of the Blood of England, he
married the next Heiress; and he was called in by the Nation in General. He was
declared King by the Three Estates of the Kingdom. Now had the French King any
Veil like this to cover his Usurpation of several Provinces, which being joined
together, are as good as a Kingdom? Our Eyes are not yet sufficiently open to
see the difference between the King of France and a Usurper. He wrested those
Countries from Spain, from the Empire, from the Duke of Lorrain, in open War
and by the dint of Sword? What other way did Crowwel, the most Infamous of all
Usurpers, ascend the Throne of England? Was it not by the force of open War,
and with his Arms in his hand? By what means did the Turks usurp the Estates of
the Christian Princes? Was it not by main force? Therefore they are no Usupers.
And Excellent Definition of an Usurper. If fraud be required to make a Usurper,
was there ever known a more wicked piece of Treachery than that by which he got
Strasburgh, and all the reunited Countries? But some will say, the King of
France is too Conscientious; he would not have despoiled a King, he would not
have dethroned the King of England. A most apparent piece of Truth! It was the
niceness of his Conscience, I warrant ye, that hindered hi from taking Brussels
and Antwerp as he did Gaunt; or as if he would not have taken Madrid, if it had
been in his power, as well as Messina. While we see him devour, we see that he
is Insatiable; let him but alone till his hunger is assuaged, and you shall see
how far he will eat on. If Castile had called him, and made him King, he would
have gone thither f possible he could, and would have conquered it was he
conquered Sicily. After all this, you may, if you please, give ear to the most
Christian King, when he talks so like a Christian against Usurpers.

Nevertheless, we ought not to refuse him the Honor of being an Enemy to
Protestant Usurpers. For that is a double Crime in a Catholic King to favor a
Usurper and a Protestant Usurper: that is very bad indeed. Yet we see that the
most Christian King has changed his Principles, and that we need not to be
afraid, for the future, of his doing what he has done formerly. We might very
well set before his Eyes tekely, the Usurper of Hungary, who obtained that
Title to be given him by the Ottoman Port, and who has done his utmost
endeavor to get possession of it. That Usurper is a Protestant, for he is a
Lutheran. Nevertheless the most Christian King must not disown but that he has
acknowledged him for one of his best Friends. Had France no other Veil to hide
her Miscarriages than a Cobweb, yet she is so brazen-fat'd, that she would deny
what she did behind that Curtain, with the same confidence as if she had had a
wall of a hundred foot thick to conceal her. And therefore it is that you will
find her perhaps denying all her strict ties of Friendship and Treaty with
Tekely and the Turk. But what will she say to her Union with Cromwell? Here is
an Example that nearly concerns England, where now the Dispute lies. Henry
William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, Prince of the Blood of England, married to
Mary of England, Eldest Daughter of James, called in by the English, Crowned
King by the three Estates is a Usurper. He is a Protestant; Let every Catholic
be anathematized that adheres to him.

But Cromwell, a Person of mean Extraction, yet a Protestant; but the
Abomination of all of his own Religion, the Murderer of his King, whose Head
he had cut off upon a public Scaffold; The Tyrant of England, and sworn Enemy
of all Catholics, is no Usurper. It is lawful for a most Christian King to
make a League Offensive and Defensive with him, to give him Entrance into
Flanders, to invite him to invade the Countries of a Catholic Prince, to
deliver Dunkirk into his Hands, and give it to that same English Usurper. At
that time the Motives and Inducements of Religion, Blood, and safety of all
Sovereign Princes were but Chimera's: never any such tings really known in the
World till the most Christian King begins to be afraid of England under the
Government of the Prince of Orange. It Is a Crime for a Catholic King to have
any Alliance with such a Person. In good truth, it is apparent that the most
Christian King derides Religion and Christianity; and laughs at all Europe
beside.

Let us suppose the Catholic King to be at a loss: behold him between two
Usurpers; between the King of France; a Usurper without the least shadow of
Pretense, of two Dutchies, two great Provinces, and several Cities and
Territories, and between Henry William of Nassau, Usurper of England, as France
pretends. The most Christian King invites him, by all the Motives of Religion,
Blood, and safety of Kings, to unite with him in a War against the Usurper of
England: at least if the Condition of his Affairs will not permit him to engage
in such a Union, to observe and exact Neutrality. On the other side, King
William of England promises him great Advantages, if he will join with Him.
What shall the Catholic King do? In my Opinion, between one Usurper and to
other, his Interest requires him to declare for the Usurper, that never took
any thing from him, against the Usurper that has wrested from him by force so
considerable a part of his Dominions. What can France say to This?

But to say no more of the pretended Usurpation of England; who has told France
that the Catholic King has joined with a Usurper? He has united with the
Emperor his Kinsman and Ally; He has joined with the Pope, the Head of the
Church: Against whom? Against the common Enemy of the Empire, against the
general Enemy of Europe, against the declared Enemy of the Holy Empire. Where
is the Scandal? The Prince of Orange, lawful Elected, King of England by the
Three Estates of the Kingdom, is upon his March the same way. What sort of
Morals has the Court of France found out to prove, that it is not lawful for
the Catholic King to make an Alliance with him in defense of the Common
Liberty of Europe? Is it for us to dispute the Rights of the People and Kings
of England? We should take it very ill that the English should intermeddle with
the Government of Castile or Arragon. If there be any wrong done, it is done by
all the Nation: Now I cannot find that the whole Body of a Nation is answerable
for its Conduct to any other than God himself. If King James have any right on
his side, we will not take it ill, that he defend his Title. But this is a
Quarrel to be disputed between the People and Him, wherein no body has to do to
concern himself; much less the Catholic King, who never received any Kindness,
but all the damage that might be from the late Kings of England, as being
always in League with France to the ruin of the House of Austria. This is the
first time for these two hundred years past, that the House of Austria has
found England in a condition to be advantageous to their Interests: and France
is mighty unwilling that they should lay hold of the Lucky Conjuncture. It Is
very unjust: and the Accusation which the most Christian King raises thereupon,
is a Pretense without any ground.

After all, what would be the benefit of that plausible Alliance into which his
most Christian Majesty tells us, that he has labored so much to persuade the
Catholic King for the restoring King James? It would produce a bloody War.
England environed with the Sea, united to Holland, and in Alliance with other
Protestant Princes is able to maintain a War against all the other Princes of
Europe. And in this War Spain would be a loser, the Empire would get nothing,
and France would win all. For when the Allies were weakened by extravagant
Expenses and a tedious War with England, then would France fall upon them and
level all before him. This is a true Prospect of the Designs of France, so
Religious, so Catholic, so Zealous for the Rights of lawful Sovereigns.

And now, has not the Marquess of Gastannaga just reason to publish, That the
most Christian King's Declaration is injurious to his Catholic Majesty, while
it labors to render all his Alliances with the Princes and States his
Neighbors scandalous to all the World, whose glorious Aim is only the repose
of Christendom, and the reciprocal Grandeur of each others Dominions. The
Scandal then being wiped away, as it is clear there is none in this case, it is
as apparent that his Catholic Majesty cannot dispense with his entering into an
Alliance with all the Enemies of France, let them be of what Religion they
will. For this Union tends to the glorious End, which is the safety and repose
of Europe, of which the most Christian King has been the Disturber for several
years. His Ambition is boundless, nor will it admit of any Limits: and
therefore it is requisite that Bounds should be set him in spite of his teeth,
it being necessary, as the Marquess of Gastannaga says, for the reciprocal
Grandeur of each others Dominions. Not that the Emperor or the King of Spain,
or their Allies have any design of Conquest upon those Princes that acknowledge
and worship Jesus Christ. That Honor is left for the most Christian King, to
pillage and devour the Children of the Church. The Emperor is contented with
conquering the Countries of the Christians out of the hands of Infidels. And as
for his Catholic Majesty, all that he desires, is but to regain what has been
so unjustly ravished from him. Nor does it appear that the Protestant States,
the English and Hollanders either have or can have any prospect of Conquest,
nor any other Interest than that of the public safety and the preservation of
the Liberty of Europe. But to be an Enemy of France, to go about to stop the
Career of her Fury, is to declare War against Heaven, if you will believe the
Ministers and Council of Versailles.

His Majesty was informed at the same time, that the Spanish Embassadonr in
England was continually with the Prince of Orange. And thus for the future the
Court of France it seems will take upon her to regulate the Visits and motions
of Foreign Ambassadors in Foreign Courts, so that they shall not dare to pay
common Civilities without her permission. Wherefore should the Catholic King
forbear holding that good Correspondence with the Prince of Orange which he had
always observed while he was at the Hague: Had the Prince of Orange given the
King any occasion to order his Ministers not to see him any more? It Is very
true, the behavior of the Prince was quite different toward Monsieur Barillon,
the most Christian King's Ambassador; for he sent him away packing with
ignominy: and he had good reason so to do. For that Ambassador was sent into
England for nothing else but to engage King James in a Conduct entirely
opposite to the Interests of Europe and the public peace. 'Twas his business
to cheat England, and to tie he Hands that she might not oppose the Ambitious
designs of the most Christian King: and aster the flight of King James, he
staid behind for nothing else but to be a Spy and a Firebrand of Sedition. But
the Spanish Ambassador was there to engage England to do her duty, by
suppressing the Attempts of France. The Prince of Orange comes into England,
and by the flight of King James becomes Master of Affairs, and turns the Tide,
so that the Revolution proves altogether favorable to the Interests of his
Catholic Majesty and of all Europe. What reason has the most Christian King to
take it ill that we should lay hold of such a lucky Circumstance, for the
restoring Christendom to peace, and that flourishing Condition which it
formerly enjoyed?

One of the King of France's Reasons for declaring War against the Catholic
King is, That the Governor of the Spanish Netherlands we very busy in raising
new Forces. Is not this very fine, that the King of France shall cover Land and
Sea with Armies and Fleets, shall declare War against the Pope and the Emperor,
threaten the Universe, make preparations as if he were to conquer all the East,
and that he Princes of Christendom and their Governors must not dare to make
moderate Levies for their own security, but that the King of France must take
from thence and occasion to declare War against them? The Method of this
Ambitious Prince is to strike without giving notice, and to take, and burn
Cities and Towns without any Declaration, as was apparent by the burning of
Genoa, and the seizing of Strasburgh and Philipsburgh which he has wrested from
the Empire. However it behooves us to trust to his Honesty, we must neither
stir, nor make any Levies in the Spanish Netherlands, because that at the Court
of Madrid he is endeavoring to lull the People asleep with Proposals of Peace
and Neutrality. It was also a very great Crime in the Governor of the
Low Countries to let in the Dutch and Brandenburgh Forces into the principal
Spanish Cities of Flanders. Is it not a wonderful thing that we should be so
Cautious against a faithless Enemy? It Is true, that since there was no War
declared between France and Spain, it behooved our Governor to live and sleep
at his ease, upon the Faith and security of the Treaties, since there was no
necessity for him, to put Foreign Forces into his fortified Cities. But who is
there that does not know that there is no Faith or Trust in France; That
Treaties of Truce and Peace, Capitulations and Promises are but Ropes of Chaff,
which she breaks in the first fits of her Fury and Ambition, without giving
warning to any body.

France also has found out another great Motive to declare War against Spain,
for that she has discovered, That the Agent of the Prince of Orange have
received considerable sums at Cas diz and Madrid. In good truth we are become
very happy-and now the Credit of the Crown of Spain is again restored. The
pretended weakness of the Catholic King, the Poverty of is exhausted
Treasuries, and the slowness of his Returns for the Low Countries were the
subjects of the Scoffs and Raillery of France. Now, thanks be to Heaven, Spain
is in a condition to furnish Foreiners with considerable Sums. And what is this
to the King of France? Who ever heard it said, that when Men pay their Debts,
or borrow money of their Friends, that they incur the Crime of Infidelity
toward those with whom they are otherwise at Peace. This very Act of Spain in
paying money to the Prince of Orange, is a sufficient proof that she never
intended to break the Truce first. For upon Emergent occasions every body has
need of his own.

In short, France has found out that the Catholic King deserved the utmost of
her Indignation, and that he should be proceeded against with Fire and Sword,
because at least, He would not oblige himself to observe and exact Neutrality,
and not promise to succour-her Enemies either directly or indirectly.

It Is a very strange thing that France will take upon her to bind up other
States by Treaties upon Treaties, and observe none her self. What need was
there of a Treaty of Neutrality, since the Truce of 1684. was still in force in
respect of the Catholic King? And if France intended to make any satisfaction
to the Empire for the dismal Invasion of Germany, would not things be in their
former condition without any need of a Neutrality? But France refusing to give
the Emperor and the Pope satisfaction; was not this an uncivil, dishonest and
ridiculous Demand, that the King of Spain should look on quietly and without
stirring while France pushed forward her furious Attempts against the Emperor
and the Pope, against whom the most Christian King had declared War? Can this
be any occasion to break a Treaty of Peace, because France would not stay to
see which way the Catholic King intended? For seeing France had Enemies enough
to deal with, tho the Catholic King had forborne to meddle in the Affair, and
that he had waited to see the end of the Quarrel and the success of the War
without having any hand in it, the most Christian. King had what he could
desire. The Truce had been in force, and the Neutrality by consequence. If his
Catholic Majesty had at length declared War against France, he had had time
enough then to think of defending him himself. So that this Declaration of War
against Spain had not engaged the most Christian King in new Expenses: seeing
that having a War with Holland he was obliged to have an Army in the
Netherlands. But the King of France thought to perform an Act of great courage
and boldness, by being beforehand with the Male contents, and foremost in
declaring a War against all the States which he foresaw could give him any
trouble, as in the gaiety of his Heart, he declared War at one time both
against the Pope and the Emperor, fearing they would make a Peace with the
Turk to fall upon him. Presently after he declared War against the Hollanders,
who were busy about their own affairs, because he foresaw, that in the
conclusion, it would not a little perplex him, should they engage in the
Interests of the Empire. And at length he declared War against his Catholic
Majesty at a time when he observed the Truce, because he thought he could not
prevent his assisting the Emperor, his Kinsman and Ally. It Is a wonder that
this Magnificent Braggard suffered England to get the start of him. and that he
let King William be the first that declared the War. We shall see how this
Hectoring and Bouncing will thrive with the most Christian King. He has had the
pleasure of declaring War against all Europe, and to give the first Blows; we
shall know shortly who will strike hardest and continue longest in breath. And
thus much for the reasons upon which the King of France grounds his Declaration
of War. There are others but I omit them, because they are so very weak, that
they are not worth repeating.

Our Governor in his Counter-Declaration does not bring so many; but they are
much better and more satisfactory. He grounds his Counter-Declaration only upon
two Arguments:

The first, That the Arms of France inhumanly and with all manner of cruelties
and unheard of Barbarisms lay desolate all the States of the Empire, without
any regard to the Laws of Religion or War, or the sacred Right of Capitulations.

The Second, That the Ministers of France make use of all the tricks and
slights of Negotiation, and of all other means to disturb the Harmony of
Christendom, and to bring in the whole Ottoman Power to the Destruction of
Hungary, and at the same time to ranverse the Peace concluded between his
Imperial Majesty, his Illustrious Allies and the Ottoman Port. Upon this second
Reason we could enlarge very much, if all had not been said already that is to
be spoken; that is to say, how justly and how truly we have Reason to complain
of the Infamous Alliances between the Court of France and the Turk, to the Ruin
of Christendom. We are convinced of it by Letters intercepted, and undeniable
proofs of the private Correspondence, which they have always held with the
Rebels of Hungary; and their furnishing them with the Assistance both of Men
and Money, and all this, since the General Peace of Nimeghen. We know that it
was France that solicited the Port to invade the Emperor's Dominions, and to
undertake the Siege of Vienna. We know that it was France that practiced
whatever could be devised to break the Peace between the Emperor and the Turk.
All this is so notorious, that there is no necessity to prove it: the Court of
France moreover makes her brags of it. We accuse her, and she glories in it. We
agree the matter of Fact; the dispute is only concerning the Nature of it: Let
the World judge whether it be just and honest for a Christian Prince that would
be thought so zealous a Catholic, to solicit the Forces of Infidels to
overthrow and extirpate Christianity; and whether the Emperor and the King of
Spain have not more than sufficient reason to abhor Peace with a Prince that
declares War against Jesus Christ, by uniting with the professed Enemies of the
Cross.

The next Reason which the Marquess of Gastannage alleges is founded upon the
unheard of Inhumanities, Cruelties and Barbarisms, perpetrated in the States of
the Empire by the French Forces, by the peculiar Order of the most Christian
King. This was a sound Argument, when our Governor produced it: but it is very
much improved since that time, in regard those Cruelties are multiplied since
at a strange rate. There was enough then to privilege our Governor to speak
what he said. But what might he not now have said, had he seen what since has
befallen us? The fair Cities of Worms, Spire, and Oppenheim, and all those
other Towns that lie upon the Rhine, from Philipsburg to Mayence, have
undergone the same Fate. That lovely Canton of Germany, the Delight of the
Earth, and true Terrestrial Paradise, is now a dreadful Desert; where there is
nothing to be seen but smoking Ruins, the Cries of which mount up to Heaven.
Spire, the Seat of Imperial Justice, where God voic'd forth his Oracles to
determine the differences between Man and Man, and preserve the Peace of
private Families, is at present a heap of Ashes. The very Names of considerable
Lineages are annihilated, the Seeds of Eternal Discord are sown in the Ground,
and the effects of the French Fury have extended themselves even to future
Ages, by the Destruction of so many German Families. Worms, a spacious and
renowned City, is now become an Object that terrifies the Sight. Nothing but
Ruins are there to be seen, which bespeak the most execrable Cruelty that ever
was committed. The whole Country round about presents nothing to your view but
Desolation, not to be imagined. Neither Trees, nor Vineyards; no planted
Orchards or Gardens: no Corn, no verdant Fields or Meadows, nor any hope of
Harvest. All is become one dreadful Object all alike: Conflagration, Fire and
Ashes: Depopulation, intermixed with smoking heaps of Ruin and Rubbish. And
what occasioned these Extravagant Outrages? Perhaps they might be done upon the
first motions of an Indignation, not easily mastered. Perhaps it might be the
effect of sudden Rage, upon the Sacking of a City taken by Storm, where the
Soldiers incensed by the dangers they have escaped, and greedy of Plunder, put
all to the Sword. No -- it was in cold blood that these horrid Inhumanities
were exercised; and upon Cities and Provinces, of which they had been in
Possession for several Months; upon People that endured their slavery with
Patience, and of whom they had not the least reason in the World to complain.
It was done after mature Deliberations and Resolutions taken in the Cabinet and
Cabal at Versailles, consisting of the King, Louvay, and de Croissy. Did ever
the whole Senate of Devils fix upon Resolutions so horrid and Infernal? Lucifer
and his Angels never imagined or executed any thing so dismal, to the
Destruction of Mankind. Suppose you saw the Inhabitants of that spacious and
lovely Country hurrying out of the midst of Fire and Flames; Mothers with their
Infants in their Arms, bathing their Cheeks with Tears, and sending up their
piercing Cries to Heaven; disconsolate Husbands dragging their Wives and
Children after them; old Men slowly creeping from the danger, tottering at
every step, and bewailing the Loss and Desolation of a Country, where they had
enjoyed Tranquillity and Pleasure for so many years together; young Men
abandoning the hopes of those Fortunes and Estates they were just ready to
inherit by the Death of their Parents, whom old Age was about to dispose to a
better Life. Set before your Eyes this numerous Multitude dispersed among the
Woods, wandering over the Mountains, laden with those small remains of that same
fatal Shipwreck which every one could save; consumed with Weariness,
overwhelmed with Grief, surrounded with Affliction, and making the Banks of
the River echo with the Plaints and Lamentations.

Lastly consider, that as an Accumulation of Cruelty, they refused these
miserable Creatures the Consolation of seeking Sanctuary and Relief among their
fellow Countrymen beyond the Rhine. All that they desired was to die Freemen,
and to breath forth their last gasp in the Arms of their Friends and Relations.
But they constrained them only to change the Place of their Captivity, and to
retire into the Cities, which the French as yet are Masters of upon the Rhine;
on purpose to redouble their Affliction, in seeing their abodes newly assigned
them, destined to the same Desolation as their native Soil.

In these firs of general Fury there was nothing spared. Things the most Sacred
were profaned. The Bishops and they that officiated at the Altars were dragged
about the Streets in Pomp and Triumph. They were constrained to save those
sorry Remnants which the Soldiers left, and what they could rescue out of their
Churches, among the Rocks and Forests. The Religious Orders were haled from
their Solitudes, and the Spouses of Christ were exposed to the Insolences of
the Victorious Soldiers. Those Churches that were formerly the Sanctuaries of
the unfortunate, were laid level with the Earth; the Devotion of our Ancestors
that reared them, not being able to preserve them.

Who would have thought or Age could have produced such dreadful
Extravagancies? And yet for all this, we are Debtors to the King of France.
There needs no more to distinguish him from all the Princes in the World. Tho
he was well enough known before by his new Law, while he pretended, that
whatever had belonged, or had formerly been annexed to the Countries which had
been conceded to him by the Treaties of Munster and Nimeghen, ought to return
to him. Observe a Maxim of War, which is no less new, but very terrible: That
there is a necessity of burning, destroying, and annihilating whatever cannot
be kept, lest the Enemy should make any benefit of it. Never was any conception
of Hell so dreadful. What would have become of the world if this Maxim had been
in force two Ages ago? What would have become of Germany, during a War of fifty
Years, from the unfortunate Overthrow of Frederick Elector Palatine, who
aspired to the Crown of Bohemia, to the Peace of Munster. There is not a City
in Germany that was not subjected several times to the change of various
Masters. If a War were made upon their foundation, that nothing is to be left
for the Enemy to make a benefit of, all the Cities in the World would be
reduced to Ashes.

The Hollanders are happy in this, that that same Devil which now possesses
France, did not enter her sooner: For then the great City of Vtrecht, the
Cities of Arnheim, Nimeghen, Campen, Zwoll, Deventer, Doesburgh, Bommel, Thiel,
and in a word, all the Towns of Guelders, Overyssel, and the Province of
Vtrecht which France abandoned, had been utterly destroyed; the famous City of
Messina had been like the top of Mount Gibello, not far distant from it.

Has not our Governor reason enough to say, That the French have no regard to
the Laws of Religion or War? We know that the Laws of War do authorize many
Acts, which in Peace are looked upon to be wicked and villainous. when we quit
a City that we cannot keep, we carry away whatever may render it formidable to
those that are forced to leave it: We demand Ransom, and take the chief
Inhabitants for Hostages. Nor were the French ignorant how to make the best
Advantage of these Privileges during the Dutch War. Thus also when we abandon
any strong Garrisons, we take care to ruin the principal Fortifications.
Lastly, when we are sorely pressed upon by the Enemy, Necessity constrains us to
destroy whatever may be serviceable in the Country to the Enemies Army; We
burn up the Hay, carry away the Corn, set on fire what we cannot carry away,
and destroy all the Mills. But to fall without mercy upon Cities and Houses,
and to burn them and lay them in Ashes, is a monstrous and unparalled
Extravagance, contrary to all the Laws of War: And then consider the time, at
the beginning of a War, before any Brush or Defeat received. So that it could
be no fear of urging Mischief that occasioned these Madnesses. And now to what
purposs is all this? Would the Germans and their Horses have eaten the Walls of
the magnificent Castle of Heydelbergh, or the Houses of so many Cities, had
they been left standing? Are these the Provision and Ammunition that maintain
Armies? What tho the French had left the Cities of Heydelbergh, Manheim,
Frankendale, Spire, Worms, and Oppenheim, with their Houses entire, but empty
however, without Corn, Wine, or Cattle, would the Enemy have been a whit the
better; or at least, would not they themselves have been though to have some
moderation in their Anger. But these Stones and these Houses will remain
eternal Witnesses, that the Spirit of the French Cabal is a thousand times
worse than that of the Turks, since the Infidels were never guilty of the like.
It Is such a reproach to the Christian Name, that when the News of it shall
reach the Ottaman Port, there is no doubt but all the Divan will lift up their
hands to Heaven, and give God thanks for revenging them upon the Christians by
the Christians themselves, who commit those heinous Impieties which their
Janisaries and Spahi's would be afraid to do. And therefore, I wish that all
Europe would make the following Reflections upon these enormous Irregularities
of France.

The first is, That France neither desires, nor hopes for Peace, as Affairs
stand: For she leaves no room either to hope for, or to ask. Can we make a
Peace with France without reparation of our Damages? What satisfaction can she
give us for so many Wrongs? The Revenue of France for ten Years together, will
never come near what we have reason to demand for above forty or fifty Cities
burnt, and thirty Leagues of a fruitful and populous Country laid waste and
desolate. Therefore France never desires any Peace. It Is true, she complains as
if we intended to perpetuate the War by Alliances, wherein we engage our selves
not to lay down Arms, till France be reduced to that condition wherein she was
after the Peace of Munster. But indeed it is she that would perpetuate the War,
and render Peace impossible, by such dismal Desolations. And then, since Peace
is not the desire of France, it behooves us never to give over till we have
subdued her by War.

The second Reflection is, That since France is thus disposed, all the Allies
must resolve upon this, either to dye or vanquish, for there is no Medium.
Therefore Generous Germans, be assured, that whatever Cities you suffer her no
take, will be only a Prey to her devouring Flames; and for that reason defend
them to the last extremity. If you are besieged, bury your selves under your
own Ruins, and perish nobly.

As for you Hollanders, whose Cities are the Wonders of the World: Consider
likewise that if you are too sparing of your selves, you will become a Prey to
an Enemy that will not be sparing of You, but lay your goodly Palaces all in
Ashes.

And thou, the conquered Part of Flanders, and you Cambray, Valenciennes, S.
Omer, Lisle, Tournay, and Douay, and the rest that groan under the Bondage of
France, behold in the Mirror of others Sufferings your own approaching Fate.
For if the French are constrained to draw out their Garrisons to reinforce
their Armies, be assured they will set ye all on Fire, to the end you may be
useless to their Enemies: Therefore take your opportunity betimes, to shake off
so terrible a Yoke, and prevent so dreadful a Misfortune.

And you the Cities of Brabant and Flanders, still remaining under the Dominion
of your Lawful Sovereign, and make up one of the most lovely Ornaments of the
Christian World be afraid of the same Fate, and be ascertained that you will
not escape it, if you fall into the hands of the French; and therefore be not
Niggards either of your Money or Lives to answer the Expectations of that
illustrious Governor, who is your Tutelar Angel.

But as for you French. Men, accustomed to Servitude for so many Years, in
whose Breasts there is nothing remaining of the old Generosity of the Ancient
Franks, do you believe your selves secure from these Outrages? Assure your
selves you live under a Monarch who looks upon himself to be All in All, and
all the World to be nothing. At this time he burns and ransacks Germany. He
tells you, It Is to save the State. But know, that he looks upon himself alone
to be the State: And therefore, for his own preservation he will burn you as he
now burns his Neighbors. When the Germans shall be entered into Lorrain, be
assured he will reduce Champaigne to the same condition with the Countries upon
the Rhine; if they enter through Picardy, he will burn that also to secure
himself; if we land an Army, he will burn Normandy to secure Versailles.
Neither are these Conjectures, for we have good Intelligence, and are well
assured of it. Consider therefore how to prevent the Crew of Firebrands, set
your selves at Liberty, and lend your hands to those that are ready to set you
free.

My last Reflection is, that as he makes War without giving any Quarter, so we
ought to use as little Mercy in making War upon him. Not that we would counsel
the Allies to deal by France, as the French have dealt by Germany (God forbid)
We ought not to punish the Innocent for the Crimes of the guilty. We ought to
spare the People, to deliver them from the Thraldom under which they groan, and
to gain them by all manner of gentle Usage. But as for those that shall be
found in Arms, those Firebrands in pay under the most destructive Burner in the
World, by no means have any pity upon them, but burn all those Incendiaries
without compassion. Let us not forbear chasing them, till we come to the very
Gates of that bloody cruel and fiery Cabal; that so those detestable
Counselors may be forced to pay the full Penalty for all those Calamities
which their accursed Counsels have brought upon all Europe. By this means we
may be serviceable to the most Christian King himself; by delivering him out of
the infamous Clutches of those that tarnish his Glory, and render him the
common Enemy of all the Earth.

The END.
Books Printed for ROBERT CLAVEL.
AN Account of the present State of Ireland, giving a full Relation of the new
Establishment made by the late K. James, as it was presented to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Shrewsbury, His Majesty's principal Secretary of State,
and others of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. With an Account of
what Sums of Money, Arms, and number of Officers arrived there from France;
together with the State of Derry and Eniskilling, and several other Affairs
relating to that Kingdom, particularly of the Proceedings of the Parliament
there.

The Journal of the Proceedings of the Parliament in Ireland with the
Establishment of their Forces there.

The Charge of subduing the Irish Rebellion, in 1641.


