A TREATISE CONCERNING The Right Use OF THE FATHERS, IN THE Decision of the
CONTROVERSIES that are at this Day in RELIGION

Written in FRENCH BY JOHN DAILLE, Minister of the Gospel in the Reformed
Church at PARIS.

Hieron. Apol. adv. Ruffin. Fieri potest, ut vel simpliciter erraverint
(Scriptores Ecclesiastici) vel alio sensu scripserint, vel a librariis
imperitis eorum paulatim scripta corrupta sint. Vel certe, antequam in
Alexandria quasi Daemonium meridianum Arius nasceretur, innocenter quaedam, and
minus caute locuti sunt, and quae non possint perversorum hominum calumniam
declinare. LONDON, Printed for John Martin, and are to be sold by Robert
Boulter at the Turks Head in Cornhill. M.DC.LXXV.

To the Noble LADY, ANNE MORNAY, Lady of Tabarriere, and Baroness of St.
Hermine, etc.
MADAM,
IT is now almost four Years since that your Son, the late Baron of St.
Hermine, acquainting me with what manner of Discourse He was ordinarily
entertained at Court, by those who labored to advance the Roman Religion, the
rather to make him disgust the Reformed, told me, That the Chiefest Argument
which they urged against him, was, Antiquity, and the General Consent of all
the Fathers of the First Ages of Christianity. And although of himself He
understood well enough the Vanity of this Argument of theirs; yet
notwithstanding, for his own fuller satisfaction, He desired me that I would
discover unto Him the very Bottom and Depth of this Business. This therefore I
did, as Exactly as possibly I could, and gave Him my Judgment at Large in this
Particular: Which Discourse of mine He was pleased to like so well, that
conceiving some hopes from thence, that it might happily be of use to others
also, I shortly after put Pen to Paper, and digested it into this Treatise You
now see. It having therefore been Composed at first for His Service, I had
resolved also with my self to have Dedicated it to His Name; purposing, by this
small Piece of Service, to testify to the World the Continuation of the
Affection I bare to His Progress in Piety. But that deadly Blow which snatched
Him from us in the Flower of His Age, about two Years since, at the Famous
Siege of Bosledue, having left us nothing of Him now, save only the Spoils of
His Mortality, and the Memory of His Virtue, together with our Great Sorrow for
having enjoyed Him here so short a time; I am constrained, Madam, to change my
former Resolution. For, to Dedicate my Book to Him, in the State wherein He now
is, in Heaven; following the Example of many, both Ancients, and Modern
Writers, who have not stuck to direct their Discourses from hence below, to
those whom God has taken up into Heaven; I cannot persuade my self, that the
Practice is either Lawful, or Fit. For, besides the Vanity of the Thing, should
we hold Discourse with one, who, being at so great, and almost infinite a
Distance from us, cannot possibly hear what we say; I should account it also,
if so be He could hear us, a Point of extreme Inhumanity, I had almost said,
Impiety, to disturb that Perfect Rest His Blessed Soul now enjoys; which has
now no more to do with our Debates or Discourses here below, but sees the Truth
now in a most pure Light, and enjoys that Everlasting Bliss wherewith our
Savior has out of his Mercy crowned His Faith, and Perseverance in the Fear
of His Name. I shall therefore content my self with cherishing, and preserving,
whilst I live, the precious Memory of His Worth, the Excellency of His Wit, the
Soundness of His Judgment, the Sweetness of His Nature, the Fairness of His
Carriage, and those other Choice Parts, wherewith He was accomplished; but
above all His singular Piety, which clearly shone forth in His Words, and
Actions, till the hour of His Death.

And Madam, as for this small Treatise, which was at first conceived and
composed for Him, I thought I could not, without being guilty of a piece of
Injustice, present it to any other, but Your Self: seeing it has pleased God,
notwithstanding the Common Order of Nature, to make You Heir to Him, to whom it
belonged. This Consideration only has emboldned me to present it to Your
Hands; knowing that the Nature of this Discourse is not so suitable to that
Sorrow which has of late cast a Cloud over Your House; it having pleased God,
after the death of the Son, to deprive You of the Father; and to the Loss of
Your Children, to add that also of Your Noble Husband. But, my desire of
avoiding the being Unjust, has forced Me to be thus Vncivilly Troublesome:
seeing I accounted it a kind of Theft, should I have any longer withheld from
You that which was Your Right, by this Sad Title of Inheritance. Be pleased
therefore, Madam, to receive this Book, as a part of the Goods of your Deceased
Son; which I now honestly restore, in the view of the whole World, after some
times Concealment of it in my Study. This Name, I know, will oblige You to
afford it some place in Your Closet, which is all that I can at present desire.
For, as for the reading of it, besides that Your Exquisite Piety (which is
built upon Infinitely much Firmer Grounds, than these Disputes,) has no need
at all of it; I know also, that Your present Condition is such, as that it
would be very Troublesome unto You. And if You shall chance to desire to spend
some hours in the Perusal of it; it must be hereafter, when the Lord, by the
Efficacy of His Spirit, shall have comforted Yours, and shall have allayed the
Violence of Your Grief: to whom I pour out my most earnest Prayers, that He
would vouchsafe Powerfully to effect the same, and to shed forth His most holy
Grace upon You, and Yours; and that He would by His great Mercy preserve, Long,
and Happily, that which remains of that Goodly, and Blessed Family, which He
has bestowed upon You. This, Madam, is one of the most Hearty Prayers of

Your most Humble, and Obedient Servant, DAILLE.

The Design of the whole WORK.
THE Fathers cannot be the Judges of the Controversies in Religion at this day
betwixt the Papist and the Protestant. 1. Because it is, if not an impossible,
yet at least a very difficult thing to find out, what their sense has been
touching the same. 2. Because that their Sense and Judgment of these things,
(supposing it to be certainly, and clearly understood.) not being Infallible,
and without all danger of Error, cannot carry with it a sufficient Authority
for the satisfying the Understanding; which neither can, nor indeed ought to
believe any thing, in point of Religion, but what it knows to be certainly True.

The first of these Reasons is proved by these Mediums following.

I. We have very little of the Writings of the Fathers, especially of the
First, Second, and Third Centuries, page 1. II. Those Writings which we have of
the Fathers of those times, treat of matters very far different from the
Controversies now in hand. p. 8. III. The Writings, which go under the names of
the Fathers, are not all truly such, but are, a great part of them,
Supposititious and Forged, either long since, or of later times. p. 11. IV.
Those of the Writings of the Fathers, which are Legitimate, have been in many
places corrupted, by Time, Ignorance, and Fraud, both Pious and Malicious, both
in the Former, and Later Ages. p. 34. V. The Writings of the Fathers are hard
to be understood, by reason of the Languages, and Idioms they wrote in; the
Manner of their Writing, which is for the most part encumbered with Figures, and
Rhetorical Flourishes, and nice Logical Subtilties, and the like; and also by
reason of the Terms which they for the most part used-in a far different
sense, from what they now bear. p. 69. VI. When we meet with an Opinion clearly
delivered, in the Writings of any of the Fathers, we must not from hence
conclude, that the said Father held that Opinion: seeing that we often find
them speaking those things, which themselves have not believed; whether it be,
when they report the opinion of some other, without naming the persons; (as
they frequently do in their Commentaries:) or in disputing against an
Adversary; in which kind of Writing they take liberty to say one thing, and
believe another: or whether it be that they concealed their own private Opinion
purposely, as they have done in their Homilies, merely in compliance to such a
part of their Auditory. p. 100. VII. Supposing that we are well assured, that a
Father has clearly delivered his Opinion in any Point, we ought
notwithstanding to enquire into the time wherein he wrote that Opinion of his,
whether it were before, or after he arrived to Ripeness of Judgment. For we
see, that they have sometimes retracted in their old age, what they had written
when they were young. p. 117. VIII. But suppose that a Father has constantly
held one Opinion; it will nevertheless concern us to inquire, How he held it,
and in what degree of Belief, whether as Necessary, or Probable only: and then
again, in what degree of Necessity, or of Probability he placed it: Beliefs
being not all equally either Necessary, or Probable. p. 123. IX. After all this
we are to examine, whether or no he deliver this, as his own particular Opinion
only, (for this cannot necessarily bind our faith;) or whether he deliver it,
as the Opinion of the Church in his time. p. 136. X. In the next place it will
concern us to enquire, whether he deliver it for the Judgment of the Church
Universal, or of some particular Church only: those things which have been
received by the Major Part, having not always notwithstanding been received by
some particular parts of the Church. p. ^4^. XI. And after all this, whether
you take the Church for the Collective Body of Christians, or only for the body
of the Clergy, or Pastors; it is notwithstanding impossible to know, what the
Belief of the whole Church in any Age has been; for as much as it frequently
so falls out that the Opinions of these Men, who have appeared to the World,
have not only not been received, but on the contrary have also been Opposed,
and Contradicted by th^se Members of the same Church, who have not at all
appeared to the World; who notwithstanding, both for their Learning, and Piety,
deserved perhaps to have had as much, or more Esteem, and Authority than the
other. p. 151.
The Second Book.
THE second Reason, namely, that neither the Testimony nor the Preaching of the
Fathers is altogether Infallible, is proved by these following Considerations.
p. 1. II. The Fathers themselves witness against themselves, that they are not
to be believed Absolutely, and upon their own bare word. p. 11. III. It
appears plainly, by their Manner of Writing, that they never intended that
their Writings should be our Judges. p. 40. IV. They have erred in diverse
Points, not only Singly, but also many of them together. p. 60. V. They have
very much contradicted one the other, and have maintained different Opinions,
in Matters of great Importance. p. 112. VI. Lastly, to say the truth, neither
Party allows them for Judges; but reject them boldly, and without any
scruple, both the one and the other; maintaining diverse things which the
Fathers were ignorant of, and rejecting others, which were maintained by them:
the Protestants, in those things, where the Fathers have gone either against,
or besides the Scripture; the Church of Rome, where they oppose against them
the Resolutions of their Popes, or of Councils. Seeing therefore that both
Parties attribute the Supreme Authority to some other Judges, the Fathers,
though perhaps their Resolutions should be grounded on Divine Authority, could
never be able notwithstanding to clear their Differences, and to reconcile the
two Parties. p. 126.
So that it follows from hence, that our Controversies are to be decided by
some other means, than that of their Writings; and that we are to observe the
same Method in Religion, that we do in all other Sciences, making use of those
things wherein we all agree, for the clearing of those wherein we differ;
comparing exactly the Conclusions of both Parties with their Principles, which
are to be acknowledged and granted by both sides; whether it be in Reason, or
Divine Revelation. And as for the Fathers we ought to read them carefully and
heedfully; and especially without any prejudication on either side, searching
their Writings for their Opinions, and not for our own: arguing Negatively,
concerning those things which we find not in them, rather then Affirmatively;
that is to say, holding all those Articles for suspected, which are not found
in them, it being a thing altogether Improbable, that those Worthies of the
Church were Ignorant of any of the Necessary and Principal Points of Faith: but
yet not presently receiving for an Infallible Truth, whatsoever is found in
them, for as much as, being but Men, though Saints, they may sometimes have
erred, either out of pure Ignorance, or else perhaps out of Passion, which they
have not been always wholly free from; as appears clearly by those Books of
theirs which are left Us.

The Testimonies of the Lord Faulkland, Lord Digby, Doctor Tailor, Doctor
Rivet, concerning this learned Book.
Reader,
THE Translation of this Tract has been often attempted, and oftener de^^^ed by
many Noble Personages of this and other Nations: among others by Sir Lucius
Carry, late Lord Viscount Faulkland, who with his dear Friend Mr. Chillingworth
made very much use of it in all their Writings against the Romanists. But the
Papers of that learned Nobleman, wherein this Translation was half finished,
were long since involved in the common loss. Those few which have escaped it
and the press, make a very honorable mention of this Monsieur, whose
acquaintance the said Lord was wont to say was worth a Voyage to Paris. Page
202. of his Reply he has these words, This observation of mine has been
confirmed by consideration of what has been so temperately, learnedly, and
judiciously written by Monsieur Daille, our Protestan-Perron. And what the same
Lord in a Treatise, which will shortly be published says concerning the Popish
Perron, viz. Him I can scarce ever laudare in one sense, that is quote, but I
must laudare in the other, that is praise, who has helped the Church to all the
advantages which wit, learning, industry, judgment, and eloquence could add
unto her, is as true of this our Protestant. I shall add but one Lords
Testimony more, viz. the Lord George Digbies in his late Letters concerning
Religion in these words, p. 27, 28. The reasons prevalent with me whereon an
inquiring and judicious person should be obliged to rely and acquiesce are so
amply and so learnedly set down by Monsieur Daille in his Employ des Pe^^s that
I think little, which is material or weighty can be said on this subject, that
his rare and piercing observation has not anticipated. Were it needful to
wander to Foreigners for Testimonies I could tell you how highly this Author is
esteemed by the Learned and Famous Doctor Andr. Rivet, upon whole importunity
his Book des Images and other Tracts have been translated: but writing to
Englishmen I will only name the judicious Doctor Jer. Tailor Libert. of Proph.
Sect. 8. n. 4. in these words, I shall choose such a topic as makes no invasion
upon the great reputation of the Fathers, which I desire should be preserved
sacred as it ought. For other things let who please read Mr. Daille du vrai
usage des Peers.

Et siquis eueulo locus inter Oscines, I must ingenuously profess, that it was
the reading of this rational Book which first convinced me that my study in the
French Language was not ill employed, which has also enabled me to commend
this to the World, as faithfully translated by a judicious hand. And that if
there were no other use of the Fathers, there is very much, while, Testem quem
quis adducit pro se, tenetur accipere contra se, is a rule in reason, as well
as Civil Law: and that the works of Cord. Perron. (for whose monstrous
understanding [ they are the words of Viscount Faulkland p. 59.] Bellarmine and
Bironius might, with most advantage to their party, and no disgrace to them,
have been employed in seeking citations) being built upon the principle. That
whatever the Fathers witness to be tradition and the doctrine of the Church
must be received of all for such and so relied on. And this principle being
here thoroughly examined. You have here as sufficient a constitation of Perrons
Book against K. J. and by consequence of the Marquess of Worcesters against K.
C. and Dr. Vanes, and other Epitonizers of the Cardinal, as you have of Mr.
Cressys in the Preface to the Lord Faulkland, by the learned I. P.

Chr. Coll. Aug. 1. 1651. T. S.

THE PREFACE.
ALl the Difference in Religion, which is at this day betwixt the Church of
Rome and the Protestants, lies in some certain Points which the Church of Rome
maintains as important, and necessary Articles of the Christian Faith:
Whereas the Protestants, on the contrary, neither believe, nor will receive
them for such. For, as for those things which the Protestants believe, for
their part; and which they conceive to be the Fundamentals of Religion; they
are so evidently, and undeniably such, as that even their Adversaries
themselves do also allow of, and receive them, as well as they: for as much as
they are both clearly delivered in the Scriptures, and expressly set down by the
Ancient Councils and Fathers; and are indeed unanimously received by the
greatest part of Christians in all Ages, and Parts of the World. Such, for
example, are these Maxims following: Namely, That there is a God, who is
Supreme over all, and who created the Heavens and the Earth. That having
created Man after his own Image, this Man, revolting from his Obedience, is
fallen, together with his whole Posterity, into most extreme and eternal misery,
and become infected with Sin, as with a mortal Leprosy, and is therefore
obnoxious to the Wrath of God, and liable to his Curse. That the Merciful
Creator, pitying Man's Estate, graciously sent his Son Jesus Christ into the
World: That his Son is God Eternal with him, and that having taken Flesh upon
himself in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, and become Man; He has done and
suffered, in this Flesh, all things necessary for our Salvation, having by this
means sufficiently expiated for our Sins, by his Blood: and that having
finished all this, he is ascended again into Heaven, and sits at the right
hand of the Father; from whence He shall one day come, to judge all Mankind,
rendering to every one according to their Works. That to enable us to
communicate of his Salvation, by His Merits, He sends us down His Holy
Spirit, proceeding both from the Father and the Son, and who is also one and
the same God with Them; in such sort, as that these Three Persons are
notwithstanding but One GOD, who is Blessed for ever. That this Spirit
enlightens our Understanding, and begets Faith in us, whereby we are justified.
That after all this, the LORD sent his Apostles, to Preach this Doctrine of
Salvation throughout the whole World. That These have planted Churches, and
placed in each of them Pastors, and Teachers; whom we are to hear with all
reverence, and to receive from them Baptism, the Sacrament of our Regeneration;
and the Holy Eucharist, or Lords Supper, which is the Sacrament of our
Communion with Jesus Christ. That we are likewise all of us bound to love GOD,
and our Neighbor, very fervently; observing diligently that Holy Doctrine
which is laid down unto us in the Books of the New Testament, which have been
inspired by His Spirit of Truth; as also those other of the Old; there being
nothing, either in the one, or in the other, but what is most true. These
Articles, and some other few the like, which there perhaps may be, are the
substance of the Protestants whole Belief: and if all other Christians would
but content themselves with these, there would never be any Schism in the
Church. But now their Adversaries add to these, many other Points, which they
press, and command Men to believe, as necessary ones, and such, as without
believing of which, there is no possible hope of Salvation. As for example:
That the Pope of Rome is the Head, and Supreme Monarch of the whole Christian
Church throughout the World. That He, or at least the Church which he
acknowledges a true one, cannot possibly err in matter of Faith. That the
Sacrament of the Eucharist is to be adored, as being really Jesus Christ, and
not a piece of Bread. That the Mass is a Sacrifice, that really expiates the
Sins of the Faithful. That Christians may, and ought to have in their Churches
the Images of God, and of Saints, to which they are to use Religious Worship,
bowing down before them. That it is lawful, and also very useful, to pray to
Saints departed, and to Angels. That our Souls after death, before they enter
into Heaven, are to pass through a certain Fire, and there to endure grievous
Torments; thus satisfying for their Sins. That one neither may, nor ought to
receive the holy Eucharist, without having first confessed himself in private
to a Priest. That none, but the Priest himself that consecrated the Eucharist,
is bound by right to receive it in both kinds: And a great number of other
Opinions, which their Adversaries protest plainly, That they cannot with a safe
conscience believe. And these Points are the ground of the whole Difference
betwixt them; the one Party pretending, That they have been believed, and
received by the Church of Christ in all Ages, as revealed by him: and the other
maintaining the contrary. Now seeing that, none of these Tenets having any
ground from any Passage in the New Testament (which is the most Ancient and
Authentic Rule of Christianity) the Maintainers are fain to fly to the
Writings of the Doctors of the Church, which lived within the four or five
first Centuries after the Apostles, who are commonly called the Fathers; my
purpose is in this Treatise to examine, whether or no this be a good and
sufficient means, for the decision of these Differences. And for this purpose,
I must first presuppose two things, which any reasonable Person will easily
grant me. The first is, That the Question being here about laying a Foundation
for certain Articles of Faith, upon the Testimonies or Opinions of the Fathers,
it is very necessary that the Passages which are produced out of them, be
clear, and not to be doubted of; that is to say, such as we cannot reasonably
scruple at, either touching the Author out of whom they are alleged, or the
Sense of the Place, whether it signify what is pretended to. For a Deposition
of a Witness, and the Sentence of a Judge, being of no value at all, save only
for the reputation of the Witness, or Judge; it is most evident, that if either
proceed from Persons unknown, or suspected, they are invalid, and prove nothing
at all. In like manner, if the Deposition of a Witness, or Sentence of a Judge
be obscure, and in doubtful Terms, it is clear, that in this case the Business
must rest undecided, there being another Doubt first to be cleared, namely,
What the meaning of either of them was. The second Point that I shall here lay
down for a Foundation to the ensuing Discourse, is no less evident than the
former; namely, That to allow a sufficiency to the Writings of the Fathers, for
the deciding of these Controversies, we must necessarily attribute to their
Persons very great Authority, and such as may oblige us to follow their
Judgment in Matters of Religion. For, if this Authority be wanting, how clear
and express soever their Opinions be, in the Articles now controverted, it will
do nothing at all toward their Decision. We have therefore here two things to
examine in this Business: The first is, Whether or not we may be able now
certainly and clearly to know, what the Opinion of the Fathers has been
touching the Differences now in hand. The second, Whether their Authority be
such, as that whatever faithful Person shall clearly and certainly know what
their Opinion has been in any one Article of Christian Religion, he is thereby
bound to receive that Article for True. For, if the Church of Rome be but able
to prove both these Points, it is then without all dispute, that their
Proceeding is good, and agreeable to the End proposed, there being so many of
the Ancient Fathers Writings alleged at this day by them. But if, on the
contrary side, either of these Two things, or both of them, be indeed found to
be doubtful, I should think that any Man of a very mean Judgment, should be
able to conclude of himself, That this way of Proof, which they have hitherto
made use of, is very insufficient; and that therefore they of necessity ought
to have recourse to some other more proper and solid way in the Proof of the
Truth of the said Opinions, which the Protestants will not by any means receive.

THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I.
REASON I. Touching the Difficulty of knowing the Sense of the Fathers, in
reference to the present Controversies in Religion; drawn from hence: Namely,
Because there is very little extant of Their Writings, for the Three First
Centuries.

IF we should in this particular take the same course, which some Writers of
the Church of Rome make use of against the Holy Scriptures, it would be a very
easy matter to bring in question, and render very doubtful, and suspected, all
the Writings of the Fathers. For, when any one alleges the Old or New
Testament, these Gentlemen presently demand, How, or by what means they know,
that any such Books were truly written by those Prophets, and Apostles, under
whose Names they go. If therefore, in like manner, when these Men urge Justin,
Irenaeus, Ambrose, Augustine, and the like, one should take them short, and
demand of them, How, and by what means they are assured, that these Fathers
were the Authors of those Writings, which at this day go under their Names, it
is very much to be doubted but that they would find a harder Task of it, than
their Adversaries, in justifying the Inscriptions of the Books of Holy Writ;
the Truth whereof is much more easy to be demonstrated, than of any Humane
Writings whatsoever. But I pass by this too-artificial way of Proceeding, and
only say, That it is no very easy matter to find out, by the Writings of the
Fathers, what has really beeen their Opinion, in any of those Controversies
which are now in debate, betwixt the Protestant and the Church of Rome. The
Considerations which render the knowledge of this so difficult, are many: I
shall therefore in this First Part handle some of them only, referring the
rest to the Later, examining them one after another.

The first Reason, therefore, which I shall lay down for the proving of this
Difficulty, is, The little we have extant of the Writings of the Ancient
Fathers, especially of the First, Second, and Third Centuries; which are those
we are most especially to regard. For, seeing that one of the principal Reasons
that moves the Church of Rome to allege the Writings of the Fathers, is to
show the Truth of their Tenets, by the Antiquity, which they reckon as a Mark
of it; it is most evident, that the most Ancient ought to be the most taken
notice of. And indeed, there is no question to be made, but that the Christian
Religion was more pure, and without mixture, in its beginnings and Infancy,
than it was afterward, in its Growth and Progress: it being the ordinary
course of Things, to contract Corruptions, more or less, according as they are
more or less removed from their first Institution: As we see by experience in
States, Laws, Arts, and Languages; the Natural Propriety of all which is
continually declining, after they have once passed the Point of their Vigor,
and, as it were, the Flower and Prime of their Strength and Perfection. Now I
cannot believe, that any faithful Christian will deny, but that Christianity
was in its Height and Perfection in the time of the Blessed Apostles: And
indeed it would be the greatest injury that could be offered them, to say, that
any of their Successors have either had a greater desire, or more Abilities, to
advance Christianity, than they had. It will hence follow then, That those
Times which were nearest to the Apostles, were necessarily the purest, and less
subject to suspicion of Corruptions, either in Doctrine, or in Manners, and
Christian Discipline: it being but reasonable to believe, that if there be any
Corruptions crept into the Church, they came in by little and little, and by
degrees; as it happens in all other things. If any one shall here object, That
even the very next Age immediately after the times of the Apostles was not
without its Errors, if we may believe Hegesippus; who, as he is cited by
Eusebius, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles lib. 3. cap. 29. (...).
witnesses, that the Church continued a Virgin till the Emperor Trajan's
time; but, that after the death of the Apostles, the Conspiracy of Error began
to discover it self with open fce. I shall not oppose any thing against this
testimony; but shall only say, that if the Enemy, immediately upon the setting
of these Stars of the Church, their Presence and Light being scarcely shut in,
had yet the boldness presently to fall to sowing his evil seed; how much more
had he opportunity to do this in those. Ages which were further removed from
their Times; when as the Sanctity and Simplicity of these great Teachers of the
World having now by little and little vanished out of the memories of Men,
Humane Inventions, and new Fancies began to take place. So that we may however
conclude, That supposing that Christianity, even in the First Ages, has not
been altogether exempt from alteration in Doctrine; yet are they much more free
from it, than the succeeding Ages can pretend to be; and are therefore
consequently to be preferred before them in all respects: it being here
something like what the Poets have fancied of the Four Ages of the World, where
the succeeding Age always came short of the former. Cassand. Consult. Ferdinan.
p 894. Perron. Epist. to Casaub.
For, as for the Opinion of those Men, who think the best way to find out the
true Sense of the Ancient Church, will be, to search the Writings of those of
the Fathers chiefly who lived betwixt the time of Constantine the Great, till
Pope Leo, or till Pope Gregory's time; that is to say, from the end of the
Third Century, till the beginning of the Seventh: I take this as a Confession
only of the small number of Books that are left us of those Ages before
Constantine; and not that these Men allow, that the Authority of these Three
later Ages, ought to be preferred to that of the Three former. If we had but as
much Light, and as clear Evidences of the Belief of the one, as we have of the
other, I make no question but they would prefer the Former. But if they mean
otherwise, and are indeed of a persuasion, that the Church was really more pure
after Constantine's time, than before; they must excuse me, if I think that
they by this means confess the distrust they have of their own Cause, seeing
they endeavor to get off as far as they can from the Light of the Primitive
times; retreating back to those Ages wherein it is most evident there was both
less Perfection, and Light, than before: running clean contrary to that
excellent Rule which S. Cypr. ep. 74. p. 195.
Cyprian has given us; That we should have recourse to the Fountain, whenever
the Channel and Stream of Doctrine, and Ecclesiastical Tradition is found to be
any whit corrupted. But however, let their meaning be what it will, their
Words, in my judgment, do not a little advantage the Protestants Cause; it
being a very clear confession, That those Opinions about which they contest
with them, do not at all appear clearly in any of the Books that were written
during the Three First Centuries. For, if they were found clearly in the same,
what Policy were it then in them to appeal to the Writers of the Three
following Centuries, to which they very well know, that their Adversaries
attribute less, than to the Former? But besides this tacit Confession of
theirs, the thing is evident; namely, That there is left us at this day very
little of the Writings of the Fathers of the Three First Centuries of
Christianity, for the deciding of our Differences. The blessed Christians of
those times contented themselves, for the greatest part of them, with writing
the Christian Faith in the hearts of Men, by the beams of their Sanctity, and
holy Life, and by their Blood shed in Martyrdom, without much troubling
themselves with the writing of Books: Whether it were, Orig* Praef Operis
contra Cells. p. 1, 2.
because, as Learned Origin elegantly gives the Reason, they were of opinion
that the Christian Religion was to be defended by the Innocence of Life, and
honesty of Conversation, rather than by Sophistry, and the Artifice of Words:
or whether, because their continual Sufferings gave them not leisure to take
Pen in hand, and to write Books; or else, whether it were for some other Reason
perhaps, which we know not. But this we are very well assured of, that except
the Writings of the Apostles, there was very little written by others in these
Primitive times: which was the cause of so much trouble to Eusebius in the
beginning of his History, Eusebius. Hist Eccles. l. 1. c. 1. (...).
having little or no light to guide him in his Undertaking, and treading, as
himself says, in a new path, unbeaten by any that had gone before him.
Besides, the greatest part of those few Books which were written by the
Christians of those Times, have not come down to our hands, but were lost,
either through the injury of Time, that consumes all things, or else have been
made away by the malice of Men, who have made bold to suppress and smother
whatsoever they met with, that was not wholly to their gust. Of this sort were
those five Books of Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, the Apology of Quadratus
Atheniensis, and that other of Aristides, the Writings of Castor Agrippa,
against the XXIV Books of the Heretic Basilides, the five Books of Hegesippus,
the Works of Melito Bishop of Sardis, Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, Apollinaris
Bishop of Hierapolis, the Epistle of Pinytus Cretensis, the Writings of
Philippus, Musanus, Modestus, Bardesanes, Pantaenus, Rhodon, Miltiades,
Apollonius, Serapion, Bacchylus, Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, Heraclius,
Maximus, Hammonius, Tryphon, Hippolytus, Julius, Africanus, Dionysius
Alexandrinus, and others of whom we have no more left, save only their Names,
and the Titles of their Books, which are preserved in Eusebius, Hieron l. de
Scriptor. etc. Eusebius. in hist. passim. Tertul. aliquorum meminit.
S. Hierome, and others. All that we have left us of these Times, which is
certainly known to be theirs, and that no Man doubts of, is, some certain
Discourses of S. Justin the Philosopher and Martyr, who wrote his second
Apology a hundred and fifty years after the Nativity of our Savior Christ; the
Five Books of S. Irenaeus, who wrote not long after him; Three excellent and
learned Pieces of Clemens Alexandrinus, who lived toward the end of the second
Century; diverse Books of Tertullian, who was famous about the same time: the
Epistles and other Treatises of S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, who suffered
Martyrdom about the year of our Savior CCLXI, the Writings of Arnobius, and of
Lactantius his Scholar, and some few others. For, as for Origin, S. Cyprian's
Contemporary, who alone, had we but all his Writings entire, would be able
perhaps to give us more light and satisfaction in the Business we are now upon,
than all the rest; we have but very little of him left us, and the greatest
part of that too most miserably abused, and corrupted; the most learned, and
almost innumerable Writings of this great and incomparable Person, not being
able to withstand the violence of Time, nor the envy and malice of Men, who
have dealt much worse with him, than so many Ages, and Centuries of Years that
have passed, from his time down to us. And thus have I given you an account of
well-nigh all that we have left us, which is certainly known to have been
written by the Fathers of the Three First Centuries. For, as for those other
Pieces which are pretended to have been written in the same times, but are
indeed either confessed to be supposititious by the Romanists themselves, or
are rejected by their Adversaries, and that upon very good and probable
grounds; these are not to have any place at all, or account here, in clearing
the Controversy we have now in hand.

The Writings of the Fourth and Fifth Centuries have, I confess, out-gone the
Former for number, and good fortune too; the greatest part of them having come
down safe to our Hands: but they come much short of the other in Weight and
Authority; especially in the Judgment of the Protestants, who maintain, and
that upon very probable Grounds too, That the Christian Religion has from the
beginning had its declinings by little and little, losing in every Age some
certain degree of its Primitive and Native Purity. And besides, we have good
cause perhaps to fear, lest the multitude of Writers of these two Ages trouble
us as much, as the paucity of them in the three preceding; and that, as before
we suffered under scarcity, we now be overwhelmed with their multitude. For,
the multitude of Words, and of Books, serves as much sometimes to the
suppressing of the Sense and Opinion of any Public Body, as Silence it self;
our Minds being then extremely confounded, and perplexed, while it labors to
apprehend what is the True and Common Opinion of the Whole, amidst so many
differently-biassed Particulars, whereof each endeavors to express the same:
it being most certain, that amongst so great and almost infinite variety of
Spirits, and Tongues, you shall very hardly meet with two Persons, that shall
deliver to you one and the same Opinion, (especially in Matters of so high a
nature, as the Controversies in Religion are) after the same form and way of
representation, how unanimous soever their Consent may otherwise be in the same
Opinion. And this Variety, although it be but in the Circumstances of the
thing, makes notwithstanding the Foundation it self to appear different also.

CHAP. II.
Reason II. That those Writings which we have of the Fathers of the First
Centuries, treat of Matters very far different from the present Controversies
in Religion.

BUt suppose that neither the want of Books in the Three First Centuries, nor
yet the abundance of them in the Three following, should bring along with it
these inconveniences; it will however be very hard to discover out of them,
what the Opinion of their Authors has been, touching those Points of Christian
Religion now controverted. For the Matters whereof They treat, are of a very
different nature; these Authors, according as the necessity of their times
required, employing themselves either in justifying the Christian Religion, and
vindicating it from the aspersion of such Crimes wherewith it was most falsely
and injuriously charged; or else in laying open to the World the Absurdity* and
Impiety of Paganism; or in convincing the hard-hearted Jews; or in confuting
the prodigious Fooleries of the Heretics of those times; or in exhortations to
the Faithful to Patience and Martyrdom; or in expounding some certain Passages
and Portions of the Holy Scripture: all which things have very little to do
with the Controversies of these times, of which they never speak Syllable,
unless they accidentally or by chance let a Word drop from them, toward this
side, or that side, yet without the least thought of us, or of our
Controversies; although both the one and the other Party sometimes lights upon
Passages, wherein they conceive they have discovered their own Opinions clearly
delivered, though in vain for the most part, and without ground: just as he
did, that hearing a Ring of Bells, thought they perfectly ^ounded out unto him,
what he in his own thoughts had fancied. Justin Martyr, and Tertullian,
Theophilus, and Lactantius, Clemens, and Arnobius, show the Heathen the
vainness of their Religion, and of their gods; and that Jupiter and Juno were
but Mortals, and that there is but one only God, the Creator of Heaven and
Earth. Irenaeus bends his whole Forces against the prodigious Opinions of
Basilides, the Valentinians, and other G^osticks, who were the Inventors of the
most Chimaerical Divinity that ever came into the fancy of Man. Tertullian also
whips them, as they well deserve it; but he especially takes Marcion,
Herm^genes, Apelles, Praxcas* and others, to task; who maintained, That there
were Two Gods, or Two Principles, and confounded the Persons of the Father and
the Son. Cyprian is wholly upon the Discipline and the Virtues of the Christian
Church. Arius, Macedonius, Eunomius, Photinus, Pelagius, and afterward
Nestorius and Eutyches, made work for the Fathers of the Fourth and Fifth
Centuries. The Blasphemies of these Men against the Person or the Natures of
our Savior Christ, or against the Holy Ghost and its Grace, which have now of
a long time lay buried, and forgotten, were the Matters debated in those times,
and the subject of the greatest part of the Books then written, that have come
to our Hands. What relation has any thing of all this to the Business of
Transubstantiation, and the Adoration of the Eucharist, or the Monarchy of the
Pope, or the Necessity of Auricular Confession, or the Worshipping of Images,
and the like Points, which are the Business of the present Controversies, and
which none of the Ancients has handled expressly, and of set purpose; and
perhaps too never so much as thought of? It is very true indeed, that the
silence of these Fathers in these Points, which some set so much by, is not
wholly mute; and perhaps also it may pass for a very clear Testimony: but
certainly not on their side who maintain them affirmatively. But however, this
is a most certain truth, That throughout the whole Body of the genuine Writings
of these Fathers, you shall not meet with any thing expressly urged, either for
or against the greatest part of these Opinions. I shall most willingly confess,
That the belief of every Wise man makes up but One entire Body, the Parts
whereof have a certain correspondence and relation to each other; in such sort,
as that a Man may be able, by those things which he delivers expressly, to give
a guess what his Opinion is touching other things, which he declares himself
not at all in: it being a thing utterly improbable that he maintains any one
Position which shall manifestly clash with his other Tenets, or that he rejects
any thing that necessarily follows upon them. But besides that this manner of
Disputation presupposes, that the Belief of the Ancient Fathers hangs all
close together, no one Position contradicting another, but having all its Parts
united, and depending one upon another; which notwithstanding is not altogether
unquestionable, as we shall show elsewhere: Besides all this, I say, it
requires also a sharp piercing Wit, which readily and clearly apprehends the
Connexions of each several Point; an excellent Memory, to retain faithfully
whatever Positions the Ancients have maintained; and a solid Judgment, free
from all pre-occupation, to compare them with the Tenets maintained at this
day: And what Man soever is endued with all these Qualities, I shall account
him the fittest Man to make profitable Use of the Writings of the Fathers, and
the likeliest of any to search into the bottom of them. But the mischief of it
is, that Men so qualified, are very rare, and hard to be found. I shall add
here, Gontery, Veron, and others.
That if you will believe some certain Writers of the Church of Rome, this
whole Method is vain and useless; as is also that which makes use of
Argumentation, and Reason; means which are insufficient, and unable (in the
judgment of these Doctors) to bring us to any certainty, especially in Matters
of Religion, wherein, their Opinion is, we are to rely upon clear and express
Texts only. So that, according to this account* we will not, if we be wife,
believe that the Fathers held any of the aforenamed Points, unless we can find
them in express terms delivered in their Writings; that is to say, in the very
same terms that we read them in the Decrees and Canons of the Council of Trent.
Seeing then that according to the Opinion of these Men, those Testimonies only
are to be received, which are express, and likewise, that of these Points now
controverted, there is searcely any thing found expressly delivered by the
Fathers: we may, in my Opinion, very Logically and reasonably conclude, that it
is, if not an impossible, yet at least a very difficult thing (according to
these Men) to come to the certain knowledge of the Opinion of the Ancients,
touching the greatest part of the Tenets of the Church of Rome, which are at
this day rejected by the Protestants.

CHAP. III.
Reason III. That those Writings which go under the Names of the Ancient
Fathers, are not all truly such; but a great part of them suppositions, and
forged, either long since, or of later Times.

I Come now to more important Considerations; these two former, though they are
not in themselves to be despised, or neglected, being yet but trivial ones in
respect of those which follow. For there is so great a confusion in the most
part of these Books whereof we speak, that it is a very hard thing truly to
find out who were their Authors, and what the Meaning and Sense of them is. The
first Difficulty proceeds from the infinite number of Forged Books, which are
falsely attributed to the Ancient Fathers: The like having happened also in all
sorts of Learning and Sciences; insomuch that the Critics at this day are
sufficiently troubled in discovering, both in Philosophy, and Humanity, which
are forged and supposititious Pieces, and which are true and legitimate. But
this Abuse has not reigned any where more grossly, and taken to it self more
liberty, than toward the Ecclesiastical Writers. All Men complain on this, both
on the one side, and on the other, and labor all they can to deliver us from
these Confusions, though oftentimes with little success, by reason of the
eagerness of their Passion, by which they are carried away, ordinarily judging
of Books according to their own Interest, rather than the Truth, and rejecting
all those that any whit contradict them; but defending those which speak of
their side, how good or bad soever they otherwise chance to be. So that, to say
the truth, they judge not of their own Opinions by the Writings of the Fathers,
but of the Writings of the Fathers by their own Opinions. If they speak with
Us, it is then Cyprian and Chrysostom; if not, it is some Ignorant Modern
Fellow, or else some Malicious Person, who would fain cover his own filthiness
under the rich Garment of these excellent Persons. Now if it were Passion only
that rendered the Business obscure, we should be able easily to quit our hands
of it, by stripping it, and laying it open to the World* and all moderate Men
would find enough to rest satisfied with. But the worst of it is, that this
Obscurity oftentimes falls out to be in the things themselves; so that it is a
very hard, and sometimes an impossible thing, to clear them; whether it be by
reason of the Antiquity of the Error, or else by reason of the near
resemblance of the ^alse to the True. For these Forgeries are not new, and of
yesteryesterday; but the Abuse has been on foot above fourteen hundred years.
It is the complaint of the greatest part of the Fathers, That the Heretics, to
gain their own Dreams the greater Authority, Hegesippus apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 22.
vented them under the Names of some of the most eminent Writers in the Church,
and even of the Apostles themselves. Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, who was so
much esteemed by the great S. Council. 7. Act. 5. Tom. 3 p. 552.
Basil, Archbishop of Caesarea, wrote a particular Tract on this Subject,
alleged by the Fathers of the Seventh Council, against a certain Passage
produced by the Iconoclasts out of I know not what idle Treatise, entitled,
The Travels of the Apostles. And I would to God that Tract of this Learned
Prelate were now extant! if it were, it would perhaps do us good service in
discovering the Vanity of very many ridiculous Pieces, which now pass up and
down the World under the Names of the Primitive and most Ancient Christians. S.
Hier. l de scrip. Eccles Tom. 1. p. 346 B. and 350. C.
Hierome rejects diverse Apocryphal Books, which are published under the Names
of the Apostles, and of their first Disciples; as namely, of S. Peter, of
Barnabas, and others. The Gospel of S. Thomas, and the Epistle to the
Laodiceans, Council 7. Act 6.
are put in the same rank by the Seventh Council. Now if these wretched Knaves
have been thus saucy with the Apostles, as to make use of Their Names, how much
more likely is it, that they would not stick to make as bold with the Fathers?
And indeed this kind of Imposture has always been very ordinary. Thus we read,
Council. 5. Collat. 6.
That the Nestorians sometime published an Epistle under the Name of S. Cyril
of Alexandria, in the defense of Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuestia, who was the
Author and first Broacher of their Heresy: Marian. ep ad. Mon. Alex. ad calcem
Council. ^halc. T. 2. p. 450. E. Leont. lib. extat. Bibl. SS. PP. T 4 part. 2.
and likewise that the Eutychists also vented certain Books of Apollinaris,
under the Title of The Orthodox Doctors, only to abuse the simple People.
Leontius has written an express Tract on this Subject; wherein he shows, That
these Men abused particularly the Names of S. Gregory of Neocaesarea, of Julius
Bishop of Rome, and of Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria: and he also says
particularly, That the Book entitled, (...), A particular Exposition of the
Faith, which is delivered unto us by Turrianus the Jesuit, Greg. Thaumat. op.
Par. ann. 1622. page 97. ubi vide Voss.
Gerardus Vossius, and the last Edition of Gregorius Neocaesariensis, for a
true and legitimate Piece of the said S. Gregory, is not truly his, but the
Bastard Issue of the Heretic Apollinaris. And the like Judgment do the
Publishers of the Bibliotheca Patrum give of the XII Anathema's, Bibl. SS. PP.
T. 1. Gr. Lat.
which are commonly attributed to the same S. Gregory. The Monothelites also,
taking the same course, forged an Oration under the Name of Menas Patriarch of
Constantinople, Council. 6. Act. 3. and Act. 14. T. 3. Council.
and directed to Vigilius Bishop of Rome: and two other Books under the Name of
the same Vigilius, directed to Justinian and Theodora; wherein their Heresy is
in express terms delivered: and these three Pieces were afterward inserted into
the Body of the Fifth Council, and kept in the Library of the Patriarch's
Palace in Constantinople. Council. 6. Act. 3. and Act. 14. T. 3. Council.
But this Imposture was discovered, and convinced in the VI Council: for
otherwise, who would not have been deceived by it, seeing these false Pieces in
so Authentic a Copy? I bring but these few Examples, to give the Reader but a
taste only of what the Heretics not only dared, but were able also to do, in
this particular: and all these things were done before the end of the Seventh
Century, that is to say, above nine hundred years ago. Since which time, in all
the Disputes about the Images in Churches, Council. 7. Act. 6. Refut.
Iconoclast. Tom. 5.
and in the differences betwixt the Greek and Latin Churches, and indeed in
the most part of all other Ecclesiastical Contestations, you shall find nothing
more frequent, than the mutual Reproaches that the several Parties cast at each
other, Council. Florent. Sess. 20. T. 4.
accusing each other of forging the Pieces of Authors which they produced each
of them in defense of their own Cause. Judge you therefore, whether or not the
Heretics, using the same Artifice, and the same Diligence* now for the space
of so many Centuries since, though in different Causes, may not in all
probability have furnished us with a sufficient stock of spurious Pieces, sent
abroad under the Names of the Ancient Fathers, by their professed Enemies? And
do but think whether or no we may not chance to converse with an Heretic
sometimes, when we think we have a Father before us; and a professed Enemy,
disguised under the mask of a Friend? So that it will hence follow, That it may
justly be feared, that we sometimes receive and deliver for Maxims and Opinions
of the Ancient Church, no better than the very Dreams of the Ancient Heretics.
For we must conceive, that they were not so foolish, as to discover their Venom
at the first dash, in the height of their Heretical Positions; but rather, that
they only cunningly cast in here and there some sprinklings of it, laying the
foundation of their Heresy as it were afar off only; which makes the Knavery
the more hard to be discovered, and so consequently the more dangerous. But
supposing that this Juggling Trick of the Heretics may have very much corrupted
the Old Books; yet notwithstanding, had we no other spurious Pieces than what
had been forged by them, it would be no very hard matter to distinguish the
True from the False. But that which renders the Evil almost uncurable, is, that
even in the Church it self this kind of Forgery has been both very Ordinary,
and very Ancient. I impute a great part of the cause of this Mischief to those
Men, who before the Invention of Printing, were the Transcribers and Copiers
out of Manuscripts: of whose negligence and boldness in corrupting of Books, S.
Hierome very much complained even in his time: Hier. Ep. 28. ad Lucin. Tom. 1.
Scribunt (says he) non quod inveniunt, sed quod intelligunt; and dum alienos
errores emendare nituntur, ostendunt suos: That is, They write, not what they
find, but what they understand; and whilst they endeavor to correct other Men's
Errors, they show their own. We may very well presume, that what liberty these
Men took in corrupting, they took the same in forging Books too: especially
since this last course was beneficial to them, which the other was not. For by
altering or corrupting the Books they wrote, they could not make any advantage
to themselves: whereas in forging new Books, and venting them under great and
eminent Names, they put them off both faster and dearer. So likewise if there
came to their hands any Book, that had either no Authors Name; or having any,
it was but an obscure, or a tainted one: to the end that these evil Marks might
not prejudice the venting of it, they would raze it out without any more ado,
and inscribe it presently with some one of the most Eminent and Venerable Names
that was in the Church; that so the Reputation and Favor that That Name had
found in the World, might be a means of the better putting off their false
Wares. As for example: The Name of Novatianus, who was the Head of a Schism
against the Roman Church, became justly to be odious to Christian ears; as that
of Tertullian was the more esteemed, both for the Age, Wit, and Learning of the
Person. Now the Transcriber considering this with himself, without any other
design, or end, than only of his own private Gain, has, in my judgment, made
an exchange, attributing to Tertullian that Book of the Trinity, which is
indeed Novatianus his; as we are given to understand also by S. Hier. Apol. 2.
contr. Ruff.
Hierome. And I am of opinion, that both the birth and fortune of that other
Piece De Poenitentia has been, if not the very same, yet at least not much
unlike that of the other. So likewise that Book which bears Title, De
Operibus Cardinalibus Christi, Auctor operis, De Operibus Card. Christi, inter
Cyprian. oper. p. 444.
which was composed and sent by the Author of it to one of the Popes, without
setting down his Name, as himself there testifies, has been vented abroad
under the Name of S. Cyprian, only because by this means it is the more
profitable to the Manuscript-monger; and it has formerly always passed, and
does still pass for his; notwithstanding that, in my judgment, it is clear
enough, that it cannot be his, as is ingenuously confessed by Erasmus in edit.
Cypr. sua Sixtus Senens. Biblioth. lib. 4. Bellar. de Euchar. l 2. cap. 9. De
amiss. great. l. 6. c. 2. P^ssevin. in Apparat. Scult. Medulla Patr. Andr.
Rivet. l. 2. c. 15. Crit. Sacr. Aubert. de Euchar. l. 2. c. 8.
very many of the Learned, both of the one, and of the other side. Ruffinus had
some Name in the Church; though nothing near so great a one as Cyprian had: and
this is the reason why the aforementioned Merchants have inscribed with S.
Cyprian's Name that Treatise upon the Apostles Creed, which was written by
Ruffinus. Besides the Avarice of these Librarii, their own Ignorance, or at
least of those whom they consulted, has in like manner produced no small
number of these spurious Pieces. For when either the likeness of the Name, or
of the Style, or of the Subject treated of, or any other seeming Reason, gave
them occasion to believe, that such an Anonymous Book was the Work of such or
such an ancient Author, they presently copied it out under the said Author's
Name; and thus it came from thenceforth to be received by the World for such,
and by them to be delivered for such, over to Posterity. But all the blame is
not to be laid upon the Transcribers only, in this particular: the Authors
themselves have contributed very much to the promoting of this kind of
Imposture. For there have been found in all Ages some that have been so
sottishly ambitious, and so desirous, at what rate soever, to have their
Conceptions published to the World, as that finding they should never be able
to please, and get applause abroad of themselves, they have vented them under
the Name of some of the Fathers; choosing rather to see them received, and
honored, under this false Habit, than disdained, and slighted, under their own
true one. These Men, according as their several Abilities have been, have
imitated the Style and Fancy of the Fathers, either more or less happily; and
have boldly presented these Issues of their own Brain to the World, under their
Names. The World, the greatest part whereof has always been the least subtle,
has very readily collected, preserved, and cherished these false Births, and
has by degrees filled all their Libraries with them. Others have been moved to
use the same Artifice, not out of Ambition but some other irregular Fancy, as
those Men have done, who, having had a particular affection either to such a
Person, or to such an Opinion, have fallen to write of the same, under the Name
of some Author of good Esteem and Reputation with the World, to make it pass
the more currantly abroad: Just as that Priest did, who published a Book
entitled, Hier. de script. Eccl. Tom. 1. p. 350. Ex Tertul. li. de Baptismo,
cap. 17.
The Acts of S. Paul, and of Tecla; and being convinced of being the Author of
it, in the presence of S. John, he plainly confessed, that the love that he
bare to S. Paul was the only cause that moved him to do it. Such was the
boldness also of Ruffinus, Hier. l. 2. Apol. contr. Ruffin. Tom. 2. p. 334. and
Ep. 69. T. 2. and Apol. contr. Ruff. ad Pammach. et Marc. Tom. 2.
a Priest of Aquileia, (whom S. Hierome justly reprehendeth so sharply, and in
so many places) who to vindicate Origen's Honor, wrote an Apology for him,
under the Name of Pamphilus, a holy and renowned Martyr; although the truth of
it is, he had taken it partly out of the First and Sixth Books that Eusebius
had written upon the same Subject, and partly made use of his own Invention in
it. Some such like Fancy it was, that moved him also to put forth the Life of
one Sextus, a Pythagorean Philosopher, Hier. in Jerem. com. 4. tom. 4.
under the Name of S. Sixtus the Martyr, to the end that the Work might be
received the more favorably. What can you say to this? namely, That in the
very same Age there was a Personage of greater Note than the former, who,
disliking that Hierome had translated the Old Testament out of the Hebrew,
framed an Epistle under his Name, wherein he makes him repent himself of
having done it; which Epistle, even in S. Hierome's Lifetime, though without
his knowledge, was published by the said Author, both at Rome, and in Africa?
Who could believe the truth of this bold attempt, Hier. l. 2. Apol. contra
Ruffin. Tom. 2.
had not S. Hierome himself related the Story, and made complaint of the Injury
done him therein? I must impute also to a Fancy of the same kind, though
certainly more innocent than the other, the spreading abroad of so many
Predictions of our Savior Jesus Christ, and his Kingdom, under the Names of
the Sibylls; which was done by some of the first Christians, only to prepare
the Pagans to relish this Doctrine the better; Orig contra Cells. lib. 7.
as it is objected against them by Celsus, in Origin. But, that which is of
greater consequence yet, is, that even the Fathers themselves have sometimes
made use of this Artifice, to promote the Interest either of their own
Opinions, or their Passions. We have a notable Example hereof, which was
objected against the Latins by the Greeks, Council. Flor. Sess. 2. p 457.
above two hundred years since, of two Bishops of Rome, Zozimus and Boniface;
who to authorize the Title which they pretended to have of being Universal
Bishops, and Heads of the whole Christian Church, and particularly of the
African, forged, about the beginning of the Fifth Century, certain Canons in
the Council of Nice, and alleged them for such diverse times, Council. Afric. 6.
cap. 3.
in the Councils in Africa; which notwithstanding, after a long and diligent
search, could never yet be found in any of the Authentic Copies of the said
Council of Nice, although the African Bishops had taken the pains to send as
far as Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, to get the best and truest
Copies that they could. Neither indeed have the Canons and Acts of the Council
of Nice at this day, though it has since that time passed through so many
several hands, any such thing in it^ no, not in the Editions of those very Men
who are the most interested in the Honor of the Popes; as that of Dionysius
Exiguus, who published his Latin Collection of them about the year of our
Savior Christ 525. nor in any other either Ancient or Modern. For at for that
Authentic Copy of the Council of Nice, which one Friar John, Council. Flor.
Sess 20.
at the Council of Florence, pretended to have been the only Copy that had
escaped the Corruptions of the Arrians, and had for this cause been always kept
under Lock and Key at Rome, with all the safety and care that might be; out of
which Copy they had transcribed the said Canons: I confess, this Copy must
needs have been kept up very close, under Locks and Seals, seeing that three of
their Popes, namely, Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, could never be able to
produce it, for the justification of their pretended Title, against the African
Fathers, though in a case of so great Importance. And it is a wonderful strange
thing to me, that this Man, who came a thousand years after, should now at last
make use of it in this cause; whereas those very Persons who had it in their
custody, never so much as mentioned one Syllable of it: which is an evident
Argument, that the Seals of this rare Book were never opened, save only in the
Brains of this Doctor, where only it was both framed and sealed up, brought
forth and vanished, all at the same instant; the greatest part of those Men
that have come after him, having laid aside this Chimerical Invention, being
ashamed to make use of it any longer. And to say truth, that which these Men
answer, by way of excusing the said Popes, is not any whit more probable;
namely, That they took the Council of Nice, and that of Sardica, in which those
Canons they allege are really found, for one and the same Council. For whom
will these Men ever be able to persuade, That two Ecclesiastical Assemblies,
betwixt which there passed near twenty two whole years, called by two several
Emperors, and for Matters of a far different nature; the one of them for the
Explanation of the Christian Faith, and the other for the Re-establishing of
two Bishops in their Thrones; and in Places very far distant from each other:
the one at Nicaea in Bithynia, the other at Sardica, a City of Illyricum: the
Canons of which two Councils are very different, both in substance, number, and
authority; the one of them having always been received generally by the whole
Church; but the other having never been acknowledged by the Eastern Church;
should yet notwithstanding be but one and the same Council? How can they
themselves endure this, who are so fierce against the Greeks, for having
offered to attribute (which they do notwithstanding with more appearance of
truth) to the Sixth Council, those CII Canons which were agreed upon ten years
after at Constantinople, in an Assembly wherein one party of the Fathers of the
Sixth Council met? How came it to pass that they gave any credit to the Ancient
Church, seeing that in the Greek Collection of her Ancient Canons, those of the
Council of Sardica are quite left out; and in the Latin Collection of Dionysius
Exiguus, made at Rome eleven hundred years since, they are placed, not with
those of the Council of Nice, nor yet immediately after them, as if they all
made up but one Body betwixt them: Codex Can. Ec. Un. Dionys. Exig. p. 99.
but are put in a place a great way behind, after the Canons of all the General
Councils that had been held till that very time he lived in? And how comes it
to pass, that these Ancient Popes, who alleged these Canons, if they believed
these Councils to be both one, did not say so? The African Bishops had diverse
and sundry times declared, That these Canons, which were by them alleged, were
not at all to be found in their Copies. Certainly therefore, if those who had
cited them, had thought the Council of Nice, and that of Sardica to have been
both but one Council, they would no doubt have made answer, That (...) Canons
were to be found in this pretended Second Part of the Council of Nice, among
those which had been agreed upon at Sardica; especially when they saw that
these careful Fathers, for the clearing of the Controversy betwixt them, had
resolved to send to this purpose as far as Constantinople, and Alexandria. And
yet for all this, there is not the least Syllable, tending this way, said by
them. And certainly if the Canons of the Council of Sardica had been in those
days reputed as a part of the Council of Nice, it is a very strange thing, that
so many Learned and Religious Prelates as there were at that time in Africa, as
namely* Aurelius, Alypius, and even S. Augustine, that glorious Light, not of
the African only, but of the whole Ancient Church, should have been so
ignorant in this particular. But it is a wonder beyond all belief, that three
Popes, and their Legates, should leave their Party in an Ignorance so gross,
and so prejudicial to their own Interest; it being in their power to have
relieved them in two words. We may safely then conclude, That these Popes,
Zozimus, and Boniface, had no other Copies of the Council of Nice, than what we
have: and also, that they did not believe that the Canons of the Council of
Sardica were a part of the Council of Nice; but that they rather purposely
alleged some of the Canons of Sardica, under the name of the Canons of the
Council of Nice. And this they did according to that Maxim which was in force
with those of former times, and is not utterly laid aside even in our own;
namely, That for the advancing of a Good and Godly Cause, it is lawful
sometimes to use a little Deceit, and to have recourse to your Piae Frauds.
They therefore firmly believing as they did, That the Supremacy of their See,
over all other Churches, was a Business of great importance, and would be very
profitable to all Christendom; we are not to wonder, if for the establishing
this right on themselves, they made use of a little Legerdemain, alleging
Sardica for Nice: reckoning with themselves, that if they brought their Design
about, this small Failing of theirs would in process of time be abundantly
satisfied for, by the benefit and excellency of the thing it self. Yet
notwithstanding this Opposition made by the African Fathers against the Church
of Rome, Pope Leo, not many years after, Leo in ep. ad Theodos. Imp. Tom. 2.
Council.
writing to the Emperor Theodosius, did not forbear to make use of the old
Forgery, citing one of the Canons of the Council of Sardica, for a Legitimate
Canon of the Council of Nice: which was the cause that the Emperor Valentinian
also, Valentin. in ep. ad Theod. Tom. 2. Council Galla Placid. in ep. ad
Theodos. Tom. 2.
and his Empress Galla Placidia, writing in the behalf of the said Pope Leo to
the Emperor Theodosius, affirmed to him for a certain Truth, That both all
Antiquity, and the Canons of the Council of Nice also, had assigned to the Pope
of Rome the Power of judging of Points of Faith; and of the Prelates of the
Church; Leo having before possessed them, That this Canons of the Council of
Sardica was one of the Canons of Nice. And thus, by a strong perseverance in
this Pious Fraud, they have at length so fully persuaded a great part of
Christendom, that the Council of Nice had established this Supremacy upon the
Pope of Rome, that it is now generally urged by all of them, whenever this
Point is controverted. I must crave pardon of the Reader, for having so long
insisted on this Particular, and perhaps longer somewhat than my Design
required: yet, in my judgment, it may be of no small importance to the Business
in hand. For (will the Protestants here say) seeing that two Popes Bishops, and
Princes, which all Christians have approved, have notwithstanding thus foisted
in false Wares; what ought we to expect from the rest of the Bishops and
Doctors? Since these Men have done this in the beginning of the Fifth Century,
an Age of so high repute for its Faith and Doctrine, what have they not dared
to do in the succeeding Ages? If they have not forborne so foully to abuse the
sacred Name of the Council of Nice, the most Illustrious and Venerable Monument
of Christianity, next to the Holy Scriptures; what other Authors can we imagine
they would spare? And if in the face of so Renowned an Assembly, and in the
presence of whatever Africa could show of Eminency, both for Sanctity and
Learning; and even under the eye of the great S. Augustine too, they made no
conscience at all to make use of so gross a piece of Forgery; what have they
not since, in these later Times, while the whole World for so many Ages lay
covered with so thick darkness, dared to do? But as for my part, I shall
neither accuse nor excuse at present these Men's Proceedings; but shall only
conclude; That seeing that the Writings of the Fathers, before they came to us,
have passed through the hands of those who have sometimes been found to use
these juggling Tricks; it is not so easy a matter as People may imagine, to
discover out of those Writings which now pass under the Names of the Fathers,
what their Opinions were. The like Inclinations produced the very same Effects
in the Fifth Council; Council. 5 Act. 5. Tom. 2. Council.
where a Letter forged under the Name of Theodoret, touching the Death of S.
Cyril, was both read, and by a general silence approved by the whole Assembly;
which yet notwithstanding was so evidently false, that those very Men who
caused the Body of the General Councils to be Printed at Rome, have convinced
it of falsehood, and branded it as spurious. Such another precious Piece is that
foolish Story of a Miracle wrought by an Image of our Savior Christ in the
City Berytus, which is related in very ample manner, Council. 7. Act. 4. Tom. 3.
Council.
in the VII Council, and goes forsooth, under the Name of S. Athanasius, but is
indeed so tasteless a Piece, and so unworthy the Gallantry and clearness of
that great Wit, that he must not be thought to have common sense, that can find
in his heart to attribute it to him. And therefore we see, that notwithstanding
the Authority of this Council, Nannius in edit. op. Athan. Bellar de imag. l. 2
c. 10. and lib. de script. Eccles. in Athan Possevin. in appar. in Athan.
both Nannius, Bellarmine, and Possevine, have plainly confessed, that it was
not written by Athanasius. I shall place in this Rank the so much cried up Deed
of the Donation of Constantine, which has for so long a time been accounted as
a most Valid and most Authentic Evidence, and has also been inserted into the
Decrees, and so stiffly maintained by the Bishops of Agobio, D. 96. C.
Constantino nostro. 14. Augusti. Steuchius de Dona. Constant. Baron. in annal.
Melchior Canus locor. Theolog. l. 11. p. 511.
against the Oppositions of Laurentius Valla. Certainly those very Men who at
this day maintain the Donation, do notwithstanding disclaim this Evidence, as a
piece of Forgery. Of the same nature are the Epistles attributed to the first
Popes, as Clemens, Anacletus, Euaristus, Alexander, Sixtus, Telesphorus,
Hyginus, Pius, Anicetus, and others, down to the times of Siricius; that is to
say, to the year of our Savior Christ CCCLXXXV. which the World read under
these Venerable Titles at the least for eight hundred years together; and by
which have been decided, to the advantage of the Church of Rome, very many
Controversies, and especially the most important of all the rest, namely, that
of the Pope's Monarchy; which shows plain enough the Inclination, (shall I
call it^) or rather the purposed Design of the Merchant that first vented them
abroad. The greatest part of these notwithstanding, are accounted forged even
by many of the Learned of their own Party; Hen. Kaltheis. ap. Magdeb. cent. 2.
Nic. Cusan. Conc. Cath. l. 2. c. 34. Jo. de Turrecr. de Eccl. lib. 2. c. 101.
Jo. Driedo de dogm. and scrip. Eccl. l. 1. c. 2. Cl. Espens. de Contin. l. 1. c
2. G. Cassand. defens. lib. de officio pii viri, p. 843. Sim. Vig. ex respons.
Syn. Basil. etc. en la lettre contr. Durand. Baron. Annal. T. 2. an. 102. and
an. 865. Erasm. praefat. in Hieron.
as namely, Henricus K^ltheisen, Nicolas Cusanus, Jo. de Turrecremata, both
Cardinals; Erasmus, Jo. Driedo, Claudius Espensaeus, Cassander, Simon Vigor,
Baronius, and others: as indeed their Forgery appears plain enough, by the
barbarousness of their Style, the Errors that you meet with every foot in
computing the Times, and in History; the Pieces that they are patched up of,
stolen here and there out of several Authors, whose Books we have at this day
to show: and also by the general silence of all the Writers of the Eight first
Centuries, among whom there is not one word mentioned of them. Now I shall not
here meddle at all with the Six or Seven last Centuries; where, in regard of
diverse Articles of Faith, most eagerly by them pressed and established, there
has been more need than ever of the Assistance of the Ancients; and where, in
respect of the dark Ignorance of those Times, and the scarcity of Opposers,
they had much better opportunity than before to forge what Books they pleased.
This Abuse the World was never free from, till the Times of the Light breaking
forth in the Last Century; at what time Erasmus by name, gives us an account,
how he himself had discovered one of these wretched Knaves, whose ordinary
practice it was to lay his own Eggs in another Man's Nest, putting his own
Fooleries on S. Hierome particularly, and on S. Augustine, and S. Ambrose. And
who knows what those many Books be, that are daily issued out of the selfsame
Shops, that of old were wont to furnish the World with these kind of Knacks? Is
it not very probable, that both the Will, and the Dexterity, in forging and
venting these false Wares, will rather in these days increase, than abate, in
the Professors of this Trade? So that, if besides what the Malice of the
Heretics, the Avarice and Ignorance of Transcribers of Manuscripts, and the
ambition and affection of Men has brought forth of this kind, there have yet
so many others bent their endeavors this way, and that in a manner all along,
for the space of the last Fourteen hundred years, although they had their
several ends; we are not to wonder at all, if now in this last Age we see such
a monstrous number of Writings falsely Fathered upon the Ancients: which, if
they were all put together, would make little less than a Fourth or a Fifth
part of the Works of the Fathers. I am not ignorant, that the Learned have
noted a great number of them, and do ordinarily cast them into the later Tomes
of Editions; and that some have written whole Books upon this very Subject; as
namely, Ant. Possevine's Apparatus, Bellarmine's Catalogue, Scultetus his
Medulla Patrum, Rivet's Critic, and the like, both of the one and the other
Religion. But who can assure us that they have not forgotten any thing they
should have noted? Besides, that it is a new Labor, and almost equal to the
former, to read so many Books of the Moderns as there are. And when all is
done, we are not presently to sit down upon their Judgments neither, without a
due examination had of them. For each of them having been prepossest with the
Prejudices of the Party in which they were brought up before they took this
Work in hand, who shall warrant us, that they have not delivered any thing in
this case, in favor of their own particular Interest, as has been touched
before? The justness of this suspicion is so clear, that I presume that no Man
that is but any whit versed in these matters, will desire me to prove my
Assertion. Neither shall I need to give any other reason of it, than the
Conflict; and Disagreements in Judgments which we may observe in these Men: the
one of them oftentimes letting pass for pure Metal, what the other perhaps will
throw by for Dross: Which Differences are found not only betwixt those that
are of quite opposite Religions; but, which is more, even betwixt those that
are of the self same Persuasion. Those whom we named not long before, who were
all of the Roman Church, cry down (as we have said) the greatest part of the
Decretals of the first Popes. Franciscus Turrianus, a Jesuit, receives them,
and defends them all, in a Tract written by him to that purpose. Baron. Annal.
Tom. 1. an. 51.
Baronius calls the Recognitions which are attributed to Clemens Romanus, A
Gulf of Filth and Uncleanness; full of prodigious Lies, and frantic Fooleries.
Bellar. de lib. arbit. T. 5. c. 25. NOs fatemur librum esse corruptum, etc. Sed
tamen vel esse Clementis Romani, vel alterius aeque docti, ac antiqui.
Bellarmine says, That this Book was written either by Clemens, or else by some
other Author as Learned and as Ancient as he. Some of them hold those
Fragments, published by Nicol. Faber, under the Name of S. Hilary, for good and
legitimate Pieces; and some others again reject them. Erasmus, Sixtus Senensis,
Melchior Canus, and Baronius, are of opinion, That the Book Of the Nativity of
the Virgin Mary, is falsely attributed to S. Hierome: Christophorus a Castro, a
Spanish Jesuit, maintains the contrary. Cardinal Cajetan, Laurentius Valla,
Erasmus, and some others, hold the Books of Dionysius the Areopagite for
suspected, and spurious: Baronius, and almost all the rest of their Writers,
maintain that they are true and legitimate. Turrianus, Bovin, and some others,
commend unto us the Constitutions of the Apostles, for a legitimate Piece: But
Baronius, Possevine, Petavius, and a great many others, speak doubtfully of
them. And a Man shall find in the Writings of those of the Church of Rome,
infinite variety of divided Judgments, in such Cases as these. He that has a
mind to furnish himself with Examples of this Nature, may have recourse to
their Books, and particularly to the Writings of the late Cardinal Perron, who
differs as much from the rest, in this Point of Criticism, as he does for the
most part in the Method he observes in his Disputations. Now I would willingly
be informed, what a, Man should do, amidst these diversities of Judgment; and
what Path he should take, where he meets with so disagreeing Guides. But yet
suppose that these Authors have done their utmost endeavor in this Design,
without any particular affection, or partiality; how, notwithstanding, shall we
be satisfied concerning their sufficiency for the performance of their
Undertaking? Is it a light Business, think you, to bring the whole stock of
Antiquity to the Cruzet, and there to purify and refine it, and to separate
all the Dross from it, which has so deeply, and for the space of so many Ages,
been not only as it were tied, and fastened on to it, but even thoroughly mixed,
united, and incorporated with it? This Work requires the most clear and
refined Judgment that can be imagined, an exquisite Wit, a quick piercing Eye,
a perfect Ear, a most exact knowledge in all History, both Ancient and Modern,
both Ecclesiastical and Secular; a perfect knowledge of the Ancient Tongues,
and a long and continued Conversation with all sorts of Writers, both Ancient,
of the middle Ages, and Modern; to be able to judge of their Inclinations, and
which way their Pulse beat; to understand rightly the manner of their
Expression, Invention, and Method in Writing; each Age, each Nation, and each
Author, having their own peculiar ways in all these. Now such a Man as this, is
hardly produced in a whole age. As for those Men who in our Times have taken
upon them this part of Criticism, who knows not, who sees not, that but reads
them, how many of these forenamed Qualities are wanting in them? But yet
suppose that such a Man were to be found, and that he should take in hand this
Discovery; I do verily believe that he would be able very easily to find out
the Imposture of a bungling Fool, that had ill counterfeited the Stamp, Color,
and Weight, in the Piece which he would father upon some other Man; or that
should, for example, endeavor to represent either S. Hierome, or S.
Chrysostom, with a stammering Tongue, and should make them speak barbarous
Language, bad Latin, and bad Greek; or else perhaps should make use of such
Terms, Things, or Authors, as were not known to the World till a long time
after these Men; or should make them treat of Matters far removed from the Age
they lived in, and maintain Opinions which they never thought of, or reject
those which they are notoriously known to have held: And of this sort, for the
most part, are those Pieces which our Critics have decried, and noted unto us
as spurious. But if a Man should chance to bring him a Piece of some able
Master, that should have fully and exactly learnt both the Languages, History,
Manners, Alliances, and Quarrels of the Family he has boldly thrust himself
into, and should be able to make happy use of all these, assure your self, that
our Aristarchus would be here as much puzzled to discover this Jugler, as they
were once in France, to convince the Impostures of Martin Guerre. Now how can
we imagine, but that among so many several Persons, that have for their several
Purposes employed their utmost Endeavors in these kinds of Forgeries, there
must needs have been, in so many Centuries of years, very many able Men, who
have had the skill so artificially to imitate the Fancy and Style of the
Persons whom they act, as that it is impossible to discover them? Especially,
if they made choice of such a Name as was the only thing remaining in the
World of that Author, so that there is no mark left us either of his Style,
Discourse, or Opinions, to guide us in our Examination. And therefore, in my
judgment, he was a very cunning Fellow, and made a right choice, that undertook
to write under the Name of Dionysius the Areopagite: for we having not left us
any true Legitimate Piece of this Author, by which we may examine this Cheat,
the Discovery must needs be difficult; and it would have proved so much the
more hard, if he had but used a more modest and less swelling manner of
Expression: Whereas for those others, who in the Ages following made bold with
the Names of S. Hierome, S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, and the like; of whose
legitimate Writings we have very many Pieces left us: a Man may know them at
the first sight, merely by the Style; those Gothic and rude Spirits being no
more able to counterfeit the Graces and Elegancies of these great Authors, than
an Ass is to imitate the Warblings of the Nightingale. I confess, there is
another Help, which, in my judgment, may stand us in more stead, in this
Particular, than all the rest; namely, the Light and Direction of the Ancients
themselves, who oftentimes make mention of other Writers of the Church which
lived either before, or in their own Times: S. Hierome among the Latins, having
taken the pains to make a Catalogue of all those whose Names and Writings he
knew of, down from the Apostles time to his own; which was afterward continued
by Gennadius. To this we may also add that incomparable Work of the Patriarch
Photius, which he calls his Bibliotheca, and is now published in this our Age;
where this great Person has given us his Judgment of most of the Authors of
the Greek Church. Now this Help we may make use of two manner of ways: The one
is, in justifying a Book, if it be found mentioned by these Authors: The other
is, in rejecting it, if they say nothing of it. As for the first of these, it
concludes only according to the Quality of the Authors who make mention of a
suspected Book. For, some of the Fathers themselves have made use of these kind
of Forgeries, as we have formerly said; others have favored them, because they
served their turn; some have not been able to discover them; and some others
have not been willing to do so, whatsoever their Reason has been. I shall not
here repeat the Names of any of those that have done these things themselves:
And as for those that have favored them, there are good store of examples, as
Justin Martyr, Theophilus, and others, who allege the Sibylls Verses, as
Oracles; which are notwithstanding the greatest part of them forged. Hier. ep.
84. ad Magn. Tom. 2.
Clemens Alexandrinus, the most Learned, and most Polite of all the Fathers, in
S. Hierome's judgment, how often does he make use of those Apocryphal Pieces
which go under the Names of the Apostles and Disciples, to whom they were most
falsely attributed; citing under the Name of Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 2.
Barnabas, and of Id. Strom. l. 1. and l. 2. and alibi passim.
Hermes, such Writings as have been forged under their Names? And did not the
VII Council in like manner make use of a supposititious Piece, attributed to
Athanasius, as we have showed before; and likewise of diverse others which are
of the same stamp? That even the Fathers themselves therefore have not been
able always to make a true discovery of these false Wares, no Man can doubt;
considering that of those many necessary Qualifications which we reckoned up
before, as requisite in this Particular, they may oftentimes have failed in
some. S. Hierome himself, the most knowing Man among all the Latin Fathers,
especially in Matters of this nature, sometimes lets them pass without
examination; as there, where he speaks of a certain Tract against
Mathematicians, Hier. ep. 84. ad Magn. Tom. 2.
attributed to Minutius Foelix, If at least (says he) the Inscription
represent unto us the right Author of the Book. And in another place,
whatsoever his reason was, Id. in Catal. Tom. 1.
he delivers to us for Legitimate Pieces, the Epistles that go about under the
Name of S. Paul to Seneca, and of Seneca to S. Paul; which, notwithstanding,
Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. an 66.
Cardinal Baronius holds for suspect^^ and spurious, as doubtless they are. But
even those Men who have been able to discover these false Pieces, have not
sometimes been willing to do it; either being unwilling to offend the Authors
of them, or else not daring to cast any disrepute upon those Books, which
having many good things in them, had not in their judgment any false or
dangerous Positions in them. And this is the reason why they made choice to let
such things pass, rather than out of a little tenderness of conscience to
oppose them; there being, in their apprehension, no danger at all in the one,
and much trouble and envy in the other. And therefore I am of opinion, That S.
Hierome, for example, would never have taken the pains, nor have undergone the
envy, in laying open the Forgeries of Ruffinus, if the misunderstanding that
happened to be betwixt them, had not engaged him to it. Neither do I believe that
the African Fathers would ever have troubled themselves in convincing the false
Allegation of Zozimus, but for their own Interest, which was thereby called in
question. For wise and sober Men never use to fall at variance with any Body,
till they needs must; neither do they quickly take notice of any Injury or
Abuse offered them, unless it be a very great one; and such as has evident
danger in it: which was not at all perceived or taken notice of at first, in
these Forgeries; which nevertheless have at length, by little and little, in a
manner born down all the good and true Books. These Considerations, in my
opinion, make it clearly appear, That the Title of a Book is not sufficiently
justified by a Passage or two being cited out of it by some of the Ancients,
and under the same Name. As for the other way, which renders the Authority of
a Book doubtful, by the Ancients not having made any mention of it, I confess
it is no more demonstrative than the other: forasmuch as it is not impossible,
that any one, or diverse of the Fathers, may not have met with such a certain
Wri^^r that was then extant; or else perhaps that they might omit some one of
those very Authors which they knew. Yet notwithstanding is this the much surer
way of the two; there being less danger, in this case, in rejecting a True
Piece, than in receiving a Forged one; the want of the Truth of the one, being
doubtless much less prejudicial, than the receiving the opposite Falsehood of
the other. For as it is a less sin to omit the Good, than to commit the Evil
that is opposite to it, in like manner is it a less Error not to believe a
Truth, than to believe the Falsehood which is contrary to it. And thus we see
what confusion there is in the Books of the Ancients, and what defect in the
Means which is requisite for the distinguishing the False from the True:
insomuch that, as it often falls out, it is much easier to judge what we ought
to reject, than to resolve upon what we may safely receive. Let the Reader
therefore now judge, whether or no these Writings having come down along
through so many Ages, and passed through so many Hands, which are either known
to have been notoriously guilty, or at least strongly suspected of Forgery, the
Truth in the mean time having made on its part but very weak resistance against
these Impostures; it be not a very hard matter to discover, amidst the infinite
number of Books that are now extant, and go under the Names of the Fathers,
which are those that truly belong to them; and which again are those that are
falsely imposed upon them. And if it be so hard a matter to discover in gross
only which are the Writings of the Fathers; how much more difficult a Business
will it be to find out what their Opinions are touching the several
Controversies now in agitation. For we are not to imagine, that it is no great
matter from which of the Fathers such an Opinion has sprung, so that it came
from any one of them: for there is altogether as much difference amongst these
Ancient Doctors, both in respect of Authority, Learning, and Goodness, as among
the Modern. Besides, that an Ages being higher or lower; either raises or
lesseneth the Repute of these Writings, in the esteem both of the one Party,
and of the other, as it were, so many grains, as years: And certainly not
altogether without good reason; it being most evident to any one that has been
but the least versed in the reading of these Books, That Time has by degrees
introduced very great Alterations, as well in the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Ancients, as in all other things. Our Conclusion therefore shall be, That
whosoever shall desire to know what the Sense and Judgment of the Primitive
Church has been, touching our present Controversies; it will be first in a
manner as necessary for him, as it is difficult, exactly to find out both the
Name and the Age of each of these several Authors.

CHAP. IV.
Reason IV. That those of the Writings of the Fathers which are Legitimate,
have been in many Places corrupted by Time, Ignorance, and Fraud, both Pious
and Malicious, both in the former and later Ages.

BUt, put the case now here, that you had by your long and judicious Endeavors
severed the True and Genuine Writings of the Fathers, from the Spurious and
Forged: there would yet lie upon you a second Task, whose event is like to
prove much more doubtful, and fuller of difficulty than the former. For it
would concern you in the next place, in reading over those Authors which you
acknowledge for Legitimate, to distinguish what is the Author's own, and what
has been soisted in by another Hand; and also to restore to your Author,
whatsoever either by Time or Fraud has been taken away; and to take out of him
whatsoever has been added by either of these two. Otherwise you will never be
able to assure your self, that you have discovered out of these Books, what the
true and proper meaning and sense of your Author has been; considering the
great Alterations that by several ways they may have suffered, in several
Times. I shall not here speak of those Errors which have been produced by the
Ignorance of the Transcribers; Hier. ep. 28. ad Lucin. Tom. 1.
Who write (as Hierome has complained of them) not what they find, but what
themselves understand: Nor yet of those Faults which necessarily have grown up
out of the very Transcribing; it being an impossible thing, that Books which
have been copied out an infinite number of times, during the space of ten or
twelve Centuries of years, by Men of so different Cap^^cities* and Hands,
should all this while retain exactly, and in every Particular, the self-same
Juice, the same Form and Body that they had when they first came forth from the
Author's own hand. Neither shall I here say any thing of the sufferings of
these Books, by Moths, and a thousand other Injuries of Time, by which they
have been corrupted; while all kind of Learning, for so many Ages together, lay
buried, as it were, in the Grave; the Worms on one side feeding on the Books of
the Learned, and on the other the Dust defacing them; so that it is impossible
now to restore them to their first integrity. And this is the sad Fate that all
sorts of Books have lain under; whence has sprung up so great variety of
Readings as are found almost in all Authors. I shall not here make any
advantage of this; though there are some Doctors in the World, that have showed
us the way to do it, taking advantage from this Consideration to lessen the
Authority that the Holy Scriptures of themselves ought to have in the esteem of
all Men, under this color, That even in these Sacred Writings there are
sometimes found varieties of Reading, which yet are of very little or no
Importance, as to the Groundwork. If we would tread in these Men's steps, and
apply to the Writings of the Fathers, what they speak and conclude of the
Scriptures, we could do it upon much better terms than they; there being no
reason in the Earth to imagine, but that the Books of the Ancient Writers have
suffered very much more than the Scriptures have; which have always been
preserved in the Church, with much greater care than any other Books have been
whatsoever, and which have been learnt by all Nations, and translated into all
Languages; which all Sects have retained, both Orthodox and Heretics,
Catholics and Schismatics, Greeks and Latins, Moscovites and Ethiopians;
observing diligently the Eye, and the Hand, one of the other: so that there
could not possibly happen any remarkable Alteration in them, but that presently
the whole World, as it were, would have exclaimed against it, and have made
their Complaints to have resounded throughout the Universe. Whereas, on the
contrary, the Writings of the Fathers have been kept, transcribed, and read in
as careless a manner as could be; and that too but by very few, and in few
Places, being but rarely understood by any, save those of the same Language;
which is the cause that so many Faults have both the more easily crept into
them, and likewise are the more hard to be discovered. Besides, that the
particular Style and Obscurity of some of them, renders the Errors the more
important. As for example: Take me a Tertullian, and you shall find, that one
little Word added, or taken away, or altered never so little, or a Full-point
or Comma but out of its place, will so confound the Sense, that you will not be
able to find what he would have. Whereas in Books of an easy, smooth, clear
Style, as the Scriptures for the most part are, these Faults are much less
prejudicial, seeing they cannot in any wise so darken the Sense, but that it
will be still easy enough to apprehend it. But I shall pass by all these
minute Punctilioes, as more suitable to the Enquiries of the Pyrrhonians and
Academicks, whose Business it is to question all things; than of Christians,
who only seek, in simplicity and sincerity of heart, whereon to build their
Faith. I shall only here take notice of such alterations as have been
knowingly and voluntarily made in the Writings of the Fathers, purposely by our
holding our peace, to disguise their S^nse, or else to make them speak more
than they meant. And this Forgery is of two sorts: The one has been made use
of with a good intention; the other out of malice: Again, The one has been
committed in Times long since past, the other in this last Age, in our own
days, and the days of our Fathers. Lastly, the one is in the Additions made to
Authors, to make them speak more than they meant; the other in subtracting from
the Author, to eclipse and darken what he would be understood to say. Neither
ought we to wonder, that even those of the honest, innocent, primitive Times
also made use of these Deceits, seeing that, for a good end, they made no great
scruple to forge whole Books, taking a much stranger and bolder course, in my
opinion, than the other. For without all doubt it is a greater Crime to coin
false Money, than to clip, or a little alter the true. This Opinion has always
been in the World, That to settle a certain and assured estimation upon that
which is good and true (that is to say, upon what we account to be such) it is
necessary that we remove out of the way, whatsoever may be a hinderance to it;
and that there can be no great danger either in putting in, or at least in
leaving any thing in, that may yield assistance to it, whatsoever the issue of
either of these may in the end prove to be. And hence has it come to pass,
that we have so many ancient Forgeries, and also so many strange stories of
Miracles, and of Visions; many taking a delight in feigning (as S. Hier. ep. 4.
ad Rustic. Tom. 1. Daemonum contra se pugnantium p^rtenta co^fingunt.
Hierome says) great Combats which they have had with Devils in Deserts: all
which things are merely fabulous in themselves, and acknowledged too to be so
by the most intelligent of them; yet notwithstanding are tolerated, and
sometimes also recommended to them, forasmuch as they account them useful, for
the settling or increasing either of the Faith or Devotion of the People. What
will you say, if at this day there are some, even of those Men who make
profession of being the greatest haters in the world of these subtilties, who
cannot nevertheless put forth any Book, but they must needs be lopping off, or
falsifying whatsoever does not wholly agree with the Doctrine they hold for
true; fearing, as themselves say, lest such things coming to the eye of the
simple Common People, might infect them, and possess their Heads with new
Fancies? So firmly has this Opinion been of old rooted in the Nature of Man.
Now I will not here dispute, whether this proceeding of theirs be lawful, or
not: I shall only say by the way, That in my judgment it is a very great shame
for the Truth, to be established or defended by such falsifications and shifts;
as if it had not sufficient Weapons, both defensive and offensive, of its own,
but that it must be fain to borrow of its Adversary: and it is besides a very
dangerous course too; because that the discovery of any one Cheat, oftentimes
renders their Cause, who practiced it, wholly suspected; insomuch that, by
making use of such slights as these in Christian Religion, either for the
gaining to you, or confirming the faith of some of the simpler People, it is to
be feared, that you may give distaste to the more understanding sort; and so by
this means at length may chance to lose the Affections of the simpler sort too.
But whatsoever this course of Cheating be, either in it self, or in its
Consequences; it is sufficient for my purpose, that it has been a long time
practiced in the Church, in matters of Religion; for proof whereof, I shall
here produce some Instances. The Heretics have always been accused of using
this Artifice: but I shall not here set down what Alterations have been made by
the Ancientest of them, even in the Scriptures themselves. If you would have a
Taste of this Practice of theirs, go but to Tertullian and Epiphanius, and you
shall there see, how Marcion had clipped and altered the Gospel of S. Luke, and
those Epistles of S. Paul, which he allowed to be such. Neither have those
other of the Ages following been any whit more conscientious in this
Particular, as may appear by those Complaints made by Ruffinus Ruffin. in
Expos. Symbol. and lit. de adult. script. Origin.
, in his Exposition upon the Apostle's Creed; and in another Treatise written
by him purposely on this Subject: which is indeed contradicted by Hier. ep. 65.
Tom. 2. and Apol. 2. contr. Ruff.
S. Hierome, but only in his Hypothesis, as to what concerned Origin; but not
absolutely in his Thesis: and by the like Complaints of Cyril. ep. ad Ich.
Antioch. in Act. Conc. Ephesians.
S. Cyril, and diverse others of the Ancients: and among the Moderns, by those
very Persons also who have put forth the General Councils at Rome, who inform
us, in the Preface to the First Volume, In Praefat. in Tom. 1. Council. Genesis
That Time, and the Fraud of the Heretics, have been the cause that the Acts
of the said Councils have not come to our hands, neither entire, nor pure and
sincere, that which has remained of them: and before, they grievously bewail,
that we should be thus deprived of so great and so precious a Treasure. Now
this Testimony of theirs, to me, is worth a thousand others; seeing it comes
from such who in my opinion are evidently interested to speak quite otherwise.
For if the Church of Rome, who is the pretended Mistress and Trustee of the
Faith, has suffered any part of the Councils to perish and be lost, which is
esteemed by them as the Code of the Church; what then may the rest have
suffered also? And what may not the Heretics and Schismatics have been able
to do? And if all these Evidences have been altered by their Fraud, how shall
we be able by them to come to the knowledge of the Sense and Judgment of the
Ancients? I confess I am very much ama^ed, to see these Men make so much
reckoning of the Acts of the Councils, and to make such grievous Complaints
against the Heretics, for having suppressed some of them. For if these things
are of such use, why then do they themselves keep from us the Acts of the
Council of Trent, which is the most considerable Council, both for them, and
their Party, that has been held in the Christian Church these eight hundred
years? If it be a Crime in the Heretics, to have kept from us these precious
Jewels; why are not they afraid, lest the blame which they lay on others, may
chance to return upon themselves? But doubtless there is something in the
Business, that renders these Cases different: and I confess I wonder they
publish it not; the simpler sort; for want of being otherwise informed,
thinking perhaps, (though, it may be, without cause) that the reason why the
Acts of this last Council are kept so close from them is, because they know
that the publishing of them would be either prejudicial, or at least
unprofitable, to the Greatness of the Church of Rome: And they also again, on
the other side, conceive, that in those other Acts, which they say have been
suppressed by the Heretics, there were wonderful Matters to be found, for the
greater advancing and supporting of the Church of Rome. Whatsoever the Reason
be, I cannot but commend the Ingenuity of these Men, who, notwithstanding their
Interest, which seems to engage them to the contrary, have yet nevertheless
confessed, That the Councils which we have at this day are neither entire, nor
uncorrupted. But let us now examine, whether or no even the Orthodox Party
themselves have not also contributed something to this Alteration of the
Writings of the Primitive Church, Epiphanius in Anchor. (...).
Epiphanius reports, That in the true and most correct Copies of S. Luke it was
written, that Jesus Christ wept* and that this passage had been alleged by S.
Irenaeus: but that the Catholics had blotted out this Word* fearing that the
Heretics might abuse it. Whether this Relation be true, or false, I must rely
upon the Credit of the Author: But this I shall say, That it seems to me a
clear Argument* That these Ancient Catholics would have made no great scruple
of blotting out of the Writings of the Fathers any Word that they found to
contradict their own Opinions and Judgment; and that with the same Liberty that
they inform us the Heretics used. For seeing that, as this Father informs us,
they made no Conscience of making such an Attempt upon the Gospel of the Son of
God himself; with how much greater confidence would they adventure to geld the
Books of Men? Certainly Ruffinus, a Man so much applauded by Hier. ep. 5. ad
Flor. and ep. 41. ad Ruffin.
S. Hierome, before their falling out; and so highly esteemed by Aug. ep. ad
Hier. quae est inter ep. Hier. 93. and iterum ep. 97.
S. Augustine, who very much bewails the Breach betwixt those two; and whom
Gennald. in Catal. inter op. Hier.
Gennodius has placed, with a very high Elogie of his Worth, in his Catalogue
of Ecclesiastical Writers; has so filthily mangled, and so licentiously
confounded the Writings of Origin, Eusebius, and others, which he has
translated into Latin, that you will hardly find a Page, in his Translations,
where he has not either cut off, or added, or at least altered something. S.
Hierome also, although his Enemy, yet agrees with him in this Point; Hier. ep
62. ad Theoph. Alex. and lib. 2. Apol. contra Ruffin.
confessing in several Places, That he had indeed translated Origin, but in
such sort, as that he had taken liberty to cut away that which was dangerous,
and had left only that which was useful, and had interpreted only what was
Good, and had left out the Bad; that is to say, that if he found any thing
there, that was not so consonant to the Common Judgment and Opinions of his
Time, and so might possibly give Offense to the simple People, he suppressed it
in his Translation; affirming also, that S. Hier. ep. 75. Id. praefat. in lib.
Eusebius. de loc. Hebr.
Hilary, and Eusebius Bishop of Verceil, had done the like. And again, in his
Preface to Eusebius his Book, De locis Hebraicis, he confesses, that he had
left out that which he conceived was not worth remembering; and that he had
altered the greatest part of it. And to make it appear, that this has been his
constant practice, we need but compare his Latin Chronology, with the Greek
Fragments which remain of Eusebius; where you may plainly see what liberty
these Ancients allowed themselves in the Writings of others. And what doubt is
there to be made, but that those Men that came after them, following the
Authority of so great an Example, carefully either took out of their Copies, or
else left out of their Translations, the greatest part of whatever they found
to be dissonant to the Opinions and Customs which were received in the Church
in the Times they lived in? and likewise, that for adding the greater Authority
to them, some have had the boldness to add in some places what they conceived
to be wanting? From whence else could it proceed, that we should have so many
unseasonable breakings off in many places, and so many impersinent Additions in
others, as there are to be met with frequently in the Ancient Authors? Whence
otherwise should we have those many course Patches, that are ready to grate the
Skin off our Fingers, in the midst of their soft Satin and Velvet? and that
inequality of Pulse and Breath, that we may observe in one and the same Author,
in a quarter of an Hours reading? It would prove a troublesome business, to
bring in here all the Examples of this kind that we might; there being scarcely
any of the Moderns, that have taken any pains in writing upon the Fathers, but
have noted and complained of this Abuse: and hence it is, Tom. 4. op. Amb. p.
211. lib. 2. de Abra. in marg. annot.
that we oftentimes meet with such like Notes as this, in the Margins of the
Fathers: Hic videtur aliquis assuisse nugas suas, and the like. And that which
is observed also by Vives, upon the XXI Book of S. Augustine De Civitate Dei,
Lud. Vives in lib. 21. de Civ. Dei, c. 24. In antiquis libris. Brug. and Colon.
non le guntur isti december aut duodecim qui sequuntur versus.
namely, That ten or twelve Lines which we find at this day in the XXIV Chapter
of that Book, which contain a Positive Assertion of Purgatory, were not to be
found in the ancient Manuscripts of Bruges, and of Collen; no, nor yet in that
of Paris, as is noted by those that Printed S. Augustine, Anno 1531. One
Holstein. op. lim. praef. tom. op. Athan. Neque solius Athanasti ea fortuna, ut
ineptissimorum interpolatorum manus subiret, cum Chrysostomi, Procli,
aliorumque homilias similibus sequiorum saeculorum ineptiis faedatas, in iisdem
regiis codicibus invenerim.
Holsteinius also, a Dutchman, testifies, That he had met with diverse Pieces
among the Manuscripts of the King's Library, of Chrysostom, Proclus, and
others, that had in like manner been scratched in diverse Places by the like
Hands, by some Interpolators of the later and worst Ages. But I may not here
forget to note, That this Alteration has taken place, even in the most sacred
and Public Pieces also; as namely, in the Liturgies of the Church, and the
like: and I shall give you this Observation, to the end it may carry with it
the greater gracefulness and weight, in the Expressions of Andreas Masius, a
Man of singular and profound Learning; yet of such Candor and Integrity as
renders him more admired, than his Knowledge does; and which, together with his
other Excellencies, endears him to all moderate Men of both Professions. This
Learned Person taking notice, that the Liturgy of S. Basil was not so long in
the Syriac, Andr. Masius Praef. in Litur. Sir.
as in the Greek, gives this Reason of it: For (says he) Men have always been
of such a humor and disposition in Matters of Religion, as that you shall
scarcely find any that have been able to content themselves with the Ceremonies
prescribed unto them by their Fathers, how holy soever they have been in
themselves: so that we may observe, that in tract of time, according as the
Prelates have thought fittest to move the Affections of the People to Piety and
Devotion, many other things have been either added, or altered; and (which is
much worse) many superstitious things have been introduced also: in which
particular, I conceive the Christians of Syria to have been more moderate, and
less extravagant than the Greeks and Latins, as having not the opportunity of
enjoying that quiet and plentiful state of Life, which the others had. Thus the
Learned Masius. Cassand. in Liturg. cap. 2.
And Cassander, who has also turned over the Writings of the Ancients with
innocent Hands, confesses, and proves out of other Authors, That the ancient
Liturgies have by little and little been enlarged, by the several Additions of
the Moderns. Thus proportionably as the World it self has changed, so would it
have whatever there remained of Antiquity, to suffer its Alterations also;
imagining, that it was but reasonable that these Books should in some measure
accommodate their Language to the Times, forasmuch as the Authors of them, in
all probability, would have done so themselves, believing and speaking with the
Times, had they been now living. Now to render them the more acceptable, they
have used those Arts upon them, that some old Men are wont to practice; they
have new colored their Beard and Mustachioes, cutting off the rude and
scattered hairs; they have polished their Skin, and given it a fresh
Complexion, and taught them to speak with a new Voice, having changed also the
Color of their Habit: insomuch, that it is much to be feared, that we
oftentimes do but lose our labor, when we search in these disguised Faces, and
Mouths, for the Complexion and Language of true Antiquity. Eusebius. in Chro.
edit^num. 2148. and 2158. Vide Scalig. in loc. p. 198 a. and 201 a.
Thus have they taught Eusebius to tell us, in his Chronicon, that the Fast of
Lent was instituted by Telesphorus; and the Observation of the Lords Day, by
Pius, both Bishops of Rome: which is a thing Eusebius never so much as dreamt
of, as may appear out of some Manuscripts of him, See also Card. Perron's Reply
to K. James, Observe. 2. c. 8.
where you shall find him wholly mu^e, as to these Points, wherewith the
Moderns so much please themselves. But to return, and to take the Times all
along as they lie, we may observe that this License grew stronger daily, as the
Times grew worse; because that the greater the distance of time was from the
Author's own Age, the more difficult the discovery of these Forgeries must
necessarily be: the Example also of some of the most eminent Persons among the
Ancients, who had sometimes made use of these sleights, adding on the other
side boldness to every one, and courage to venture upon what they had done
before them. For, I pray you, is it not a strange thing, that the Legates of
Pope Leo, in the year 451. in the midst of the Council of Chalcedon, where were
assembled 600 Bishops, the very Flower and Choice of the whole Clergy, should
have the confidence to allege the VI Canon of the Council of Nice, in these
very Words, Council. Chalced. Act. 16. Tom. 2. Council.
That the Church of Rome has always had the Primacy: Words which are no more
found in any Greek Copies of the Councils, than are those other pretended
Canons of Pope Zozimus: neither do they yet appear in any Greek or Latin
Copies, nor so much as in the Edition of Dionysius Exiguus, who lived about
fifty years after this Council. When I consider, that the Legates of so holy a
Pope would at that time have fastened such a Wen upon the Body of so Venerable a
Canon, I am almost ready to think, that we scarcely have any thing of Antiquity
left us, that is entire, and incorrupt, except it be in Matters of
Indifferency, or which could not have been corrupted, without much noise; and
to take this Proceeding of theirs, which is come to our knowledge, as an
advertisement purposely given us by Divine Providence, to let us see, with how
much consideration, and advisedness we ought to receive for the Council of
Nice, and of Constantinople, and for Cyprian, and Hiero^o's Writings, that
which goes at this day for such. About seventy four years after the Council of
Chalcedon, Dionysius Exiguus, whom we before mentioned, made his Collection at
Rome, which is (...) printed at Paris, Cum Privilegio Regi^, out of very
ancient Manuscripts. Whosoever shall but look diligently Into this Collection,
shall find diverse alterations in it, one whereof I shall instance in; only to
show, how ancient this Artifice has been among Christians. The last Canon of
the Council of La^dicea, which is the 163. of the Greek Code of the Church
Universal, forbidding to read in Churches any other Books, than those which are
Canonical; gives us withal a long Catalogue of them. Dionysius Exiguus,
although he has indeed inserted in his Collection Number. 162. the beginning of
the said Canon, which forbids to read any other Books in the Churches,
besides the sacred Volumes of the Old and New Testament; yet has he wholly
omitted the Catalogue, or List of the said Books: fearing, as I conceive, lest
the Tail of this Catalogue might scandalize the Church of Rome; where, many
years before, Pope Innocent had, Innocent. 1. ep. 3. ad Exup. Tholos. c. 7.
by an express Decree to that purpose, put into the Canon of the Old Testament,
the Maccabees, the Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, Tobit, Judith, etc. of
which Books the Fathers of the Council of Laodicea make no mention at all,
naming but XXII Books of the Old Testament; and in the Catalogue of the New,
utterly omitting the Apocalypse. If any Man can show me any better reason of
this suppression, let him speak: as for my part I conceive this the most
probable that can be given; however, we are not at all bound to divine, what
the motive should be, that made Dionysius out off that part of the Canon. For,
whatsoever the reason were, it serves the turn well enough, to make it appear,
that at that time they made no great conscience to curtal, if need were, the
very Text of the Canons themselves. So that if we had not had the good luck to
have had this Canon entire, and perfect, in diverse other Monuments of
Antiquity; as namely, in the Collections of the Greeks, and also in the
Councils of the French Church; we should at this Day have been wholly ignorant,
what the judgment of the Fathers of L^^odices was, touching the Canon of the
holy Scriptur^s* which is one of the principal Controversies of these times. It
is true, I confess, that the Latins have their revenge upon the Greeks,
reproaching them in like manner, because that in their Translation of the Code
of the Canons of the African Church, they have left the Books of the Maccabees
quite out of the Roll of the Books of the Scripture, which is set down in the
24. Canon of their Collection, expressly against the Faith of all the Latin
copies of this Collection, Perron Repl. l. 1. c. L.
both Printed, and Manuscript; as Cardinal Perron affirms: and yet there are
some others, Christ. Justel. in Not. ad Can. 24. God. Gr. Eccles. Afric.
who assure us, that no Book of Maccabees appears at all in this Canon, in the
Collection of Cres^bnius, a Bishop of Africa, not yet printed. The Greek Cud^
represents unto us VII. Canons of the I* Council of Constantinople; which are
in like manner found both in Balsamon, and in Zonaras, and also in the Greek
and Latin Edition of the General Councils, printed at Rome. The three last* of
these do not appear at all, in the Latin Code of (...) though they are very
considerable ones, as to the business they relate to, which is, That Order in
Proceeding, in passing Judgment upon Bishops accused* and in receiving such
persons, who forsaking their Communion with Heretics, desire to be admitted
into the Church. (...) very hard to say, what should move the (...) this
Council thus. But this I am (...) in the VI. Canon, which is one of those (...)
has omitted, and which treats of judging of Bishops accused, there is not
the least mention made, of Appealing to Rome, nor of any Reserved Cases,
wherein it is not permitted to any, save only to the Pope himself, to judge a
Bishop: the power of hearing and determining all such matters being here
wholly, and absolutely referred to the Provincial and Dioce^an Synods. Now
whether the Greeks added this tail to the Council of Constantinople, (which yet
is not very probable,) or whether Dionysius, or the Church of Rome curtalled
this Council, it will still that way also appear clearly, that this boldness in
g^lding, or making Additions to Ecclesiastical Writings, is not at all in use
in these days. After the Canons of Constantinople, there follow in the Greek
Code, VIII. Canons of the General Council of Eph^sus, set down also both by
Balsamon, and Zonaras, and printed with the Acts of the said Council of
Ephesus, in the First Tome of the Roman Edition. But Dionysius Exiguus: has
discarded them all, not giving us any one of them: and you will hardly be able
to give a handsome guess, what his reason should be: unless perhaps it were,
because that the business of the eighth Canon displeased him: which is, that
the Bishops of Cyprus had their Ordinations within themselves, without
admitting the Patriarch of Antioch to have any thing to do with it: and that
the same course ought to be observed in all other Provinces, and Diocesses: so
that no Bishop should have power to intrude into a Province, which had not from
the beginning been under His, and His Predecessors jurisdiction: Council. Ephesians.
Can. 8. qui in VII. Gr. est 178. Cod. Can. Eccl. (...).
For fear, that under the pretense of the Administration of Sacred Offices, the
pride of a Secular Power should thrust it self into the Church; and so by this
means we should lose (said these good Fathers) by little and little, before we
were aware, the Liberty that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of all
mankind, has purchased for us with his own Blood. I know not, whether this
Constitution, and these words, have put the Latins into any fright, or not: or
whether any other reason has moved them, not to receive the Canons of the
Council of Ephesus into their Code. But this is certain, that they do not
appear any where among them, and it is now at the least seven hundred and fifty
years and upward, Anastas. Biblioth. Praef. in Synod. VIII. Tom. 3. Council. genesis
that A^astasius Bibliothecarius, the Popes Library Keeper, testified, that
these Canons were not any where to be found, in the most Ancient Latin Copies;
withal accusing the Greeks of having forged them. But let them try out this
dispute among themselves: yet whether these Canons were forged by the Greeks;
or whether they have been blotted out of this Council, and smothered by the
Latins; it is still a clear case, that the Cheat is very near of eight hundred
years standing. But in the next example that follows, the business is evidently
clear, without any more ado. For whereas the Greek Code, Numb. ^06. sets before
us in the XXVIII* Canon of the General Council of Chalcedon, a Decree of those
Fathers, by which, conformably to the First Council of Constantinople, they
ordained, that Seeing that the City of Constantinople was the seat of the
Senate, Conc. Chalc. Can. 28. Cod. Graec. Eccl. Vni^. 206. (...).
and of the Empire, and enjoyed the same Privileges with the City of Rome;
that therefore it should in like manner be advanced to the same Height, and
Greatness in Ecclesiastical Affairs, being the second Church in order, after
Rome; and that the Bishop of it should have the Ordaining of Metropolitans, in
the Three Diocesses of Pontus, Asia, and Thrace; which Canon is found both in
Balsamon and Zonaras; and also has the Testimony of the greatest part of the
Ecclesiastical Historians, both Greek, and Latin, that it is a Legitimate
Canon of the Council of Chalcedon; in the Acts of which Council, at this day
also Extant, it is set down at large: yet notwithstanding in the Collection of
Dionysius Exiguus, this Canon appears not at all, no more than as if there had
never been any such thing thought of at Chalcedon. We know very well, that Pope
Leo, and some others of his Successors rejected it: but he that promised us,
that he would make an orderly Digestion of the Canons of the Councils, and
translate them out of the Greek, why, or how, did he, or ought he to omit, this
so remarkable a Canon? If all other Evidences had been lost how should we have
been able so much as to have ghessed, that any such thing was ever treated of
at Chalcedon? Where, or by what means could we have learnt, what the opinion
was of the DCXXX. Fathers, which met here together, touching this Point; which
is the most important one, of all those that are at this day controverted
betwixt us? And it is now eleven hundred years, and upward, since this Omission
was first on foot. And who will pass his word to us, that among so many other
Writings, whether of Councils, or particular Men's Works, whether Greek or
Latin, the like liberty has not been at any time used? Rather by these
Forgeries which have come to our knowledge, who can doubt, but that there have
been many other the like, which we are ignorant of? Thou have gone along
innocently perhaps, reading these Books of the Ancients, and believing, thou
there find the pure sense of Antiquity; and yet thou see here, that from
the beginning of the Sixth Century they have made no scruple of cutting off,
from the most Sacred Books they had, whatsoever was not agreeable to the gust
of the Times. And therefore, though we had no more against them than this, it
were, in my judgment, a sufficient reason to move us to go on here very warily,
and, as they say, With a stiff Rein, through this whole business. In the next
place, there is a very observable Corruption in the Epistle of Adrian I.
Council. VII. Act. 2. Tom. 3. Council.
to the Emperor Constantine, in the time of the Second Council of Nice. For in
the Latin Collection of Anastasius, made about seven hundred and fifty years
since, Adrian is there made to speak very highly, and magnificently of the
supremacy of his See, and he rebukes the Greeks very shrewdly, for having
conferred upon Tarasius, the Patriarch of Constantinople, the Title of
Universal Bishop. And all this while, there is not so much as one word of this
to be found, neither in the Greek Edition of the said VII. Council, nor yet in
the common Latin ones. The Romanists accuse the Greeks of having suppressed
these two Clauses: and the Greeks again accuse the Romanists, of having foisted
them in: neither is it easy to determine, on which side the guilt lies.
However, it is sufficient for me, that wheresoever the fault lies, it evidently
appears hence, that this curtalling and adding to Authors, according to the
interest of the present Times, has now a very long time been in practice
amongst Christians. Which appears also very evidently, in the next piece
following in the same Council, namely, the Epistle of Adrian to Tarasius; which
is quite another thing in the Greek, from what it is in Anastasius his Latin
Translation; and that in Points too of as high importance, as those other
before mentioned. And so in the V. Act likewise, Conc VII. Act. 5. Tom. 3. Conc.
where both in the Greek Text, and also in the Old Latin Translation, Tarasius
is called Universal Bishop; this Title appears not at all in Anastasius his
Translation. In the same Act the Fathers accuse the Iconoclasts, Ib. p. 557.
of having cut out many Leaves out of a certain Book in the Library at
Constantinople; and that at a certain City called Photia, they had burned to
the number of Thirty Volumes; and that besides all this, they had rased the
Annotations out of a certain Book; and all this out of the malice they bore
against Images, which these Books spoke well and favorably of. But yet I do
not see, how we can excuse the Romanists, from being guilty of corrupting
Anastasius, in those passages above noted; nor yet of the injury they do
Eusebius, in the Exposition which they give of some certain words of His, only
to render Him odious; Council VII. Act. 6. advers^ Synod. Iconocl. Sect. 5.
(...). Ibid. p. 625 (...).
objecting against Him, that He says, That the Carnal Form of Jesus Christ was
changed into the nature of the Deity: whereas, all that he says is, That it
was changed by the Deity, dwelling in i^. Whence it appears, how much credit we
are to give to these Men, when they allege here and there diverse strange and
unheard of pieces; and on the contrary, scornfully reject whatever their
Adversaries bring; as, for example, they did a remarkable Passage, alleged by
them out of Epiphanius: which Passage they refused as supposititious; Because
(said they) if Epiphanius had been of the same judgment with the Iconoclasts,
Ib. p. 616. (...),
he would then in his Panarium, have reckoned the Reverencing of Images among
the other Heresies. And may not a man by the same reason as well conclude, that
Epiphanius was a favourer of the Iconoclasts; for otherwise he would have
reckoned their opinion among the rest of the Heresies by him reckoned up? I
shall not here say any thing of their refusing so boldly, and confidently, those
Passages alleged out of The odotui Ancyranus, and others. Since that time you
shall find nothing more ordinary, in the Books both of the Greeks and the
Latins, than the like reproaches, that they mutually cast upon each other, of
having corrupted the Pieces and Evidences wherein their cause was the most
concerned: As for example, at the Council of Florence, Mark Bishop of Ephesus
disputing concerning the Procession of the Holy Ghost, had nothing to answer to
two passages that were alleged against him; the one out of that piece of
Epiphanius, Council Florent. Act. 18. To. 4. Conc. (...).
which is entitled, Ancoratus: the other out of S. Basils Writings, against
Eunomius; but that That piece of Epiphanius had been long since corrupted: and
so likewise of that other passage out of S. Basil, that Some one or other who
favored the opinion of the Latin^s, had accommodated that place to their
sense: withal Ib. Act. 20.
protesting, that in all Constantinople there was but four Copies only of the
said Book that had that passage alleged by the Latins* but that there was in
the said City above a thousand other copies wherein those words were not to be
found at all. Then had the Latins nothing to return upon them more readily,
than that it had been the ordinary practice, not of the West, but of the East;
to corrupt Books* and for proof hereof, they presently cite a passage out of S.
Cyrill, which we have formerly set down: where notwithstanding he speaks not
any thing, save only of the Heretics; that is to say, of the Nestorians, who
were said to have falsified the Epistle of Athanasius to Epictetus; but not a
word there of all the Eastern men, much less of the whole Greek Church. The
Greeks then charged back upon the Latins the story of Pope Zozimus, mentioned
in the preceding Chapter. And thus did they bandy stiffly one against the
other, each of them, as may be easily perceived, having much more appearance of
reason and of truth, in their accusation of their Adversary, than in excusing
or defending themselves. I shall here give you also another the like answer,
made by one Gregorius, a Greek Monk, a strong maintainer of the Union made at
Florence, Apol. Gregor. Mon. Protosyn. contr. Ep. Marc. Ephesians. Tom. 4. Council.
to a passage cited by Mark Bishop of Ephesus, out of a certain Book of John
Damascene; affirming, that The Father only is the Cause, to wit, in the
Trinity: These words (says this Monk) are not found in any of the ancient
Copies: which is an evident argument, that it had been afterward foisted in by
the Greeks, to bring over this Doctor to their opinion. Petavi^^ Not. in
Epiphan.
Petavin^ has in like manner lately quitted his hands of an objection, taken
out of the 68. Canon of the Apostles, against the Fasting on Saturdays, which
is observed in the Roman Church: pretending, that the Greeks have falsified
this Canon. But whosoever desires to see how full of uncertainty the Writings
of this later Antiquity are, let him but read the VIII. Council which is
pretended by the Western Church, to be a general Council, and but compare the
Latin and the Greek Copies together, withal taking especial notice of the
Preface of Anastasius Bibliothecarius; who after he has very sharply reproved
the Ambition of the Greeks, and accused the Canons which they produce of the
Third General Council, as Forged, and supposititious; to make short work with
them, he says in plain terms, that the Greeks have corrupted all the Councils,
except the First. What then have we now left us to build upon, seeing that this
Corruption has prevailed even as far as on the Councils, which are the very
heart of the Ancient Monuments of the Church? Neither yet has the Nicene
Creed, which has been approved and made sacred in so many General Councils,
been able to escape these Alterations. For, not to speak any thing of these
Expressions, which are of little importance; De Coelis, from Heaven; secundum
Scripturas, according to the Scriptures; Deum de Deo, God of God; which
Cardinal Julian Council. Flor. Sess. 12.
affirmed, at the Council of Florence, were to be found in some Creeds, and in
some others were not: it is now the space of some Ages past, since the Eastern
Church Council Flor. Sess. 4 and 5. and Conc VII Act. 7. quo loco videnda annot.
marg.
accused the Western of having added Filioque and the Son, in the Article
touching the Procession of the Holy Ghost; the Western Men as senselesly
charging back upon them again, that they have cut it off: Which is an
Alteration, though it seem but trivial in appearance, that is of great
importance, both to the one side, and to the other, for the decision of that
great Controversy, which has hitherto caused a separation betwixt them;
namely, Whether or no the Holy Ghost proceed from the Son, as well as from the
Father? Which is an evident Argument, that either the one or the other of them,
has, out of a desire to do service to their own Side, laid false hands upon
this Sacred Piece. Now whatever has been attempted in this kind by the
Ancients, may well pass for Innocence, if compared but with what these Later
Times have dared to do; their Passion being of late years so much heated, that
laying all Reason and Honesty aside, they have most miserably and shamelesly
corrupted all sorts of Books, and of Authors. Of those Men that go so
desperately to work, we cannot certainly speak of their baseness as it
deserves: and in my judgment, Laurentius Bochellus, in his Preface to the
Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae, Laur. Bochel Praefat* in Decret* Eccles Gal.
Taceo innumeros Auctores sacros, protanos, veteres, recentiores, ab is^i^ tam
improbi quam in^oelicis ingenii homin^bus miserab (...) decurtatos, vel ipsis
Regibus parcero non assuetis, nedum S. Ludovico, cujus* Pragmaticae (ut vocant)
Sanctionis articulos nonrull^s, maxim ad rei Gallicae statum pertinentes, abs
Bibliotheca illa SS. PP. Constitutionibus Regiis; and statutis Episcoporum
quorundam Synodalibus Reginae urbium Lutetiae nuper impressis expunxerunt. Vae,
iterum vae, ut cum Vidente exclamem, Nebulonibus, qui tales Musarum Castitati
and integritati venerandae non solum insidias struunt, sed and Musas ipsas
impudenter, and nequiter subdolo religionis zelo, nullius frontis homines
devirginant, sucumque istum pietatis nomen ementitum, inter Pias frauds
numerant.
had all the reason in the world to detest these Men, as People of a most
wretched and malicious spirit, who have most miserably gelded and mangled so
infinite a number of Authors, both Sacred and Profane, Ancient and Modern;
their ordinary custom being, to spare no Person, no not Kings, nor even S.
Lewis himself, out of whose Pragmatica Sanctio ( as they call it) they have
blotted out some certain Articles (principally those which concerned the State
of France) out of the Bibliotheca Patrum, the Constitutiones Regiae, and the
Synodical Decrees of certain Bishops, lately Printed at Paris. Woe, woe (to speak
with the Prophet) to these mischievous Knaves, who do not only lay such
treacherous snares for the venerable Chastity and Integrity of the Muses, but
do also most impudently and wickedly d^flour, under a false and counterfeit
pretense of Religion, even the Muses themselves; accounting this juggling to be
but a kind of Pious Fraud. But we do not here write against these Men: it is
sufficient for us to give a hint only of that which is as clear as the Sun;
namely, that these Men have altered, and corrupted, by their Additions in some
places, and gelding of others, very many of the Evidences of the Ancients
Belief. These are they, who in this Period of the XII Epistle of S. Cyprian,
written to the People of Carthage; Cypr. Ep. 12. Extr. Audiant quaeso patienter
Consilium nostrum; expectent regressionem nostram, ut cum ad vos per Dei
misericordiam venerimus, convocati Coepiscopi plures secundum Domini doctrinam,
and Confessorum praesentiam, beatorum Martyrum literas and desideria examinare
possimus. Cypr. Pamel and Gryph. Lugd. An. 1537. l 3. ep. 16. p. 148. Aliae
Editiones, ut Manutii, item Morellii, Par. An. 1568. p. 158. legunt Secundum
vestram quoque sententiam.
I desire that they would but patiently hear our Counsel, etc. that our
Fellow-Bishops being assembled together with us, we may together examine the
Letters, and Desires of the Blessed Martyrs, according to the Doctrine of our
Lord, and in the presence of the Confessors, and secundum vestram quoque
sententiam, and according as you also shall think convenient: have maliciously
left out these words, and secundum vestram quoque sententiam: By which we may
plainly understand, that these Men would not by any means have us know, that
the Faithful People had ever any thing to do with, or had any Vote in the
Affairs of the Church. These be they, who in his Fortieth Epistle, have changed
Cypr. Pamel. Epist. 40. p. 7. Cathedra una super Petrum Domini voce fundata.
Gryph. An 1537. p. 52. Morel. An. 1564. p. 124. habebant, super Petram.
Petram into Petrum, a Rock into S. Peter, and who following the steps of the
ancient Corrupters, have foisted in, in his Tract, De Vnitate Ecclesiae, here
and there, as they thought fit, whole Periods, and Sentences, against the faith
of the best and most uncorrupted Manuscripts: as for example, in this place;
Cypr. Pamel. p. 254. Super illum unum aedificat Ecclesiam suam and illi
pascendas mandat oves suas. Quae verba desiderantur in Edit. Gryph. anno 15^7
and Morel. anno 1564.
He built his Church on him alone (S. Peter) and commanded him to feed his
sheep: and in this, Cypr. Pamel. ibid. Unam Cathedram Constituit: Quae verba
defiderabantur in Editione Gryphii, anno 1537. and Morel anno 1564.
He established one sole Chair: and this other, Cypr. Pamel. ibid. Primatus
Petro datur, ut una Ecclesia Christi, and Cathedra una monstretur; and pastores
sunt omnes; sed unus grex ostenditur, qui ab Apostolis omnibus unanimi
consensione pascatur: quae verba omnia, exceptis illis, (ut una Ecclesia
monstretur) non habebantur in Edit. Gryph. neque Morel ^ti sup.
The Primacy was given to Peter, to show, that there was but one Church, and
one Chair of Christ: and this, Cypr. Pamel p. 254. Qui Cathedram Petri, super
quam sundata est Ecclesia, absunt a Gryph. and Morel. Edit.
Who left the Chair to Peter, on which he had built his Church: Which are
Additions that every one may see what they aim at. These are the Men who cannot
conceal the Pamel. in arg. ep. 75. Cypr. Atque adeo fortassis consultius foret,
nunquam editam fuisse hanc Epistolam; ita ut putent, consulto illam omisisse
Manutium.
regret they have for not having suppressed an Epistle of Firmilianus,
Archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, who was one of the most Eminent Persons
in his Time; which Epistle Manutius had indeed omitted in his Roman Edition of
S. Cyprian; but was afterward put in by Morellius in his, amongst the Epistles
of S. Cyprian, to whom it was written: and all because it informs us, how the
other Bishops in ancient* Times had dealt with the Pope. So that we may hence
observe, of what temper these Men have always been; and may guess how many the
like Pieces have been killed in the Nest. Nic. Faber, in ep. ^d Front. Ducaum
in Opusc p. 216.
Out of the like Shop it is, that poor S. Ambrose is sent abroad, but so ill
accoutred, and in so pitiful a plight, that Nicolas Faber has very much be
wailed the corruption of him. For those Gentlemen, who have published him,
being over ingenuous (as he says) in another man's Works, have changed,
mangled, and transposed diverse things; and particularly they have separated the
Books of the Interpellation of Job, and of David, which were put together in
all other Editions; and to do this, they have, by no very commendable example,
foisted in, and altered diverse things: and they have likewise done as much in
the First Apology of David; and more yet in the Second, where they have rased
out of the eighth Chapter five or six Lines, which are found in all the ancient
Editions of this Father. Ibid. p. 215.
They have also attributed to this Author certain Tracts which are not his; as
that, Of the Forbidden Tree, and that other upon the last Chapter of the
Proverbs. And we may by the way also take notice, That this is the Edition
which they followed, who printed S. Ambrose his Works at Paris, Anno. 1603.
Such hands as these they were that have so villanously curtailed the Book Of
the Lives of the Popes, written by Anastasius, or rather by Damasus; leaving
out, in the very Entry of it, the Authors Epistle Dedicatory, written to S.
Hierome, because it did not so well suit with the present temper of Rome:
leaving out in like manner in the Life of S. Peter, the Conclusion of all,
which I shall here set down, as it is found in all Manuscripts. Hic B.
Clementem Episcopum consecravit, eique cathedram, vel Ecclesiam omnem
disponendam commisit, dicens: Sicut mihi gubernandi tradita est a Domino meo
Jesu Christo potestas ligandi solvendique ita and ego tibi committo, ut ordines
dispositores diversarum causarum, per quos actus Ecclesiasticus profligetur;
and tu minime in curis saeculi deditus reperiaris, sed solummodo ad orationem,
and praedicationem populi vacare stude. Post hanc dispositionem Martyrio
coronatur. Habentur haec ex Euchar. Salm ad Sirmond. cap. 5. Editio Par. anno
1621. p. 664.
He consecrated S. Clement Bishop, and committed to his Charge the Ordering of
his Seat, or of the whole Church, saying, As the Power of Binding and Loosing
was delivered to me by my Lord Jesus Christ, in like manner do I commit to thy
charge the appointing of such Persons, as may determine of such Ecclesiastical
Causes as may arise; that Thou thy self may not be taken up with worldly
cares, but may apply thy whole studies only to Prayer, and Preaching to the
People. After he had thus disposed of his Seat, he was ^rowned with Martyrdom.
This is the Testament that S. Peter made, but it has been suppressed and kept
from us, because in it he has charged his Successors with such Duties as are
quite contrary both to their Humor and Practice. And in another place, in the
same Book, Anastas. in Stephano V. p. 219. Dei ordinante providentia Papa Orbis
consecratus est. Ms. habent, Papa Urbis: ex Salm in Euchar. ad Sirmond. p. 464.
in stead of Papa Vrbis; that is to say, The Pope or Bishop of the City,
namely, of Rome, as all Manuscripts have it; these worshipful Gentlemen will
needs have us read, Papa Orbis, that is, The Bishop of the whole World*
forasmuch as this is now the Style of the Court, and this has now long since
grown to be the Title of the Bishop of Rome. These are the Men, who in Vid
Fulbert. Carnot. Edit. a Villersio, anno 1608. Par. p. 168.
Fulbertus, Bishop of Chatres, where he cites that remarkable Passage of S.
Augustine, This then is a Figure, commanding us to communicate of the Passion
of the Lord, have inserted these words, Figura ergo est, dicet Haereticus; It
is a Figure then, will an Heretic say: cunningly making us believe this to be
the saying of an Heretic, which was indeed the true sense and meaning of S.
Augustine himself, and so cited by Fulbertus. These be the very Men also, who
in S. Gregory have changed Exercitus Sacerdotum, Gregor. M^ep. l. 4. ep. 38.
Omnia, etc. quae praedicta sunt* fiunt. Rex superbiae prope est; and quod dici
nefas est, Sacerdotum ei praepatatur exitus Ms. habent, Sacer^o^um ^i
praepatatur exercitus Ex Tho. James. in Vindic. Gregor loc. 666. quo modo
citatur etiam a Bellarmino hic locus, lib. 3. de Rom P^nt c. 13. Sect. Addit.
and ex^r. c. Sect. pari ratione.
into Exitus Sacerdotum; reading in the 38 Epistle of his fourth Book, thus;
All things, etc. which have been foretold, are accomplished. The King of Pride
(he speaks of Antichrist) is at hand; and which is horrible to be spoken, the
Failing, (or end) of Priests is prepared: Whereas the Manuscripts (and it is so
cited by Bellarmine too) read, an Army of Priests is prepared for him. These be
they who have made Aimonius to say, Aimon. de Gest. Franc. l. 5 c. 8. In qua^
Synodo, (quam Octavam Universalem illuc convenientes appellarunt,) de
Imaginibus adorandis. secundum quod Orthodoxi Doctores antea definierant,
^tatuerunt: legendum, Al^ter quam Orthodoxi definierant; sic enim legit ipse
Baron. Annal. Tom. X. an. 869.
That the Fathers of the pretended VIII General Council had ordained the
Adoration of Images, according as had been before determined by the Orthodox
Doctors: Whereas he wrote quite contrary, That they had ordained otherwise than
had been formerly determined by the Orthodox Doct. as appears plainly, not only
by the Manuscripts, but also by the most ancient Editions of this Author; and
even by Card. Baronius his alleging of this Passage also, in the Tenth Tome of
his Annals, An. Dom. 869. These are they who have quite rased out this
following Passage out of Oecumenius; (...).
For they who defended and favored the Law, introduced also the worshipping of
Angels; and that, because the Law had been given by them. And this Custom
continued long in Phrygia, insomuch that the Council of Laodicea made a Decree,
forbidding to make any Addresses to Angels, or to pray to them: whence also it
is, that we find many Temples among them, erected to Michael the Archangel:
Which Passage David H^eschelius, in his Notes upon the Books of Origin against
Celsus, p. 483. witnesses. That himself had seen and read, in the Manuscripts
of Oecumenius; and yet there is no such thing to be found in any of the Printed
Copies. Who would believe but that the Breviaries and Missals should have
escaped their Razour? Yet, Simon. Vigor l. 1. de la Monarch Ecclesiastique, chapter
1. F. Paolo di Vinet. Apol. contr. Bellarm Sic legitur in B^ev. Clement. VIII.
jussu recognitis, p. 937.
as it has been observed by Persons of eminent both Learning and Honesty,
where it was read, in the Collect on S. Peter's day, heretofore thus, Deus, qui
B. Petro Apostolo tuo, collatis clavibus regni coelestis, animas ligandi, and
solvendi Pontificium tradidisti: that is, O God, who have committed to thy
Apostle S. Peter, by giving him the Keys of the Heavenly Kingdom, the Episcopal
Power of Binding and Loosing Souls: in the later Editions of these Breviaries
and Missals, they have wholly left out the word Animas, Souls; to the end that
People should not think that the Popes Authority extended only to Spiritual
Affairs, and not to Temporal also. And so likewise in the Gospel upon the
Tuesday following the Third Sunday in Lent, they have Printed, Sic legitur in
Bre^iar. Clem. VIII jussu reco^n. p. 369.
Dixit Jesus Discipulis suis; that is, Jesus said to his Disciples, whereas it
was in the old Books, Sic legebatur in Brev. impres. Paris. 1492. per Jo. de
Prato.
Respiciens Jesus in Discipulos, dixit Simoni Petro, si peccaverit in te frater
tuus: Jesus looking back upon his Disciples, said unto Simon Peter, If thy
Brother have offended against thee, etc. cunningly omitting those words
relating to Simon Peter, for fear it might be thought that our Savior Christ
had made S. Peter, that is to say, the Pope, subject to the Tribunal of the
Church, to which he there sends him. And if the Council of Trent would but have
hearkened to Thomas Passio, a Canon of Valencia, they should have blotted out of
the Pontifical all such Passages as make any mention of the Peoples giving
their Suffrage and Consent in the Ordination of the Ministers of the Church;
and, among the rest, that, where the Bishop at the Ordination of a Priest
says, That Pontif. Romans de Ordinat. Presbyt. fol. 38. Neque enim fuit frustra
a Patribus institutum, ut de electione illorum, qui ad regimen altaris
adhibendi sunt, consulatur etiam populus; quia de vita and conservatione
praesentandi, quod nonnunquam ignoratur a pluribus, scitur a paucis; and
necesse est, ut facilius ei quis obedientiam exhibeat ordinato, cui assensum
praebuerit ordinando.
it was not without good reason, that the Fathers had ordained, That the Advice
of the People should be taken touching the Election of those Persons who were
to serve at the Altar; to the end, that having given their Assent to their
Ordination, they might the more readily yield Obedience to those who were so
Ordained. The meaning of this honest Canon was, that to take away all such
Authorities from the Heretics, the best way would be to blot them all out of
the Pontifical, to the end that there might be no trace or footstep of them
left remaining for the future. Pet. Soavez. Hist. Council. Trident. l. 7.
But they have not contented themselves with corrupting only in this manner
some certain Books, out of which perhaps we might have been able to discover
what the Opinion and Sense of the Ancients have been; but they have also wholly
abolished a very great number of others. And for the better understanding
hereof, we are to take notice, that the Emperors of the first Ages took all
possible care for the stifling and abolishing all such Writings as were
declared prejudicial to the True Faith; as namely, the Books of the Arrians,
and Nestorians, and others* which were under a great penalty forbidden to be
read, but were to be wholly suppressed and abolished, by the Appointment of these
ancient Princes. The Church it self also did sometimes call in the Books of
such Persons as had been dead long before, by a common consent of the Catholic
Party, as soon as they perceived any thing in them that was not consonant to
the present Opinion of the Church; Conc. V. Col. VIII.
as it did at the Fifth General Council, in the Business of Theodorus,
Theodoreius, and Ibas, all three Bishops, the one of Mopsuestia, the other of
Cyprus, and the third of Edissa, anathematizing each of their several Writings,
notwithstanding there Persons had been all dead long before: dealing also, even
in the quiet times of the Church, Id. Col. V. and Col. VIII. Anath. XI.
with Origin in the same manner, after he had been now dead about three hundred
years. The Pope then has not failed to imitate, now for the space of many
Ages, both the one and the other of these rigorous Courses, withal increasing
the harshness of them from time to time: in so much that, in case any of the
Opinions of the Ancients has been by chance found at any time to contradict
his, we are not to make any doubt, but that he has very carefully and
diligently suppressed such Pieces, without sparing any, though they were
written perhaps two, three, four, or five hundred years before, more than the
others. As for example: It is at this day disputed, whether or no the Primitive
Church had in their Temples, and worshipped the Images of Christ, and of
Saints. This Controversy has been sometime very eagerly, and with much hea^,
and for a long time together, debated in the Greek Church. That Party which
maintained the Affirmative, bringing the business before the VII Council,
Council. VII. Act. 8. Car. 9.
held at Nicaea, it was there ordained, That it should be unlawful for any Man
to have the Books of the other Party; withal charging every Man to bring what
Books they had of that Party to the Patriarch of Constantinople, to do with
them, as we must conceive, according as had been required by the Legates of Pope
Adrian; Idem Act. 5. (...).
that is, that they should burn all those Books, which had been written against
the Venerable Images: including, no doubt, within the same Condemnation, all
such Writings of the Ancients also, as seemed not to favor Images; as namely,
the Epistle of Eusebius to Constantia; and that of Epiphanius to John of
Jerusalem, and others, which are not now extant, but were, in all probability,
at that time abolished. For, as for the Epistle of Epiphanius, that which we
now have, is only S. Hieromes Translation of it, which happened to be preserved
in the Western parts; where the passion in the behalf of Images was much less
violent, than it was in the Eastern: but the Original Greek of it is no where
to be found. Adrian II. in his Council ordained in like manner, that the
Council held by Photius, against the Church of Rome, should be burnt, together
with his other Books, and all the Books of those of his Party, which had been
written against the Sea of Rome: Cap. 1. Habetur in Council. VIII. Act. 7. Ibid.
Act. 1. in Ep. Adriani.
and he commanded the very same thing also in the VIII. Council, which is
accounted by the Latins for a General Council. It is impossible, but that in
these Fires very many Pieces must needs have perished, which might have been of
good use to us, for the discovering what the opinion of the Ancients was,
whether touching Images, which was the business of the VII. Council; or that
other Controversy, touching the Power of the Pope; which was the principal
Point debated in the Synod held by Photius; some of whose Pieces they, for the
self same reason, do at this day keep at Rome under Lock and Key; which
doubtless they would long ere this have published, had they but made as much
for the Pope, as in all probability they make against him. This rigorous
proceeding against Books came at length to that height, Conc. Later. sub Leone
X. Sess. 10.
as that Leo X. at the Council of Lateran, which brake up An. 1518. decreed,
That no Book should be printed, but what had first been diligently examined, at
Rome, by the Master of the Palace; in other places, by the Bishop, or some
other person deputed by him to the same purpose; and by the Inquisitor, under
this penalty; That all Book sellers offending herein, should forfeit their
Books, which should be presently burnt in public; and should pay a hundred
Ducats, when it should be demanded, toward the Fabric of S. Peter; (a kind of
punishment, this, which we find no examples of in all the Canons of the Ancient
Church,) and should also be suspended from exercising his Function, for the
space of a whole year. This is a General Sentence, and which comprehends as
well the Works of the Fathers, as of any others; as appears plainly by this,
that the Bishop of Malfi, Ibid. Responderunt omnes placere, excepto R. P. D.
Alexio, Episcopo Malfitano, qui dixit, Placere de novis operibus, non autem de
Antiquis.
having given in his opinion, saying, that he concurred with them, in relation
to New Authors, but not to the Old; all the rest of the Fathers voted simply
for all; neither was there any Limitation at all added to this Decree of the
Council. This very Decree has been since strongly confirmed by the Council.
Trid. Sess 5. Decreto de Edit. and usu Sacror. lib.
Council of Trent, which appointed also certain persons to take a Review of the
Books, and Censures, and to make a Report of them to the Company, Idem Sess.
18. Quo facilius ipsa possit varias, and peregrinas doctrinas, tanquam Zizania,
a Christianae Veritatis tritico separare.
To the end that there might be a separation made, betwixt the good Grain of
Christian Verity, and the Darnel of strange Doctrines: That is in plain terms,
that they might blot out of all manner of Books, whatsoever relished not well
with the gust of the Church of Rome. But these Fathers, having not the leisure
themselves to look to this Pious Work, appointed certain Council. Trident. Sess.
25. decreto de Indice lib.
Commissaries, who should give an account of this matter to the Pope: whence
afterward it came to pass, that Pope Pius IV. first, and afterward Sixtus V.
and Clement VIII. published certain Rules, and Indexes, of such Authors and
Books, as they thought fit should be either quite abolished, or purged only;
and have given such strict order, for the printing of Books, as that in those
Countries where this order is observed, there is little danger that ever any
thing should be published, that is either contrary to the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, or which makes any thing for their Adversaries. All these
Instructions, which are too long to be inserted here, may be seen at the end of
the Council of Trent, where they are usually set down at large. And in order to
these Rules, they have since put forth their Indices Expurgatorii, (as they
call them;) namely, that of the Low Countries, and of Spain, and other places;
where these Gallants come with their Razor in their hand, and sit in judgment
upon all manner of Books, rasing out, and altering, as they please, Periods,
Chapters, and whole Treatises also often times, and that too in the Works of
those Men, who for the most part were born, and bred up, and dyed also in the
Communion of their own Church. If the Church for eight or nine hundred years
since, had so sharp Razors as these men now have; it is then a vain thing for
us, to search any higher, what the judgment of the Primitive Christians was,
touching any particular Point: for, whatsoever it was, it could not have
escaped the hands of such Masters. And if the Ancient Church had not heretofore
any such Institution as this; why then do we, who pretend to be such Observers
of Antiquity, practice these Novelties? I know very well, that these men make
profession of reforming only the Writings of the Moderns: but who sees not,
that this is but a Cloak which they throw over themselves; lest they should be
accused as guilty of the same cruelty that Jupiter is among the Poets; for
having behaved himself so insolently against his own Father? Those Pieces which
they raze so exactly in the Books of the Moderns, are the cause of the greater
mischief to themselves, when they are found in the Writings of the Ancients, as
sometimes they are. For what a senseless thing is it, to leave them in, where
they hurt most; and to raze them out, where they do little hurt? The
Inquisition at Madrid puts out Ind. (...) gat. Sandoval. in Athanas. Ind. 1.
these words in the Index of Athanasius, Adorari solius Dei est; that is,
Athanas. Orat 3. ^^^tra Arian. (...).
God alone is to be worshipped: and yet notwithstanding, these words are still
expressly found in the Text of Athanasius. The same Father says, Id. in Frag.
and Fest. (...).
That there were some other Books, (besides those which he had before set
down,) which, in truth, were not of the Canon; and which the Fathers had
ordained, should be read to those, who were newly come into the Christian
Communion, and desired to be instructed in the word of Piety: reckoning in this
number, the Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesi^sticus, Judith, Esther, Tobit, and some
other. Nevertheless these very Cens^rs put out, in the Index of Athanasius his
Works, those words which affirm, that the said Books are not at all Canonical.
In the Index of St. Augustine they put out these w^rds, Christ h^th given the
sign of his Body: which yet are evidently to be seen in the Text of this
Father, in his Book against Adimantus, Id. in August.
Chap. 12. They put out in like manner, these words: Augustine accounted the
Eucharist necessary to be administered to Infants: which opinion of S. Augustine
is very frequently found expressed, either in these very words, or the like,
throughout* his Works, as we shall see hereafter. They likewise put out these
words; Infr. l. 1. c. 8. Ind. Exp. Sandov. in August. August. contr. Maxim.
lib. Nonne si templum alicui Sancto Angelo excellentissimo de lignis and
lapidibus faceremus, ana thematizemur a veritate Christi, and ab Ecclesia Dei,
etc.
We ought not to build. Temples to Angels: and yet the very Text of S.
Augustine says, If we should erect a Temple of Wood, or of Stone, to any of
the holy Angels, should we not be Anathematized? And this is the practice of
the Censors, both in the Low Countries, and in Spain, in many other
particulars, which we shall not here set down. Now if thou cuttest off such
Sentences as these, out of the Indexes of these Holy Fathers; why do thou not
as well raze them out of the Text also? Or if thou leavest them in the one, why
do thou blot them out in the other? What can the meaning be of so strange a
way of proceeding in so Wise Men? But yet, who sees not the reason of it? For,
these Sentences, which these Men ^hus boldly and rudely correct, are as
displeasing to them in the Ancients, as in the Moderns; and where they may
safely do it, they expunge them, as well out of the one, as out of the other.
But this they dare not do openly, for fear of giving too much scandal to the
World, which they are unwilling to do: because if they should deal so
uncivilly, and make so bold with Antiquity, they would quite take off that
respect, which all people bear toward it; which being a matter which very
nearly concerns themselves, it is a special point of wisdom in them, carefully
to keep up the Reputation of it. But in lashing the poor Moderns, who have made
Indexes to all the Works of the Fathers, they save their Credit, and do their
business too; ruining the opinions which they hate, by chastising the one; and
yet withal preserving the venerable Esteem of Antiquity, which they cannot
subsist without, by sparing the other. And yet I cannot see, why Bertram a
Priest, who lived in the time of the Emperor Charles the Bold, which is about
some seven hundred and fifty years since, should be reckoned among the Moderns:
and yet his Book, De Corpore and Sanguine Domini, is absolutely, and without
any limitation, forbidden to be read, in the Index of the Council of Trent, in
the Letter B^ among the Authorsof the second Classis, as they call them. But
yet the Censors of the Low Countries have dealt with him more gently, shall I
say, or rather more cruelly; not taking his life away quite, only maiming him
in the s^veral parts of his Body, and leaving him in the like sad condition
with Deiphobus in the Poet: -- Lacerum crudeliter ora,
Ora, manusque ambas, populataque tempora, raptis
Auribus, and truncas inbonesto vulnere nares.
For they have cut you off, with one single dash of their Pen, two long
Passages, consisting each of them of twenty eight, or thirty Lines a piece, and
which are large enough to make up a very considerable part of a small Treatise;
such as his is. And that the Reader may the better judge of the business, I
shall here set down one of these Passages entire as it is. Bertram. Presbyt.
lib. De Corp. and Sangu. Dom. Considerandum quoque, quod in pane illo non solum
corpus Christi, verum etiam corpus in eum credentis populi figuretur: unde
multis frumenti granis conficitur, quia corpus populi credentis multis per
verbum Christi fidelibus augmentatur, (al. coagmentatur) Qua de re ficut
mysterio panis ille Christi corpus acc^pitur; sic etiam in mysterio membra
populi credentis in Christum intimantur. Et sicut non corporaliter, sed
spititualiter panis ille credentium corpus dicitur: sic quoque Christi corpus
non corporaliter, sed spiritualiter necesse est intelligatur. Sic and in vino,
qui sanguis Christi dicitur, aqua misceri jubetur, nec unum sine altero
permittitur offerri, quia nec populus sine Christo, nec Christus sine populo,
sicut nec caput sine corpore, vel corpus sine capite valet existere. Igitur si
vinum illud, sanctificatum per ministrorum officium, in Christi sarguinem
corporaliter convertitur, aqua quoque, quae pariter admixta est, in sanguinem
populi credentis necesse est corporaliter convertatur. Ubi namque una
sanctificatio est, una consequenter operatio; and ubi par ratio, par quoque
consequitur mysterium. At videmus in aqua secundum corpus nihil esse conversum,
consequenter ergo and in vino nihil corporaliter ostensum. Accipitur
spiritualiter, quicquid in aqua de populi corpore significatur; accipiatur ergo
necesse est spiritualiter quicquid in vino de Christi sanguine intimatur. I^em,
quae a se differunt, idem non sunt: Corpus Christi, quod mortuum est, and
resurrexit, and immortale factum jam non moritur, and mors illi ultra non
dominabitur, aeternum est, jam non passibile. Hoc autem, q^od in Ecclesia
celebratur, temporale est, non aeternum; corruptibile est, non incorruptibile,
in via est, non in patria, Differunt igitur a se, quapropter non sunt idem.
Quod si non sunt idem, quomodo verum Corpus Christi dicitur, and verus sanguis?
Si enim Corpus Christi est, and hoc dicitur vere quia Corpus Christi in
veritate Corpus Christi est, and si in veritate Corpus Christi, incorruptibile
est, and impassibile, ac per hoc aeternum. Hoc igitur Corpus Christi quod
agitur in Ecclesia necesse est ut incorruptibile sit, and aeternum. Sed negari
non potest corrumpi, quod per parts commutatum dispertitur ad sumendum, and
dentibus commolitum in corpus trajicitur.
We ought further to consider ( says Bertram, speaking of the Holy Eucharist,)
that in this Bread is represented not only the Body of Christ, but the Body of
the People also, that believe in him. And hence it is that it is made up of
many several grains of wheat, because that the whole Body of believing People
is united together, and made into one, by the word of Christ. And therefore as
it is by a Mystery, that we receive this Bread, for the Body of Christ: in like
manner it is by a Mystery also, that the Members of the People believing in
Christ, are here figured out unto us. And as this Bread is called the Body of
Believers, not corporally, but spiritu^lly; so is the Body of Christ also
necessarily to be understood to be represented here, not corporally, but
spiritually. In like manner is it in the Wine, which is called the Blood of
Christ; and with which it is ordained, that water be mixed; it being forbidden
to offer the one without the other: because that as the Head cannot subsist
without the Body, nor the Body without the Head; in like manner neither can the
People be without Christ, nor Christ without the People: so that in this
Sacrament, the Water represents the Image of the People. If then the Wine,
after it is consecrated by the Office of Ministers, be corporally changed into
the Blood of Christ, of necessity then must the Water also be changed
corporally into the Body of the Believing people: because that where there is
but one only, and the same Sanctification, there can be but one and the same
Operation: and where the Reason is equal, the Mystery also that fellows it is
equal. But now as for the Water, we see that there is no such corporal change
wrought in it: it therefore follows, that neither in the Wine is there any
corporal Transmutation. Whatsoever then of the Body of the People is signified
unto us, by the Water, is taken spiritually: it follows therefore
necessarily, that we must, in like manner take spiritually, whatsoever the Wine
represents unto us, of the Blood of Christ. Again, those things, which differ
among themselves, are not the same: Now the Body of Christ which died, and was
raised up to life again, now dies no more, being become immortal; and Death
having no more power over it, it is eternal, and free from further suffering.
But this, which is Consecrated in the Church, is Temporal, not Eternal;
corruptible, not free from corruption; in its journey, and not in its native
country. These two things therefore are different one from the other, and
consequently cannot be one and the same thing. And if they be not one and the
same thing, how can any man say, that this is the Real Body and Real Blood of
Christ? For if it be the Body of Christ; and if it may be truly said, that this
Body of Christ is really and truly the Body of Christ: the Real Body of Christ
being Incorruptible and Impassible, and therefore Eternal; consequently this
Body of Christ, which is consecrate^ in the Church, must of necessity also be
both Incorruptible and Eternal. But it cannot be denied, but that it does
corrupt; seeing it is cut into small pieces, and distributed ( to the
Communicants,) who bruise it very small with their teeth, Index Expurg. Belq.
in Bertram. Non male aut inconsulte omittantur igitur omnia haec a fine
p^ginae: Considera^dum quoque quod in pane illo, etc. Usque ad illud mul^o
post, Sed aliud est quod ex^eri^^ geritur, etc. in cad. page Et seq. page omnia
illa sequentia, Item quae idem sunt, una definitione comprehenduntur, etc.
Usque ad illud, Hoc namque quod agitur in via, spiritualiter, etc. Seq. page
and so take it down into their Body. Thus Bertram. His other passage, which is
longer yet than this, is of the same Nature; but I shall not here set it down,
to avoid prolixity. Now these Gentlemen finding, that the language of both
these passages did very ill accord with the business of Transubstantiation,
they thought it the best way to cut them clear out: for fear, lest coming to
the Peoples knowledge, they might imagine, that there had been Sacramentarians
in the Church, ever since the time of Charles the Bald.

Thou then whoever thou art, that think thy self bound to search in the
Writings of the Fathers for the Doctrine of thy Salvation, learn from this
Artifice of theirs, and those many other Cheats which we, to their great grief,
are now searching into, what an extreme desire they have to keep from us the
Opinion, and sense of the Ancients in all those Particulars, where they never
so little contradict their own Doctrine: and remembering withal, how they have
had, and still have every day, such opportunities of doing what they please in
this kind, thou can not doubt, but that they have struck deep enough, where
there was cause: which blows of theirs, together with the Alterations and
Changes, that Time, the Malice of Heretics, the innocent and pious Fraud of
the Primitive Church, and the Passion of the later Christians have long since
produced, have rendered the Writings, and Venerable Monuments of Antiquity, so
imbroiled and perplexed, that it will be a very hard matter for any man to make
any clear and perfect discovery of those things, which so many several Artists
have endeavored to conceal from U^.

CHAP. V.
Reason V. That the Writings of the Fathers are hard to be understood, by
reason of the Languages and Idioms they wrote in, the Manner of their Writing,
which is for the most part encumbered with Figures, and Rhetorical Flourishes,
and nice Logical Subtilties, and the like; and also by reason of the Terms,
which they for the most part used in a far different sense from what they now
bear.

IF any Man, either by the light of his own proper Wit, or by the assistance
and direction of some able and faithful hand, shall at length be able thereby,
as by the help of the Clew the Poets speak of, to wind himself happily out of
these two Labyrinths, and to find any Pieces of the Ancients, that are not
only Legitimate, but also entire, and incorrupt; certainly that Man has very
good reason to rejoice at his own good fortune, and to give God hearty thanks
for it. For I must needs confess, that it is no very small satisfaction to a
Man, to have the opportunity of conversing with those Illustrious Persons of
the Ages past, and to learn of them what their Opinions were, and to compare
our own with theirs;

-- Versasque audire, and reddere voces.
But yet this I dare confidently pronounce, That if he would know out of them
what their Sense and Opinion has: truly been, touching the Differences now in
agitation, he will find, that he is now but at the very beginning and entrance
of his Business; and that there remain behind many more Difficulties to be
overcome in his passage, than he has yet grappled with. One of the two
disagreeing Parties, refusing the Scriptures for the Judge of Controversies, by
reason of its Obscurity, lays this for a Ground (and indeed rationally enough)
that no obscure Books are proper for the decision of Controversies. Now I do
not know, why a Man may not, with as much reason, say of the most of the
Writings of the Fathers, as S. Hier. ep 139. ad Cypr. Plerumque nimium disertis
accidere solet ut major sit intelligentiae d^fficultas in eorum
explanationibus, quam in iis quae explanare conantur.
Hierome did of some certain Expositors of some parts of the Scrip^ures, That
it was more trouble to understand Them well than those very things which they
took upon them to expound: that is to say, That it is much harder rightly to
understand Them, than the Scriptures themselves. For, that a Man may be able
fully to understand them, it is in the first place necessary, that he have
perfect and exact skill in those Languages wh^rein they wrote; that is to say,
in the Greek, and Latin, which are the Tongues that most of them wrote in. For,
as for those of the Fathers who have written either in Syriack, or Arabic, or
Ethiopian, or the like Vulgar Tongues of their own; whose Writings perhaps
would be as useful to us, in the discovery of the Opinions of the Ancient
Church, as any others; we have not, that I know of, any of these Monuments now
publicly to be seen abroad, but only some Translations of them, in Greek, or
in Latin: as namely, the Works of S. Ephraem (if at least those Books which go
abroad under his Name, be truly his:) and the Comment. de Paradiso of Moses
Bar-Cephas, translated into Latin by Masius; and perhaps some few other the
like. I know very well, that for the most part Men trust to the Translations of
the Fathers, whether they be in Latin, or in the Vulgar Languages; and that the
World is now come to that pass, that People will not stick to take upon them to
judge of the Greek Fathers, without having (at least, that can be perceived out
of their Writings) any competent knowledge of the Greek Tongue: Bellarmine.
which cannot in my judgment, be accounted any thing less than a point of the
highest boldness and unadvisedness that can be. The thing is clear enough of it
self, that to be able to reach the Conceptions and Sense of a Man, especially
in Matters of Importance, it is most necessary that we understand the Language
he delivers himself in, his Terms, and the manner of their coherence; there
being in every particular Language a certain peculiar Force, and Power of
Significancy, which can very hardly be so preserved in a Translation, but that
it will lose in the passage something of its natural Luster and Vigor, how
knowing, able, and faithful soever the Interpreter be. But this, which is very
useful indeed in all other cases, is most necessary in this particular Business
we have now in hand; by reason of the little care and fidelity that we find in
the Translations of the greatest part of the Interpreters of the Fathers,
whether Ancient, or Modern. We have before seen how Ruffinus, and even S.
Hierome himself too, have laid about them, in this particular; and, long after
them, Anastasius also, in his Translation of the VII Council; who
notwithstanding, in his Preface to the VIII, gives us this for a most
Infallible Rule; namely, That whatsoever is found in his Translation, is True,
and Legitimate; and on the contrary, whatsoever the Greeks have said, either
more or less, is suppositious and forged. If all the other Interpreters of the
Councils and Fathers, had been Men of the same Temper that Anastasius here
would have us believe him to have been of, we might then indeed very well lay
by the Greek Text, and content our selves with such dull Latin as he has
furnished us with in his Translation: But the mischief of it is, that all the
World does not believe this Testimony which he has given of himself; and that,
although he has such a special gift in valuing his own Translation above the
Original, yet this will hardly ever be allowed to the rest of Translators,
especially the Modern; who having been Men that have been for the most part
carried away with their affection to their own Party, he must needs be a very
weak Man, that should trust to them in this case, and rely upon what they say.
Whosoever has yet a mind to be further satisfied how far these Men's
Translations are to be trusted, let him but take the pains to compare the Greek
Preface to Origen's Books against Celsus, with the Latin Translation of
Christophorus Persona; and, if he please, he may do well to run over some part
of the Books themselves: and if he has a mind to sacrifice himself to the
Laughter of the Protestants, let him but produce them, upon the honest word of
this trusty Trucheman, this Passage out of the Fifth Book, for the Invocation
of Angels; We ought to send up our Vows, and all our Prayers, and Thanksgivings
to God, Origin, Christoph Pers^na, lib. 5. contr. Celsum Vota namque and preces
omnes, and gratiarum insuper actiones ad Deum, sunt per Angelum transmittenda.
qui per Pontificem, and vivens verbum, and Deum, Angelis praefectus est
caeteris. Orig. contr. Cells. l 5 p. 239. (...).
by the Angel, who has been set over the rest, by him ^ho is the Bishop, the
Living Word, and God: In which words he seems to intimate, That Jesus Christ
has appointed some one of the Angels to hear our Prayers; and, that by him we
ought to present them to God. Whereas Origin says the clean contrary; namely,
That we ought to send up to God, who is above all things, every of our Demands,
Prayers, and Requests, by the great High Priest, the Living Word, and God, who
is above all the Angels. You have a sufficient discovery also of the Affections
of Translators, who many times make their Authors speak more than they meant,
in Jo. Christophorson's Translation of the Ecclesiastical Historians; as
likewise in most of the Translators of these later Times, excepting only some
very few of the more moderate sort. But we shall not need to insist any longer
on this Particular, which has been sufficiently proved already, by the several
Parties of both Sides, discovering the falseness of their Adversaries
Translations; as every Man must needs know, that is any whit conversant in
these kind of Writings; where you shall meet with nothing more frequent, than
these mutual Reprehensions of each other. Now in the midst of such distraction,
and contrariety of Judgments, how can a Man possibly assure himself, that he
has the true sense and meaning of the Fathers, unless he hear them speak in
their own Language, and have it from their own mouth? I shall here lay down
then for a most sure Ground, and undeniable Maxim, That to be able rightly to
apprehend the Judgment and Sense of the Fathers, it is necessary that we first
understand the Language they write in; and that too, not slightly, and
superficially; but exactly, and fully: there being in all Languages certain
peculiar Terms, and Idioms, familiarly used by the L^arned, which no Man shall
ever be able to understand thoroughly and clearly, that has but a superficial
knowledge of the said Languages, and has not dived even to the depth and very
bottom of them. If you would see how necessary the knowledge of an Authors
Language is, and how prejud^cial the want of it; do but turn to that Passage of
Theodoret, Theod. Dial. 2.
where speaking of the Eucharist, he says thus; (...). The Protestants, and
all their Adv^r^^ries (before Cardinal Perron) interpret this place thus; The
Mystical Symbols, after Consecration, do not leave their proper Nature: for
they continue in their first Substance, Figure, and Form. Now what can be said
more expressly against Transubstantiation? But yet the abovenamed Cardinal,
having it seems consulted those old Friends of his among the Grammarians, who
had heretofore taught him that (...) signified to smoke or evaporate, Perron.
Repl p. ^09. Answ. to the 2 Instit. where he takes this word to signify, To
sum; whereas the true signification is, To pollute, on defile.
will needs persuade us, that this Passage is to be interpreted otherwise;
namely, That the Signs in the Eucharist continue in the figure and form of
their first Substance: which would be tacitly and indirectly to allow
Transubstantiation. Now it is true, that this Exposition is contrary not only
to the Design and purpose of the Author, but to the usual way of speaking also
among the Greeks. But, in case you had not exact skill in the Language, how
should you be able to judge of this Interpretation? especially seeing it put
upon you with so much confidence, and unparalled boldness, according to the
ordinary custom of this Doctor, who never affirms or recommends any thing to us
more confidently, than when it is most doubtful and uncertain. It is out of the
same rare and unheard of Grammar, that the said Cardinal has elsewhere taken
upon him to give us that notable Corr^ction of his, of the Inscription of an
Epistle written by the Emperor Constantine, to Miltia^es Bishop of Rome,
Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5. Hist. Eccl. (...). Perron in his Repl. says, we ought to
read it thus; (...). But it seems more probable that we should read, (...), and
to Merocles, wh^ was at that time Bishop of Millane, as is observed by Optatus,
lib. 1. page 334.
set down in the Tenth Bo^k of Eusebius his Ecclesiastical History, reading it
thus: Constantinus Augustus, to Miltiades Bishop of the Romans (wishes long
time) or long opportunity:) whereas all Copies, both Manuscript, and Printed,
have it, Constantinus Augustus, to Miltiades Bishop of the Romans, and to Mark:
fearing, I suppose, lest some might accuse the Emperor of not understanding
himself aright, in making this Mark here Companion to the Pope, who in all
things ought to march without a Copesmate. I should never have done, if I
should but go about to set down all those other Passages, in which he has used
the same Arts, in wresting the words of the Ancients to a wrong sense, which
otherwise would seem to make for the Protestants: whence it may plainly appear,
how necessary the knowledge of the Languages is, for the right understanding of
the Sense of the Fathers. So that in my judgment, the Result of all this will
clearly be, that as we have before said, it is a difficult thing to come to the
right understanding of them. For, who knows not what pains it will cost a Man
to attain to a perfect knowledge of these two Tongues? what Parts are
necessarily required in this case? A happy Memory, a lively Conceit, good
bringing up, continual pains-taking, much and diligent Reading, and the like;
all which things do very rarely meet in any one Person. But yet the truth of
this Assertion of ours is clearly proved also, by the continual Debates and
Disputes of those, who though they have referred the Judgment of their
Differences to the Decision of the Fathers, ^o yet no^^^thstanding still
implead each other at their B^^, and cannot possibly be brought to any
Agreement (...). Many of the Writers of the Church of R^me obj^ct against the
Protestants, as an Argument of the obscu^^y of the Scriptures, the
Controversies that are be^^^x^ themselves and the Lutherans, against the
Calvinists touching the Eucharist; and of the Calvinists against the Lutherans,
and the Arminians, in the Point of Predestina^ion. If this Argument of theirs
be of any force at all, who sees not that it clearly proves that which we
maintain in this particular? For, the Greeks and the Latius, who both of them
make profession of submitting themselves to the Authority of the Fathers, and
to plead all their Causes before them, have not as yet been able to come to any
Agreement. Do but observe the Passages betwixt these two, at the Council of
Florence, Conc. Flor. Sess. 5. de Decreto qu^dam Council. Ephesians. Act. 6. Sess. 11,
and 12.
where the strongest and ablest Champions on both Sides were brought into the
Lists, how they wrangled out whole Sessions, about the Exposition of a certain
short Passage in the Council at Ephesus; and some other the like out of
Epiphanius Council. Flor. Sess. 18, 20, and 21.
, S. Basil Council. Flor. Sess. 21.
, and others: and how, after all their Disputes, how clearly and powerfully
soever each Party made their vaunts the Business was carried on their Side,
they have yet left us the Sense of the Fathers much more dark and obscure than
it was before; their Contestations having but rendered the Business much more
perplexed; each Side having indeed very much appearance of Reason, in what they
urge against their Adversaries; but very little solidity in what they have said
severally for themselves. Certainly the Latins, who are thought to have had the
better Cause of the two, Ibid. loc. Basil. (...)
and who, upon a certain Passage of S. Basil, alleged by themselves, triumphed
as if they had got the day, baffling and affronting the Greeks in a very
disdainful manner, and giving them very harsh Language also, used
notwithstanding such an odd kind of Logic to persuade the receiving of the
Exposition which they gave, as that even at this day, Basil. in Orat. in Sacr.
Baptis. p. 511. Tom. 1. Edit. Paris apud Michael. Sonnium anno 1618.
in the last Edition of S. Basil's Works, Printed at Paris, and Revised by
Fronto Ducaeus, the Latin Translation follows, in this Particular, not their
Exposition, but that of the Greek Schismatics. And some of the Protestants
having also had the same success in some particular Points controverted betwixt
themselves, it lies open to every Man's observation, how much obscurity there is
found in the Passages cited by both Sides. Tertul. contr. Marc. l. 4. c. 40.
Acceptum panem, and distributum discipulis, corpus suum illum fecit, Hoc est
corpus meum, dicendo, id est, Figura Corporis mei. Aug. contr. Adimant. c 12
Non enim Dominus dubitavit dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret
corporis sui.
If Tertullian was of the Opinion of the Church of Rome, in the Point
concerning the Eucharist, what could he have uttered more dark and obscure,
than this Passage is of his, in his Fourth Book against Marcion: Christ having
taken Bread, and distributed it to his Disciples, made it his Body, in saying,
This is my Body; that is, to say, The Figure of my Body? If S. Augustine held
Transubstantiation, what can the meaning be of these words of his; The Lord
stuck not to say, This is my Body, when he delivered only the Sign of his
Body? If these Passages, and an infinite number of the like, do really and
truly mean that which Cardinal Perron pretends they do, then was there never
any thing of obscurity either in the Riddles of the Theban Sphinx, or in the
Oracles of the Sibyls. If you look on the other side, you shall meet with some
other Passages in the Fathers, which seem to speak pointblank against the
Protestants: as for example; where they say expressly, That the Bread changes
its nature; and, That, by the Almighty Power of God, it becomes the Flesh of
the Word: and the like. And so in all the Controversies betwixt them, they
produce such Passages as these, both on the one side, and on the other: some
whereof seem to be irreconcilable to the Sense of the Church of Rome, and some
other, to the Sense of their Adversaries. If Cardinal Perron, and those other
subsime Wits of both Parties, can have the confidence to affirm, that they find
no difficulty at all in these Particulars, we must needs think, that either
they speak this but out of a Bravado, setting a good face upon a bad matter; or
else, that both the Wits; and Eyesight of all the rest of the World are
marvelous dull, and feeble, in finding nothing but Darkness there, where these
Men see nothing but Light. But yet for all this, if there be not obscurity in
these Writings of the Fathers, and that very much too; how comes it to pass
that even these very Men find themselves ever and anon so tormented to find out
the meaning of them? How comes it to pass, that they are fain to use so many
words, and make trial of so many tricks, and devices for the clearing of them?
Whence proceeds it, that so often, for fear of not being able to satisfy their
Readers, they are forced to cry down either the Authors, or the Pieces, out of
which their Adversaries produce their Testimonies? What strange Sentences, and
Passages of Authors are those, that require more time, and trouble in the
clearing Them, than in deciding the Controversy it self; and which multiply
Differences, rather than determine them; oftentimes serving as a Covert, and
retreating-place to both Parties? The sense, and meaning of these words is
debated; This is my Body. For the explaining of them, there is brought this
Passage, out of Tertullian; and that other, out of S. Augustine. Now I would
have any Man speak in his conscience, what he thinks; whether or not these
words are not as clear, or clearer, than those Passages which they allege out
of these Fathers, as they are explained by the different Parties. I desire,
Reader, no other judge than thy self, whosoever thou art; only provided, that
thou will but vouchsafe to read, and examine that which is now said upon these
places, and withal consider the strange Turnings and Windings-about, that they
make us take, to bring us to the right sense and meaning of them. In a word, if
the most able Men that are, did not find themselves extremely puzzled, and
perplexed, in distinguishing the Legitimate Writings of the Fathers from the
Spurious; it is not likely, that the Censors of the Low Countries, who are all
choice, picked Men, should be forced to show us so ill an Example of finding a
way to help our selves, Ind. Exp. Belg. in Bertr. Plurimos in C^tholicis
veteribus errores excogitato commento persaepe negamus, and commodum iis sensum
affingimus, dum opponuntur In disputationibus, aut in confilctibus cum
adversariis.
when the Authority of the Ancients is strongly pressed against us by our
Adversaries, as they do, in excusing the expressions of the Fathers sometimes,
by some handsoml^ contrived invention, and imputting some convenient probable
sense upon them. That which has been said, I am confident is sufficient to
convince any reasonable Man of the Truth of this Assertion of ours; namely,
that it is a very hard matter to understand the sense and opinions of the
Fathers by their Books. But, that we may leave no doubt behind us. let us
briefly consider some few of the principal Causes of this Difficulty. Certainly
the Fathers, having been Wise Men, all of them both spoke, and wrote, to be
understood; insomuch that, having both the will, and the ability to do it, it
seems very strange, that they should not be able to attain to the end they
aimed at. But we must here call to mind, what we have said before; namely, that
these Controversies of ours being not in their time yet sprung up; they had no
occasion, neither was it any of their design, either to speak, or write any
thing of them. For these Sages stirred up as few doubts, in matters of
Religion, as they could: Besides that their times furnished them with
sufficient matter of Disputes, in Points which were then in agitation; without
so much as thinking of Ours, now on foot. And they have very clearly delivered
their sense, in all those Controversi^s, which they have handled. Even
Tertullian himself, who is the most obscure amongst them all, has
notwithstanding delivered himself so clearly, in the debates betwixt him and
Marcion, and others, that there is no place left for a Man to doubt, what his
opinions were, in the points debated of. I am therefore fully persuaded, that
if they had lived in these times, or that the present Controversies had been
agitated in their times, they would have delivered their judgment upon them
very plainly, and expressly. But seeing they have not touched upon them, but
only by the By; and as they come accidentally into their way, rather than upon
any set purpose; we are not to think it strange, if we find them not to have
spoken out, and given their sense clearly, as to these Debates of ours. For as
any Man may easily observe in the ordinary course of things, those things that
happen without design, are never clear; and full, but ambiguous, and doubtful;
and oftentimes also contrary perhaps, either to the sense, or the affection of
the person from whom they proceeded. Thus before the springing up of that
pernicious doctrine of Arius, who so much troubled the Ancient Church; there
wa^ very little said, of the Eternity of the Divine Nature of Jesus Christ: or
if the Fathers said any thing at all of it, it was only in passage, and by the
By, and not by design: and hence it is also, that what they have delivered in
this particular, is as obscure, and hard to be rightly understood, as those
other Passages of theirs, that relate to our present Controversies. Do but
explain the meaning a little, if you can, of this passage of Justin Martyr, in
his Treatise against Tryphon; where he says, that, Just. contr Tryph. p. ^83.
and 356. Edit. Paris. 1615.
The God which appeared to Moses, and to the Patriar^hs, was the Son, and not
the Father: for as much as the Father is not capable of Local Motion, neither
can properly be said to ascend, or descend: and, that Ibid. p. 357. (...). etc.
No Man ever saw the Father but only heard his Son, and his Angel; who is also
God, by the will of the Father. Which words of his cannot be very well
explained, without allowing a difference of Nature, in the Father and the Son;
which were to establish Arianisme. Do but observe, what Tertullian also ^ays,
in this particular; namely, Tertul. lib. 2. co^tr. Marc. c. 27. Quem ex
semetipso proferendo, Filium fecit.
That the Father, bringing him forth out of himself, made his Son: and, Id. l.
cont. Prax. cap. 9. and passim in eo opere. Pater tota Substantia est, Filius
vero derivatio torius, and portio.
That the Father is the Whole Substance, and the Son, a Portion, and a
Derivation of that Whole: and many other the like Passages, which you meet with
here and there in that excellent Piece of his, written against Praxeas, which
will hardly be reconciled to any good construction. In like manner does
Dionysius Alexandrinus call the Son, Dion. Alex. apud Athanas. ep. de fide
Dion. Alex. Vide and Basil ep. 51. T. 2. p. 802. (...). Athan ep. de Syn. Arim.
and Seleu. Vide and Hilar. de Syn. Octoginta Episcopi olim respu erunt (...).
The Work or Workmanship of the Father: which are the very Terms that were so
much quarrelled at in Arius. And the LXXX. Fathers, who condemned Paulus
Samosatenus, Bishop of Antioch, said expressly, That the Son is not of the same
essence with the Father: that is to say, they in express Terms denied the
(...), or Consubstantiality of the Son, which was afterward established in the
Council of Nice. It were no very hard matter to make good this Observation, in
reference to all the other Disputes that have arisen in the Church, against
Macedonius, Pelagius, Nestorius, Eutyches, and the Monothelites; to wit, that
the Fathers have spoken very obscurely of these matters, before the
Controversies were started; as persons that spoke accidentally only thereof,
and not of set purpose. It is now a good while since, that S. Hier. Apol. 2.
contr Ruff. Vel certe antequam in Alexandria, quasi Daemonium meridianum Arius
nasceretur, innocenter quaedam, and minus caute locuti sunt, and quae non
possint perversorum hominum calumniam declinare.
Hierome said, That before that Arius, that Impudent Devil, appeared in the
World, the Fathers had delivered many things Innocently, and without taking so
much heed to their words, as they might have done; and indeed some things, that
can hardly escape the Cavils of wrangling spirits. And this has also been
observed by some of the most learned among the Moderns; as namely, Cardinal
Perron. Repl. Obs. 4. c. 5.
Perron, and the Jesuit Dion Petau. in Panar, Epiph. ^d Haer. 69. quae est
Arian. Quod idem plerisque veterum Patrum, cum in hoc negotio, (Trinitatis,)
tum in aliis fidei Christianae capitibus, usu^ venit, ut ante erroru^ atque
haerese^n quibus ea sigilatim oppugnabantur originem nondu^ satis illustrata
and patefacta rei veritate, quaedam scripris suis asperserint, quae cum
Orthodoxae fidei regula minime consentiant.
Petavius, a Man highly esteemed by those of his own Party; who writing upon
Epiphanius, and endeavoring to clear Lucian the Martyr from the suspicion of
being an Arrian, and a Samosatenian; says, * That in this Question touching
the Trinity, as also in diverse others, it has so fallen out, that most of the
Ancient Fathers, who wrote before the springing up of those particular Heresies
in the Church, have in their. Writings let fall here and there such things, as
are not very consonant to the Rule of the Orthodox Faith. Since therefore they
have done thus in other Points; what marvel is it if they have likewise done
the same in these particular Controversies at this day debated amongst us? and
that, having lived so long before that the greatest part of these Controversies
were started, they have spoken to them so obscurely, doubtfully, and
confusedly. For my part I think, it would have been the greater wonder of the
two, if they had done otherwise, and shall account it as a very great sign of
Forgery, in any Piece which is attributed to Antiquity, when ever I find it
treating expressly, and clearly of these Points, and as they are now adays
discoursed of. Do but compare the expressions of the most Ancient Fathers,
touching the Divinity, and Eternity of the Son of God, with their expressions
touching the Nature of the Eucharist; and certainly you will find, that the one
are not more wide of the Truth at this day professed, touching this last Point;
than the other were from the Doctrine long since declared in the Council of
Nice. The Council of Nice expressly, and positively declared, That the Son is
Consubstantial with the Father: the Council of Antioch had before denied this.
Whether the Fathers therefore affirm, or deny, that the Eucharist is really the
Body of Christ, they will not however therein contradict thy opinion, whosoever
thou art, whether Romanist, or Protestant, any more, than the Fathers of the
Council of Antioch seem to have contradicted those of the Council of Nice. We
may add hereto, that as the Arians ought not in reason to have alleged, in
justification of their opinion, any such Passages of the Ancient Fathers, as
had innocently, in passage only, and in discoursing on other subjects, without
any thought of this opinion of theirs, fallen from them, so neither to say
truth, is there any reason, that either Thou, or I, should produce, as
Definitive Sentences upon our present Controversies, which have been started
but of late years, any such Passages of the Fathers as were written by them, in
treating of other matters, many Ages before the breaking forth of our
Differences, whereof they never had the least, thought; and concerning which
they have confequently delivered themselves very diversely, and obscurely, and
sometimes also seemingly contradicting themselves. And as we find, that some of
the Faithful Christians, who lived after these Primitive Fathers, have
endeavored to reconcile their sayings to the Truth which they professed; as
Athanasius has done in some Passages of Dionysius Alexandrinus, Athan. ep. de
fid. Dionys. Alex. and ep. de Syn. Arim. and Seleuc. ubi supra.
and of the Fathers of the Council of Antioch; in like manner ought we to use
our utmost endeavor to make a handsome interpretation of all such passages in
the Writings of these Men, and the like as seem to clash with the true Orthodox
Belief, touching the Eucharist, and the like other Points: and withal not
accounting it any great wonder, if we sometimes chance to meet with Passages,
which seem to be utterly inexplicable. For it may so fall out, that they may be
really so; seeing it is very possible, that in the Points touching the Person,
and the Natures of the Son of God, some such expressions may have fallen from
them; as is very well known to those, who are versed in their Writings.
Possibly also we may meet with some Passages of theirs, which though they may
be explicable in themselves, may notwithstanding appear to us to be
Indissoluble; by reason perhaps of our wanting some one of those Circumstances,
which are necessarily requisite for the enlightening, and clearing the same: as
for example, when we are ignorant of the scope and drift of the Author, and of
the Connection and Dependencies of his Discourse, and other the like
particulars, which are requisite for the penetrating into the sense of all
sorts of Writers. For it is with Men's words, as it is with P^eces of Picture:
they must have their proper Light, to show, themselves according to the meaning
and intention of the Author: and according to the difference of the Lights we
see them by, they also have a different appearance. As for example, if any one
should now (...), alone, and barely, without reference to the rest of the
Discourse, and history of its Author, this short Passage of Dionysius
Alexandrinus, where he calls the Son of God, (...), The Workmanship, or
Manufacture of the Father; (...).
and adds certain other very shange Terms also touching this particular; (as we
daily see, the custom of some is, in the business of our present
Controversies, to produce the like shreds, and little short Passages; severed
from the main Body of the Discourse whereof they are a part;) which of us, how
able so ever he be, could possibly imagine any thing e^se, but that this is an
absolute (...) expression, and such as cannot be interpreted to any other
sense? And yet Athanasius, in the places before cited, makes it plainly appear
that it is not so; and by the advantage of those through Lights which he had in
the Subject there treated of by the Author, he demonstrates unto us, that this
expression of Dionystus, how strange soever it appear, has notwithstanding a
good, and allowable sense in that place. And that we may be able more fully to
apprehend the truth of this our Assertion, we shall in the next place take into
consideration some other causes of the obscurity of the Fathers: among which I
shall rank in the first place, their having sometimes purposely, and upon
Design, endeavored either wholly to conceal their Conceptions from us; or at
least to lay them down, not naked, and open, but as it were with a Curtain (and
that sometimes a very thick one too) drawn over them; to the end that none but
those of the quickest, and most piercing eyes should be able to penetrate into
them: some of their Meditations having been such, as they themselves accounted
either less useful, or else perhaps such as it was not so safe to commit to
weak, vulgar spirits. Whether this practice of theirs were raised upon good
grounds, or not, I shall not here stand to examine: it is sufficient for me to
show, that it was usual with them, as may appear, among the rest, Clem. Alex.
Strom 1. (...), etc. (...)
out of Clement Alexandrinus, about the beginning of his Stromateis, where
giving an account of the Design of his Book, he says that, He had passed over
some things in silence; fearing to write that which he made some simple even to
speak of; not that he envied his Readers any thing, but fearing rather lest
they might happily, out of a misunderstanding of them, fall into error; and so
he might seem to have put a Sword into the hand of a Child. He adds further,
That he had handled somethings clearly, and some other obscurely; laying the
one open to our view, but wrapping up the other in Riddles. But that which
makes most to our present purpose, is, that they are known to have taken this
course particularly in some certain of those Points which are now controverted
amongst us; as namely, in that touching the Sacraments of the Church. For as
they celebrated their holy Mysteries in secret, and apart by themselves, not
admitting either the Pagans, Cassand. in Liturg. c. 26.
or the Catechumeni, nor yet (as some assure us) any person whatsoever, save
only the Communicants, to the sight of them; in like manner also in their
Writings, especially in those that were to be read openly to the people in
their public Assemblies, they never spoke but very obscurely, and darkly, as
has been observed, in Point of the Eucharist, by Cardinal Perron, and by
Casaubon, Casaub. in Basin. exercit. 16.
Petavius, and others, in the Points of Baptism, Confirmation, and other holy
Ceremonies of the Christians. Do but observe, how wary Theodoret, Epiphanius,
and other of the Ancient Writers are, in naming the matter of the Eucharist,
describing it in general terms only, and such as they only could understand,
who had been formerly partakers of that holy Sacrament. I shall not here take
upon me to examine the end which they proposed to themselves in so doing; which
seems to have been, to beget in the minds of the Catechumeni a greater
reverence, and esteem of the Sacraments, and withal a more earnest and eager
desire to be admitted to partake of them: fearing, lest happily the laying open,
and discoursing plainly of the Matter and Manner of Celebration of the
Sacraments, might something take off from one of these two Affections in them.
Seeing therefore that not only in this, but in diverse other Particulars also,
they have purposely, and upon design, concealed their Sense and Opinions from
us; we ought not to account it so strange a matter, if we many times find their
Expressions to be obscure, and (which is a consequence of obscurity) if they
sometimes also seem to clash, and contradict one another. And indeed it were
more to be wondered at, if these Men, who were for the most part able, learned
Men, having a purpose of writing obscurely on these Points, should yet have
left us their Opinions clearly and plainly delivered in their Writings. But
there is more in it yet than so; for sometimes also, even where they had no
purpose of being so, they yet are very obscure; and sometimes again the little
Conversation they have had with those Arts which are requisite for the
polishing of Language, was the cause of their not expressing themselves so
clearly: and sometimes perhaps their Genius, and natural Disposition might be
the reason hereof; all their Study and Industry they could take, not being able
to correct this natural defect in them. I believe we may very safely reckon
Epiphanius in the first Rank of these kind of Writers; who was indeed a good
and holy Man, but yet had been very little conversant in the Arts, either of
Rhetoric, or Grammar; as appears sufficiently out of his Writings, where you
shall often find him failing, not only in the clearness of his Expressions, and
the course and fit contrivance of his Periods, but also even in the Order and
Method, which is the true Light of all Discourse: which Defects must
necessarily be the cause of much obscurity in very many Places; as indeed is
much complained of by the Interpreters of this Father. Others perhaps there
have been, who have endeavored to polish their Language by Arts, who yet have
not been able to compass their desire, whether it were, because they began too
late; or else perhaps through the dullness of their Wit, and want of Capacity,
as we see, all Natures are not capable of receiving all Forms, what pains and
industry soever they take, for the making such Impressions. In this number you
may reckon that Victorinus, of whom S. Hierome gives this so favorable
Testimony, Hier. ep. 84. ad Magn. Victorino Martyri in libris suis licet desit
eruditio, tamen non deest eruditionis voluntas.
saying, That though indeed he wanted Learning, he wanted not a desire and good
will to Learning. Such another also was Ruffinus, whose Language and
Expressions the same great Censor of the Ancients so sharply reproves, noting
in him very many Improprieties of Speech, and other absurdities: In Apol 1. in
Ruff* and Apol. 2. and Apol. ad Ruff.
and yet, for all this, he would not be taken off from his scribbling humor;
and which is more, he did not want those who admired him too: it being commonly
observed, That those who wrote most in any Age, were not always the ablest Men;
this Itch reigning rather in the ignorant, than in the other. Photius in his
Bibliotheca has noted the like defects in some of his Greek Writers. But yet
this Obscurity in the Fathers has proceeded, not from their Ignorance, but
rather from their great Learning. For, those among them who were furnished with
all manner of Secular Learning, and had been trained up from their Infancy in
the Eloquence and Knowledge of the Greeks, could not but retain this Tincture,
and sometimes also had their flyings out, and made show of this their Treasury;
by this means mixing with the Christian Philosophy many exotic Words, Customs,
and Discourses: which Mixture, though it give indeed much delight to the
Learned, yet it must necessarily render the sense of these Authors the more
dark and perplexed. What can you name me more mixed, or fuller of variety, than
Clemens Alexandrinus his Stromata, as he calls them, and his other Works; which
are throughout interlaced with Historical Allusions, Opinions, Sentences, and
Proverbs, out of all sorts of Writers, both Sacred and Profane; being here
heightened with rich, lightsom Colors, there shaded with Darkness; in such
sort, as that it is a vain thing for an ignorant Person to hope ever to reach
his meaning? What shall I say of Tertullian, who, besides that natural
harshness and roughness which you meet with in him throughout, and that
Carthaginian Spirit and Genius which is common to him with the rest of the
African Writers, has yet shadowed and overcast his Conceptions with so much
Learning, and with so many new Terms and Passages out of the Law, and with such
variety of Allusions, Subtilties, and nice Points, as that the greatest stock
both of Learning and Attention that you can bring with you, will be all little
enough to fit you for a perfect understanding of him. I shall not here speak
any thing of S. Hilary, and the loftiness of his Fancy, and the height of his
Language, and that Cothurnus Gallicanus which S. Hierome has noted in him, and
some other of his Countrymen. Neither shall I here take any notice of the
Copiousness of the Africans, nor of the subtilty of the Athenians, and of those
that had their Education among them; the consideration of all which Particulars
would afford matter for a just Tract. I shall only say in general, That whereas
the manner of the Christians Writing and expounding the Scriptures, was at
first very plain, easy, and brief; it in a very short time came to be changed,
and to be clogged with Subtilties, and flourishes of Secular Learning; as
Methodius in Epiphanius testifies. Method. apud Epiph. Haer. 64. (...).
The Doctors (says he) no longer regarding an honest, plain, and solid way of
teaching, began now to endeavor to please, and to be favorably received by
their Auditors; just as Sophisters are wont to do, who reckon their Labors
rewarded by their Auditors applauding their Learning; selling themselves at
this so cheap a rate. For as for the Ancients, their Expositions were always
very brief; their utmost ambition in those days being, not to please, but to
profit their Hearers. Gregory Nazianzen also very sadly, and eloquently, as his
manner is, complains of this. Greg. Naz. Enc. Athan. (...).
There was a time (says he) when our Affairs flourished, and we were in a
happy estate, when as this vain and wanton kind of Divinity, which is every
where now in fashion, together with all its Artifices and Delicacies of
Language, was not at all admitted into the Sheepfolds of the Lord. In those
days, to hearken after, or to vent any Novelties or Curiosities in Divinity,
was reckoned all one as to play the Jugler, and to show Tricks of Leigerdemain,
with cunning and nimble shiftings of Balls under a Cup, deceiving the Eyes of
the Spectators; or else by delighting them with the various and effeminate
Motions and Windings of a lascivious Dance. On the contrary, rather a plain,
masculine, and free way of Discourse was then accounted the most Pious. But
now, since that the Pyrthonians, and those of Sextus his Faction, together with
the Tongue of Contradiction, have, like some grievous, malignant Disease,
broken in upon our Churches; since that Babbling is now allowed for Learning;
and, as it is said in the Acts, of the Athenians, since we spend our time in
nothing else but in hearing or telling some new thing; O for some Jeremy, to
bewail the Confusion and Darkness we lie under; who might furnish us, as that
Prophet was only able to do, with Lamentations suitable to our Calamities! And
certainly S. Hierome Hieron. ep. 50. ad Pammach. and passim. ibid.
, in his Epistle to Pammachius, has as good as said, That even for his
Writings also, it is necessary that the Reader be acquainted both with all the
Sleights of Logic, and all the Flourishes and Heights of Rhetoric. Which
censure of his reaches also to the Writings of Origin, Methodius, Eusebius,
Apollinaris, Tertullian, Cyprian, Minutius, Victorinus, Id. ibid.
Lactantius, Hilary, and others; whom he affirms to have all observed the
same method in their Writings. Now although any Rational Man must needs
willingly grant me, that the Translations of Terms and ^igures, either in the
Word only, or else in the Things themselves, and such other the like Ornaments
of Rhetoric; as also the subtilties of Logic, and, in a word, all the
Artifices in what other sorts of Learning soever there are, must necessarily
render any Discourse the more obscure and shaded: yet for the fuller clearing
of this Point, I shall here add some few Proofs and Examples. Hier. sup ep.
139. ad Cypr.
S. Hierome declares himself on our side sufficiently, where he attributes
the cause of the obscurity that is found in the Writings of some certain
Authors, to their being too Learned and Eloquent. Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. lib.
6. Annot. 152.
Sixtus Senensis observes, That the Fathers have uttered many things in the
heat of their Passion, which we are not to take in the strict literal sense.
And Petavius has of late also noted, Petav. Not. in Epiph. Multa sunt a
Sanctissimis Patribus, praesertimque a Chrysostomo in Homiliis aspersa, quae si
ad exactae veritatis regulam accommodare volueris, boni sensus inania
videbuntur.
That the Fathers have let fall from them, up and down in their Homilies, very
many things, which cannot be reconciled to any good sense, if we should examine
them by the exact Rule of Truth. We both of us excuse this in them oftentimes
thus, by showing that under so many Flowers and Leaves, wherewith they crown
their Discourses, they many times couch a quite different Sense, from that
which their Words in apperance seem to carry. Who has not observed the strange
Hyperboles of S. Chysostome, S. Hilary, S. Ambrose, and the like? But that I
may make it plainly and evidently appear unto you, how much these Ornaments do
darken the clearness of the Sense of an Author, I shall only here lay before
you one Instance, taken from S. Hierome; Hier. ep. 21. ad Eustoch.
who, writing to Eustochium, gives her an account, how that for his being too
much addicted to the Study of Secular Learning, he was brought before the
presence of our Lord, and was there really with Stripes chastised for it. And
think not (says he) that this was any of those drowsy Fancies, Ibid. Nec vero
sopor ille suerat, aut vana somnia, quibus saepe deludimur. Testis est Tribunal
illud, an^e quod jacui; testis judicium triste quod timui. Ita mihi nunquam
contingat in talem incidere quaestionem! Liventes fateor habuisse me scapulas,
plagas sensisse post somnum, and tanto dehinc ^udio divina legisse, quanto non
ante mortalia legeram.
or vain Dreams, which sometimes abuse us. I call to witness hereof that
Tribunal, before which I then lay, and that sad Judgment which I was then in
dread of. So may I never hereafter fall into the like danger, as this is true!
I do assure you, that I found my Shoulders to be all over black and blue, with
the stripes I then received, and which I afterward felt when I awaked: So that
I have ever since had a greater affection to the reading of Divine Books, than
I ever before had to the study of Humane Learning. Now hearing him speak thus,
who would not believe this to be a true Story? and who would not be ready to
understand this Narration in the literal sense? And yet it appears plainly,
from what he has elsewhere confessed, that all this was but a mere Dream, and
a Rhetorical piece of Artifice, frequently used by the Masters in this Art;
contrived only for the better and more powerful diverting Men from their too
great affection to the Books of the Heathens. For, Ruffinus picking a quarrel
with him for this, and objecting against him, That contrary to the Oath which
he had before taken, he did notwithstanding still apply himself to the study of
Pagan Learning: S. Hierome, after he had alleged many things to quit himself
from this Accusation, Ibid Audiat Prophetarum voces, somn^is non esse
credendum; quia nec adulterii somnium ducit me ad Tartarum, nec corona Martyrii
in Coelum levat.
Hier. Apol. adv. Ruffin. Haec dicerem, si quippiam vigilans promisissem: Nunc
autem, novum impudentiae genus, objicit mihi somnium meum.
Thus you see (says he) what I could have urged for my self, had I promised
any such thing waking: But now do but take notice of this new and unheard of
kind of impudence; He objects against me my very Dreams: And then presently
does he refer him to the Words of the Prophets, saying, We must not take heed
to Dreams; for neither does an adulterous Dream cast a Man into Hell, nor that
of Martyrdom bring him to Heaven: And so he at last plainly says, That this
Promise of his was made only in a Dream; Ibid. Tu a me somnii exigis
sponsionem.
and that therefore consequently it carried no obligation with it. And who
knows but that the Life of Malchus, which he has so delicately and
artificially described unto us, and some other the like Pieces of his, and of
some others, may be the like Essays of Wit? We see he does not stick to
confess, That the Life of Paulus Eremita was accounted for such, by some of his
back-friends: Hier. in Vit. Hilarion.
and it is very probable, that his 47^ Epistle, which is so full of Learning
and Eloquence, is but an Essay of the same nature; he having there fancied to
himself a fit Subject only whereon to show his own Eloquence, as the usual
manner of Orators is. Thus thou see, Reader, how great darkness is cast over
the Writings of the Ancients by these Figures, and Flourishes of Rhetoric, and
other Artifices of Humane Learning, which they so often and so
over-licentiously use, at least for our parts, who, to our great disadvantage,
find, that so many Ornaments and Embelishments, do rather disguise and hide
from us the bottom and depth of their Conceptions. Who shall assure us, that
they have not made use of the same Arts in their Discourses touching the
Eucharist, to advance the Dignity of the Divine Mysteries, and to increase the
Peoples Devotion? as likewise touching the Power of the Prelates, to procure
them the greater respect and obedience from their People? What probability is
there that they would spare their Pencils, their Colors, their Shadows, and
their Lights, in those Points where this their Art might have been employed to
so good purpose? And to this place I shall refer those other Customs of theirs,
which are so frequent with them, of denying and affirming things as it were
absolutely; notwithstanding the purpose and intent of their Discourse be to
deny or affirm them only by way of comparison, and reference to some other
things. Who could choose but think that S. Hierome was tainted with the Heresy
of Marcion, and of the Eneratites, hearing him so fiercely inveigh against
Marriage, as he does in his Books against Jovinian, and oftentimes in other
places also? insomuch that there have sometimes fallen from him such words as
these: Seeing that in the use of the Woman there is always some Corruption;
Hier. lib. 1. advers. Jovin. Si corruption ad omnem coitum pertinet, incorruptio
autem proprie castitatis est; praemia pudicitiae nuptiae possidere non possunt.
and that Incorruption properly belongs to Chastity; Marriage (says he)
cannot be accounted of so high esteem as Chastity. And a little after: My
opinion is, Ibid. Existimo quod qui uxorem habet, quandiu revertitur ad id
ipsum ne tentet eum Satanas, in carne seminet, and non in Spiritu. Qui autem in
carne seminat, (non ego, sed Apostolus loquitur,) metit corruptionem.
That he that has a Wife, till such time as he returns to that pass, as that
Satan tempts him not, (that is to say, so long as he makes use of her, as of a
Wife,) he sowes in the Flesh, and not in the Spirit. Now he that sows in the
Flesh, (it is not I that say it, but the Apostle,) the same shall reap
Corruption. Now these words, taken literally, condemn Marriage, and the use
thereof, as defiling a Man, and depriving him of Blessed Immortality. Yet
notwithstanding, in his Epistle to Pammachius he informs us, Id. ep. 50. ad
Pammachium.
That these Passages of his, and all other the like, are not to be understood
as spoken positively and absolutely, but only by way of comparison; that is, he
would be understood to say, That the Purity and Felicity of Virgins is such, as
that in comparison of it, that of the Marriage Bed is not at all to be
mentioned. This Key is very necessary for the finding entrance into the Sense
of the Ancients: and the Fathers of the VII Council made very good use of it,
in giving the Sense of two or three Passages that were objected against them by
the Iconoclasts. Council. VII. Act. 6. (...).
The first was out of S. Chrysostom: Through the Scriptures we enjoy the
presence of the Saints, having the Images, not of their Bodies, but of their
Souls. For, the things there spoken by them, are the Images of their Souls.
Ibid. (...).
The second was out of Amphilochius: Our care is, not to draw in Colors on
Tables the Natural Faces of the Saints; (for we have no need of any such thing)
but rather to imitate their Life and Conversation, by following the Example of
their Virtue. The third was out of Austerius: Ibid. (...).
Draw not the Portraiture of Christ on thy garments; but rather bestow upon the
Poor the price that these expenses would amount to. For as for him, it is
sufficient that he once humbled himself, in taking upon him our flesh. Would
not any man, that hears these words, believe these three Fathers to have been
Iconoclasts? I confess, I cannot see, what almost could have been said more
expressly against Images: and yet the second Council of Nice pretends, Council
VII ubi supra.
* that these Fathers here speak only by way of Comparison; meaning to say no
more, than that the Images of Jesus Christ, and of the Saints, are much less
profitable than the reading their Books, or the imitation of their Lives, or
than Charity toward the Poor. I know very well, that it is no very easy
matter, handsomely to apply this Answer to the words of these Fathers: However
we may make this use of it; that seeing that the Council of Nice has followed
this Rule, it is an evident Argument to us, that the sayings of the Fathers
both may, and ought sometimes to be taken in a quite different sense from what
they seem to bear: so that it will clearly follow from hence, that they are
very hard to be understood. Consider then with your self, whether or no among
the so many several Passages, as are brought on the one side, and on the other,
touching the present Controversies, there may not be very many of them, which
are to be understood, as has formerly been said, by way of Comparison only;
that is to say, quite contrary to what they seem to say. Now as the Rhetoric
used by the Fathers has rendered their Discourses made to the People full of
obscurity; in like manner has their Logic sown a thousand Thorns, and
Difficulties, throughout their Polemical Writings. For many times, while they
are in the heat of their Disputations, they have their mind so intent upon the
present scope they drive at, as that having regard to nothing else, they let
fall such expressions, as look very strangely, if they be considered in
reference to some other Points of Christian Religion. Sometimes also, whilst
they use their utmost endeavor to beat down one Error, they seem to run into
the contrary Error: in like manner as those who would streighten a crooked
Plant, are wont to bow it as much the contrary way; that so having been worked
out of its former bent, it may at length rest in a middle posture: which
similitude Theod Dial. 3. c. 30. (...). Sic and Bas. de Dion. Alex. ep. 41.
Theodoret also makes use of, upon this very subject. And in this manner also
did Athanasius explain those words of Dionysius Alexandrinus, which were urged
against him by the Arrians, as seeming to make very much for them, as we have
touched before. He wrote not this, ( A^han. Ep. de fid. Dion. Alex. (...), etc.
(...)
Athanasius answers,) Positively, and with a purpose of giving an account of
his Belief in these Words, but as being led on to utter them, by the occasion,
and the persons he discoursed with. In like manner (says he) as a Gardener
orders the same Trees in a different manner, according to the difference of
the soil where they are. Neither may any one blame him, for lopping off some,
and graffing others, for planting this, and plucking up that by the roots. On
the contrary rather, whoever knows the reason of this, will admire the variety,
and several ways of his industrious Proceeding. And then afterward he says,
that Athan Ibid. (...).
Dionysius maintained those Positions, upon occasion of the Error of certain
Bishops of Pentapolis, who maintained the opinion of Sabeliius; and that he did
this, by Dispensation, as he there speaks; that is to say, not positively and
simply, but as in reference to such a certain case only. Now no man ought Athan
Ibid. (...).
says he) to wrest to the worst sense, those things which are either said, or
done by Dispensation; or to interpret them as himself pleases. And in another
place he in the same manner explaineth the words of the Fathers of the Council
of Antioch, who had denied the Consubstantiality of the Son; * showing that
their intention was, only to overthrow a Position which Paulus^ Somos^^enus had
laid down; namely, that the Father, and the Son, were both one and the self
same Person, and had not any distinct subsistence. By this very Rule also does
S. Basil interpret that saying of Gregonius Ne^eaesariensis, Basil. Ep. 64
(...).
namely, That the Father and the Son are Two, according to our Apprehension
only; Ibid. (...), etc.
but that in Hypostasis they are but One: saying, That he spoke this, not
Dogmatically, but only let it fall from him in the heat of Disputation. Whence
it appears, that in all such Writings of the Fathers, the opinion which they
oppugn, is the Rule and Measure of whatsoever they are to be understood therein
either to affirm, or deny. This is that which varieth their sense and meaning,
though oftentimes expressed in the same manner, and with the very same words,
with that of the Heretics. When they dispute against the Valentinians, or the
Manichees; a man would then believe them to be Pelagians: and so likewise, when
they are contesting with the Pelagians, you would then imagine, that they
defended the opinions of the Manichees. If they dispute against Arius, you
would think they favored Sabellius* and again, when they oppose Sabellius, you
would believe that they were Arians: as has been observed by the Bishop of
Corn. Mussus Episc. Bipont. Comment. in ep. ad Romans c. 5.
Biponto, particularly in S. Augustine. The like practice to this, we may every
day observe in our Preachers. When they preach against Covetousness, they seem
in a manner to cry up Prodigality: and if they declaim against Prodigality,
they then seem to approve Covetousness. Thus is it also with the Protestants:
when they would overthrow those empty Figures, which are fathered by their
Adversaries upon those they call Sacramentarians, you would judge that they
maintained the Reality of the Eucharist, as the manner of speaking is. And when
they dispute against Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence, you would then
swear, that they defended the opinion of these very Sacramentarians. There is,
amongst Athanasius his Works, a certain very learned, elegant, and acute Tract,
wherein is debated, as strongly as may be, that Point, touching the Distinction
of the Two Natures in Jesus Christ. T. 2. Oper. Athan. Par. impr. a^. 1627.
(...).
Do but read what he there says, in the beginning of that Discourse, and you
will think it could not proceed from any but from Nestorius his mouth. And yet
you will perceive plainly by the last Chapter of the said Book, that he was not
any whit of his opinion. Now if by any misfortune it should so have happened,
that this last Chapter had been lost, Athanasius must necessarily have been
taken for a Nestorian, by reason of the dangerous Expressions which he has
there made use of, being occasioned thereunto through the heat of this Dispute,
which he maintained against the opinions of the Eutychians. And for the very
same reason also, Julius Bishop of Rome, seems to have favored the contrary
Error, namely that of Eutyches, in that Epistle of his cited by Gennadius;
which was indeed heretofore of good use, against the opinion of those men, who
maintained Two Persons in Christ; but which Gennad. in Catal. inter Op. Hier.
Nunc autem perniciosa probatur. Fomentum enim est Eutychianae and Timotheanae
impietatis.
now is found to be pernicious, (says he) by fomenting the impieties of
Eutyches and Timotheus: Which has given occasion to some of the more Facund.
Herm. defens. 3. capit. lib. 1 p. 40. quo loco vide Sirmondum.
Modern Authors, who have written since Gennadius his time, to think that this
Epistle was not truly Pope Julius his, but had been put upon him by the false
dealing of the Heretics. The case was the same with these Ancient Fathers, as
it is with a Pilot of a Ship, who is to stear his Vessel betwixt two Rocks, one
only whereof he has discovered, the other lying hid under water: so that
taking no other care, save only to avoid the danger which he sees before his
eyes, he very easily falls into that other, which he never so much as
suspected: so that if he split not his Vessel upon it, and so be utterly cast
away, he will very hardly however avoid receiving a brush at least by it. Thus
these Fathers saw indeed the Rock of Paulus Samosatenus his Doctrine, and that
of Nestorius; but did not at all observe that of Arius, or of Eutyches, which
lay yet under water, and concealed; and so employing their utmost endeavors to
avoid the danger of the two former, which they then only feared, they have very
hardly escaped falling into, or at least touching very near upon the two
latter, which they then had no thought of at all. Do but imagine then, how
w^rily and carefully it concerns us to walk, amidst these Disputes of the
Ancients, which are so beset with Thorns; and with how much judgment we are to
distinguish betwixt what things are Principal, and what but Accidental only;
betwixt the Cause, and the Means; and betwixt the Excess, or Defect in their
Expressions, and their True sense, and meaning: and then tell me whether you
think it reasonable, or not, that two or three words only, which may perhaps
accidentally have fallen from them in their Disputations, either against the
Valentinians, and Marcionites, or against the Nestorians, or Eutychists, should
be taken as their Definitive Sentences upon such Points as are now controverted
amongst us, whether touching Free Will, or the Properties of the Body of
Christ, and the nature of the Eucharist. But, before we close up this matter,
we are to take notice, that the changing of Customs, both Civil, and
Ecclesiastical especially, and the variation of Words in their signification,
do not a little contribute to this Difficulty of understanding the Writings of
the Fathers. Who knows not, and indeed who confesses not, both on the one
side, and on the other, that the outward Face of the World, and even of the
Church it self too, is in a manner wholly changed? I speak not here of the
Doctrine; but only of the upper Garment, as I may call it, and the outward part
of the Church. Where is the Ancient Discipline? What is become of the rigid and
severe Rules of those Ancient Times? Where are those so mysterious Ceremonies
in Baptism, and in the Administration of the Eucharist? Where are those Customs
then used in the Ordination of the Clergy? All these things are now quite
forgotten and buried; the Church by little and little having apparelled it self
in other Colors, and in another different Garb. The Books then of the Ancients
being full of Allusions to th^se things, which we are in a manner now wholly
ignorant of; it must necessarily follow from hence, that it will be a hard
matter for us to guess at their meaning in any such Passages. But yet there
arises much more confusion out of the words they used; which we have still
retained, though in a different signification. We have indeed these words,
Pope, Patriarch, Mass Oblation, Station, Procession, Mortal Sins, Penance,
Confession, Satisfaction, Merit, Indulgence, as the Ancients had, and make use
of an infinite number of the like Terms; but understand them all in a sense
almost as far different from theirs, as our Age is removed from theirs: Just in
like manner as of old, under the Roman Emperors, the names of Offices, and of
things, for a long time continued the same that had been in use in the time of
the old Republic, but with a sense clear different from what they had formerly
born. Thus when we light upon any Passage in the Ancients, where the Bishop of
Rome is called Papa or Pope; we presently begin to fancy him with all his
Pontificalibus about him, and all the Glory at this day belonging to this Name;
not bating him so much as his Guard of Switzens, and his Light-Horses: whereas
they, that are but indifferently versed in these Books, know, that the name
Papa or Pope, was given to every Bishop. So likewise when we meet with the word
exomologesis or Confession, we presently fancy a man down upon his knees before
his Confessor, shriving himself before him in private of all the sins he has
committed. The word Mass likewise makes us prick up our ears, as if, even from
those Ancient Times, the whole Liturgy, and all the Ceremonies used at the
Celebration of the Eucharist, had been the very same that they are at this day:
whereas the Learned of both Parties acknowledge, that these Names have, since
that time, lost very much of their old, and acquired new significations. But
this, which has been said, is enough, if not more than needed, for the
clearing this Point, touching the obscurity in the Writings of the Fathers: so
that we shall here conclude, what we proposed at the beginning; namely, that it
is not so easy a matter, as people may imagine, to discover by their Writings,
what the sense of the Ancient Church has been, touching the Points at this day
controverted amongst Us.

CHAP. VI.
Reason VI. That the Fathers oftentimes conceal their own Private Opinions, and
speak those things which themselves believed not; whether it be, when they
report the Opinion of some others, without naming the persons; as they
frequently do in their Commentaries; or in disputing against an Adversary,
where they make use of whatsoever they can; or else whether they have done so,
in compliance to their Auditory, as may be observed in their Homilies.

THE Writings of the Fathers are, for the most part, of three sorts; that is,
they are either Commentaries upon the Holy Scriptures; or Homilies delivered
before the People; or else they are Polemical Discourses, and Disputations with
the Heretics. Now we have formerly seen, how much their Ornaments of Rhetoric
have darkened, and rendered their sense obscure, in their Writings of the first
and second sort; and what their Heats of Disputation, and Logical Wranglings
have caused, in those of the later. Let us now see, if having drawn the
Expressions of the Fathers out of these thick Clouds, and attained to a clear
and perfect understanding of the sense of them; we may be able at length to
rest assured, that we have discovered what their opinions have been. I confess,
I could heartily wish that it were so: but considering what they have
themselves informed us, concerning the nature, and manner of their Writings; I
am much afraid, that we neither may, nor indeed ought, to reckon our selves in
any sure condition, even then, when we are upon these very Terms. For as
concerning their Commentaries, which we have often occasion to consult, upon
sundry Passages of Scripture, touching the meaning whereof we disagree among
our selves; hear what S. Hierome says, who was the most Learned of all the
Latins, and who gives place but very little to any of the Greeks in these
Matters. What (says he) is the business of a Commentary? Hier. ep. ad Pammach.
and Marc. Apol. advers. Ruff. Commentarii quid operis habent? Alterius dicta
edisserunt; quae obscure script^ sunt, plano sormone manifestant, multorum
sententias replicant, and dicunt, Hunc locum quidam sic edisserunt, alii sic
interpretantur; illi sensum suum and intelligentiam his testimoniis, and hac
nituntur ratione firmare; ut prudens Lector cum diversas explanationes legerit,
and multorum vel probanda vel improbanda didicerit, judicet quid verius sit,
and quasi bonus Trapezita adulterinae monetae pecuniam reprobet. Number diversae
interpretationis, and contrariorum inter se sensuum tenebitur reus, qui in uno
opere quod edisserit, expositiones posuerit plurimorum?
It expounds the Words of another Man, and declares in plain Terms the Sense
of Things obs^urely written; it represents the several Opinions of others,
and says, Some expound this Passage thus, and others interpret it thus. These
endeavor to prove their Sense and Meaning, by such Testimonies, and such
Reasons; to the end that the Intelligent Reader having several Expositions
before him, and reading the Judgments of diverse Men, some bringing what he may,
and others perhaps what he cannot admit of, he may judge which among the rest
is the truest; and, like a wise Banker, may refuse all adulterated Coin. Now I
would fain ask, whether he ought to be accounted guilty of diversity in his*
Interpretations, or of Contradiction in the Senses given, who in one and the
some Commentary shall deliver the Expositions of diverse Persons? and so on, as
it there follows in the Place afore-cited. He speaks likewise to the same
sense in diverse other Places throughout his Works. Id. Apol. advers. Ruff. Hic
est Commentariorum mos, and explanantium regula, ut opiniones in expositione
varias persequantur, and quid vel sibi, vel aliis videatur edisserant. Et hoc
non solum sanctarum interpretes scripturarum, sed saecularium quoque literarum
explanatores faciunt, tam Latinae Linguae quam Graecae.
This (says he) is the usual manner of Commentaries, and the Rule that
Commentators go by; to set down in their Expositions the, several Opinions they
have met withal; and to deliver both what their own, and what the Judgment of
others is upon the Place. And this is the practice not only of the Interpreters
of the Scriptures, but of the Expositors also of all kind of Secular Learning,
as well in the Greek as in the Latin Tongue. Now I must needs say, that this
seems to be a very strange way of Commenting. For, what light, or what
certainty can a Reader be able to gather out of such a Rhapsodie of different
Opinions, tumbled together in a heap, without so much as intimating either
which is good or bad, or probable, or necessary, or to the purpose, or not? But
seeing it has pleased S. Hierome to follow this course, whatsoever his reason
be, you see plainly, that we are not to take as his, whatsoever he has
delivered in his Commentaries. And seeing also he speaks in general terms, as
he does, of the nature and manner of a Commentary, we are not to doubt, but
that the rest of the Fathers have been the greatest part of them of the same
Judgment, and that consequently they took the same course in those Expositions
which we have of theirs. So that it will hence follow, that notwithstanding
that we should chance to find in these kind of Writings of theirs, an Opinion,
or an Interpretation, clearly delivered; yet may we not from thence presently
conclude, that this was the Authors own Opinion; for, perhaps he only delivered
it as the Opinion of some other Man. Now if the Fathers had been but careful to
have taken in Water out of wholesome Fountains only, filling up their
Commentaries with no other Opinions or Interpretations, save only those of
Persons of known Piety, Faith, and Learning, this Mixture would have proved the
less dangerous by much. For, notwithstanding that we should often be at a
stand, and doubt, whether that which we there find be the true Sense and
Opinion of the Father whose Name it goes under; yet however we might still rest
assured, that though it should not perhaps be his, yet must it certainly be the
Opinion of some other good Author, if not of equal, yet of little less
Authority than he. But the mischief of it is, that they took a quite contrary
course, many times stuffing up their Commentaries with very strange senseless
Expositions, and sometimes too with dangerous ones, and such as were taken out
of very suspected Authors, and which had no very good Name neither in the
Church. Hier. Praefat. in Comment in ep. ad. Galat. and Apol 2. adv. Ruff. and
ep. 89. ad August. and alibi saepe.
S. Hierome tells us often, (and whoever shall but diligently and attentively
read him, may easily observe as much) that his Commentaries (which make the
greatest and most considerable part of his Works) are interwoven throughout
with Expositions taken out of Origin, Didymus, Apollinaris, and others, who
were at that time ill spoken of, as Men who too presumptuously put upon the
World their own private Opinions, Hier. Comment. 5 in Es praef*de Origin
Ingenium suum facit Ecclesiae Sacramenta.
Fashioning the Mysteries of the Church out of their own private Fancies; as S.
Hierome himself sometime said of Origin. Now this is wonderful strange to me:
for, no Man is morce fierce in crying down these Authors, than he, being indeed
one of the principal Heads of that Holy League of Theophilus and Epiphanius,
against Origin and his Party. No Man ever reproved any one so sharply, as he
has done Ruffinus, for offering to present to the view of the Latins the
poisonous Doctrines of Origin, in those Books of his which he had translated:
And in the mean time he himself stuffs up his own Commentaries with the same;
many times without using any preparation at all about them, or furnishing his
Reader with any Counter-poyson, in case he meet with any of them. Vid. Comment.
in Nahum.
So likewise, in his Commentaries upon the Prophets, he ever and anon brings
in diverse Expositions out of the Jews themselves; insomuch that when you think
you are reading and searching after the Opinion and Sense of S. Hierome, upon
such or such a Passage, you often read that of an Heretic, or of a Jew. If the
Fathers would have but taken the pains to have given us notice every time, who
the Author was whose Opinion they alleged; this manner of Commenting upon the
Scriptures would have been much more beneficial unto us, and less troublesome.
For, the Name would have been useful to us, in directing us what account we
were to make of such Opinions and Expositions. But this they do but very
seldom; as you may observe out of the Expositions of S. Hilary, S. Ambrose, and
others; who robbing poor Origin without any mercy, Vid. Hieron. Apol. adv.
Ruff. ad* Pammach. and Marcel. and Ep. 141. ad Marcel.
do not yet do him the honor so much as to name him scarcely. This is certain,
that you shall find in S. Ambrose many times whole Periods, and whole Pages
too, taken out of S. Basil: but, unless my memory fail me very much, you shall
never find him once named there. These Men deliver you the Opinions and Words
of other Men, Id. Comment. in ep. ad Galat.
just as if they were their own; and yet will not be bound to warrant them us
for good and sound. S. Hierome, in his Commentary upon the Epistle to the
Galatians, expounds that Passage where there is mention made of S. Paul's
reproving S. Peter, by way of Dispensation; telling us, that S. Paul did not
reprehend him, as if he had indeed accounted him blameworthy; but only for the
better Edification, and bringing in of the Gentiles, by this seeming
Reprehension of his; who did but act this part with S. Peter, Ut hypocrisis
observandae Legis, quae nocebat iis qui ex gentibus crediderant, correptionis
hypocrisi emendaretur, and uterque populus salvus fi^ret; dum and qui
circumcisionem laudant, Petrum sequuntur, and qui circumcidi nolunt, Pauli
praedicant libertarem.
to the end (says he) that the Hypocrisy, or false show of observing the Law,
which offended those among the Gentiles who had believed, might be corrected by
the Hypocrisy, or false show of Reprehension, and that by this means both the
one and the other might be saved: whilst the one, who stood up for
Circumcision, followed S. Peter; and those other, who refused Circumcision,
applaud, and are taken with S. Paul's Liberty. S. Augustine, utterly disliking
this Exposition of S. Hierome, wrote unto him in his ordinary, grave, and meek
way; modestly declaring the Reasons why he could not assent unto it: which
Epistles of his are yet extant. The other answers him a thousand strange
things; but particularly he there Hieron. e^^ad August. quae est 89.
protests, That he will not warrant for sound whatever shall be found in that
Book of his: And to show that he does not do this without good reason, he
sets down a certain Passage out of his Preface to it, which is very well
worth our Consideration. For after he has named the Writings of Origin,
Didymus, Apollinaris, Theodorus, Her^clas, Eusebius Emisse^us, Alexander the
Heretic, and others, he adds, Hier. ibid. Itaq ut simpliciter ^at^ar legi haec
omnia, and in mente mea plurima coacervans acci^o notario, vel mea, v^l a^iena
dictavi, nec ordinis, nec verborum interdum, nec sensuum memor.
That I may therefore plainly tell the truth, I confess, that I have read all
these Authors; and collecting together as much as I could in my memory. I
presently called for a Scribe, to whom I dictated either my own Conceptions, or
those of other Men, without remembering either the Order, or the Words
sometimes, or the Sense. Do but think now with your self, whether or no this be
not an excellent rare way of Commenting upon the Scriptures, and very well
worthy both to be esteemed and imitated by us! He then turns his Speech to S.
Augustine, saying, If therefore thou lightedst upon any thing in my Exposition,
which was worthy of reprehension, it would have stood better with thy Learning,
Id. ibid. Si qu^d igitur reprehensione dignum putaveras in explanatione
no^stra, eruditionis tuae fuerat quaerere, etc. Vide and Apol. contra Ruff.
to have consulted the Greek Authors themselves, and to have seen whether what
I have written be to be found in them, or not; and, if not, then to have
condemned it, as my own private Opinion. And he elsewhere gives the same answer
to Id. Apol. 2. adv. Ruff.
Ruffinus, who upbraideth him for some absurd Passages in his Commentaries upon
the Prophet Daniel. Now, according to this reckoning, if we would know whether
or no what we meet with in his Commentaries be his own proper Sense, or not; we
must first turn over the Books of all these ancient Greeks* that is to say, we
must do that which is now impossible to be done; seeing that the Writings of
the greatest part of them are utterly lost: and must not attribute any thing to
him, as his proper Opinion, how clearly and expressly soever it be delivered,
unless we are first able to make it appear, that it is not to be found in any
of those Authors out of whose Writings he has patched up his Commentaries.
For, if any one of them be found to have delivered any thing you here meet
with, you are to take notice, that it belongs to that Author, S. Hierome in
this case having been only his Transcriber, or at most but his Translator. So
that you may be able, perhaps, by the reading of Books in this manner
collected, to judge whether the Fathers have had the skill to make a handsome
and artificial Connection and Digestion of those things which they took out of
so many several Authors, or not: but whether or no they believed all that they
have set down in their Books, you will be no more able to discover, than you
can judge what Belief any Man is of, by the Books he transcribeth; or can guess
at the Opinions of an Interpreter, by the Books he translateth. Whence we may
conclude, that testimonies brought out of such Books as these, are of little or
no force at all, either for or against us. And this seems to have been the
Opinion of Cardinal Bellarmine also, where, to a certain Objection brought out
of one of S. Hierome's Books, he makes this Answer; That the Author in that
place speaks according to the Opinion of others; as he often does in his
Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Ephesians, and in other places. The like
course has Cardinal Perron taken, where the Protestants have urged against the
Church of Rome, the Authority of S. Hilary, touching the Canon of the
Scriptures of the Old Testament; confidently answering, That the Notes cited
out of that place of S. Hilary, are not his, but Origen's, in his Commentary
upon the First Psalm; part of whose Words he had transcribed, and put into his
own Prologue upon the Psalms: and yet S. Hilary neither so much as names
Origin, nor yet gives us any intimation at all, whether we are to receive what
is there spoken touching the Scriptures, as from Origin, or from himself. And
the ground of this Answer of his is taken from what S. Hierome has testified
in diverse places; namely, that S. Hilary has transcribed the greatest part of
his Commentaries out of the said Origin. Now if we but rightly consider the
account which S. Hierome has given, as we showed before, of all Commentaries
in general, how can we have any assurance whether that which the Fathers
deliver in these kind of Writings, be their own proper Opinion, or only some
other Man's transcribed? And if we can have no assurance hereof, how can we
then account them of any force at all, either for or against us? So that it is
most evident, that this Method which the Fathers have observed in their
Expositions of the Scriptures, must needs render the things themselves very
doubtful, how clearly and expressly soever they have delivered themselves. But
has it not concerned them to be more careful in their Homilies, or Sermons;
and to deliver nothing there, save only what has been their own proper
Opinion, and Belief? May we not, at least in this particular, rest assured,
that they have spoken nothing, but from their very soul; and that their Tongues
have vented here their own Opinions only* and not those of other Men?
Certainly, in all reason, they should not have uttered any thing in this Sacred
Place, from whence they taught their People, save what they conceived to have
been most true. And yet, besides what we have formerly noted, as to this
particular, namely, that they did not always speak out the whole truth, but
concealed something of it, as not so fit for the ears either of the Pagans, or
of the weaker sort of Christians; Cardinal Perron, Perron of the Euchar. l. 1.
c. 10. Aut. 24. chapter 15. and passim locis infra citandis.
that great and curious Inquirer into all the Customs of the Ancients, has
informed us, that in regard of the aforesaid Considerations, they have
sometimes gone further yet. For, in expounding the Scriptures to the People,
where the Catechumeni were present, if by chance they fell upon any Passage
where the Sacraments were spoken of, that they might not discover these
Mysteries, they would then make bold to wrest the Text a little, and instead of
giving them the true and real Interpretation of the Place, which they
themselves knew to be such, they would only present their Auditory with an
Allegorical and Symbolical, and (as this Cardinal says) an Accidental and
Collateral one, only to give them some kind of small satisfaction; forasmuch
as, if in such cases they should have been utterly filent, it would
questionless have much amazed their Auditors, and in some sort also have
scandalized, and given them offense. To satisfy therefore their expectation,
and yet to keep these Mysteries still concealed from them, they waved the
business handsomely, laying before them that which they accounted not the best
and truest, but the fittest for their purpose and design. Thus do we sometimes
please little Children with an Apple, or some little Toy, to take them off the
desire they have to something of greater value. Those therefore who take all
that the Fathers deliver in the like places for good and solid Expositions, and
such as they themselves really believed, do very much deceive themselves; and
believing they have a solid Body in their Arms, embrace only an empty Shadow.
Now we should hardly believe those Holy Men to have been guilty of any such
juggling dealing as this, had we not the word of this so great a Cardinal for
our Warrant; upon whose Authority we have, for this once, adventured to propose
it to the Readers consideration, and shall withal produce some few Examples,
taken out of the same Author. S. Augustine being to expound the sixth Chapter
of the Gospel of S. John, where, as he conceives, our Savior Christ is very
copious in his Discourse concerning the Eucharist; he presently falls to
overshadow and disguise the Mystery, with such a number of Allegories, Riddles,
and Ambiguities, as that, if you dare believe the Cardinal, throughout the
whole XXVI Tract there is not one Period but has in it some Elusion,
Diversion, or Diminution of the true and solid Definition of this Article. Thus
does he interpret the Bread which came down from Heaven, to be the Gift of the
Holy Ghost: Perron. Tract. de S. August. c. 12. and lib 2. de ^^ch. Aut. 22. c.
1.
Our Savior (says he) purposing to send down the H. Ghost, says, That It is
the Bread which descended from Heaven. You may, if you please, believe, upon
the faith of this Father, that this is the true sense and meaning of the Place:
But yet the Cardinal makes it appear, out of Calvin, that it cannot be so. He
likewise contradicts after the same manner, that which the same Father says
a little after; to wit, That the purpose of our Savior was, to let us
understand that this Meat and Drink, whereof he speaks in S. John, is the
Communion and Fellowship, that is betwixt his Body, and his Members, who are
the Holy Church, in his faithful Servants, Predestined, Called, Justified,
and Glorified. Had not the Cardinal given us this information, who would ever
have imagined, that this Author (who was so Conscientious, as that he made it a
great quarrel against S. Hierome, only for having laid Dissimulation to St.
Paul's charge,) should here himself say, that our Savior Christ would have us
to understand His Words thus, unless he himself really believed this to be the
true sense and meaning of them? The Cardinal applies also this very
consideration, to the greatest part of those other Passages, cited out of this
Father, by the Protestants; as namely to this: to believe in Christ, is, to eat
the Bread of Life: and to this other, He that believes in him, eats of it;
and he is invisibly fed by it, because that he is also invisibly born again:
and this other: Whosoever eats of this Bread, he shall never die: but this is
to be understood of him that eats of it, according to the virtue of the
Sacrament, and not according to the visible Sacrament; of him that eats of it
Internally, and not Externally; of him that eats of it with his heart, and
not of him that cheweth it with his teeth. In all which places the Cardinal
pretends, that S. Augustine suppresseth the true, full, and solid Definition
of this Manducation, or eating of the Flesh, and drinking the Blood of Christ;
and instead thereof, presents this Allegorical, and Accidental Meditation to
the Catechumeni, only to cast a mist, as it were, before their Eyes, and to
elude their curiosity. He makes use of the same course also, in answering those
Passages, which are alleged by the Protestants out of Theodoret, Id. de Eu^h.
l. 2 A^t. 24. c. 15.
and Gregory Nazi^nzen Id. l* 2. A^t. 18. c. 5.
; who, he says, Id. Ibid.
called the Eucharist, the Antitype of the Body and Blood of Christ, in the
same manner as Abrah^m, being among Infidels, called Sarah, his Sister;
concealing something of what was true, but yet affirming nothing that was
false. He likewise explaineth after the same manner this Passage, out of
Clemens Alexandrinus his Paedagogus: Perron. de Euch. l. 2. Aut. 5.
The (...), and the Blood of Christ, is* Faith* and the Promise. In a word, he
is so much pleased with this Observation, as that he fetches it in at every
turn: Id. de Euch. page 52. 329. 332. 339. 344 356. 417. 420. 434 501. 503.
508. 510. 516. and Trac. de S. August. p. 55. 57. 95. 145. 191.
and indeed we may very well say, that this is his main Treasury, out of which
he produces the greatest part of those subtle, and so admired Solutions that
he gives to the Passages objected against them out of the Fathers. Those that
have a mind to examine these places of his, may happily find something to
return upon him, in some of those Applications which he has there made. It is
enough for our present purpose, that he grants us, that the Fathers in their
Sermons and Discourses made to the people have oftentimes made use of this
piece of Art, it following clearly from hence, that we cannot then possibly
have any assurance, that they themselves accounted, as solid and full, such
Expositions, and Opinions, as they have delivered in these Writings of theirs.
For, as the Cardinal endeavors by this means to weaken the force of those
Passages of S. Augustine, Gregory Nazianzen, Theodoret, and Clemens
Alexandrinus; may not the Protestants, when you allege against them any
Passages out of the Homilies of St. Chrysostom, or Eucherius, which seem to
make strongly against their opinions, be allowed to have the same Liberty, and
to answer; that these Fathers speaking before the people, made use of this
Dispensation, speaking that which they thought to be, not the Best, and Truest,
but the most proper for the edification of others? and that they had an
apprehension, that a bare and down wright expression of the Truth, might
possibly have taken off the Heat of the peoples Devotion? there being
apparently (say they) more cause to doubt, that the people might di^-esteem and
^^ight the Sacrament, than to fear lest they should adore it: as indeed the
Fathers are much more careful in concealing the matter of the Sacrament, the
outward appearance whereof is apt to make it di^esteemed* than they are in
concealing the Form, which is of so Venerable a nature: saying often, and in
express terms, that it is the Body of Christ; but ordinarily forbearing to say*
that it is or that it was a Piece of Bread.

We come now to the third sort of the Writings of the Ancients, wherein the
Fathers dispute against the Adversaries of their faith; namely, the Pagans,
Jews, and Heretics. We have formerly touched how much obscurity the
earnestness and heat of spirit have caused in the expressions of the Fathers;
and this defect proceeds from the weakness of their Passion only; and not
from any design or purpose that they had of speaking thus, rather than
otherwise. For, seeing that all manner of passions do disturb, and in some
small measure, as it were, confound the Judgment; and seeing it is hard for a
Man, how holy soever he be, to go through with a Disputation, without some
alteration in his Temper, especially if it be of any Importance, as all those
touching Religion are: we are not to wonder at it, if in these Cases we
sometimes find the language of the Fathers something mixed, and appearing of
several colors, such as Passion usually dies both the Countenance and the
Words withal of such persons, as it has seized on. But besides this Confusion,
which is caused merely by the Agitation of the spirits, without the Fathers so
much as thinking of it; we are here further to take notice, that the proper
design, and the Law of the Method that is observed in disputations, is the
cause of our incountring with so many, and so great Difficulties. For their
opinion was, that in this kind of Writing it was lawful for them to say, and
make use of any thing, that might advance their Cause, although it were
otherwise but Light and Trivial, or perhaps also contrary to what themselves
believed; and so, on the other side, to conceal and reject whatsoever might
prejudice their Cause, though otherwise True, and allowable. Now that this
Observation may not seem strange, and incredible, as coming out of my mouth;
let us hear what they themselves say* in this particular. And first let us hear
S. Hierome, who was the greatest Critic of them all, and who by often
exercising the strength of his admirable Wit, both by himself, and with others,
has observed more, touching the Style, Method, Natural Disposition, and
Opinions of the Fathers, than any other. Hier. ep. 50. ad Pammach. Simul
didicimus, plura ess^ videlicet genera dicendi, and inter caetera aliud esse
(...) scribe^e, allud (...): In priori vagam esse disputationem, and adversario
respondentem nunc haec, nunc illa proponere, argumentari ut liber, aliud lo^ui,
aliud agere, p^nem (ut dicitur) o^^e dear, lapidem tenere. (...) sequen^^.
^^tem aperta fron^, and ^t ita dicam, ^ngenuitas necessaria est. Aliud est
quaerere, aliud defin^: in altero pugnandum, in altero^d cendum est. Tu me
stantem in p^aelio, and de vita per^clitan^em, studiosus magister doceas? N^ll
ex obliquo, and unde no^ putaris, vulnus infe^^e. Directo percure gladio.
T^^rpe ^^bi est hostem dolis (...) non viribus. Quasi non and haec ar^ fumni^
p^ga^^tium ^t, (...) minari, (...) percut^^e. Legite obsecro vo^ De^nor
^^hen^m, legite Tull^um: ac ne forsitan Rhetores v^bis d^^pliceant, quorum
artis est veri^imilia mag^s quam vera dicere, legite ^^atonem, Theophrastum,
Xenophontem, Aristorelem, and reliquos qui de So r^ font manantes dive^^ ^is
(...) quid in illis apertum, quid simplex est? quae verba non sensuum? qui
sensus non victorix? C^n^de ate quibus argumentis, and quam lubricis
problematibus diaboli spiritu contex^a subvertant: and quia inte^dum cogu^tur
loqui, non qu^d senti^nt, sed quos necesse, est, dicunt adversus ea quae dicu^t
Gentises. Taceod L^^nis scriptor (...) (...), Cypriano, Minucio, Vi^^orino,
(...), Hitario* ne non tam me d^fendisse, quam alios vide^^r accusasse.
We have learned together, (says He, writing to Pammachius,) that there are
diverse sorts of Discourse; and among the rest, that it is one thing, to write
(...), by way of Dis^utation; and another thing, to write (...), by way of
Instruction. In the former of these the Disputes are free, and rambling where,
in answering an Adversary, and proposing one while one thing, and another while
another, a Man argues as he pleases; speaking one thing, and doing another;
showing bread (as it is in the proverb) and holding a stone in his hand.
Whereas in the second kind? an open Forehead, and that I may so speak,
Ingenuity is necessarily required. It is one thing to make Inquiries, and
another to de^ine: in the one we must fight, in the other we must te^ch. Thou
see me in a combat, and in peril of my life; and do thou come with thy
grave Instructions, like some Reverend Schoolmaster? Do not wound me by
stealth, and from whence I least expected it. Let thy sword strike directly at
me: it is a shame for thee to wound thy Enemy by guile, and i^t by strength: as
if it were not a piece of the greatest mastery in fighting, to threaten one
part, but hit another. I beseech you read Demosthenes, read Tully: and lest
perhaps you should refuse Orators, whose profession it is to propose things
rather probat^e, th^n true; read Plato, Theophrastus, Xenophon Aristo^le, and
others; who springing all from Socrates his Fountain, as so many several
Rivolets ran several ways: what can you find in them, that is clear and open?
what word in them but has its Design? and what Design, but of Victory only?
Origin, Methodius, Eusebius, Apollinaris, have written largely against Celsus,
and Porphyrie: do but observe what manner of Arguments, and how slippery
Problems they made use of, for the subverting of those works, which had been
wrought by the spirit of the Devil: and how that being sometimes forced to
speak, they alleged against the Gentiles, not that which they believed, but
that which was most necessary to be said. I shall not here speak any thing of
the Latin Writers, as Tertullian, Cyprian, Minucius, Victorinus, Lactantius,
and Hilary, lest I might seem rather to accuse others, than to defend my self.
Thus S. Hierome. For, as for that which he presently adds, touching St. Paul,
whom he believes to have practiced the very same Arts, this is no proper place
to examine, either the* Truth, or the Use of this Opinion of his; ^or as much
as our purpose is here to treat of the Fathers only. Now you see, that he
testifies clearly, that they were wont, in their Disputations, sometimes to
say one thing, and believe another; to show us Bread, and keep a Stone in their
hand; to threaten one part, and to hit another; and that they were sometimes
constrained to fit their words, not to their own proper Thoughts, Athan. ep. de
fide Dion. Alex.
but to the present Necessity. And the very same thing is confessed also by
Athanasius, speaking of Dionysius Alexandrinus, as has been said before:
namely, that he wrote, not simply, and plainly, as giving us an account of his
own Belief; but that he was moved, and as it were forced to speak as he did, by
reason of the Occasion, and of the Person he disputed against. The like account
does S. Basil give of a certain Passage of Gregorius Neocaesari (...) answering
for him with this distinction; Basil sup. c. 5. ^.
That he spoke not in that place. Dogmatically, but only by way of Economy,
Athan. ep. de fid. Dion. Alex. (...).
or Dispensation. By which Term is meant, that a Man keeps to himself what he
believes, and proposes some other thing, lying wide of his own opinion,
either this way, or that way; being concerned so to do out of some certain
particular considerations. And as we sometimes see, that the Water ascends;
being forced to mount up, to fill some space, which otherwise would remain
void: (Now you will not, I hope, conclude from hence, that this is its natural
and ordinary motion:) In like manner was it with the Fathers; who, being
sometimes distressed, and hard put to it in Disputation; for to avoid, as I may
so speak, some certain Vacuum, which they were afraid of, they sometimes left
their Natural Motion, and their proper sense and opinion, and took up some
other contrary one, according to the Necessity of the present occasion. And
indeed, although St. Hienome had not given us this notice, the thing it self
would evidently enough have appeared, out of their Writings. For otherwise, how
could any one possibly have believed, that they could have spoken so diversely
as they have done in many particulars, blowing hot and cold with one and the
same mouth? How could they possibly have delivered so many things contrary
either to Reason, or to the Scriptures, or to the Fathers? For (as the same St.
Hierome says) who is so very a Block head, and so ignorant i^ the Art of
Writing, as that he will praise and condemn^ne and the same thing; pull down
what he has b^ilt; and build, what he had pulled down? Now the Hier. ep. 50.
ad Pam. Quis enim tam hebes, and sic in scribendo rudis est, ut idem laudet and
damnet? aedificata destruat, and destructa aedificet? Hier. ep. ad Desider.
quae est 144. Certe adorasse ubi steter^ne pedes Domini, pars fidei est.
Fathers are often observed to have done this very thing. We are therefore to
conclude, that they have been forced to it, out of some special Design; and
that they did it, as they use ^o speak, by Economy, or particular
Disp^nsation* se^ing that it is evident, that the greatest part of them were
very able Men. St. Hierome by namo recommending the going in Pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, went thus far, as (...) say* That it was a part of our Faith, to go
and (...) in ^^ose places, where the feet of our Savior, once st^^d; and to
(...) a sigh^ of the (...) which at this day continue fresh, both of his
Nativity, Cross, and Passion. Now how does this agree with that large
Discourse, Id. ep. 13. ad Paulin. Quorsum (inquies) haec tam longo repetita
principio? Videlicet ne quidquam fidei tuae deesse p^tes, quia Hi^osolyma^ ^on
vidi^^, nec nos idcirco meliores existimes quod hujus loci habi^aculo fruimur.
which he has made in another place, to a quite contrary sense? namely, in his
Epistle to Paulinus; where at length concluding, he gives him this Reason of
the length of his Discourse; * To the end ((...) he) that thou may not think
that any thing is wanting to the completing of thy Faith because thou have not
visited Jerusalem; or, that we are any whit the better for having the
opportunity of dwelling in this place. And here he concurs with Gregory N^ssen,
who ^ath written a Discourse, expressly against the opinion of those, Who
account it to be one of the parts of Pi^^y to have visited Jerusalem. Let any
rational Man therefore now judge, whether or no this course must not
necessarily embroil, and inwrap in a world of almost inexplicable Difficulties,
the Writings of the Fathers. For, how is it possible that we should be able to
judge, when they speak as they thought, Greg. Nyss. in Ep. (...), etc. (...),
(...). Hier. ep. 50 ad Pam. Debuerat prudens and benignus Lector etiam ea quae
videntur dura aestimare de caeteris, and non in uno atque eodem libro criminari
me diversas sententias protulisse.
and when not? Whether they mean really what they say, or whether they make but
a flourish only? Whether the Bread which they show us, be to deceive, or to
feed us? Whether the Problems they propose be solid, or slippery ones? Whether
their Positions be Dogmatical, or Oeconomical? Certainly, if our Court
judgments were framed after this manner, we should never hope to have an end in
any suit of Law. For as for that which S. Hierome says, That an intelligent,
and favorable Reader ought to judge of those things which seem hard, out of
the rest of the Discourse: and not presently to accuse any Author of
blockishness, for having delivered in one and the same Boo^, two contrary
Opinions: I confess that this is very true; but yet it does not remove the
Difficulty. For how intelligent and discerning a Man soever the Reader be, it
will very often be impossible for him, to make a right judgment in this
particular: as for example, when those other things are wanting which S.
Hierome would have a Man to make the measure of his judgment: or, when one
brings us no more of an Author, save only a bare Sentence; the Chapter, and
Book where these words are, which have need to be explained, being quite out of
his memory. And how many such are alleged every day, in our Disputations? What
can we now do, or which way shall we turn our selves, if meeting with a Passage
out of any of the Fathers, that needs to be explained, we can find no other
place in him concerning the same Point; or if there be none found, but what is
as doubtful as the other; or that is not in some other Book controverted it
self? Who shall regulate us, amidst such Contradictions as these? But, which is
yet worse, those things which S. Hierome prescribes us for a Rule, and
direction to our judgment, are now in these days of ours very unseasonable, as
being harsh, as to the one side, and pleasing to the other; according to men's
several affections, and interest; according to which they are wont to
interpret, and judge of the Fathers; whereas we should rather search in them,
which way we are to direct our judgments. And that favourableness which S.
Hierome requires in us, cannot be here of any use at all; but may possibly
besides do very much hurt. For the greater the affection is that we bear to any
Father; the greater care and pains will we take in vindicating his words, and
interpreting them in a sense as far different as we can from what we have long
since condemned, as Erroneous and Unsound; though possibly this may have been
his real sense, and opinion. As for example, in those Passages before-cited,
out of S. Hierome, and Gregory Nyssen, the Protestant accounts that a very
harsh piece of Doctrine, which yet his Adversary is very well pleased with: the
one of them sweats, and torments himself much, in the explaining of such a
Passage, as appears very easy to the other; the one takes that for Text, which
the other accounts but as a Gloss. And thus the greater affection men bear to
the name, and authority of any one of the Fathers, the more do they labor and
use their utmost endeavors, to bring him over to speak to their Opinion; that
is to say, in plain truth, to force him out of his own; it being impossible
that we should hold both Opinions at once. We shall here therefore conclude,
That how clear and express so ever the Words of the Fathers may be, yet
nevertheless will it very often so fall out, as that we cannot have any
assurance that we have their Sense expressed in them; whether it be in their
Expositions of the Scriptures, or in their Homilies and Sermons before the
People, or lastly, in their Disputations with their Adversaries, touching their
Faith.

CHAP. VII.
Reason VII. That the Fathers have not always held one and the same Belief; but
have sometimes changed some of their Opinions, according as their Judgment has
grown riper, through Study, or Age.

AMongst all the Ecclesiastical Writers, the Pen men of the Old and New
Testament only have received the knowledge of Divine things by an extraordinary
Inspiration: the rest have acquired their knowledge by the ordinary means of
Instruction, Reading, and Meditation; in such sort, as that this Knowledge came
not unto them in an instant, as it did to the others; but increased in them by
degrees, ripening and growing up by little and little, in proportion as they
grew in years: whence it is, that their Writings are not all of them of the
same weight, nor of the same Value. For, who sees not, that what they, as it
were, sportingly wrote in their younger years, is of much less consideration
than those other Pieces which they wrote in their riper age? Who, for instance,
Hier. Ep. 1. ad Heli^dor: vid. Ep. 2. ad Nepot.
would equal the Authority of that Epistle of S. Hierome to Heliodorus, written
by him when he had but newly left the Rhetoric Schools, being yet a Child, and
full of that innocent and inconsiderate Heat which usually attends those
years, to that of those other graver Pieces, which he afterward sent abroad
into the Church, when he had now arrived to his full strength, and ripeness of
Wi^, and to the perfection of his Studies? S. Augustine has left us a
remarkable Testimony, that the Fathers profited by Age and Study in the
Knowledge of the Truth, when as in his old age, taking Pen in hand, he reviewed
and corrected all that he had ever written during his whole Life; faithfully
and ingenuously noting whatsoever he thought worthy of reprehension, and giving
us all those his Animadversions collected together in the Books of his
Retractations; which, in my judgment, is the most glorious and most excellent
of all those many Monuments which he has left to Posterity; whether you
consider here the Learning, or the Modesty and Sincerity of the Man. Hier. ep.
65. de Erroribus Origenis. Ipse Origenes in Epistola quam scribit ad Fabianum,
Romanae urbis Episcopum, poenitentiam agit cur talia scripserit, etc.
S. Hierome reports, that Origin also, long before, had in his old age
written an Epistle to Fabianus Bishop of Rome, wherein he confesses, That he
repented him of many things which he had taught and written. Neither is there
any doubt, but that some such like thing may have happened to most of the other
Fathers; and that they may have sometime disallowed of that which they had
formerly believed, as true. Now from this consideration there falls in our way
a new Difficulty, which we are to grapple with, in this our Inquiry into the
true, genuine sense of the Fathers, touching our present Controversies. For,
seeing that the Condition and Nature of their Writings is such, it is most
evident, that when we would make use of any of their Opinions, it will concern
us to be very well assured, that they have not only sometime either held or
written the same; but that they have moreover persevered in them to the end.
Vincent. Lirinens. lib. adv. prof. Novit. seu Common.
Whence Vincentius Lirinensis, in that Passage of his which is so often urged,
for the making use of the Ancient Authors in deciding our present
Controversies, thinks it not fit that we should be bound to receive whatsoever
they have said, for certain and undoubted Truth, unless they have assured and
confirmed it unto us by their Perseverance in the same, as he there speaks.
Cardinal Perron also evidently shows us the same way, by his own practice:
for, disputing about the Canon of the Holy Scriptures (which he pretends to
have been always the very same in the Western Church, with that which is
delivered unto us by the III Council of Carthage, where the Maccabees are
recko^ed in among the rest;) and finding himself hardly pressed by some certain
Passages alleged by the Protestants out of S. Hierome to the contrary, he
answers the Objection, by saying, among other things, Perron's Repl. l. 1. c.
50.
That this Father, when he wrote the said Passages, was not yet come to the
ripeness of his Judgment, and perfection of his Studies; whereas afterward,
when he was now more fully instructed in the truth of the Sense of the Church,
he changed his Opinion, and retracted (as this Cardinal says) both in general,
and in particular, whatsoever he had before written in those three Prologues,
where he had excluded the Maccabees out of the Canon. Id. ibid.
And so likewise, to another Objection brought to the same purpose, out of the
Commentaries of S. Gregory the Great, he gives the like answer, saying, That S.
Gregory, when he wrote that Piece, was not yet come to be Pope, but was a plain
Deacon only, being at that time employed at Constantinople, as the Popes Nuncio
to the Greeks. Now these Answers of his are either insufficient; or else, it
will necessarily follow from hence, That we ought not to rest certainly
satisfied in the Testimony of any Father, except we first be assured, that not
only he never afterward retracted that Opinion of his; but that, besides, he
wrote it in the strength and ripeness of his Judgment. And see now how we are
fallen into a new Labyrinth: For, first of all, from whence, and by what means
may we be able to come truly and certainly to the knowledge of this Secret;
when as we can hardly meet with any light Conjectures, tending to the making of
this Discovery, namely, Whether a Father has in his old age changed his
Opinion, touching that Point for which it is produced against us, or not? If
they had all of them been either able, or willing to have imitated the Modesty
of S. Augustine, we should then have had little left to trouble us. But you
will hardly find any, either of the Ancients, or of those of Later times, that
have followed this example; unless it be Cardinal Bellarmine, who has lately
thought good to revive this Piece of Modesty, which had lain dead and buried
for the space of so many Ages together, by writing a Book of Retractations:
which Book of his is very diversely received by the Learned, as well of the one,
as of the other Religion. But yet, if you will stand stiff upon it, with
Cardinal Perron, and not allow the saying of a Father to be of any value,
unless it were written by him after the Ripeness of his Studies; I shall then
despair of our ever making any Progress, so much as one step forward, by this
means, in the business in hand. For, (will the one and the other Party say,
upon every Testimony that shall be produced against them) how do we know
whether this Father had yet arrived to the Ripeness of his Judgment, when he
wrote this Book, or not? Who can tell whether or no those days of his Life that
he enjoyed after the Writing hereof, might not have bestowed as well clearness
on his Understanding, as Whiteness on his Head; and have changed his Judgment,
as well as his Hair? We suppose here, that no such thing appears in any of
his other Writings. How many Authors are there who have changed their Opinions,
and yet have not retracted what they had formerly written? But suppose now,
that we should have lost that particular Tract wherein the Author had given
Testimony of the changing of his Opinion; what should we do in this cafe? If
Time should have deprived us of S. Augustine's Retractations, and some other of
his later Writings, as it has of an infinite number of other Pieces, both of
his, and other of the Fathers, which would have been of as great importance to
us, we must certainly have thought, that he had believed, that the Cause of
Predestination is the Prescience or Foreseeing of the Faith of Men, reading but
what he says in one of the Books which he first wrote, namely, August.
Exposit. quar. prop. ex Ep. Rim. proposit. 60. Non ergo elegit Deus opera
cujusquam in praescientia, quae ipse daturus est: sed ^^dem elegit, etc.
That God has not elected the Works of any Man, according to his Prescience;
seeing that it is* He himself that gives the same to a Man: But, that he has
elected his Faith by His Pres^ience; that is, He has elected those who He
foresaw would believe his Word; that is to say, He made choice of them to
bestow His Holy Spirit upon, that so by doing Good Works they might attain
everlasting. Life. Now would the Pelagians and Semipelagians have brought this
Passage as an infallible Argument that S. Augustine was of their Opinion; but
that his Retractations, and his other Books which were written afterward, in
his later time, clearly make it appear, that this Argument is of no force at
all; forasmuch as this Learned Father, having afterward better considered of
this Point, wholly altered his Opinion: Id. Retract. lib. 1. cap 23. Nondum
diligentius quaesiveram, nec adhuc inveneram, qualis sit Electio Gratiae, de
qua idem dicit Apostolus, Reliquiae, etc.
I had not (says he) as yet diligently enough inquired into, nor found out,
what the Election of Grace was, whereof the Apostle speaks in these words;
There is a Remnant (to be saved) according to the Election of Grace: which
certainly is not Grace, if any Merits preceded it; so that that which is given,
should be rendered rather as due to the Merits, than as given freely by Grace.
Now who knows, but that among those Fathers whom we so confidently allege
every day, some of them may have retracted those things which we at this day
read in their Works; and that Time may have devoured their Retractations of
those their Opinions, and may have left us only their Errors? Besides, who
knows, and can truly inform us, what Date their Writings bear? Whether they
were the Fruits of their Spring, or of their Summer, or of their Autumn?
Whether they were gathered green, or were suffered to ripen upon the Tree?
Doubtless this whole Inquiry is very dark; there being scarcely any mark of
their Season to be found upon the greatest part of them. There are indeed some
few of them, that have some of these Marks; but yet they are so doubtful and
uncertain ones, as that the most able and choicest Wits are sometimes deceived
in this their Inquiry. And when all is done, who knows not, that there are
some Trees that bear their Summer-fruit even in the very beginning of the
Summer, when as the Springtime is yet hardly past? And again, the Fruits which
are gathered at the end of the Later Season, are not always the ripest: for
Time, in stead of ripening, many times rotteth them. In like manner is it also
with Men, and consequently with the Fathers. Sometimes their Summer yields
much more, and better Fruit than their Autumn. For, as for the Winter, that is
to say, the last part of our Age, it is evident that it usually brings forth
nothing at all, or if it do chance to force it self beyond Nature, the Fruits
it brings forth are yet worse, and more crude and imperfect, than those even
of the Spring. Seeing therefore it is for the most part impossible to give any
certain judgment of these things, either by the History of these Authors, or by
their Books themselves; and that again on the other side, without this we ought
not to sit down upon any thing we find in their Writings, as reckoning we have
made a discovery what their Opinions have been: we may safely conclude in this
Point also, as we have done in the former, That it is a very hard matter to
know truly and precisely what the Opinions and Sense of the Ancients have been,
touching the Differences at this day debated amongst us.

CHAP. VIII.
Reason VIII. That it is Necessary, and withal very hard, to discover how the
Fathers have held all their several Opinions; Whether as Necessary, or as
Probable only; and in what degree of Necessity, or Probability.

Logic teaches us, That True Propositions are not all equally so; some of
them being but Contingent only, as the Schools speak; and others being
Necessary: and again, both the one and the other being more or less either
Contingent or Necessary, according to that admirable Division which the
Philosopher has made, Arist. Poster. Analyt. (...), (...), (...).
into those Three Degrees of Necessity, explained by him in the First Book of
his Demonstrations. And hence it comes to pass, that the Knowledge or Ignorance
of these Degrees is the more or less important, in those Sciences whereunto
they appertain; there being some of them, as namely, those which they call
Principles, that are so Necessary, as that a Man cannot be ignorant of them,
without overthrowing the whole Science wherein they ought to have place: and
there being others again, on the contrary side, that a Man may be ignorant of,
so far, as to hold their Contradictories for true, and yet nevertheless not run
any great hazard. As for example, These here following are Philosophical
Principles of the first sort; namely, That there is Motion; and, That every
Body occupies some certain Place, and the like. For, I beseech you, what
strange Philosophy would it be, that should either be ignorant of, or should
deny these Principles? But these other following are of the second sort;
namely, That there are precisely but Five Senses in Living Creatures; and, That
the Heavens are not of an Elementary Substance, and the like. For, although
these Propositions are by most held to be True, yet notwithstanding are they
not so Necessary, but that a Man may pass for a Philosopher, and yet not only
be ignorant of these Positions; but may also, if he please, maintain even those
things that are contradictory to them. Now if there be any Science where this
Consideration ought carefully to be applied, it is, in my judgment, in this of
Divinity. For, there is very much difference betwixt the Truths whereof it
consists; some of them being evidently more Necessary than others, as Origin
proves plainly, in his XXVII Homily upon S. Matthew. Do but compare these two
Propositions together; Christ is God; and, Christ suffered death, being of the
age of thirty four or thirty five years: who sees not, that though both these
Propositions are true, yet notwithstanding there is a very vast difference
betwixt them. For, the former of these is Necessarily True, that is to say, it
is True in such sort, as that it is Impossible but that Christ should be God;
the Salvation of Mankind, which is the End of our Religion, being otherwise not
possibly to be obtained: But as for the second, notwithstanding that it is
true, and is collected clearly enough out of the Scriptures, yet is it not at
all Necessary. For, Christ might, if he had so pleased, have suffered at the
Fortieth or Fiftieth year of his age, without any prejudice at all to our
Salvation, which was the End of His Suffering. Now according to this diversity
of D^grees, the Belief or Ignorance of these two Propositions are also of very
different importance. The first of them we may not be ignorant of, and much
less deny, without renouncing Christianity. The second we may be ignorant of,
and even deny too, as supposing it false, yet without any great danger. To be
able therefore to come to a clear and perfect understanding, what was the Sense
of the Fathers touching the Points of Religion at this day controverted amongst
Us, it is necessary that we should know, not only whether they believed, or not
believed them; but also, how they believed, or not believed them: that is to
say, whether they held them as Propositions Necessarily, or Probably, either
True, or False; and besides, in what Degree either of Necessity, or Probability
they placed them. Now that this Inquiry is very Necessary, Cardinal Perron has
clearly demonstrated in that Learned Epistle of his, written to Casaubon,
against K. James. For, the King attributing to himself the name of Catholic,
under pretense that He believed, and held all those things, that the Fathers of
the four or five first Centuries did; the Cardinal denies his Sequel; replying,
among other things, that to be of the Communion of the Ancients, a Man ought
not only to believe what they believed, but also to believe it in the same
manner, and in the same Degree, that they did: that is to say, to believe as
Necessary to Salvation, what they believed as Necessary to Salvation; and to
believe as profitable to Salvation, what they held for such; and for lawful,
and not repugnant to Salvation, what they held for lawful, and not repugnant to
Salvation. And thus he goes on, and gives us a long and exact Division of the
different Degrees of Necessity, which may, and ought to be considered, in all
Propositions touching Religion. I could heartily wish that this Occasion had
carried on this Learned Prelate so far, as to have made an Exact Application of
this Doctrine, and to have truly informed us, of what the greatest part of the
World is at this day Ignorant; namely, in what Degree each Point of the
Christian Faith is held, either by the Church of Rome, or by the Ancient
Fathers; and what things are absolutely Necessary in Religion; and what are
those other things, that are necessary under some certain Conditions only:
which again are necessary by the necessity of the Means; and which, by the
necessity of the Precept; (as he there speaks:) that is to say, which are those
things, that we ought to observe, either by reason of their Profit, as being
Means which are profitable to Salvation: and which we are to observe, by reason
of the Commandment only, being enjoined us by such an Authority, as we owe
Obedience to: and after all these Points, Which again All* and every of the
Faithful are bound to believe Expressly; and, which are those, that it is
sufficient to believe in gross only, and by an I^plicite Faith: and Lastly,
which are those things that we ought actually to do* and, which are those, that
it is sufficient if we approve of them only, though we do them not. So that it
appears clearly out of these Words of his, that to be able to know, what the
Belief of the Fathers has been, especially in the Points now in debate, we
ought first to be assured, in what degree they believed the same. And that this
distinction was of very great Consideration with the ancient Church, it appears
sufficiently out of the special regard which it always had unto it; opening to,
or shutting the door against men, first of all, according to the things which
they believed, or not believed: Secondly, according to the different manners,
how they believed, or not believed them. For it Excommunicated those who
rejected those things that it held as Necessary; and so likewise, those, who
pressed as things Necessary, such as it held for things probable only. But it
received, with all the sweetness that might be, all those who either were
Ignorant of, or doubted of, or indeed denied those things which it accounted
though True, yet not Necessarily so. This appears clearly, Hist. Eccles.
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. Cod. Graeci cap. 26.
out of an Epistle written by Irenaeus to Victor Bishop of Rome, set down by
Eusebius, in his Ecclesiastical History: where this holy Man testifies, that
although there had been before Victors time, the same difference betwixt the
Asian and the Roman Church, touching the celebration of Easter Day* yet
notwithstanding they lived in peace, and mutual amity together; neither were
any of the Asian Bishops ever excommunicated at Rome, for their dissenting from
them, either in this, or in any other Point: but that rather on the contrary,
Polycarpus, coming to Rome, in the time of Pope Anicetus, after they had had a
Conference touching the differences betwixt them, and each of them continued
still firm in his former opinion; yet notwithstanding did they not forbear to
hold fair correspondence with each other, and to communicate together; Anicetus
also, out of the respect he bare to Polycarpus, allowing him the use of his own
Church, to celebrate the Eucharist in. Tertullian in his Book, Tertul. de
Praescript. advers. Haeret. c. 4. Caeterum manente forma ejus in suo ordine,
quantumlibet quaeras, and tractes, and omnem libidinem curiositatis effundas,
etc. Vid. l. de Virg. vel l 1.
De Praescriptionibus adversus Haereticos, requires only that the Rule of Faith
(as he calls it) should continue in its proper Form, and Order; allowing every
Man, in all other particulars, to make what Inquiries and Discourses he please,
and to exercise his Curiosity to the height of Liberty: which is an evident
Argument, that He admitted into His Communion all those who not contradicting
the Rule of Faith, broached any other opinions; if so be they held them but as
Probable only; and proposed not any thing which was contrary to the Rule of
Faith. The Author of the Apol Orig. inter opera Origin.
Apology of Origin published by Ruffinus* under the name of Pamphilus, was of
the same opinion also* For, having confessed, that Origin, if not held, yet
published some certain very strange opinions, touching the State of the Soul
before the Birth of Man, and concerning the Nature of the Stars; he wi^hal
maintains, that these opinions do not presently make a Man an H^retick* and
that even among the Doctors of the Church there was diversity of opinion
touching the same. But besides all this, it is evident that this difference of
judgment is even at this day to be found in the Church of Rome; where you shall
find the Jacobins and the Franc^s^ans maintaining opinions utterly
contradictory to each other, touching the Conception of the Virgin Mary; the
one of them maintaining that she was conceived without sin; whereas the other
utterly deny it. And, that which makes me wonder the more, is, that they suffer
such Contradictory opinions as these to be held amongst them, in such
particulars, as considered barely in themselves, seem yet to be of very great
Importance. As for Example, a Man may either believe that we oug^^ to yield to
the Cross the Adoration of Latria; or, if he please, he may believe the
contrary; without losing, either by reason of the one, or the other, the
Communion of the Church, and Salvation. And yet notwithstanding if you but
consider the thing in it self, it will appear to be a matter of no such
Indifferency as people take it for. For, if the Former of these Opinions be
indeed True; then must those that are of the other Opinion, needs sin very
grievously, in not worshipping a Subject, that is so worthy of Adoration. But
if it be False, then are those Men that maintain the same, guilty of a much
greater sin, by committing so horrible Idolatry. What Point is there in
Religion, that seems to be of greater Importance than that, touching the
Foundation, and Head of all Ecclesiastical Power, upon the Authority whereof
the whole Faith, and State of the Church turns? And yet, touching this
Particular also, which is of so great consequence, do they suffer Men to
maintain Contradictory Opinions; some attributing this Dignity to the Pope; and
others, to a General Council. Ferron. Repl. l. 4. in Praefat.
Now if the opinion of the First of these be true, then is the Faith of the
Later built upon a very Erroneous Ground: but if the opinion of the Later be
true, than does the Faith of the Former depend upon a Cause, which is not
Infallible; and consequently is Null. Now these Different opinions are
reconciled, by saying, that the Church accounting neither of these Beliefs as
necessary to Faith; a Man is not presently an Heretic, for holding the False
opinion of the two; nor yet is he to be counted Orthodox, merely for holding
the True one. Seeing therefore that this Particular concerns the Communion of
the Church, and our Salvation also, which depends thereon; it will behove us
to know certainly, in what Degree the Ancients placed those Articles, which are
at this day so eagerly pressed upon the Protestants; and whether they held them
in the same, or in a Higher, or else in a Lower Degree of Necessity, than they
are now maintained by the Church of Rome. For, unless this be made very clear,
the Protestants, though they should confess, (which yet they do not,) that the
Fathers did indeed really believe the same; might yet allege for themselves,
that notwithstanding all this, they are not bound to believe the same; for as
much as all opinions in Religion are not presently Obligatory, and such as all
Men are bound to believe; seeing that there are some that are indeed necessary,
but some others that are not so. They will answer likewise, that these opinions
are like to those at this day controverted, betwixt the Dominicans, and the
Franciscans; or to those other Points, debated betwixt the Sorbonists and the
Regulars: wherein every one is permitted to hold what he pleases. They will
urge for themselves the Determination of the Council of Trent, ^onc. Trident.
Sess. 21. cap. ^. extr. and Can. 4.
which in express terms distinguishes betwixt the opinions of the Fathers;
where having thundered out an Anathema, against all those that should maintain,
that the Administering of the Eucharist was necessary for little Infants, they
further declare, that this Thunderbolt extended not to those Ancient Fathers,
who gave the Communion to little Infants; for as much as they maintained, and
practiced this, being moved thereunto upon Probable Reasons only, and not
accounting it necessary to Salvation. Seeing therefore that some Errors, which
have been condemned by Councils, may be maintained in such a certain Degree,
without incurring thereby the danger of their Thunderbolts: by the same reason
a Man may be ignorant of, and even deny some Truths also, without running the
hazard of being Anathematized. Who can assure us, (may the Protestants further
add) that the Articles which we reject, are not of this kind? and such, as that
though perhaps they may be true, it is nevertheless lawful for us not to
believe. My opinion therefore is, that there is no Man now that sees not, that
it concerns the Doctors of the Roman Church, if they mean to convince their
Adversaries out of the Fathers first to make it appear unto them, that the
Ancients held the said Points, not only as True, but as Necessary also, and in
the very same Degree of Necessity that they now hold them. Now this must needs
prove a business of most extreme Difficulty, and much greater here, than in any
of the other particulars before proposed. And I shall allege no other Argument
for the proof of this, than that very Decree we cited before, where the Council
of Trent has declared, that the Fathers did not Administer the Communion to
Infants, out of any opinion that it was necessary to Salvation; Council.
Trident. Sess. 21. c. 4. Ut enim sanctiss^^i^ill^ Patres sui facti probabi^em
causam pro illius temporis ratione habuerunt; ita certe eos nulla salutis
necessitate id ^ec^sse, sine controversi^ tenendum est.
but did it upon some other probable Reasons only. For, we have not only very
good reason to doubt, whether the Fathers held this opinion, and followed this
practice, as probable only, but it seems besides (with all Reverence to that
Council be it spoken,) to appear evidently enough out of their Writings, that
they did hold it as Necessary. For, do but hear the Fathers themselves* and St.
Augustine in the first place: who says, Aug. l. 1 ^e peccat. Mor* and rem^ss
Ex antiqu^, ut existimo, and Apostolica Traditione Ecclesiae Christ^^msitum
tenent, praeter Baptismum and participationem Dominicae men^ae, non solum ad
Regnum Dei, sed nec ad salutem, and vitam^aeternam posse quenquam hominum
pervenire. Hoc enim and Scriptura ^estatur, etc. Ibid. Paulo post. Si erg^, ut
tot and tanta divina testimonia concinunt, nec salus, nec vita aeterna sine
Baptismo, and corpore and sanguine Domini cu^quam specta^^a est; frustra sine
his promittitur parvulis.
That the Churches of Christ hold, by an Ancient, and as I conceive (says he)
an Apostolical Tradition, that without Baptism, and the Communicating of the
Lords Table, no Man can come either into the Kingdom of God or unto Salvation,
or Eternal Life. And afterward having, as he conceives* proved this out of the
Scriptures, he adds further: Seeing therefore that no Man can hope either for
Eternal, Life, or Salvation, without Baptism, and the Body and Blood of Christ,
(thus does he call the Sacrament of the Eucharist, according to the language of
his Time;) as has been proved by so many Divine Testimonies; in vain is it
promised to Infants, without the participating of these. And some three
Chapters before, treating of those words of our Savior in S. John, Except you
eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, you can have no Life in you: which words he
understands, both there an^ (...) where, of the Communicating of the
E^charist; he makes a long Discourse to prove, that they extend as well to
little Infants, as to people of riper Ag^. Id. Ibid. c. 20. vero quisquam etiam
hoc dicere audebit, qu^d ad parvulos haec sententia non perti^eat; possintque
sine participatione corporis hujus and sanguinis in se habere vitam etc?
(...) there any man says he, that dares affirm that thi^ sp^ech belongs not
to little (...) o^ that they may have life in them* without participating of
this Body* and of this Blo^d? And this is this constant manner of speaking, in
eight or ten other Passages in his Id. T. 2. ep. 106 ep. 107. ep. poster ib.
Mar. l. 2. contr. Pel. and Celest. c. 18. l. 1 contr. 2. ep. Pelag. ad Bon.
cap. 22. and l. 4 c. 4. l* 1. contr. Jul. and l. 3. c. 1. etc. 12. lib. de
Praedest. Sanct. ad Prosp. c. 13. Hypomn. l. 5. and 6. Tract. 120. in J^h.
Sermon. 32. de verb. Ap.
Works, which are too long to be here inserted* Pope Innocent I* his
Contemporany* speaks also after the same manner* proving against the
Pelagians, that Baptism is Necessary for Infants, to render them capable of
Eternal Life; for as much as, without Baptism they cannot Innoc. in ep. ad
Milevit Synod. quae est inter ep. Aug 15. Illud vero quod eos vestra
fraternitas asserit praedicare, parvulos aeternae vitae praemiis, etiam sine
baptismatis gratia posse donari, perfatuum est. Nisi enim manducaverint carnem
fi^^i hominis, and biber^nt sargu^em ejus, non habebunt vitam aeternam in
seme^ipsis. Vid. Aug. l. 2. contr. 2. ap. Pelag. c. 4. and lib. 1. contr. Jul.
c. 2.
Communicate of the E^charist, which is necessary to Salvation. Cyprian lib. ^.
Test ad Qui. c. ^5.
S. Cyprian also, long before them spoke to the very same sense: and this
Maldon. in Joan. c. 6. number. 116. M^ssam facio Augustini, and Innocent^^ I*
sententiam, quae sexce^tos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistiam
etiam Infantibus necessariam.
Maldonate affirms* to have been the opinion of the six first Centuries.
These things considered, we must needs think one of these two things following;
namely, that either the Council of Trent, by its Declaration, has made that,
which has been, to be as if it never had been; which is a Power, that the Poet
Agath^ apud Aristot. Eth ad Nicom l. 7* c. 2. (...).
Agath^ in Aristotle would not allow to God himself: or else, that the Fathers
of this Council, either out of forgetfulness, or otherwise, mistook themselves
in this account of theirs, touching the opinion of the Ancient Church in this
particular: which, in my judgment* is the more favorable, and the more
probable Conceit of the two: and if so, I shall then desire no more. For, if
these great Personages, who were chosen with so much Care, and Circumspection,
out of all parts of Christendom, and sent to Trent, to deliberate upon, and
determine a Business of the greatest Importance in the World; and were directed
by the Legates of so exquisite a Wisdom* and digested their Decrees with a
judgment so Ripe, and slow-paced, as that there is scarcely any one word in
them, but has its Design; if after all this, I say, these Men should be ^ound
to have erred in this their Inquiry, in affirming, that the Fathers held only
as Probable, that which they evidently appear to have held as Necessary: If
Pope Pius VI. with his whole Consistory, consisting of so many Eminent, and
Wise Men, has approved and confirmed this Mistake of theirs, not perceiving it
at all: what can we, or indeed what ought we to expect from any other hands,
whose soever they be, as touching the Points now controverted betwixt us; in
comparison of which, a Man may very well say, that all the Difficulty, that
this Matter now spoken of yields, is nothing at all, wherein notwithstanding
this whole Council mistook it self? Where shall we find a M that after this
their Failing, can have the courage to adventure upon so Difficult, and so
Intricate an undertaking? Who can promise himself success there, where so Great
a Council has failed? The very hope of effecting so weighty a Matter can
hardly be excused from the guilt of High Pr^sumption. For, first of all, the
Fathers tell us very seldom, in what Degree either of Necessity, or
Probability, they held their Opinions: and even when they do tell us, their
Expressions being such, as we have observed of them, we ought not presently to
conclude any thing from them, without first examining them thoroughly. For, many
t^mes, when they would recommend unto us such things, as they accounted
profitable for us; they would speak of them, as if they had been Necessary: and
so again, to take off our Belief of, and to divert our affections from such
things as they conceived either to be simply false, or otherwise unprofitable
for us; they represented them as the most detestable and pernicious things that
could be. Ignat. ep. 4. ad Phil. (...).
Whosoever fasteth upon the Lords day, or upon any Saturday, except that one
Saturday, (he means Easter-Eve) he is a murderer of Christ, said S.
Ignatius. Who would not think, hearing these so Tragical Expressions of his,
that certainly he was speaking of the very Foundation of the whole Christian
Religion? And yet the Business he there speaks of, was only the Observation of
a certain part of a Positive Law, and which yet (as most are of opinion) was at
that time received but by a part only of the Church; the belief and
observation whereof was so far from being reckoned among those things that were
Necessary, that it was scarcely placed in the first Degree of Probability; and
is now at length utterly abolished too. This manner of Discoursing is very
frequently used by Tertullian, S. Ambrose, and especially by S. Hierome* who
are all so eager for the Side which they take to, that you would think, in
reading them, that all those whom they commend, were very Angels; and all those
other, whom they speak against, arrant Devils: that whatsoever they maintain,
are the very Foundations and Groundwork of the Christian Religion; and
whatsoever they refute, is mere Atheism, and the highest Impiety* that may be.
Hieron. ep. 10. ad Furiam. Tom. 1.
Certainly S. Hierome, writing to a certain Roman Matron, named Furia, who was
a Widow, and dissuading her from marrying again, discourses of this Matter in
the very same manner as he would have done in dissuading her from the
committing of Murder. And here are we to call to mind again the diverse Reasons
of the obscurity of the Fathers, and particularly that of their Rhetoric, all
which have place in this Particular, rather than in any other. So that there
seems to be but one only Certain way left us to discover in what degree they
placed the Propositions of Christian Doctrine; namely, their Creeds, and
Expositions of their Faith, whether they were General or Particular ones; and
the Determinations of their Councils and Ecclesiastical Assemblies. For we may
very well believe, that they held as necessary all such Points, as they made
profession of in such a manner, Anathematizing all such as should deny the
same. And by this Rule we may indeed assure our selves, that they held, as
Necessary, the greatest part of all those Points wherein we at this day agree
among our selves. And some of these we have formerly set down in our Preface;
for they are most of them either delivered expressly in their Creeds, or else
positively determined in their Councils; and the Contradictors of them, there
expressly condemned. But yet this Rule will scarcely be of any use at all to us,
in the Decilion of our present Controversies: For, some of them appear not at
all, neither in that Rule of Faith so often mentioned by Tertullian, nor in the
Nicen Creed, nor in that of Co^stanti^ople, nor in the Determinations of the
Council of Ephesus, nor yet in those of Chalcedon. The first of these Councils
Anathematized Arius; the second, Macedonius; the third, Nestorius; and the
fourth, Eutyches: and yet nevertheless are the several Tenets of these very Men
at this day received, and maintained by one Side or other. Nay, which is more,
the aforesaid Articles do not at all appear neither in the two following
Councils; namely, the second Council of Constantinople, which condemned certain
Writings of Theodorus, Theodoretus, and Ibas, as we have touched before; nor
yet in the III Council of Constantinople, which Anathematized the Monothelites,
and was held about the year of our Lord DCLXXXI. And yet have these Six first
Councils (if you will believe the Fathers of the VII) established and confirmed
all those things which had been taught in the Catholic Church, Synod. 7. Act.
6. Refut. Synod. Iconocl. (...), (Sex Synodi Oecumen^cae) (...).
down from the Primitive Times, whether by Writing, or by Unwritten Tradition.
So that it will hence follow, that these Points, which appear not here in the
said Six first Councils at all, were not delivered from the beginning, neither
in Writing, nor otherwise. Only about the Eighth Century, and so for a good
while afterward, we find mention of one of those Points now controverted among
us, namely, that touching Images; which was diversely and contrarily determined
in the Councils of Constantinople, of Nicaea, and of Francfort: the Second of
these Councils enjoining the Use and Adoration of Images; whereas the First had
utterly forbid it; and the last of these Councils taking off, and correcting,
as it were, the Excesses of the other Two. What can you say to this, that
neither in the Writings of Particular Men, which yet are usually more copious,
and fuller, than the Determinations of Councils are, there is so much as any
mention made of the said Points? Epiphanius, Epiphan. in Panar. l. 3 and in
Anacephal.
in the Conclusion of his Treatise of Heresies, gives us two Discourses; in the
one whereof he sets down the Order, Customs, and Discipline of the Church in
his time: wherein I must needs say, that there are very many things which much
differ from the Customs that are at this day observed by us, both of the one
side, and of the other. In the other is contained an Exposition of the Faith of
the Church, set down at large, which he calls, Id ibid (...).
The Pillar of the Truth, the Hope and Assurance of Immortality. And yet of all
those Controversies which are at this day debated amongst us, you shall there
meet with only one which is touching the Local Descent of our Savior Christ
into Hell: which yet is an Article of very small importance, as every one
knows. In the Acts of the Sixth Council we have a Synodical Epistle of
Sophronius, Council VI. Act. II.
Patriarch of Jerusalem, wherein, as the usual Custom was, he explaineth the
Faith, in a very large and particular manner: and yet notwithstanding, you
shall no there meet with any of those Points which are now controverted amongst
us. Those that shall search more narrowly into the Business, will be apt
positively to conclude from this their silence, that these Points were not at
that time any part of the Belief of the Church: and certainly this their way of
Argumentation seems not to want Reason. But as for my own particular, it is
sufficient for me, that it confirms the Truth of my Assertion, which is, That
it is, if not an impossible, yet at least a very hard thing, to discover in
what degree either of Necessity, or Probability, the Ancient Fathers held each
of those Points which are now debated amongst us; seeing that they appear not
at all, neither in the Expositions of their Faith, nor yet in the
Determinations of their Councils; which are as it were the Catalogues of those
Points which they accounted Necessary.

CHAP. IX.
Reason IX. We ought to know what has been the Opinion, not of one, or more of
the Fathers, but of the whole Ancient Church; which is a very hard matter to be
found out.

THose who make most account of the Writings of the Fathers, and who urge them
the oftnest in their Disputations, do inform us, That the weight of their
Sayings in these Matters proceeds from hence, that they are as so many
Testimonies of the General Sense and Judgment of the Church; to which alone
these men attribute the Supreme Power of Judging in Controversies of Religion.
For, if we should consider them severally, each by himself, and as they stand
by their own strength only, they confess, that they may chance to err. So
that it will follow hence, That to the end we may make use of the Testimonies
of the Fathers, it is not sufficient for us to know whether such or such
Sayings be truly theirs; and, if so, what the meaning of them is: but we ought
further also to be very well assured, that they are conformable to the Belief
of the Church in their time: in like manner as in a Court of Judicature, the
Opinion of any single Person of the Bench is of no weight at all, as to the
passing of Judgment, unless it be conformable to the Opinion of all the rest,
or at least of the Major Part of the Company. And now see how we are fallen
again into new Difficulties. For, whence, and by what means may we learn,
whether the whole Church, in the time of Justin Martyr, or of S. Augustine, or
of S. Hierome, maintained the same Opinions in every particular, that these Men
severally did, or not? I confess, that the Charity of these Men was very great;
and that they very heartily and constantly embraced the Body and Substance of
the Belief of the Church, in all Particulars that they saw apparently to be
such. But, where the Church did not at all deliver it self, and expressly
declare what its Sense was; they could not possibly, how great soever their
desire of so doing might have been, follow its Authority, as the Rule of their
Opinions. Wheresoever therefore they treat of Points which were long since
decided, believed, and received, expressly, and positively, by the whole
Christian Church, either of their own Age, or of any of the preceding Ages; it
is very probable that they did conform to what was believed by the Church; so
that, in these Cases, their Saying may very well pass for a Testimony of the
Judgment and Sense of the Church; it being very improbable, that they could be
either ignorant what was the Public Doctrine of the Church; or that knowing
the same, they would not follow it. As for example, when Athanasius, S.
Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, and others, discourse touching the Son of
God, they speak nothing but what is conformable to the Belief of the Church in
General; because that the Belief of the Church had then been clearly and
expressly delivered upon this Point: so that whatsoever they say, as to this
Particular, may safely be received, as a Testimony of the Churches Belief. And
the like may be done in all the other Points, which have either been positively
determined in any of the General Councils, or delivered in any of the Creeds,
or that any other way appears to have been the public Belief of the Church.
If the Fathers had but contained themselves within these Bounds, and had not
taken liberty to treat of any thing, save what the Church had clearly delivered
its Judgment upon; this Rule might then have been received as a General one;
and, what opinion soever we found in them, we might safely have concluded it to
have been the Sense of the Church that was in their time. But the curiosity of
Man's Nature, together with the Impudence of the Heretics, and the Tenderness
of Conscience, whether of their own or of others, and diverse other Reasons
perhaps, having partly made them willingly, and partly forced, and as it were
constrained them to go on further, and to proceed to the search of the Truth of
several Points, which had not as yet been established by the universal and
public Consent of all Christians, it could not be avoided, but that
necessarily they must in these Inquiries make use of their own proper Light,
and must deliver upon the same their own private Opinions; which the Church,
which came after them, has since either embraced, or rejected. I shall not
here stand to prove this my Assertion, since it is a thing that is confessed on
all hands, and whereof the Romanists make special use upon all occasions, in
answering several Objections brought against them out of the Fathers. As, for
example, Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l 4. c. 14. Sect. Respondeo in primis, etc.
where Cardinal Bellarmine excuses the Error of Pope John XXII, touching the
state of the Departed Souls, before the Resurrection, by saying, that the
Church in his time had not as yet determined any thing touching this
Particular. And so likewise, where he applies the same Plaster to that (in his
Judgment) so unsound Opinion of Pope Nicolas I, who maintained That Baptism
administered in the Name of Jesus Christ only, without expressing the other
Persons of the Holy Trinity, was not withstanding valid and effectual. Id.
ibid. c. 12. Sect. Respond. Nicolaum, etc. Non invenitur ulla certa definitio
Ecclesiae de hac re. Id. ibid Sect. ult. ex his.
This is a Point (says Bellarmine) touching which we find not the Church to
have determined any thing. And, how dangerous, and almost Heretical soever the
Opinion of those Men seem to him to be, who hold, That the Pope of Rome may
fall into Heresy; yet does he permit Pope Adrian to hold the same, not daring
to rank him among the Heretics, because that the Church had not as yet clearly
and definitively delivered it self touching this Point. The same Bellarmine, in
another Controversy of great importance, touching the Canonical Books of the
Old Testament, finding himself hardly put to it, by his Adversaries urging
against him the Authority of S. Hierome, who casts Tobit, the Book of Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, and the Maccabees, out of the Canon, contrary to the Judgment
of the Church of Rome, which receives them in* rids his hands of this
Objection, after the same manner. I confess (says he) that S. Hierome held
this Opinion, because that no General Council had as yet ordained any thing
touching these Books. Seeing therefore it is most clear, both from the
Confession of our Adversaries, and also by the consideration of the thing it
self, that the Fathers have ven^ed in their Writings very many of their own
particular Opinions, digested out of their own private Meditations, and which
they had not learnt in the School of the Church; who sees not, that before we
give any certain credit unto their Sayings, we ought first to be assured of
what Nature they are? Whether they were their own particular Opinions only, or
the public Sense of their Age? Since it is confessed by all, That those of the
former sort are not always obligatory necessarily; but are such as oftentimes
may, and sometimes ought to be rejected, without any scruple at all. You will
object, perhaps, to a Protestant, That S. Hierome* worshipped the Relics of
Departed Saints. How shall I know (will he reply upon you again) whether this
was his private Opinion only, or not? If the Authority of this Father, for
want of being grounded upon some Public Declaration of the Church, could not
bind Bellarmine to receive his Opinion, touching the Canon of the Old
Testament; why should this Opinion of his, which is not any whit better
grounded than the other, persuade me to the Worship of Relics? The same will
he reply upon you, and many times with much more appearance of Reason,
concerning diverse other Testimonies produced out of the Fathers. So that,
whether you would confirm your own Faith, or whether you would wrest out of
your Adversaries hand this manner of Reply, and make good all such Allegations;
it will concern you to make it clear, concerning any Passage whatsoever, that
you shall urge out of a Father, that it is not his own private Opinion, but was
the Opinion of the Church it self wherein he lived: which, in my Judgment, is a
thing that is as hard, or harder to be demonstrated, than any one of all those
things we have yet discoursed of. For, those means by which we might easily
attain to this Knowledge, are wanting unto us; and those which we have left us,
are very weak, and very little concluding. If the Fathers themselves had but
taken so much pains as to have distinguished betwixt these two sorts of
Opinions, informing us in every particular Case, which were their own private
Opinions only, and which were taught by the whole Church; or, at least, had but
proposed some of them as Doubtful, and others again as Assured Truths, in like
manner as Origin has sometimes done; they would indeed have eased us very
much: though, to say the truth, they would not have wholly cured us of our
Grief: forasmuch as sometimes (as we shall hereafter make it appear) they
attribute to the Church those things, Infr. l. 2. c. 1.
which it is most evident that it never held. But they very seldom use to make
any such Distinction, but commonly ^ent their own private Opinions in the very
same manner as they do the public* and sometimes also, by reason of the
Passion, which these Authors may chance naturally to have been subject unto, be
the thing what it will, we shall have them recommending unto us with more
eagerness, that which they have conceived, and brought forth themselves, than
that which they have received from any other hand: so that we shall meet with
very little in them, that may give us any light in this Particular. There would
be left us yet another help in this business, by comparing that which they say
here and there throughout their Writings, with the Public Opinions of the
Church, which would be a pretty safe and certain Rule to go by, had we any
where else besides their Books, any clear and certain evidence, what the Belief
of the Church has been, in each several Age, touching all Points of Religion:
and if this were so, we should not then need to trouble our selves with the
studying the Writings of the Fathers; seeing that we read them for no other
purpose, but only to discover out of them, what the opinion of Christendom has
been, touching those Points which are at this day controverted betwixt us. But
now there is no man but knows, but this help is wanting to us. For, setting
aside the Creeds, and the Determinations of the six first General Councils, and
of some few of the Provincial, you will not meet with any Piece of this nature,
throughout the whole stock of Antiquity. Now, (as we have already made it
appear in the preceding Chapter,) the Ancient Church has not any where
declared, neither in its Creeds, nor in the aforesaid Councils, what the
opinion and sense of it has been, touching the greatest part of those Points,
which are now in dispute amongst us. It follows therefore, that by this means
we shall never be able to distinguish, in the Writings of the Fathers, which
were their own private opinions, and which they held in common with the rest of
the Church. If we could indeed learn from any creditable Author, that the
present Controversies had ever been decided by the Ancient Church; we should
then readily believe, that the Fathers would have followed this their Decision:
and then, although the Co^stitutions themselves should not perhaps have come
down to our hands, yet notwithstanding should we be in some sort obliged to
believe, that the Fathers who had both seen, and assented to the same, would
also have delivered over the sense of them unto us in their Writings. But we
meet with no such thing in any Author: but it rather appears evidently to the
contrary, through the whole course of Ecclesiastical Story, that these Matters
were never so much as started, in the first Ages of Christianity; so far have
they been from being then decided. So that it manifestly appears from hence,
that if the Fathers of those Primitive times have by chance said any thing of
them; they fetched not what they said from the Determinations of the Church,
which had not as yet declared it self touching the same; but vented rather
their own private thoughts and opinions. Neither will it be to any purpose to
object here, that the Testimonies of many Fathers together do represent unto us
the sense of the Church; although the voice of one or two single persons only
is not sufficient to do the same. For, not to answer, that that which has
happened to one, may have happened to many others; and, that if some particular
persons chance to have fallen upon some particular Opinions, possibly others
may either have accompanied, or else have followed them in the same: I say
further, that this Objection is of no force at all in this Particular. For,
seeing that the Church had not as yet declared its opinion publicly, touching
the Points at this day controverted; it is as impossible that many together,
that lived in the same time, should represent it unto us, as that one single
person should. How could they possibly have seen that; which lay as yet
concealed? How could they possibly measure their Belief by such a Rule, as was
not yet visible to the World? The Chiliasts allege the Testimonies, not of
one, not of two, but of a very great number of the most eminent and the most
ancient among the Fathers, who were all of their opinion as we shall see
hereafter. The Answer, that is ordinarily made to the Objection, is, That the
Church having not as yet declared its sense touching this Point, the
Testimonies of these Men bind us not to believe the same: which is an evident
Argument, that a great number, in this case, signifies no more than a small, in
the representing unto us, what the Belief of the Church has been; and that it
is necessary, that either by some General Council, or else by some other
public way, it must have declared its judgment touching any Question in debate
that so we may know whether the Fathers have been of the same judgment, or no.
So that according to this Account, we are to raise up again the whole Ancient
Church, and to call it to account, touching every of these particular Points
now debated, touching which the Testimonies of the Fathers are alleged; it
being impossible otherwise to give any certain judgment, whether that which
they say be their own private, or else the public Opinion; that is to say,
whether it be fit to be believed, or not. So that any man, that is but of the
meanest judgment, may easily perceive how that it is not only a difficult, but
also almost an impossible thing, to gather out of the Writings of the Fathers
so much light, as is necessary we should have, for our satisfaction in matters
of so great importance.

CHAP. X.
Reason 10. That it is a very hard matter to know, whether the Opinions of the
Fathers, touching the Controversies of these Times, were received by the Church
Universal, or but by some part of it only: which yet is necessarily to be
known, before we can make use of any Allegations out of them.

BUT suppose that a Father, relieving us in this difficult, or rather
impossible business, should tell us in express terms, that what he proposes,
is the sense and opinion of the Church in his time; yet would not this quite
deliver us out of the doubtful condition we are in. For, besides that their
words are many times, in such cases as these, liable to exception, suppose that
it were certainly and undoubtedly so; yet would it concern us then to examine,
what that Church was, whereof he speaks; whether it were the Church
Universal, or only some Particular Church, and whether it were that of the
whole World, or that of some City, Province, or Country only. Now that this is
a matter of no small importance is evident from hence; because that the
opinions of the Church Universal in Points of Faith are accounted infallible,
and necessarily true: whereas those of Particular Churches are not so, but are
confessed to be subject to Error. So that the Question being here touching the
Faith, which ought not to be grounded upon any thing, save what is infallibly
true; it will concern us to know, what the judgment of the Church Universal
has been; seeing the opinion of no Particular Church can do us any service in
this case. And, that this distinction is also otherwise very necessary, appears
evidently by this; because that the opinions and customs, which have been
commonly received by the greatest part of Christendom, have not always
presently taken place in each Particular Church; and again, those which have
been received in some certain Particular Churches, have not been entertained by
all the rest. Thus we find in story, that the Churches of Asia minor kept the
Feast of Easter upon a different day from all the other parts of Christendom:
and although the business it self seems to be of no very great importance, yet
did it nevertheless cause a world of stir in the Church; Victor, Bishop of
Rome, by reason of this little difference, excommunicating all Asia minor. Now
each party here alleged their Reasons, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 5 c. 23, 24. p.
55. Cod. Graec.
and Apostolical Tradition for what they did; speaking with so great confidence
in the justification of their own opinion, as that hearing them severally, a
man would verily believe, that each of their opinions was the very sense of the
whole Church; which notwithstanding was but the opinion of one part of it only.
The greatest part of Christendom held the Baptism of Heretics to be good and
effectual; Cypr. ep. 71. and ep. 75. quae est Firmil.
and received all those, who forsaking their Heresy, desired to be admitted
into the Communion of the Church, without re-baptizing them; as appears out of
St. Cyprian, who confesses that this had also been the custom formerly, even
in the African Churches themselves. And yet notwithstanding Firmi. ep ad Cypr.
quae est 75. inter epist. Cypr. Caeterum nos veritati and consuetudinem
jungimus; and consuetudini Romanorum, consuetudinem, sed veritatis, opponimus;
ab initio hoc tenentes, quod a Christo, and ab Apostolis traditum est.
Firmilianus, Archbishop of Caesaria in Cappadocia, testifies, that the
Churches of Cappadocia had time out of mind believed and practiced the
contrary; and had also in his time so declared and ordained, together with the
Churches of Galatia and Cilicia, in a full Synod, held at the City Iconium. And
about the same time also St. Cyprian and the Bishops of Africa fell upon the
same business, and embraced this opinion of Re-baptization of Heretics. The
Acts of the Council held at Carthage are yet extant; where you have 87 Bishops,
who with one unanimous consent established the same. The Custom at Rome in
Tertullians time, was, to receive into the Communion of the Church all
Fornicators and Adulterers, after some certain Penances, which they enjoined
them. Tertullian, who was a Montanist, exclaimed fearfully against this custom,
and wrote a Book expressly against it; which is also extant among his works at
this day. Who now, that should read this Piece of his, would not believe that
it was the general Opinion of all Catholics, that such sinners were not to be
excluded from Penance, and the Communion of the Church? And yet for all this it
is evident, out of a certain Epistle of St. Cyprian, Cypr. epist. de Anton.
that even some of the Catholic Bishops of Africa were of the contrary
persuasion: and the Jesuit Petavius is further of opinion, that this Indulgency
was not allowed, nor practiced in the Churches of Spain, till a long time
after; and, that the Ancient Rigor, which excluded for ever such Offenders
from the Communion of the Church, was in practice among them, till the time of
Pacianus, Bishop of Barcellona, who left not any hopes of Ecclesiastical
Absolution, either to Idolaters, Murderers, or Adulterers; Pacian Paran. ad
Poenit. T. 3. Bibl. PP. p. 71. Council. Laodic. can. 59. in Cod. Eccles.
univers. 163.
as may be seen in his Exhortation to Repentance. In the year of our Lord 364.
the Council of Laodicea ordained, that none but the Canonical Books of the Old
and New Testament should be read in Churches, giving us withal a Catalogue of
the said Books, which amount in all, in the Old Testament, to the number of
twenty two only; without making any mention at all of those other Books, which
Cardinal Perron calls Posthumous, namely Ecclesiasticus, the Book of Wisdom,
the Maccab^es, Judith, and Tobit. All the Canons of this Council were
afterward inserted into the Code of the Church Universal; where you have this
very Canon also, Number. 163. that is as much as to say, they were received, as
Rules of the Catholic Church. Who would believe now, but that this Declaration
of the Canon of the Scriptures was at that time received by all Christian
Churches? And yet notwithstanding you have the Churches of Africa, meeting
together in the Synod at Council. Carthag. III. can. 47.
Carthage, about the year of our Lord 397. and ordaining quite contrary to the
former Resolution of Laodicea, that among those Books which were allowed to be
read in Churches, the Maccabees, Judith, Tobit, Ecclesiasticus, and the Book of
Wisdom, (which two last they also reckon among the Books written by Solomon,)
should be taken into the number. Who knows not the difference that there was,
in the first Ages of Christianity, betwixt the Eastern and the Western
Churches, touching the Vid. Pete^^ in Epiph. p. 359.
Fasting upon Saturdays; the Church of Rome maintaining it is lawful, and all
the rest of the World accounting it unlawful? Whence it was, that we had that
so Can. Synod. Quinisex. Can. LV (...).
bold Canon passed in the Council at Constantinople, in Trullo, in these words:
Understanding, that in the City of Rome, in the time of the Holy Fast of Lent,
they fast on Saturdays, contrary to the Custom, and Tradition of the Church; it
seems good to this Holy Council, that in the Roman Church they inviolably
also observe that Canon, which says; that, whosoever shall be found to fast
either upon the Lords day, or upon the Saturday, (excepting only that one
Saturday,) if he be a Clergie-man, he shall be deposed; but if be be of the
Laity, he shall be excommunicated. Who knows not, after how many several ways
the Fast of Lent was Anciently observed in diverse Churches, an account whereof
is given you by Irenaeus, in that Pious Iren. ap. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 5.
cap. 26*
Epistle of his, which he wrote to Victor; part whereof Eusebius sets down
in his Ecclesiastical History? Who does not also know, that the opinions, and
expressions of the Greek Church, touching Free Will, and Predestination, are
extremely different, from what the Church believed, and taught in S. Augustines
time, and so downward? And as concerning the Discipline of the Church, do but
hear Anastasius Bibliothecarius, upon the VI Canon of the VII General Council,
which enjoyneth all Metropolitans to hold Provincial Synods once a year.
Anastas. Biblioth. ad Can 6. Conc. 7. Gener. Nec te move at, si hanc
definitionem minime nos habemus: cum and earum nonnullas, quas inter Canones
habemus, in auctoritatem non recipiamus; sicut quasdam ex Conciliis. Aliae
namque apud Graecos tantum, aliae vero apud certas tantum provincias in
observantiam Ecclesiarum assumuntur: sicut Laodicensis Concilii 16, and 17
Regulae, quae apud Graecos tantum servantur: and Africani Concilii 6, and 8.
capit^la, quae nulla provincia servare, nisi Africana, dignoscitur.
Neither let it at all trouble thee, (says he) that we have not this Decree;
seeing that there are some others found among the Canons, whose Authority
nevertheless we not admit of. For, some of them are in force, and are observed
in the Greek Church; and others again in certain other Provinces only. As for
example, the XVI and XVII. Canons of the Council of Laodicea are observed only
among the Greeks; and the VI* and the VIII Canons of the Council of Africa, are
received by none, but the Africans only. I could here produce diverse other
Examples; but these may suffice, to show, that the Opinions and Customs, which
have been received in one Part of the Church, have not always been entertained
in all the rest. Whence it evidently follows, that all that is acknowledged, as
the opinion, or observation of the Church, ought not therefore presently to
pass for an Universal Law. The Protestant alleges, for the justifying his
Canon of the Scriptures, the Council of Laodicea, before mentioned. Thou
answerest him perhaps, that this indeed was the opinion of the Churches; but it
was only of some particular Churches. I shall not here enter into an
Examination, whether this Answer be well grounded, or not: it is sufficient for
me, that I can safely then conclude from hence, that according to this account,
before you can make use of any Opinion, or Testimony out of any of the Fathers,
it is necessary, that you first make it appear, not only that it was the
Opinion of the Church at that time; but you must further also clearly
demonstrate unto us* what Churches opinion it was; whether of the Church
Universal, or else of some Particular Church only. It is objected against the
Protestants, that Epiphanius testifies, Epiphan Haer. 59. Tom. 1.
that the Church admitted not into the higher Orders of the Ministry, any save
those that were Virgins, or professed Continency. Now to make good this
Allegation, it is necessary that it be first proved, that the Church he there
speaks of, was the Church Universal. For (will the Protestant reply upon you,)
as Laodicea has had, as it seems, a particular Opinion touching the Canon of
the Scriptures; possibly also Cyprus may in like manner have had its particular
Resolutions touching the Ordination of the Clergy. The like may be said of the
greatest part of those other Observations and Opinions of the Ancient Church.
Now how difficult a business it will be, to clear these Matters, which are so
full of perplexity, and to distinguish of Antiquity, at this so great a
distance of time, severing that which was Public from what was Particular, and
that which was Provincial from what was National, and what was National from
that which was Universal, any Man may be able to give some kind of guess; but
none can thoroughly understand, save he that has made trial of it. Do but fancy
to your selves a City that has lain ruinated a thousand years, no part whereof
remains, save only the Ruins of Houses, lying all along here and there
confusedly; all the rest being covered all over with Thorns and Bushes. Imagine
then that you have met with one that will undertake to show you precisely where
the Public Buildings of the City stood, and where the Private; which were the
Stones that belonged to the one, and which belonged to the other; and, in a
word, who, in these confused Heaps, where the Whole lies all together, will,
notwithstanding, separate ye the one from the other. The very same Task, in a
manner, does he undertake, who ever shall go about truly and precisely to
distinguish the Opinions of the Ancient Church. This Antiquity is now of Eleven
or Twelve hundred years standing: and the Ruins of it are now only left us,
in the Books of the Writers of that Time, which also have met with none of the
best entertainment, in their Passage through the several Ages down to our time,
as we have showed before. How then dare we entertain the least hope, that
amidst this so great Confusion, we should be able yet to distinguish the
Pieces, and to tell which of them honored the Public Temple, and which went
to the furnishing of Private Chapels only? especially considering, that the
Private ones have each of them ambitiously endeavored to make their own pass
for Public. For where is the Province, or the City, or the Doctor, that has
not boastingly cried up his own Opinions, and Observations, as Apostolical? and
which has not used his utmost endeavor to gain them the Repute of being
Universal? S. Hierome allows every particular Province full liberty to do
herein as they please. Hieron. ep. 28. ad Lucinum. Unaquaeque Provincia abundet
in sensu suo, and praecepta majorum leges Apostolicas arbitretur.
Let every Province (says he) abound in its own Sense; and let them account of
the Ordinances of their Ancestors, as of Apostolical Laws. It is true indeed,
that he speaks in this place only of certain Observations of things which are
in themselves indifferent: But yet, that which he has permitted them in these
Matters, they have practiced in all other. I shall not here trouble my self to
produce any other Reasons to prove the Difficulty of this Inquiry, because I
should then be forced to repeat a great part of that which has been already
delivered. For, if it be a very hard matter to attain to any certain knowledge
what the Sense of the Writings of the Fathers is, as we have proved before; how
much more difficult a thing will it be, to discover whether their Opinions were
the Opinions of the particular Churches wherein they lived, or else were the
Opinions of the Church Universal in their Age: the same things which cause
Obscurity in the one, having as much or rather more reason of doing the like in
the other. And if you would fully understand how painful an Undertaking this
is, do but read the Disputations of the Learned of both Parties, touching this
Point; where you shall meet with so many Doubts and Contradictions, and such
diversity of Opinions, that you will easily conclude, That this is one of the
greatest Difficulties that is to be met withal throughout the whole Study of
Antiquity.

CHAP. XI.
Reason XI. That it is impossible to know exactly what the Belief of the
Ancient Church, either Universal or Particular, has been, touching any of
those Points which are at this day controverted amongst us.

BEfore we pass on to the Second Part of this Treatise, it seems not
impertinent to give the Reader this Last Advertisement, and to let him know,
that though all these Difficulties here before represented were removed, yet
notwithstanding would it still be impossible for us to know certainly, out of
the Fathers, what the Judgment of the whole Ancient Church, whether you mean
the Church Universal, or but any considerable Part thereof, has been, touching
the Differences which are now on foot in Religion. Now that we may be able to
make the truth of this Proposition appear, it is necessary that we should first
of all explain the Terms.

We understand commonly by the Church, (especially in these Disputations)
either all those Persons in General who profess themselves to be of the said
Church, of what Condition or Quality soever they be; or else, in a stricter
sense, the Collective Body of all those who are set over, and who are
Representatives of the Church; that is to say, the Clergy. So that whether you
speak of the Church Universal, or of some Particular Church, as, for example,
that of Spain, or of Carthage, this Term may be taken in either of these two
senses. For, by the Church Universal, we understand either all those Persons in
general who live in the Communion of the Christian Church, whether they be of
the Laity, or of the Clergy; or else, those Persons only who are
Ecclesiastici, or Churchmen, as we now call them. For, in the Primitive Times,
all Christians that lived in the Communion of the Catholics, were called
Ecclesiastici. In like manner, by the Church of Carthage, is meant either
generally All the Faithful that live in the particular Communion of the
Christian Church of Carthage; or else particularly, and in a stricter sense,
the Bishop of Carthage, with his whole Clergy. Now I do not believe that there
is any Man but will easily grant me, that if we take the Church in the First
sense, it is impossible to know, by way of Testimony given of the same, what
the Sense and Judgment of it has been in each several Age, touching all the
Points of Christian Religion. We may indeed collect, by way of Discourse, what
has been the Belief of the True Members of the Church: For there being some
certain Articles, the Belief whereof is necessarily requisite for the rendering
a Man such an one; whosoever rightly understands which these Articles be, he
may certainly conclude, that the True Church, whether Universal, or Particular,
has believed the same. But now, in the first place, this does not extend to
all the Points of Christian Religion, but only to those which are Necessary:
besides which, there are diverse others, concerning which we may have not only
different, but even contrary Judgments too; and yet not thereby hazard the loss
either of the Communion of the Church, or of our Inheritance of everlasting
Salvation. So then, this Ratiocination concludes not, save only of those who
are the True Members of the Church. For as for those who make but an outward
Profession only of the Truth, it being not at all necessary that they should
be saved, there is in like manner no more necessity of their embracing those
Beliefs which are requisite for that end. They may, under this Mask, hide all
manner of Opinions, how Impious soever they be. Lastly, that which makes most
for our purpose is, That this Knowledge is acquired by Discourse, whereas we
speak here of such a Knowledge as is collected by the hearing of several
Witnesses, who give in their Testimonies touching the thing which we would
know. Now the Fathers having written with a purpose of informing us, not what
each particular Man believed in their time, but rather what they thought fit
that all Men should have believed; we must needs conclude, That certainly they
have not told us all that they knew touching this particular. And consequently
therefore, partly their Charity, and partly also their Prudence, may have
caused them to pass by in silence all such Opinions, either of whole Companies,
or of particular Persons, as they conceived to be not so consonant to the
Truth. But supposing that they had not any of these considerations, and that
they had taken upon them to give us a just Account, each Man of the Opinions of
his particular Church wherein he lived; it is evident however, that they could
never have been able to have attaine^d to the end of this their Design. For,
how is it possible that they should have been able to have learnt what the
Opinion of every single Person was, amongst so vast a Multitude, which
consisted of so many several Persons, who were of so different both Capacities
and Dispositions? Who will believe, that S. Cyprian, for example, knew all the
several Opinions of each particular Person in his Diocese, so as to be able to
give us an account of the same? Who can imagine, but that among such a
Multitude of People as lived in the Communion of his Church, there must needs
have been very many who differed in Opinion from him, in diverse Points of
Religion? Even at this very day, that we may not trouble our selves to look so
high, we see by experience, that there is scarcely that Parish to be found, how
small soever it be, where there are not particular Persons that maintain, in
many Points of Religion, different Opinions from those of their Minister. But
if we take a whole Diocese together, and pass by all those who trouble
themselves not at all with the difference of Opinions in Religion, whether it
be by reason of their want of years, or their weakness of Judgment, or their
malice; and take notice only of the rest, dividing them according to the
difference of their Opinions, I am verily persuaded, that that part which shall
agree in all Points with the Bishop of that Diocese, will many times be found
to be the least. Let a Bishop preach or write what he will, touching the Points
which are now in Controversy, he will very hardly represent unto you the
Judgment of half the People of his Diocese. Now we must conceive, that the
temper of the World of old was no other than what it is at this present day:
and therefore also, for this very reason, the liberty of embracing what
Opinions a man pleased, was much greater then, than it is now; forasmuch as the
Church of Rome did not exercise its Power then throughout Christendom so
Absolutely as it does now adays: neither did the Pastors, or the Princes, use
that severity and rigor which is now every where practiced in our days; for
the repressing this diversity of Opinions. We must therefore necessarily
believe, that the Opinions of the Faithful were in those days altogether as
different, if not much more, than they are now. Whence it will also follow,
That even the Doctors themselves, who lived in those Times, could not know all
the different Opinions of Men, much less could they represent them unto us in
their Writings. But we shall not stand any longet upon a thing that no Man can
deny us; but shall rather proceed to the consideration of that which every one
no doubt will be ready here to reply upon us, touching this Particular; namely,
That it is not necessary that we should know the Opinions, in Points of
Religion, of all particular Persons, which are almost infinite in number, and
for the most part very ^ill grounded, and uncertain: but that it is sufficient
if we know what the Belief has been of the Pastors, and those that have been
set over the Church, that is to say, of the Church taken in the latter sense.
But yet I confess I do not see that this Rule is so absolutely right, as that
we ought to walk by it. For, if we are to take the Church for the Rule and
Foundation of our Faith, (as the Authors of this Reply pretend we ought to do)
the People, in my Judgment, ought not then to be here excluded, and passed by,
as a thing of no consideration. I confess, the Opinions of particular Persons
are very different one from the other; and the knowledge of some of them is
very mean, and sometimes also is none at all. But yet possibly this Reason may
chance to exclude even a good part of the Clergy also, from the Authority which
they lay claim to in this Particular; being it cannot be denied, but that both
Ignorance and Malice have oftentimes as great a share here, proportionably, as
they have among the very People it self. Who sees not, that, if we must have
regard to the Capacity of Men, there are sometimes found, even among the plain
ordinary sort of Christians in a Church, those that are more considerable, both
for their Learning and Piety, than the Pastors themselves? Ambros. Ser. 17. T.
4. p 725. Plerumque Clerus erravit: Sacerdotum nutavit sententia: divites cum
saeculi istius terreno Rege senserunt; Populus sidem propriam reservavit.
One of those Fathers, of whom we now discourse, has informed us, That many
times the Clergy have erred, the Bishop has wavered in his Opinion, the Rich
Men have adhered in their Judgment to the Earthly Princes of this World;
meanwhile the People alone preserved the Faith entire. Seeing therefore that
it may sometimes happen, and that it has also many times happened, that the
Clergy have held Erroneous Opinions, while the People only held the True, it
is very evident, in my judgment, that the Opinion of the People in these cases
ought not wholly to be neglected. And truly, S. Cyprian tells us in diverse
places, That the Church in his time had the People in very great esteem; no
Business of any importance being then transacted, without communicating the
same to the People; as may be seen by any one, in the Epistles of this Father:
insomuch that, C Cypr. in Conc Parthag. p 397. ^raesente etiam plebis maxima
part.
The greatest part of the People also were present at the Council of Carthage,
where the Question touching the Baptism of Heretics was debated; whereof we
have already spoken somewhat a little before. But because this Point is still
controverted, I shall let it alone for this time. Let us therefore grant,
(since our Adversaries will needs have it so) that it is sufficient in this
case to know what the Belief was of the Church, taken in the later and stricter
sense; that is to say, of the Clergy: for even this way it is evident enough,,
that it is a very hard, if not an impossible thing, truly to discover what it
has been in each several Age. For, there is no less diversity of Opinion among
the Clergy, than there is among the People: and many times too there is much
more; the being conversant in Books, ordinarily reducing things into nicer
subtilties, and giving occasion of raising diverse Opinions upon the same. Who
is he that will undertake to give us an Account what the Opinion is of all the
Clergy of one City only; I do not say of a Kingdom, or of all Christendom;
touching all the Articles of Religion? Who would be able to perform this, if he
should undertake it? Never was there more exact care taken for the Conservation
of Uniformity in Judgment among Christians, than is now at this day; when there
is use made, not only of the Censures and Thunderbolts of the Church, but even
of the Fire and the Sword of the Secular Powers also. And yet, notwithstanding
all this, how many Ecclesiastical Persons are there to be found, even in those
very places where these rigorous Courses are observed with the greatest
strictness, even at Rome it self, and as it were in the Popes own Bosom, who
differ very much in Judgment touching Points of Religion, both from their
Equals, and from their Superiors? In France, where, by the Blessing of God,
the Liberty of Conscience is much greater than in other places, it would be a
wonder, if, where Four Clergy Men of the more Learned, and Politer sort were
met together, Two of them should not, upon some Point or other of the Faith,
differ in judgment from the Main Body of their Church. And here I am to entreat
all those who follow Cassander in great numbers, adoring the Monuments of the
Fathers, and who take whatsoever they find in him, for the General Sense of the
Ancient Christians, but to turn their eyes back a little upon themselves, and
to consider, how many opinions they themselves hold, which are not only
different, but even quite contrary too to the Church, in the Communion whereof
they live, and of which they profess themselves to be Members, and by which
indeed they subsist. The Difference is here so great, as that it seems to be,
as it were, one State within another State, and one Church within another
Church. And yet notwithstanding, when any of the Doctors of that Party, to
which they adhere, deliver unto us, either in their Definitions, or in their
Sermons, or in their Books, the common Sense, and Judgment of their Church,
this Intermixture of Opinions is quite laid aside, and appears not at all. They
speak only of the opinions of others, passing by those of Cassander, which are
contrary to them, in silence, as if they did not at all concern the Church of
Rome neither more nor less: and yet it is very well known unto us, even to us
who live at this very day, that they are favored, and maintained by very many
of the most Eminent Persons of the Roman Clergy it self. And if this senseless
Sect, who forsooth think themselves much more refined in their opinions than
the rest of the Body whereof they are a part, should chance in time either to
fail of it self, or to be suppressed by force; their* Memory would so utterly
come to naught, as that Posterity would not know any thing of their Belief, but
only by conjecture. Every one will then believe, that the Church of Rome at
this time precisely held to the Doctrine and Opinions that he reads in the
Decrees of Trent, and in other the like Books: and yet notwithstanding we both
know, and see, that among those very Persons, which have been Anointed,
Consecrated, and Preferred also by the said Church, there is a Party that
dissenteth from it in judgment, touching diverse Important Articles of Faith.
Let us therefore reckon, that the Ancient Church had also its Cassanders, and
very many even among the Clergy it self, who held many opinions which were
different from that which was the common Belief of the Church, and which it
has at length by little and little sunk, as it were, under water, and wholly
swallowed up, so that now there is not any Tract of them left us. Christianity
was either different in the Ancient times from what it is now, or else it was
the same. If it was Different, it is then a Piece of mere Sophistry, to
endeavor to make it seem to be the same; and a very great Abuse, to produce
unto us, for this purpose, so many several Testimonies out of Antiquity. If it
were the same, it must then without all doubt have produced the same Accidents,
and have sown the same seeds of diversity of opinions in the spirits of its
Clergy. Those opinions and observations which now give offense to the
Cassandrists, would then also have offended some persons or other, that were
endued with the like Moderation. For we are not to conceive, but that those
First Ages of Christianity brought forth Spirits, that were as much, and more
refined and delicate, than ours have done. But that we may insist upon this
particular no longer, it is sufficient for me, that I have thus clearly made it
appear, that in the Ancient Church, the whole Clergy of a City, or of a Nation,
much less of the whole World, had not necessarily one and the same sense and
opinion, touching Points of Religion. So that it will follow from hence, that
we cannot know certainly, whether those opinions which we meet withal in the
Fathers, were received by all and every of the Pastors of the Church at that
time, or not. All that you can gather thence is but this at the most; that they
themselves, and some others perhaps of the most eminent amongst them (if you
please,) maintained such or such opinions: in like manner, as that which
Bellarmine, and others have written, touching the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
will inform Posterity, that these Men, and many others of our time, held these
opinions in the Church of Rome. But as those who shall conclude from the Books
of these Authors, that there is at this day no other opinion maintained, among
the Clergy themselves of the Church of Rome, touching this Particular, would
very much abuse themselves; so is it much to be feared that we in like manner
deceive our selves, when, from what we find in Two or Three of the Fathers, we
conclude, that there was at that time no other opinion held in the Christian
Church, touching those Points whereof they treat, save that which they have
delivered. It is a very hazardous business, to take Eight or Ten Men, how Holy
and Learned soever they may have been, as Sureties for all the Doctors of the
Church Universal, that lived in their Age. This is too little Security, for so
great a Sum.

Now there are Two things, which may be objected against that which we have
before delivered. The First is, that if there had been in Antiquity any other
opinions touching the Points now in Debate, which had been different from those
which we now meet with in the Books, either of all the Fathers, or at least of
some few of them; they would then both have mentioned, and also refuted them.
But we have already heretofore answered this Objection, by saying, that the
Fathers forbear to speak any thing of this Diversity of opinion, partly out of
Prudence, lest otherwise they might have provoked the Authors of the said
opinions, which were contrary to their own; and so might increase the
Difference, instead of appeasing it: and partly also out of Charity; mildly
bearing with that, which they accounted not any whit dangerous. I only speak
here of those Differences in opinion, which they knew of: for there might be a
great number of others, which they knew not of. Who can oblige you to believe,
that a Monk, for example, that had retired into a Corner, and as it were
forsaken the World, professing only to instruct a small number of Men and Women
in the Rules of Devotion, must needs have known, what the opinions in Points of
Religion of all the Prelates of his Age were? Who will pass his word unto us,
in his behalf, that he does not sometimes reprove that in some Men, which yet
the Church allowed in an infinite number of others? Who will warrant us, that
all Christendom in his time embraced all his opinions, and had no other of
their own? Possevine answering an Objection made by some, Possevine in Appar.
touching the Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, which S. Hierome has made no
mention of at all, says; that it is no great marvel, that a Man that lay hid
in a Corner of the World, should not have seen this Book, which the Arrians
endeavored to suppress. May not a Man with as much reason say, that it is no
great wonder, if S. Hierome, or Epiphanius, or any other the like Authors, who
were taken up all of them with their particular Charges, and Employments, did
not know of some opinions of the Prelates of their Age; or that either their
Modesty, or their Charity, or the little Eloquence, and Repute they had abroad,
might have made them conceal the same?

The other Objection is drawn from hence, because that these Doctors of the
Ancient Church, who held some opinions different from those which we read at
this day in the Fathers, did not publish them at all. But, I answer first of
all, that every Man is not able to do) so. In the next place, those that were
able, were not always willing to do so. Diverse other Considerations may perhaps
also have hindered them from so doing: and if they are Wise, and Pious Men, they
are never moved, till they needs must. And hence it is, that oftentimes those
opinions, which have less truth in them, do yet prevail; because that Prudence,
which maintains the True Opinion, is Mild, and Patient: whereas Rashness, which
defends the False, is of a Froward, Eager, and Ambitious Nature. But now let us
but imagine, how many of the Evidences of this Diversity of opinion may have
been made away, by those several ways before represented by us; as namely
having been either devoured by Time, or suppressed by Malicious Men; for fear
lest they should let the World see the Traces of the Truth, which they would
have concealed? But that I may not be thought to bring here only bare
Conjectures, without any proof at all, I shall produce some Examples also, for
the confirming, and clearing of this my Assertion.

Epiphanius maintains against Aerius, Epiph. in Panar. Haer. 75.
whom he ranks among his Haeresiarchae, or Arch Heretics that a Bishop,
according to the Apostle Saint Paul, and the Original Institution of the thing
it self, is more than a Priest: and this he endeavors to prove in many words,
answering all the Objections, that are made to the contrary. If you but read
the Passage, I am confident that when you had done, you would not stick to
swear, that what he has there delivered, was the general opinion of all the
Doctors of the Church; it being very unlikely, that so Great, and so Renowned a
Prelate would so slatly have denied the opinion which he disputed against, if
so be any one of his own familiar friends had also maintained the same. And yet
for all this, Saint Hierome (who was one of the Principal Lights of our Western
Church, and who lived at the same time with Epiphanius, who was his intimate
Friend, and a great admirer of his Piety,) says expressly, Hieron. Ep. (...) ad
O^^an. Tom. 2. Quanquam apud veteres iidem Episcopi and Presbyteri sucrint:
quia illud nomen dignitatis est, hoc aetatis. Id. ep. 85. ad Ev^gr. Tom. 2. Cum
Apostolus perspicue doceat, eosdem esse Presbyteros, quos and Episcopos, etc.
Id. Com. in Ag. Tom. 5. p. 512. Et Com. in Tit. Tom 6. p. 443. Fus.
that Among the Ancients, Bishops, and Priests, were the same; the one being a
name of Dignity, and the other of Age. And that it may not be thought, that
this fell from him in discourse only, he there falls to proving the same at
large, alleging several Passages of Scripture, touching this Particular; and
he also repeats the same thing, in two or three several places of his Works.
Whereby it evidently appears, that even Positions which have been quite
Contradictory to the opinions which have been delivered, and maintained by some
of the Fathers, and proposed in what terms soever, have notwithstanding been
sometimes either maintained, or at least tolerated by some others of (...) less
Authority. S. Hierome himself has ^al^ extremely foul upon Ruffinus, and has
traduced diverse of his opinions, as most Pernicious and Deadly: and yet
notwithstanding we do not any where find, that ever he was accounted as an
Heretic, by the rest of the Fathers. But we shall have occasion hereafter to
consider more at large of the like Examples; and shall only at present observe,
that if those Books of S. Hierome, which we mentioned a little before, should
chance to have been lost; every Man would then assuredly have concluded with
Epiphanius, that no Doctor of the Ancient Church ever held, that a Bishop and a
Priest were one and the same thing, in its Institution.

Who now after all this will assure us, that among so many other opinions, as
have been rejected here and there by the Fathers, and that too in as plain
terms, as these of Epiphanius, none of them have ever been defended by some of
the Learned of those times? Or, is it not possible that they may have held
them, though they did not write in defense of the same? Or, may they not
perhaps have written also in de^ence of them, and their Books have been since
lost? How small is the number of those in the Church, who had the Ability, or
at least the (...) to write? And how much smaller is the number of tho^^, whose
Wri^ings have been able to secure themselves, against either the Injury of
Time, or the Malice of Men? It is obj^cted against the Protestants, as we have
touched before, that S. Hierome commends, and maintains the Adoration of
Relics: But yet he himself testifies, that there were some Bishops, who
defended Vigilantius, who held the contrary opinion; whom he, according to his
ordinary Rhetoric calls Hiet. in Vigil. T. 2. p. 159. Proh! nefas, Episcopos
sui sceleris dicitur habere consortes.
His Consorts in Wickedness. Who knows now, what these Bishops were; and
whether they deserved any such usage at S. Hieromes hands, or no? For, the
Expressions which he uses against them, and against their opinion, are so full
of Gall, and of Choler, as that they utterly take away all credit from his
Testimony. But we have insisted long enough upon this Particular, and shall
therefore forbear to instance any further in others. For as much therefore as
it is Impossible to discover exactly, out of the Fathers, what has been the
sense and judgment of the Ancient Church; whether taken Universally or
Particularly; or whether you take the Church for the whole Body of Believers,
or for the Prelates and Inseriour Clergy only; I shall here conclude, as
formerly, that the Writings of the Ancients are altogether Insufficient, for
the proving the Truth of any of those Points, which are at this day
controverted amongst Us.

THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I.
That the Fathers are not of sufficient Authority for the Deciding of our
Controversies in Religion.
Reason I. That the Testimonies given by the Fathers, touching the Belief of
the Church, are not always True and Certain.

WE have before showed how hard a matter it is to discover what the Sense of
the Fathers has been touching the Points at this day controverted in Religion;
both by reason of the small number of Books we have left us of the Fathers of
the First Centuries; and those too which we have, treating of such things as
are of a very different nature from our present Disputes; and which besides we
cannot be very well assured of, by reason of the many Forgeries and monstrous
Corruptions which they have for so long a time been subject to; as also by
reason of their Obscurity, and Ambiguity in their Expressions; and their
representing unto us many times the Opinions rather of others, than of their
Authors: besides those many other Imperfections which are found in them, as
namely, their not informing us in what degree of Faith we are to hold each
particular Point of Doctrine; and their leaving us in doubt, whether what they
teach be the Judgment of the Church, or their own private Opinion only: and
whether, if it be the Judgment of the Church, it be of the Church Universal, or
of some Particular Church only. Now, the least of these Objections is
sufficient to render their Testimony invalid: And again, on the other side,
that it may be of force, it is necessary that it be clearly and evidently free
from all these Defects; forasmuch as the Question is here, touching the
Christian Faith, which ought to be grounded on nothing, save what is sure and
firm. Whosoever therefore would make use of any Passage out of a Father, he is
bound first to make it appear, that the Author out of whom he cites the said
Passage, lived, and wrote in the first Ages of Christianity; and besides, that
the said Person is certainly known to be the Author of that Book out of which
the said Passage is quoted: and moreover, that the Passage cited is sincere,
and no way corrupted, nor altered: and likewise, that the Sense which he gives
of it, is the true genuine Sense of the Place; and also, that it was the
Opinion of the Author, when he was now come to Ripon^^s of Judgment, and which
he changed not, or retr^cted afterward. He must also make it appear, in what
degree he held it, and whether he maintained it as his own private Opinion
only, or as the Opinion of the Church: and, lastly, whether it were the
Opinion of the Church Universal, or of some particular Church only: which
Inquiry is a Business of so vast and almost infinite labor, that it makes me
very much doubt whether or no we can be ever able to attain to a full and
certain assurance what the Real Positive Sense of the Ancients has been,
touching the whole Body of Controversies now debated in this our Age. Hence
therefore our principal Question seems to be decided; namely, Whether the
alleging of the Fathers be a sufficient and proper Means for the demonstrating
the Truth of all those Articles which are at this day maintained by the Church
of Rome, and rejected by the Protestants, or not? For who does not now see,
that this kind of proof has as much or more difficulty in it, than the
Question it self? and that such Testimonies are as Obscure, as the Controverted
Opinions themselves? Notwithstanding, that we may not be thought too hastily,
and upon too light grounds, to reject this way of Proceeding, we will pass by
all that obscurity that is found touching the Opinions of the Ancients; and
supposing it to be no hard matter to discover what the Opinion and Sense of the
Fathers has been touching the aforesaid Points, we will now in this Second
Book consider, whether or no their Authority be such, as that we ought, or may,
without further examination, believe on their score, what we know them
certainly to have believed, and to hold it in the same degree that they did.

There are two sorts of Passages to be observed in the Writings of the Fathers:
In the one, you have them speaking only as Witnesses, and testifying what the
Belief of the Church was in their Time: In the other, they propose to you, like
Doctors, their own Private Opinions. Now, there is a World of difference
betwixt these two things: For in a Witness there is required only Faithfulness
and Truth; but in a Doctor, Learning and Knowledge. The one persuades us, by
the opinion we have of his Veracity; the other, by the strength of his
Arguments. The Fathers are Witnesses only, when they barely tell us, That the
Church in their Times held such or such Opinions: And they are then Doctors,
when getting up, as it were, into the Chair, they propose unto us their own
Opinions, making them good either out of the Scripture, or out of Reason. Now,
as concerning the Testimonies that they give, touching the Faith held by the
Church in their time, I know not whether we ought to receive all they bring,
for certain Truths, or not: But this I am sure of, that though they should
deserve to be received by us for such, yet nevertheless would they stand us in
very little stead, as to the Business now in hand. The Reason which moves me
to doubt of the former of these, is, because I observe, that those very Men who
are the greatest Admirers of the Fathers, do yet confess, that although they
err very little, or not at all, in matter of Right, yet nevertheless, they are
often out, and have their failings in matter of Fact: because that Right is an
Universal thing, which is every way Uniform, and all of one sort; whereas,
matter of Fact is a thing which is mixed, and as it were enchased with diverse
particular Circumstances, which may very easily escape the knowledge of, or at
least be not so rightly understood by, the most clear and piercing Wits. Now,
the condition of the Churches Belief, in every particular Age, is matter of
Fact, and not of Right; and a Point of History, and not an Article of Faith: So
that it follows hence, that possibly the Fathers may have erred, in giving us
an account hereof; and that therefore their Testimonies, in such Cases, ought
not to be received by us, as infallibly True: Neither yet may we be thought
hereby to accuse the Fathers of Falsehood. For, how often do the honestest
Persons that are, innocently testify such things as they thought they had
seen, which it afterward appears that they saw not at all? for Goodness
renders not Men infallible. The Fathers therefore, being but Men, might both be
deceived themselves in such things, and might consequently also deceive those
who have confided in them, though innocently, and without any design of doing
so. But besides all this, it is very evident, that they have not been wholly
free from Passion neither, and there is no Man but knows, that Passion very
often disguiseth things, and ma^^^h them appear, even to the honestest Men that
may be, much otherwise than they are; insomuch that sometimes they are
affectionately carried away with one Opinion, and do as much abhor another.
Which secret Passion might easily make them believe, that the Church held that
Opinion, which they themselves were most taken with, and that it rejected that
which they themselves disliked; especially, if there were but the least
appearance or shadow of Reason to incline them to this Belief: For Men are very
easily persuaded to believe what they desire. I conceive we may hereto impute
that Testimony of S. Hierome, where he affirms, Hier. Ep. 61. de Error. Jo.
Hier. Omne deinceps humanum genus quibus animarum censetur exordiis? utrum ex
traduce, juxta bruta animalia, etc. an rationabiles creaturae desiderio
corporum, etc. an cerre, quod Ecclesiasticum est, quotidie Deus fabricetur
animas: cujus velle fecisse ess, and conditor esse non cessat?
That the Churches of Christ held, That the Souls of Men were immediately
Created by God, at the instant of their entrance into the Body. And yet
notwithstanding, that doubt which S. Augustine was in, touching this
Particular, and his inclining manifestly to the contrary Opinion, which was,
That the Soul was propagated together with the Body, and descended down from
the Father to the Son; this doubt, I say, of his, manifestly proves, that the
Church had not as yet at that time embraced or concluded upon the former of
these Opinions: it being a thing utterly improbable, Id. Apol. 2. contr. Ruff.
Miraris si contra te fratrum scandala concitentur; cum id nescire te jures,
quod Christi Ecclesiae se scire fatentut?
that so modest a Man as S. Augustine was, would have cast off the general
Opinion of the Church, and have taken up a particular Fancy of his own. But the
Passion wherewith S. Hierome was at that time carried away against Ruffinus, a
great part of the Learned Men of his time being also of the said Opinion,
easily wrought in him a belief, that it was the Common Judgment and Opinion of
the whole Christian Church. From the same Root also sprung that Error of John
Bishop of Thessalonica, Joan. Thessal in Council. VII. Act. 5. (...).
(if at least it be an Error,) who affirmed, That the Opinion of the Church
was, That Angels are not wholly Incorporeal, and Invisible; but that they have
Bodies, though of a very Rare and thin Substance, not much unlike those of the
Fire, or the Air. For those who published the General Councils at Rome,
conceive this to have been his own private Opinion only: Ibid in Marg.
Loquitur ex propria sententia.
And if so, (neither shall we need at present to examine the Truth of this
their Conceit;) you then plainly see, that the Affection this Author bare to
his own Opinion, carried him so far away, as to make him father upon the whole
Church, what was indeed but his own particular Opinion: though otherwise he
were a Man who was highly esteemed by the VII Council, Council. VII. Act. 5.
which not only cites him among the Fathers, but honors him also with the
Title of a Father. Epiphanius must also be excused in the same manner, where he
assures us, That the Church held by Apostolical Tradition the Custom which it
had of meeting together thrice a Week, for the Celebration of the Holy
Eucharist: which yet Petav. in Epiphan page 354.
Petavius makes evidently appear not to have been of Apostolical Institution.
The Mistakes of Venerable Bede, noted and censured elsewhere by Petav. in
Epiphan* p. 113, 143, 145.
Petavius, are of the fame nature also: Beda lib. de Temp. rat. c 45 Habet
enim, nisi^ fallor, Ecclesiae fides, Dominum, in carne paulo plus minus quam
XXXIII annis, usque ad suae tempora. Passionis vixisse. Mox Sancta siquidem
Romana and Apostolica Ecclesia hane se fidem tenere and ipsis testatur
indiculis, quae suis in cereis annuatim inscribere solet, ubi tempus Dominicae
Passionis in memoriam populis revocans, numerum annorum triginta semper and
tribus annis minorem quam ab ejus Incarnatione Dionysius ponit anno at. Id.
ibid. Nam quod Dominus XV Luna, feria VI, crucem ascenderit, etc. nulli licet
dubitare Catholico.
The Belief of the Church, if I mistake not, (says he) is, That our Savior
Christ lived in the Flesh Thirty three Years, or there about, till the time of
his Passion: And he says moreover, That the Church of Rome testifies, that
this is Its Belief, by the Marks which they yearly set upon their Tapers, upon
Good Friday; whereon they always inscribe a Number of Tears, which is less by
Thirty three than the common Era of the Christians. He likewise says in the
same place, That it is not lawful for any Catholic to doubt whether Jesus
Christ suffered on the Cross the XV day of the Moon, or not. Now Petavius has
proved at large, that both these Opinions, which Beda delivers unto us as the
Churches Belief, are nothing less than what he would have them. Pe^av. in
Epiphan. p. 113. 143.
The curious Reader may observe many the like Carriages in the Writings of the
Fathers: but these here already set down, in my judgment, do sufficiently
justify the doubt which I have made, namely, that we ought not to receive as
Certain Truths the Testimony which the Fathers give, touching the Belief of the
Church in their Time. Nevertheless, that we may not seem to make a breach upon
the Honor and Reputation of the Fathers, I say, that though we should grant,
that all their Depositions and Testimonies in this Particular were certainly
and undoubtedly True; yet notwithstanding would they be of little use to us, as
to our present purpose. For, first of all, there are but very few Passages
wherein they testify plainly, and in direct Terms, what the Belief of the
Church in their Time has been, touching the Points now controverted amongst
us. This is the Business of an Historian, rather than of a Doctor of the
Church, whose Office is to teach, to prove, and to exhort the People committed
to his Charge, and to correct their Vices and Errors; telling them what they
ought to do, or believe, rather than troubling them with Discourses of what is
done or believed by others. But yet when they do give their Testimony what the
Belief and Discipline of the Church in their time was, this Testimony of theirs
ought not to extend save only to what was apparently such, and which besides
was apparent to themselves too. Now, as we have formerly proved, they could not
possibly know the Sense and Opinions of every particular Christian that lived
in their time; nor yet of all the Pastors and Ministers who were set over them:
but of some certain Particular Christians only. Forasmuch therefore as it is
confessed, even by those very Men who have the Church in greatest esteem, that
the Belief of Particular Churches is not infallible, we may very easily
perceive, that such Testimonies of the Fathers as these can standus in very
little or no stead, seeing they represent unto us such Opinions as are not
always certainly and undoubtedly True, and which consequently are so far from
confirming and proving ours, as that, they rather stand in need of being
examined and proved themselves. But, yet, suppose that the Church of Rome did
hold, that the Beliefs of Particular Churches were Infallible, (which yet it
does not) yet would not this make any thing at all against the Protestants,
forasmuch as they are of the clean contrary Opinion. Now, it is taken for
granted on all hands, that Proofs ought to be fetched from such things as are
confessed and acknowledged by your Adversary, whom you endeavor to convince;
otherwise you will never be able to move him, or make him quit his former
Opinion. Seeing therefore, that the Testimonies of the Farthers, touching the
State of the Faith, and Ecclesiastical Discipline of their Times, are of this
Nature; it remains, that we now consider their other Discourses, wherein they
have delivered themselves, not as Witnesses, deposing what they had seen; but
as Doctors, instructing us in what they believed. And certainly, how Holy and
Able soever they were, it cannot be denied but that they were still Men, and
consequently were subject to Error, especially in matters of Faith, which is a
Business so much transcending Humane Apprehension. The Spirit of God only was
able to direct their Understandings, and their Pens in the Truth, and to
withhold them from falling into any Error; in like manner as it directed the
Holy Prophets and Apostles, while they wrote the Books of the Old and New
Testament. Now, we cannot be any way assured, that the Spirit of God was
present always with them, to enlighten their Understandings, and to make them
see the Truth of all those things whereof they wrote. They neither pretend to
this themselves, nor yet does any one, that I know of, attribute unto them this
Assistance, unless it be perhaps the Author of the Gloss upon the Decrees,
Gloss in Decr. D. 9. c. 3. Hodie jubentur omnia teneri, usque ad ultimum iota.
who is of Opinion, that we ought to stand to all that the Fathers have
written, even to the least tittle: who yet is very justly called to a round
account for this, by Alphons. a Castr. l. 1. advers. Haer. c. 7.
Alphonsus a Castro, and Melch. Canus l. 7. loc. Theol. c. 3. Number. 4.
Melchior Canus, Two Spanish Doctors. For as much therefore, as we are not
bound to believe any thing, save that which is True; it is most evident, that
we neither may, nor ought to believe the Opinions of the Fathers, till such
time as they appear to us to have been certainly True. Now, we cannot be
certainly assured of this, by Their Single Authority; seeing that they were but
Men, who were not always inspired by the Holy Spirit from above: and therefore
it is necessary, that we make use of some other Guides in this our Inquiry;
namely, either of the Holy Scriptures, or of Reason, or of Tradition, or of the
Doctrine of the Present Church, or of some other such means, as they themselves
have made use of: So that it hence follows, that their bare Assertions, are no
sufficient Ground for us to build any of our Opinions upon: they only serve to
incline us before hand to the Belief of the same; the great opinion which we
have of them, causing us to conclude, that They would never have embraced such
an Opinion, except it had been True. Which manner of Argumentation how ever is,
at the best, but Probable; so long as the Persons we have here to do withal,
are only Men, and no more: and in this particular Case, where the Question is,
touching Points of Faith, it is by no means in the world to be allowed of;
since that Faith is to be grounded, not upon Probabilities, but upon necessary
Truths. The Fathers are like to other great Masters in this Point, and their
Opinions are more, or less Valid, in proportion to the Reason, and Authority,
whereon they are grounded: only they have this Advantage, that their very Name
begets in us a readiness, and inclination, to receive whatsoever comes from
them; while we think it very improbable, that so Excellent men as they were,
should ever believe any thing that was False. Thus in Humane Sciences, the
saying of an Aristotle is of a far different Value, from that of any other
Philosopher of less Account; because that all men are beforehand possessed
with an Opinion, that this Great Philosopher would not maintain any thing, that
was not consonant to Reason. But this is Prejudice only: for if upon better
examination, it should be found to be otherwise, his Bare Authority would then
no longer prevail with us; what himself had sometime gallantly said, would then
here take place; namely, That it is a sacred thing, always to prefer the
Truth, Aristot. in Ethic. l. 1. c. 6. (...).
before Friendship. Let the Fathers therefore if you please, be the Aristotle's
in Christian Philosophy: and let us have a Reverent esteem of Them and their
Writings, as they deserve; and not be too rash in concluding, that Persons of
so eminent, both Learning, and Sanctity, should maintain any Erroneous, or vain
Opinions, especially in a matter of so great Importance: Yet notwithstanding
are we bound withal to remember, that they were but Men, and that their Memory,
Understanding, or Judgment, might sometimes fail them; and therefore
consequently, that we are to examine their Writings, by those Principles from
whence they draw their Conclusions; and not to sit down upon their Bare
Assertions, till such time as we have discovered them to be True. If I were to
speak of any other Persons than of the Fathers, I should not add any thing
more, to what has been already said, it having been already, in my judgment,
clearly enough proved, that they are not of themselves of Authority enough, to
oblige us necessarily to follow their Opinions. But seeing the Question here
is, touching these great Names, which are so highly honored in the Church; to
the end that no man may accuse us of endeavoring to rob them of any of the
Respect which is due unto them, I hold it necessary to examine this business a
little more exactly, and to make it appear, by considering the thing it self,
that they are of no more Authority, neither in Themselves, nor in respect of
Us, than has been already by Us attributed unto them.

CHAP. II.
Reason 2. That the Fathers themselves testify against themselves, that they
are not to be believed Absolutely, and upon their Own bare Word, in what they
deliver in matters of Religion.

THere is none so fit to inform us, what the Authority of the Writings of the
Ancients is, as the Ancients themselves, who in all Reason must needs know this
better than we: Let us therefore now hear, what they testify in this
Particular; and if we do indeed hold them in so high Esteem, as we make
profession of, let us allow of their Judgment in this particular, attributing
neither more nor less unto the Ancients, than they Themselves require at our
hands. St. Augustine, who was the Principal Light of the Latin Church, being
entered into a Contestation with St. Hierome, touching the Interpretation
beforementioned, of the second Chapter of the Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Galatians; and finding himself hardly pressed, by the Authority of six, or
seven Greek Writers, which were urged against him by the other; to rid his
hands of them, he was fain to make open profession, in what account he held
that sort of Writers: August. Ep. ad Hier quae est 19. T. 2. fol* 14. Ed.
Paris. 1579. and inter Op. Hier. 97. T. 2. p. 551. Ego enim fateor Caritati
tuae, solis eis Scripturarum libris, qui jam Canonici appellantur, didici hunc
timorem, honoremque defer, ut nullum eorum auctorem scribendo aliquid errasse
firmissime credam. Ac si aliquid in eis offendero litteris, quod videatur
Contrarium Veritati, nihil aliud quam mendosum esse codicem, vel interpretem
non assequutum esse quod dictum est, vel me minime intellexisse, non ambigam.
Alios autem ita lego, ut quantalibet sanctitate, doctrinaque praepolleant, non
ideo verum putem, quia ipsi ita senserunt, sed quia mihi, vel per illos
Authors Canonicos, vel probabili ratione, quod a vero non abhorreat,
persuadere potuerunt. Nec te, mi frater, sentire aliquid aliter existimo:
prorsus inquam, non te arbitror sic legi libros tuos velle, tanquam Prophetarum
vel Apostolorum, de quorum scriptis, quod omni errore careant, dubitare
nefarium est.
I confess (says he) to thy Charity, that I only owe to those Books of
Scripture, which are now called Canonical, that Reverence and Honor, as to
believe steadfastly, that none of their Authors ever committed any Error in
writing the same. And if by chance. I there meet with any thing, which seems
to contradict the Truth, I presently think that certainly either my Copy is
Imperfect, and not so Correct as it should be; or else, that the Interpreter
did not so well understand the Words of the Original: or lastly, that I my self
have not so rightly understood Him. But as for all other Writers, how Eminent
soever they are, either for Sanctity, or Learning, I read them so as not
presently to conclude, whatsoever I there find, to be True, because They have
said it; but rather, because they convince me, either out of the said Canonical
Books of Scripture, or else by some Probable Reason, that what they say is
True. Neither do I think, Brother, that thou thy self art of any other Opinion:
that is to say, I do not believe that thou expectest that we should read thy
Books, as we do those of the Prophets, or Apostles; of the Truth of whose
Writings, as being exempt from all Error, we may not in any wise doubt. And
having afterward opposed some other the like Authorities, against those
alleged by St. Hierome, he adds, That he had done so, Id. ibid. Quanquam,
sicut paulo ante dixi, tantummodo Scripturis Canonicis hanc ingenuam debeam
servitutem, qua eas solas ita sequat, ut conscriptores earum nihil in eis
om^^no errasse, nihil fallaciter posuisse ^on dubitem.
notwithstanding, that to say the truth, he accounted the Canonical Scriptures
only to be the Books, to which (as he said before) he owed that ingenuous Duty,
as to be fully persuaded, that the Authors of them never erred, or deceived the
Reader in any thing. This Holy man accounted this Advice to be of so great
Importance, as that he thought fit to repeat it again, in another place; and I
must entreat my Reader, to give me leave to set down here the whole Passage at
length. Id. l. 11. contr. Faust c. 5. Quod genus litterarum, non cum credendi
necessitate, sed cum judicandi liberate legendum est. Cui tamen ne
intercluderetur locus, and adimeretur posteris ad difficileis quaestiones
tractandas atque versandas, linguae, ac styli saluberrimus labor, distincta est
a postreiorum libris excellentia Canonicae Auctoritatis Veteris and Novi
Testamenti; quae Apostolorum confirmata temporibus, per successiones
Episcoporum, and propagationes Ecclesiarum, tanquam in sede quadam sublimiter
constituta est, cui serviat omnis fidelis, and pius intellectus. Ibi si quid
velut absurdum moverit, non licet dicere, Auctor hujus libri non tenuit
veritatem: sed, aut Codex mendosus est, aut Interpres erravit, aut tu non
intelligis. In Opusculis autem posteriorum, quae libris innumerabilibus
continentur, sed nullo modo illi sacratissimae Canonicarum scripturarum
excellentiae coaequantur, etiam in quibuscunque eorum invenitur eadem veritas,
long tamen est impar auctoritas. Itaque in eis, si qua forte propterea
dissonare putantur a vero, quia non, ut dicta sunt, intelliguntur, tamen
liberum ibi habet lector, auditorve judicium, quo vel approbet quod placuerit,
vel improbet quod offenderit: and ideo cuncta ejusmodi, nisi vel certa ratione,
vel ex illa Canonica auctoritate defendantur, ut demons^retur sive omnino ita
esse, sive fieri potuisse, quod v^l disputatur ibi, vel narratum est, si cui
displicuerit, aut credere voluerit, non reprehenditur.
As for these kind of Books (says he, speaking of those Books which we Write,
not with Authority of Commanding, but only out of a Design of exercising our
selves, to benefit others;) we are so to read them, as not being bound
necessarily to believe them, but as having a liberty left us, of judging of
what we read. Yet notwithstanding, that we may not quite shut out these Books,
and deprive posterity of the most profitable labor of exercising their
Language, and Style, in the handling and treating of hard Questions; we make a
Distinction betwixt these Books of Later Writers, and the Excellency of the
Canonical Authority of the Old and New Testament; which having been confirmed
in the Apostles time, has since by the Bishops, who succeeded them, and the
Churches, which have been propagated throughout the World, been placed as it
were upon a high Throne, there to be reverenced and adored, by every Faithful
and Godly Understanding. And if we chance here to meet with any thing that
troubles us, and seems Absurd, we must not say, that the Author of the Book
was ignorant of the truth; but rather, that either our Copy is false, or the
Interpreter is mistaken in the sense of the place; or else, that we understand
not him aright. And as for the Writings of those other Authors, who have come
after Them, the number whereof is almost infinite, though coming very far short
of this most sacred Excellency of the Canonical Scriptures; a man may sometimes
find in them the very same truth, though it shall not be of equal Authority.
And therefore if by chance we here meet with such things as seem contrary to
the Truth, by reason perhaps of our not understanding them only; we have our
Liberty, either in reading, or hearing the same, to approve of what we like,
and to reject that which we conceive not to be so right. So that except all
such passages be made good, either by some certain reason, or else by the
Canonical Authority of the Scriptures; and that it be made appear, that the
thing asserted either really it, or else at least, that it might have been; he
that shall reject, or not assent to the same, ought not in any wise to be
reprehended. Id. T. 2. Epist. 48 ep. 111. T. 3. l. 1. 3 de Trinit. c. 2. l. 3.
praefat. l. 5 c 1. T 7. l. 2 contr. Crescon. Gram. c. 31. etc. 32. l. 2. de
Bapt. contr. Don. c. 3. l. 3. de Peccat. mer. and rem. c. n. c. 1. de Not. and
great. c. 61. l. 4. contr. de ep. Pelag. c. 8. l. 1. contr. Julian. c. 2. l. de
bon. persever. c. 21.
And thus far have we S. Augustine testifying on our side, (as well here, as in
many other places, which would be too long to be inserted here;) that those
opinions which we find delivered by the Fathers in their Writings, are
grounded, not upon their bare Authority, but upon their Reasons; and, that they
bind not our belief otherwise, than so far forth as they are consonant either
to the Scripture, or to Reason; and that they ought to be examined by the one,
and the other, as proceeding from persons that are not infallible, but possibly
may have erred.

So that it appears from hence, that the course which is at this day observed
in the World, is not of sufficiency enough for the discovery, and demonstration
of the truth. For, we are now in doubt, suppose, what the sense and meaning is
of such a piece of Scripture. Here shall you presently have the judgment of a
Father brought, upon the said place; quite contrary to the Rule S. Augustine
gives us, who would have us examine the Fathers by the Scriptures, and not the
Scriptures by the Fathers. Certainly, according to the judgment of this Father,
the Protestant, though a Passage as clear and express, as any of the Canons of
the Council of Trent, should be brought against him, out of any of the Fathers,
ought not to be blamed, if he should answer, that he cannot by any means assent
unto it, unless the truth of it be first proved unto him, either by some
certain Reason, or else by the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures; and that
then, and not till then, he shall be ready to assent unto it. So that according
to this Account, we are to allege, not the Names, but the Reasons of Books; to
take notice, not of the Quality of their Authors, but of the Solidity of their
Proofs; to consider what it is they give us; and not the face, or hand of him
that gives it us; and, in a word, to reduce the dispute, from Persons, to
Things. And S. Jerome also seems to commend unto us this manner of
Proceeding, where in the Preface to his second Commentary upon Hosea, he has
these words: Then (says he, that is, after the Authors of Books are once
departed this life) we judge of their worth, Hier. Com. 2. in Oseam, Praefat.
Tunc sine nominum dignitate, sola judicantur ingenia; nec considerat, qui
lecturus est, cujus, sed quale sit quod lecturus est, sive sit Episcopus, sive
sit laicus, Imperator and Dominus, miles and servus, aut in purpura, and
serico, aut vilissimo panno jaceat, non honorum diversitate, sed operum merito
judicabitur.
and parts only; not considering at all the Dignity of their Name: and the
Reader has regard only to what he reads, and not to the Author whose it is. So
that whether he were a Bishop, or a Layman; a General and a Lord, or a common
Soldier, and a Servant; whether he lie in Purple and in Silk; or in the
vilest, and coursest rags; he shall be judged, not according to his degree of
honor, but according to the merit and worth of his Works. Now he here speaks
either of matter of Right, or of Fact: and his meaning is, that either we ought
to take this course in our Judgments; or else it is a plain Affirmation, that
it is the practice of the World so to do. If his words are to be taken in the
first sense, he then clearly takes away all Authority from the bare Names of
Writers, and so would have us to consider the Quality only, and weight of their
Writings, that is to say, their Reasons, and the force of the Arguments they
use. If he be to be understood in the second sense, he seems not to speak
truth, it being evident, that the ordinary course of the world is, to be more
taken with the titles and names of Books, than with the things therein
contained. But supposing however, that this was S. Hieroms meaning; we may
notwithstanding very safely believe, that he approves of the said course; for
as much as having this occasion of speaking of it, he does not at all reprehend
it. If therefore thou have any mind to stand to his judgment, lay me aside the
Names of Augustine, and of Hierome, of Chrysostom, and of Cyril; and forget
for this once the Rochet of the first, and the Chair of the second, together
with the Patriarchal Robe of the two last: and observe what they say, and not
what they were: the ground and reason of their opinions; and not the dignity of
their persons. But that which makes me very much wonder, is, that some of those
who have been the most conversant in Antiquity, should trouble themselves in
stuffing up their Books with declamatory expressions, Card. Perron, of the
Eucharist. Aut. 20.
in praise of the Authors they produce; not forbearing to recount to you so
much as the Nobleness of their Extraction, the choiceness of their Education,
the gallantry of their Parts, the eminency of their See, and the greatness of
their State. This manner of writing may perhaps suit well enough with the
precepts of Rhetoric: but sure I am, that it agrees ill enough with S.
Hierom's rule, which we gave you a little before. But let us now observe, out
of some other more clear, and express passages of his, what the judgment of
this great Aristarchus, and Censor of Antiquity has been, touching this Point.
Hier. ep 62. ad Theoph. Alex. Scio me aliter habere Apostolos; aliter reliquos
tractatores: illos semper vera dicere; istos in quibusdam, ut homines, errare.
I know (says he, writing to Theophilus, Patriarch of Alexandria) that I place
the Apostles in a distinct rank from all other Writers: for as for them, they
always speak truth: but as for those other, they err sometimes, like Men as
they were. What could he have said more expressly, in confirmation of our
Assertion before laid down? Id. ep. 65. ad Pamm. and Oceanum. Erraverunt in
side alii, tam Graeci, quam Latini, quorum non necesse est proferre nomina, ne
videamur eum, non sui merito, sed aliorum errore defendere.
There are others (says he) both Greeks, and Latins, who have erred also in
Points of Faith; whose Names I need not here set down lest I might seem to
defend Origin by the Errors of others, rather than by his own Worth. How then
can we confide in them, unless we examine their Opinions by their Reasons? Id.
ibid. Sic eum legam, ut caeteros; quia sic erravit, ut caeteri.
I shall (faith the same Author) read Origin, as I read others, because I find
he has erred, in like manner as they have done. And in another place, speaking
in general of Ecclesiastical Writers, that is, of those which We now call
Fathers, and of the Faults and Errors that are found in their Books; Hier. l.
2. Apol, contr. Ruff. Fieri enim potest, ut vel simpliciter erraverint, vel
alio sensu scripserint, vel a Librariis imperitis eorum paulatim scripta
corrupta sint; vel certe antequam in Alexandria quasi daemonium meridianum
Arius nasceretur, innocenter quaedam, and minus caute loquuti sunt, and quae
non possint perversorum hominum calumniam declinare.
It may be (says he) that either they have erred out of mere ignorance, or
else, that they wrote in some other Sense than we understand them; or, that
their Writings have by degrees been corrupted, through the ignorance of the
Transcribers; or else, before the appearing of that impudent Devil Arius in the
World, they let some things fall from them innocently, and not so warily as
they might have done, and such as can hardly escape the Cavils of wrangling
Spirits. Which Passage of his is a very excellent and remarkable one, and
contains in it a brief, yet a clear and full Justification of the greatest
part of what we have hitherto delivered in this our Discourse. Do but think
therefore with how much circumspection we are to read and to weigh these
Authors, and how careful we ought to be in examining, in their Books, whether
there be not either some fault committed by the Transcriber, or some obscurity
in the Expression, or some negligence in the Conception, or lastly, some error
in the Proposition. In another place, having set down the Opinions (...) As for
their Expositions, he resuseth them openly, whenever they do not please him.
Thus does he find fault with the Exposition which is given by the greatest part
of the Fathers, of the Word Israel; which they will have to signify, A Man
seeing God: Hier. Tradit. Hebr. Quamvis igitur grandis Auctoritatis sint, and
eloquentiae, and ipsorum umbra nos opprimat, qui, Israel, virum, sive mentem
videntem Deum, trans^^lerunt; nos magis Scripturae, and Angeli, and Dei, qui
ipsum Israel vocavit, auctoritate ducimur, quam ^ujuslibet eloquentiae
saecularis.
Notwithstanding that those who interpret it thus, are Persons of very great
both Authority and Eloquence, and whose very shadow (says he) in sufficient to
bear us down; yet cannot we choose but follow the Authority of the Scriptures,
and of the Angel, and of God, who gave this Name of Israel, rather than the
Power of any Secular Eloquence, how great soever it be. And in his CXLVI
Epistle, written to Pope Damasus, he says, Id. ep. 146. ad Damas. Licet quidam
superstitio^e magis, quam vere, non considerantes textum Psalmi, ex Patris
persona arbitrentur haec intelligi.
That there are some, who not considering the Text, conceive Superstitiously,
rather than Truly, that these words, in the beginning of the XLIV Psalm,
E^^ctavit cor meum verbum bonum, My heart is inditing a good matter, are spoken
in the Person of the Father. And yet the greatest part of those who lived in
the time of Arius, and a little after him, understood these words in the same
sense.

It was likewise the General Opinion, in a manner, of all Men, That Adam was
buried upon Mount Calvary, and in the very same place where our Savior Christ
was crucified: And yet S. Hierome Hier. in loc. Hebr. Eusebius. and Com 4. in Mat.
rejects this Opinion, and which is more, he makes himself merry with it,
without any scruple at all. So likewise, there were some among the aforementioned
Ancient Fathers, who out of a Pious Affection which they bare to S. Peter,
maintained, Hilar. in Mat. Can. 31.
That he denied not God, but Man; and that the sense of the Words of his Denial
is, I know not him to be a Man * for I know that he is God. Hier. Com 4. in
Mat. in c. 26. Hoc quam frivolum sit, pruden^ Lector intelligit, fi de^endunt
Apostolum, ut Deum mendacii reum faciant, etc.
The Intelligent Reader (says the same S. Hierome) will easily perceive, how
idle and frivolous a thing this is, to accuse our Savior as guilty of a Lie,
by excusing his Apostle. For, if S. Peter did not deny him, our Savior must
necessarily then have lied, when he said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, etc.
Id. Com. XI. in Ezech. in Praefat. Ambros. l. 2. de fid. ad Great.
He takes the same liberty also in reprehending S. Ambrose, who understands by
Gog, spoken of in the Prophet Ezechiel, the Nation of the Goths: neither do
those other Fathers escape his Lash; who pleasing themselves too much with their
Allegories, Hier. in Esai. Comm. X.
take Bosra in Isaiah, for the Flesh, whereas it signifies a Fortress. I might
here produce very many the like Passages, but these few shall now serve as a
Taste only: For who sees not by this time, that these Holy Men took not the
Fathers who went before them, for the Judges, or Arbitrators, touching the
Opinions of the Church? and that they did not receive their Testimonies and
Depositions, as Oracles, but reserved the Right, which S. Augustine allows to
every Man, of examining them by the Rule of Reason, and of the Scripture.
Neither are we to take any notice at all of S. Hierome, when he seems to except
out of this number, the Writings of Athanasius, and of S. Hilary; writing to
Laeta, and telling her, That her Daughter Paula might walk securely, and with
firm footing, by the Epistles of the one, and the Books of the other; and
therefore he counsels her Hier. ep. 7. ad Laet. Illorum tractatibus, illorum
delectetur ingeniis, in quorum libris pietas fidei non vacillat Caeteros sic
legate, ut magis judicet, quam sequatur.
to take delight in these Men's Writings; forasmuch as in their Books the Piety
of Faith wavereth not: And as for all other Authors, she may read them; but
rather to pass her judgment upon them, than to follow them. For, first of all,
although perhaps there should be some Piece of a Father, that should have no
Error at all in it, (as questionless there are many such) yet would not this
render the Authority of the same Infallible. How many such Books are there,
even of the Moderns, wherein neither the one Party, nor the other, has been
able to discover any the least Error in matter of Faith? And yet, I suppose, no
Man will presently conclude from hence, that we ought to admit of these Authors
as Judges of our Faith. A Man may there find of several Authors, touching a
certain Question that had been proposed unto him, that so the Reader might make
choice of the best; he gives this Reason of his so doing: Id. ep. 15. 2. Nec.
juxta Pythagorae discipulos, praejudicata doctoris opinio, sed doctrinae ratio
ponderanda est.
Because (says he) we ought not, according to the Example of Pythagoras his
Scholars, to have an eye to the Prejudicated Opinion of the Proposer, but
rather the Reason of the Thing Proposed: Which words of his do sufficiently
confirm the Sense which we have formerly given of that Passage of his, in the
Preface to his second Commentary upon Hosea. He presently afterward adds; Id.
ibid. Meum propositum est, antiquos legere, probare singula, retinere quae bona
sunt, and a side Ecclesiae Catholicae non recedere.
My purpose is to read the Ancients, to prove all things, and to hold fast that
which is good, and not to depart from the Faith of the Catholic Church;
according to the Rule which he has commended unto us, in his LXXVI Epistle,
where he advises us Id. ep. 76. ad Tranquil. Ego Origenem propter Eruditionem
sic interdum legendum arbitror, quomodo Tertullianum, Novatum, Arnobium,
Apollinarium, and nonnullos Ecclesiasticos scriptores, Graecos pariter, and
Latinos, ut bona ^orum eligamus, vitemuque contraria; juxta Apostolum dicentem,
Omnia probate; quod bonum est tenete.
to read Origin, Tertullian, Novatus, Arnobius, Apollinaris, and some other of
the Ecclesiastical Writers; but with this caution, that we should make choice
of that which is good, but take heed of embracing that which is not so;
according to the Apostle, who bids us prove all things, but hold fast only
that which is good. And this is the course he constantly takes, censuring, with
the greatest Liberty that may be, the Opinions and Expositions of all those who
went before him. He gives you freely his Judgment of every one of them;
affirming, Hier. ep. 13. ad Paulin. B. Cyprianus de scripturis divinis
nequaquam disseruit. Inclyto Victorinus martyrio coronatus, quod intelligit,
eloqui non potest. Lactantius utinam tam nostra confirmare potuisset, quam
facile aliena destruxit. Arnobius inaequalis, and nimius est, and absque operis
sui partitione consusus. S. Hil^rius Gallicano cothurno attollitur, and longis
interdum periodis involvitur, and a lectione simpliciorum fratrum procul est.
That Cyprian scarcely touched the Scriptures at all; that Victorinus was not
able to express his own Conceptions; that Lactantius is not so happy in his
Endeavors of proving our Religion, as he is in overthrowing that of others;
that Arnobius is very uneven and confused, and too luxuriant; that S. Hilary is
too swelling, and encumbered with too long Periods. I shall not here set before
you what he says of Origin, Theodorus, Apollinaris, and of the Chiliasts;
whose professed Enemy he has declared himself, and whom he reproves very
sharply upon all Occasions, whenever they come in his way; and yet himself
confesses them all to have been Men of very great Parts; giving even Origin
himself, who is the most dangerous Writer of them all, this Testimony, Hier.
Praefat. in lib. de Nom. Hebr. Quem ( Origenem) post Apostolos Ecclesiarum
Magistrum nemo nisi imperitus negat.
That none but the ignorant can deny, but that, next to the Apostles, he was
one of the greatest Masters of the Church. But that I may not meddle with any,
but such whose Names have never been cried down in the Church; do but mark how
he deals with Rhetitius Augustudunensis, an Ecclesiastical Author: Id ep. 133.
ad Marcel. Innumerabilia sunt, quae in illius mihi Commentariis for dear visa
sunt.
There are (says he) an infinite number of things in his Commentaries, which
in my judgment, show very mean and poor: and a little after, Id. ibid. Sed tam
male videtur existimasse de caeteris ut nemo possit de ejus erroribus judicare.
He seems to have had so ill an Opinion of others, as to have a conceit, that
no Man was able to judge of his Faults. He takes the same liberty also, in
rejecting their Opinions and Expositions; and sometimes not without passing
upon them very tart Girds too. He justifies the Truth of the Hebrew Text of the
Old Testament, and finds an infinite number of Faults in the Translation of
the LXX, against almost the general consent not only of the more Ancient
Writers, but also of those too who lived in his own time, who all esteemed it
as a Divine Piece. Hier. Praefat. in Pentateuch ad Desid. Nescio quis primus
Auctor Septuaginta Cellulas Alexandriae mendacio suo exstruxerit.
He scoffs at the conceit of those Men who believed, that the LXX Interpreters,
being put severally into Seventy distinct Cells, were inspired from above, in
the Translation of the Bible. Id. Comm. 10. in Ezech. Habitentque in
Septuaginta Cellulis Alexandrini Phari, ne vela perdant de navibus, and funium
detrimenta suspirent.
Let them keep, (says he, speaking of his own Backbiters, by way of scorn)
with all my heart, in the Seventy Cells of the Alexandrian Pharos, for fear
they should lose their Sails of their Ships, and be forced to bewail the loss
of their Cordage. perhaps the same Truth, (as S. Augustine says a little
before;) but it will not be of equal Authority with that of the Canonical
Books. Baron. Annal. an. 369. Sect. 24.
Besides, as Cardinal Baronius has observed, this last Passage of S. Hierome
ought to be understood only in the Point touching the Holy Trinity, concerning
which, there were at that time great Disputes betwixt the Catholics and the
Arians: for otherwise, if his words be taken in a General sense, they will be
found to be false, as to S. Hilaries particular, who has had his failings in
some certain things, as we shall see hereafter. In a word, although S. Hierome
were to be understood as speaking in a General sense (as his words indeed seem
to bear) yet might the same thing possibly happen to him here, which he has
observed has oftentimes befallen to others; namely, to be mistaken in his
Judgment. For we are not to imagine, that he would have us have a greater
Opinion of him, than he himself has of other Men. And S. Augustine told him,
as we have before showed, that he did not believe that he expected Men should
judge any otherwise of him. And I suppose, we may very safely keep to S.
Augustine's Judgment, and believe with him, that S. Hierome had never any
intention that we should receive all his Positions as Infallible Truths; but
rather, that he would have us to read and examine his Writings with the same
freedom that we do those of other Men. And if we have no mind to take S.
Augustine's word in this Particular, let us yet take S. Hierome's own, who in
his second Commentary upon the Prophet Habakkuk, says, Hier. Com. 2. in Abac.
Si quis autem his sagaciora, and veriora repererit, illi magis explanationi
praebete consensum.
And thus have I delivered unto you my sense in brief: but if any one produce
that which is more exact and true, take his Exposition rather than mine. And so
likewise upon the Prophet Zephaniah, he says, Id. in Sophon. Si quis autem
magis verisimilia, and habentia rationem, quam a nobis sunt disserta,
repererit, illius magis Lector auctoritate ducatur.
We have now done our utmost endeavor, in giving an Allegorical Exposition of
the Text; but if any other can bring that which is more Probable, and agreeable
to Reason, than that which we have delivered, let the Reader be swaied by his
Authority, rather than by ours. And in another place he speaks to the same
purpose, in these words: Hier. Com. in Zach. Haec ut quivimus, ut vires
ingenioli nostri far potuerunt, loquuti sumus, and Hebraeorum, and nostrorum
varias opiniones breviter perstringentes. Si quis melius, imo verius dixerit;
and nos libenter melioribus acquiescimus.
This we have delivered according to the utmost of our poor Ability, and have
given you a short touch of the diverse Opinions, both of our own Men, and of the
Jews; yet if any Man can give me a better and truer Account of these Things, I
shall be very ready to embrace the same. Is this now, I would fain ask, to bind
up our Tongues, and our Belief, so, as that we have no further liberty of
refusing what he has once laid down before us, or of searching into the
Reasons and Grounds of his Opinions? No, let us rather make use of that Liberty
which they all allow us: let us hearken to them, but (as they themselves advise
us) when what they deliver is grounded upon Reason, and upon the Scriptures. If
they had not made use of this Caution, in the reading of those Authors who went
before them, the Christian Faith had now been wholly stuffed up with the Dreams
of an Origin, or an Apollinaris, or some other the like Authors: But neither
the Excellency of the Doctrine, nor yet the Resplendency of their Holy Life,
which no Man can deny to have shone forth very eminently in the Primitive
Fathers, were able so to dazzle the eyes of those that came after them, as that
they could not distinguish betwixt that which was Sound and True in their
Writings, and that which was Trivial and False. Let not therefore the
Excellency of those who came after them, hinder us either from passing by, or
even rejecting their Opinions, when we find them built upon weak Foundations.
You see they confess themselves, that this may very possibly be: we should
therefore be left utterly inexcusable, if after this their so charitable
Admonition, we should still believe all they say, without examining any thing.
Ambros. l. 7. ep 47. Ego enim beneficio annumero, siquis mea legent scripta
dicat mihi, quo videatur moveri. Primum, quia and in iis quae scio, falli
possum. Multa autem praetereunt, mul ta quibusdam aliter sonant.
I take it for a Favor (says S. Ambrose) when any one that reads my
Writings, gives me an account of what Doubts he there meets withal: First of
all, because I may be deceived in those very things which I know. And besides,
many things escape us; and some things sound otherwise to some, than perhaps
they do to me. I shall further here desire the Reader to take notice, how
careful the Ancients were, in advising those who lived in their own time, to
take a strict Examination of their Words: As for example, where Origin
advises, Orig. Hom. 2. in Ezech. Quaeso audientes, ut diligenter attendant,
and accipiant gratiam Spiritus, de qua dictum est, discretio Spirituum; ut
probati Trapezitae facti, diligenter observent, quando falsus sim magister,
quando vero praedicem, quae sunt pietatis, ac veritatis.
That his Auditors should prove whatsoever he delivered, and that they should
be attentive, and receive the Grace of the Spirit, from whom proceeds the
discerning of Spirits; that so, as good Bankers, they might diligently observe,
when their Pastor deceives them, and when he preaches unto them that which is
Pious and True. Cyrill likewise, in his Fourth Catechesis, has these Words:
Cyrill. Hieros. Cateches. 4. (...).
Believe me not (says he) in whatsoever I shall simply deliver, unless thou
find the things which I shall speak, demonstrated out of the Holy Scriptures:
For the Conservation and Establishment of our Faith is not grounded upon the
Eloquence of Language, but rather upon the Proofs that are brought out of the
Divine Scriptures. If therefore they would not have those who heard them speak
viva voce, to believe them in any thing, unless they had demonstrated the Truth
of it out of the Scriptures, how much less would they have us now receive,
without this Demonstration, those Opinions which we meet with in their Books,
which are not only mute, but corrupted also, and altered so much, and so many
several ways, as we have formerly showed?

Certainly when I see these Holy men on one side, crying out unto us, that they
are Men subject to Errors; and that therefore we ought to consider, and
examine what they deliver, and not take it all for Oracle: and then, on the
other side, set before my eyes these Worthy Maxims of the Ages following: to
wit, Serg. Patr. C. N. Mon. in ep. ad Cyr. Council. VI. (...); Tum: (...).
That their Doctrine is the Law of the Church Universal: and, That we are bound
to follow it, not only according to the sense, but according to the Bare Words
also: and that we are bound to hold all, that they have written, even to the
lest tittle: This representation, I say, makes me call to mind the History of
Paul and Barnabas, to whom the Lycaonians would needs render Divine Honor,
notwithstanding all the resistance these Holy men were able to make; who could
not forbear to rend their garments, through the Indignation they were filled
with, to see that service paid to themselves, which was due to the Divine
Majesty alone, running in amongst them, and crying out aloud; Sirs, why do ye
these things? We also are Men of like passions with you. For, seeing that there
is none but God, whose word is certainly and necessarily True: and, seeing
that, on the other side, the Word, whereon we ground and build our Faith, ought
to be such: who sees not, that it is all one, as to invest Man with the Glory,
which is due to God alone, and to place him in a manner in his Seat, if we make
His Word the Rule and Foundation of our Faith, and the Judge of our Differences
concerning It? I am therefore steadfastly of this Opinion, that if these Holy
men could now behold from their blessed Mansions, where they now live in bliss
on high with their Lord and Savior, what things are acted here below, they
would be very much offended with this False Honor, which men confer upon them,
much against their Wills, and would take it, as a very great injury offered
them; seeing that they cannot receive this Honor, but to the Prejudice and
Diminution of the Glory of their Redeemer; whom they love a thousand times
more, than Themselves. Or if, from out their Sepulchers, where the Relics of
their Mortality are now laid up, they could but make us hear their sacred
voice; they would (I am very confident) most sharply reprove us for this Abuse,
and would cry out in the words of S. Paul; Sirs, why do ye these things? We
also were Men, of like Passions with you. But yet what need is there, either of
ransacking their Sepulchers, and disturbing their Sacred Ashes; or, of calling
down their Spirits from Heaven; seeing that their voice resoundeth loud enough,
and is heard so plainly, in these very Books of theirs, which we so imprudently
place in that seat, which is only due to the Word of God? We have heard, what
the Judgment was of S. Augustine, and of S. Hierome, (the two most eminent
Persons in the Western Church,) touching this Particular: let us not then be
all afraid, having such examples to follow, to speak freely our Opinions. But
now, before we go any further, I conceive it will be necessary, that we answer
an Objection, that may be brought against us; which is, that Athanasius, S.
Cyrill, and S. Augustine himself also, often times cite the Fathers. Besides,
what some have observed, that the Fathers seldom entered into these Lists but
when they were provoked by their Adversaries; I add further, that when we
maintain, that the Authority of the Fathers is not a sufficient Medium, to
prove an Article of Faith by; we do not thereby presently forbid either the
reading, or the citing of them. The Fathers often quote the Writings of the
Learned Heathens, the Oracles of the Sibylls, and Passages out of the
Apocryphal Books. Did they therefore think, that the^e Books were of sufficient
Authority to ground an Article of Faith upon? God forbid, we should entertain
so ill an Opinion of them: Their Faith was grounded upon the Word of God: But
yet to evidence the Truth more fully, they searched into Humane Records; and by
this Inquiry, made it appear, that the Light of the Truth, revealed unto Them,
had in some degree shot its beams also even into the Schools of Men, how Close,
and Shady soever they had been. But, if they should have produced no other, but
Humane Authority, they would never have been able to have brought over any one
person to the Faith. But after they had received, by Divine Revelation, the
Matter of our Faith; it was very wisely done of them, in the next place to
prove, not the Truth, but the Clearness of It, by these little Sparks, which
shot forth their light in the Spirits of Men. And for some the like Reason did
S. Augustine, Athanasius, Cyrill, and many other of them, make use of
Allegations out of the Fathers. For, after that each of these had grounded upon
the Authority of Divine Revelation, the Necessity, and Efficacy of Grace, the
Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, and the Union of the Two Natures
in Christ; they then fell to producing of several Passages out of those Learned
Men, who had lived before Them; to let men see, that this Truth was so clear in
the Word of God, as that all that went before them had both seen and
acknowledged the same: The Consideration whereof was both Pleasing, and Useful
unto them. For what can more delight a Faithful Heart, than to find, that the
chiefest and most Eminent Persons in the Church, had long since held the same
Opinions, touching our Savior Jesus Christ, and His Grace, that We now hold at
this day? But yet it does not hence presently follow, that though these Holy
men should have met with these Articles of our Faith, in the Writings of their
Predecessors only, without finding any Foundation of them in the Canonical
Scriptures, they would notwithstanding firmly have believed, and embraced the
same, contenting themselves with the Bare Authority of their Predecessors. S.
Augustine professes plainly, that in such a Case they might better have
rejected them, and not be blamed for so doing neither; than have received them,
unless they would incur the imputation of being over Credulous. For, it is a
point of too much Credulity, to believe any thing without Reason: and He
further affirms, that where men speak without either Scripture, or Reason;
their bare Authority is not sufficient to oblige us to believe what they
propose unto us. So that it hence appears, that Humane Testimonies are
alleged, not to prove the Truth of the Faith, but only to show the Clearness
of it, after it is once well grounded. Now the Question at this day betwixt us,
and the Church of Rome, is not concerning the Clearness of the Truth of the
Articles they believe, and press upon the World: but it yet lies upon them to
prove, even the very Ground, and Foundation of them. Show me therefore (will a
Protestant here say,) either out of some Text of Scripture, or else by some
Evident Reason, that there is any such place as Purgatory; and that the
Eucharist is not Bread; and, that the Pope is the Monarch, and Head of the
Church Universal: and then, I shall be very glad to try, if for our greater
comfort we may be able to find, in the Authors of the Third, or Fourth Century,
these Truths embraced by the Fathers of those times. But, to begin with these,
is to invert the Natural Order of things. We ought first to be assured, that
the Thing is; before we make inquiry, whether it has been believed or not.
For, to what purpose is it to find, that the Ancients believed it, unless we
find withal in their Writings, some Reason of this their Belief? And again on
the other side, what harm is it to us, to be ignorant, whether Antiquity
believed it or not; so long as we know, that the Thing is? And whereas there
are some, who to establish the Supreme Authority of the Fathers, allege the
Counsel which Sisinnius, a Novatian, and Agellius, his Bishop, gave of old to
Nectarius, Archbishop of Constantinople, and by him to Theodosius the Emperor;
Sozomen. l. 7. c. 12. Hist. Eccles.
which was, that they should demand of the Arrians, whether, or not, they would
stand to what the Fathers, who died before the breaking forth of their Heresy,
had delivered, touching the Point debated betwixt them: this is hardly worth
our consideration. For, this was a Trick only, devised by a subtle head, and
which is worse by a Schismatic; and consequently to be suspected, as a
Captious Proposal, purposely made to entrap the Adverse party; rather than any
free, and ingenuous way of Proceeding.

For, if this manner of Proceeding had been right, and good; how came it to
pass, that among so many Catholic Bishops as there were, none of them all
advised it? How came it to pass, that they were so ignorant of the Weapons,
wherewith the Enemies of the Church were to be encountered? How came it about,
that it should be proposed only by a young fellow, who was a Schismatic too?
And, if it were approved of, as right, and good Counsel; why did Gregory
Nazianzene, S. Basil, and so many other of the Fathers, who wrote in that Age
against the Arrians, deal with them wholly, in a manner, out of the Scriptures?
And certainly those Holy men, besides their Christian Candor, which obliged
them to this way of Proceeding, took a very wise course in so doing. For, if
this Controversy had been to be decided by the Authority of Humane Writers, I
know not how any man should have been able to make good that, which this
Gallant so confidently affirms, in the place aforecited; namely, That none of
the Ancients ever said, that the Son of God had any beginning of his
Generation; considering those many strange Passages that we yet at this day
meet with, touching this Particular, in the Books of the First Fathers: which
is the reason also why the Arrians al^ledged their Testimonies; as we see they
do, in the Books of Athanasius, Hilary, and others of the Ancients, who wrote
against them. But what need we insist so long upon a Story, which is rejected
by Cardinal Sozomen. loc. citat. (...).
Baronius, as being an idle Tale devised by Zozomene, who was a Novatian, *
Baron. Annal. Ann. 383.
in favor of those of his own Sect. The Counsel of Vincentius Lirinensis,
which he gives us in a certain little Discourse of his, which is very highly
prised by Gennad. in Catal inter Op. Hieron.
Gennadius, is accounted by many men much more worthy of our Consideration.
For, having first told us, that he speaks not of any Authors, Vincent. Lirin.
Common. cap. 39. Sed ^orum duntaxat Patrum sententiae conferendae sunt, qui in
fide and Communione Catholica Sancte, Sapienter, Constanter viventes, docentes,
and permanentes, vel mori in Christo fideliter, vel occidi pro Christo
foeliciter meruerunt. Quibus tamen hac lege credendum est, ut quicquid vel
omnes, vel plures, uno eodemque sensu manifest, frequenter, perseveranter,
velut quodam consentiente sibi magistrorum concilio, accipiendo, tenendo,
tradendo, firmaverint, id pro indubitato, certo, ratoque habeatur: quicquid
vero, quamvis ille Sanctus and doctus, quamvis Episcopus, quamvis Confessor,
and Martyr, praeter omneis, aut etiam contra omneis senserit, id inter
proprias, and occultas, and privatas opiniunculas a communis, publicae, and
generalis Sententiae authoritate secretum sit. T^m. 4. Bibl. PP.
Save only of such, who, having holily, wisely, and constantly lived, preached,
and persevered in the Catholic Faith, and Communion, obtained the favor at
length, either to dye faithfully in Christ, or else had the happiness of being
crowned with Martyrdom, for Christ's sake: he further adds; That we are to
receive, as undoubtedly true, certain, and definitive, whatsoever all the
aforesaid Authors, or at least the greatest part of them, have clearly,
frequently, and constantly affirmed, with an Unanimous Consent receiving,
retaining, and delivering it over to others, as it were jointly, and making up
all of them but one Common and Unanimous Council of Doctors. But this Passage
of his is so far from advancing the Supreme Authority, which some would
attribute to the Fathers, in Matters of Faith; that on the contrary I meet with
something in it, that makes me more doubt of their Authority, than I did
before. For, I find by this man's discourse, that whatsoever his reason was,
whether good or bad, he clearly appears to have had a very great desire of
bringing all Differences in Religion, before the Judgment seat of the Fathers;
and to the same end, he labors to prove, with the same eagerness and passion,
that their Judgment is in^allible in these Cases. But in the mean time I find
him so perplexed and troubled in bringing out that which he would have, as that
it appears sufficiently, that he saw well enough, that what he desired, was not
so agreeable to Truth. For he has so qualified his Proposition, and bound it
in with so many Limitations, as that it is very probable, that if all these
Conditions, which he here requires, were any where to be found, we might then
safely, perhaps, rely upon the Writings of the Fathers. But then on the other
side, it is so very difficult a matter, to meet with such a Conjunction of so
many several Qu^lifications, as that I very much doubt, whether we shall be
ever able to enjoy this happiness, or not.

For first of all, for the persons of those men, whose Testimonies we allege,
he requires that they should be such, as not only Lived, but also Taught: and
which is more, persevered too, not only in the Faith, but in the Communion also
of the Catholic Church. And then, for fear of being surprised, and taken at
this Word, he comes over us with a new supply, and qualifies his words with a
Restriction of Three Adverbs; and tells Us, that they must have lived, and
taught Holily, Wisely, and Constantly. But yet this is not all: for besides all
this, they must have either died in Christ, or for Christ. So that if they
Lived, but did not Teach; or if they both Lived, and Taught, but did not
Persevere; or if they both Lived, Taught, and also Persevered in the Faith, but
not in the Communion; or else in the Communion, but not in the Faith of the
Catholic Church; or if they yet Lived, and Taught Holily, but not Wisely; or
on the contrary, Wisely, but not Holily; and if, in the last place after all
this, having performed all the Particulars before set down, they did not at
last die either in Christ, or for Christ; they ought not according to this man's
Rule, be admitted as Witnesses in this Case. Certainly he might have stopped
here, and not have gone on still with his Modifications, as he does, limiting
the number and the words of these witnesses. For what Christian ever made
scruple of receiving the Opinion of such a one, as had both Holily, Wisely, and
Constantly lived, and taught in the Faith, and Communion of the Catholic
Church? For you might hence very well rest assured, that whatsoever he had
delivered, was True; and consequently, Fit to be believed: for how could he
have taught Wisely, and Constantly, if he had taught any False Doctrine? All
tha he here therefore promises us, is no more but this; That we should be sure
not to be deceived, provided, that we believed no other Doctrines, save what
were Holy, and True. This Promise of his is like that, which little Children
are wont to make, when they tell you, that you shall never die, if you but eat
always. Neither do I believe, that there is any man in the World so perverse,
and wilful, as not readily to assent to such a man, as he assuredly knew to be
so qualified, as Vincentius Lirinensis would here have him to be. But seeing
that it is necessary, that we should first know the Quality of the Witness,
before we hear him; it remains, in my judgment, that before we do so much as
hear any of the Fathers, we ought to be first assured, that he was so qualified
in every particular, according to Vincentius his Rule before laid down. Now I
would very fain have any one inform me, how it is possible for us to know this?
Who will assure us, that Athanasius, St. Cyrill, or what other Father you
please, both Lived, Taught, Persevered, and Died Holily, Wisely, and Constantly
in the Faith, and Communion of the Catholic Church? This can never be done,
without a most Exact Inquiry made, both into their Life, and their Doctrines,
which is an Impossible thing, considering the many Ages that have passed, from
Their times, down to Ours. But yet supposing, that this were a Possible thing,
it would nevertheless be of no use at all, as to this Authors purpose. For, He
will have us hear the Fathers, to the end, that we may be by Them instructed in
the Truth. Now, that we may be rightly informed, whether or no, they were so
Qualified, as is before required; we ought necessarily to know first of all,
what the Truth is. For how is it otherwise possible, that we should be able to
judge, whether they have taught Holily, and Wisely? And if you were beforehand
instructed in the Truth, what need have you then to hear Them, and to desire to
be instructed in it, by Them? You may indeed make use of them, for the
Illustration and Confirmation of that which you knew before; but you cannot
learn any Truth from them, which you knew not before. And if you understand the
Maxim before alleged in another sense, and take this Wisdom, and Holiness,
this Faith, and Communion of the Catholic Church, therein mentioned, for a
shadow only, and the Superficies and Outward Appearance of these things, and
for a Common and Empty Opinion, grounded merely upon the Public Voice of the
People, and not upon an Exact Knowledge of the thing it self, it will then
prove to be manifestly False; those Persons who have but the Outward Appearance
only, and not the Reality of these Qualities, being no way fit to be admitted
as Witnesses, much less to be received as the Supreme Judges, in the Point of
the Christian Faith. So that this Proposition is either Impossible, if you
understand it as the words seem to sound; or else it is False, if you take it
in any larger sense. The like Exceptions may be made against those other
Conditions, which he there further requires, touching the Number and the Words
of these Witnesses: For he allows not the force of a Law to any thing, but
what has been delivered either by All, or else by the Greatest part of them.
If he here, by All, mean All the Fathers that ever have been, or but the
Greatest Part of them only, he then puts us upon an Impossibility. For, taking
the whole Number of Fathers that ever have been, the Greatest, and perhaps too,
the Best Part of them have not written any thing at all: and among those that
have written, how many has Time devoured? and how many has the False Dealings
of Men either wholly suppressed, or else corrupted, and altered? It is
therefore evidently Impossible to know, what the Opinions have been, either of
All, or of the Greatest Part of the Fathers, in this sense. And if he restrains
this All, and this Greatest Part, to those who appear at this day, either in
their own Books, or in Historians, and the Writings of other men; it will
concern us then to inquire, Whether or no, by All, he means All promiscuously,
without distinguishing them by their several Ages wherein they lived; or else,
Whether he would have us distinguish them into several Classes, putting
together in the same Rank all those that lived in one and the same Age; and
receiving for Truth whatsoever we find to have been held and confirmed by the
greatest part of them. Now both these ways agree in this one thing; namely,
that they render the Judgment of the Christian Faith wholly Casual, and make it
depend upon diverse and sundry Accidents, which have been the Cause of the
Writings of the Fathers being either preserved, or lost. For, put the case that
Vincentius should have cleared, by this excellent course of his, some Point or
other, which had been controverted; he must have thanked the Fire, the Water,
the Moths, or the Worms, for having spared those Authors which he made use of,
and for having consumed all those other that wrote in favor of the Adverse
Party: for otherwise he should have been an Heretic. And if we should decide
our Differences in Matters of Faith after this manner, we should do in a manner
as he did, who gave Judgment upon the Suits of Law that came before him, by the
Chances he threw with Three Dice. Do but imagine now, what an endless labor it
would be, for a Man either to go and heap up together, and run over all the
Authors that ever have written, one with another; or else to distinguish them
into their several Ages they wrote in, and to examine them by Companies. And do
but imagine again, what satisfaction a Man should be able to get from hence;
and where we should be, in case we should find (as it is possible it may
sometimes so fall out, as we shall show hereafter) that the Sense and Judgment
of this Greatest Part should prove to be either contrary to, or perhaps besides
the Sense and Meaning either of the Scriptures, or of the Church. And again,
how senseless a thing were it to make the Suffrages of Equal Authority, of
Persons that are so Unequal themselves, either in respect of their Merit,
Learning, Holy Life, and Soundness of Faith: and that a Rheticius, whom S.
Hierome censured so hardly a little before, should be reckoned Equal with S.
Augustine; or a Philastrius be as good a Man as S. Hierome? There is perhaps
among the Fathers such a One, whose Judgment is of more weight than a Hundred
others; and yet forsooth will this Man have us to make our Doubles, and our
Sons, to go for as much as our Crowns and Pistols. And lastly, What reason in
the World is there, that although perhaps the Persons themselves were equal in
all things, we should yet make their Words also of equal force, which are
oftentimes of very different and unequal Authority; some of them having been
uttered, as it were, before the Bar, the Books having been produced, both
Parties heard, and the whole Cause througly examined: and the other perhaps
having been cast forth by their Authors at all adventure, as it were, either in
their Chamber, or else in Discourse walking abroad, or else perhaps by the By,
while they were treating of some other Matter? But our Friend here, to prevent
in some sort this later Inconvenience, requires, that the Word of this Greatest
Part, which he will allow to be fit to be Authorized, must have been uttered by
them Clearly, Often, and Constantly; and then, and not till then, does he allow
them for Certain and Undoubted Truth. And now you see he is got into another
Hold. For I would very fain be informed, how it is possible for us to know
whether these Fathers, which we thus have called out of their Graves, to give
us their Judgment touching the Controversies in Religion, affirmed those things
which we find in their Writings, Clearly, Often, and Constantly, or not? If in
this his pretended Council of Doctors, you will not allow the Right of giving
their Suffrage to those of whom it may be doubted, that they either expressed
themselves obscurely, or gave in their Testimonies but seldom, or have but
weakly maintained their own Opinion; I pray you tell me, whom shall we have
left at last, to be the Judges in the Decision of our present Controversies? As
for the Apostles Creed, and the Determinations of the Four First General
Councils, (which are assented unto, and approved of by all the Protestant
Party,) I confess we may, by this way of Trial, allow them as Competent Judges
in these Matters. But as for all the rest, it is evident, by what has been
delivered in the First Part of this Treatise, that we can never admit of them,
if they are thus to be Qualified, and to have all the aforementioned
Conditions. We may therefore very well conclude, That the Expedient here
proposed by this Author, is either Impossible, or else not so safe to be put in
practice; so that I shall rather approve of S. Augustine's Judgment, touching
the Authority of the Fathers. I should not have insisted so long upon the
Examination of this Proposal of his, had I not seen it to have been in so high
Esteem with many Men, and indeed with some of the Learned too. Perron,
Cassander, etc.
For in earnest, after S. Augustine and S. Hierome have delivered their
Judgments, it matters not much what this Man shall have believed to the
contrary. But yet, before we finish this Point, let us a little examine this
Author, both by S. Augustine's, and by his own Rule before laid down. S.
Augustine thinks us not bound to believe the Saying of any Author, except he
can prove the Truth of it unto us, either by the Canonical Scriptures, or else
by some Probable Reason. What Text of Scripture, or what Reason has this Man
alleged, to prove the Truth of what he has proposed? So that, whatsoever his
Opinion be, he must not take it amiss, if, according to the Advice and Practice
of S. Augustine, we take leave to dissent from him: especially, considering we
have so many Reasons to reject That, which he without any Reason given, would
have us to receive. And thus you see, that according to the Judgment of S.
Augustine, the Saying of this Vincentius Lirinensis, although you should reckon
him among the most Eminent of the Fathers, does not at all oblige us to give
our Assent unto it. And yet you will find, that his Testimony would be yet of
much less force and weight, if you but examine the Man by his own Rule. For,
according to him, we are not to hearken to the Fathers, except they both Lived
and Taught Holily and Wisely, even unto the hour of their Death. Who is there
now that will pass his word for him, that he himself was one of this number?
Who shall assure us, that he was not either an Heretic himself, or at least a
Favourer of Heretics? For, is it not evident enough, that he favored the
Semipelagians, who at that time swarmed in France, railing against the very
Name and Memory of S. Augustine; and who were condemned by the whole Church?
Who may not easily see this, by his manner of Discourse in his Vinc. Lirin. in
Comm 2. c. 43.
Commonitorium, tending this way; where he seems to intimate unto us under
hand, That Prosper and Hilary had unjustly slandered them; and that Pope
Celestin. apud Aug. l. 2. contr. Pelag. and Celest. c. 3.
Celestine, who also wrote against them, had been misinformed? And may not he
also be strongly suspected to have been the Author of those Objections made
against Prosper, which are called, Prosper. Resp. ad Object. Vincent.
Objectiones Vincentianae, Vincent's Objections? The great Commendations also
which are given him by Gennad. in Catal. in Ruff. inter Op. Hier.
Gennadius, very much confirm this suspicion; it being clear, that this Author
was of the same Sect, as appears plainly by the great account he makes of
Ruffinus, a Priest of Aquileia, who was the Grand Patriarch of the Pelagians;
saying of him, That he was not the least part of the Doctors of the Church:
Tacitly also taxing S. Hierome, his Adversary, and calling him, A Malicious
Slanderer; as also by the Judgment which he gives of S. Augustine, who was
Flagellum Pelagianorum, The Scourge of the Pelagians, passing this insolent
Censure upon him, and saying, Gennad. ubi supra.
That in speaking so much, it had happened to him, what the Holy Ghost has said
by Solomon, to wit, Prove. 10. 19.
That in the multitude of words there wants not sin. So that I cannot
sufficiently wonder at the Boldness of Cardinal Perron, who when he has any
occasion of alleging this Author, ordinarily calls him Saint Vincent de
Lerins, Saint Vincent of Lerius; thus, by a very ill example, Du Perron, en la
Repliq. au Roy de la Grand Brit. passim.
Canonizing a Person who was strongly suspected to have been an Heretic. Since
therefore he was such a one, why should any one think it strange, that he
should so much cry up the Judgment and Opinions of the Fathers; seeing that
there is no Man but knows, that the Pelagians and Semipelagians had the better
of it, by the citing Their Authorities, and labored by this means to bear down
S. Augustine's Name; and all this forsooth, only by reason that the Greatest
Part of the Fathers, who lived before Pelagius his time, had delivered
themselves with less caution than they might have done, touching those Points
which were by him afterward brought into Question; and many times too in such
strange Expressions, as will very hardly be reconciled to any Orthodox Sense?
Yet notwithstanding, should we allow this Vincentius to have been a Person who
was thus Qualified, and to have had all those Conditions which he requires in
a Man, to render him capable of being hearkened to in this Particular; what
weight, I would fain know, ought this Proposal of his to carry with it, which
yet is not found any where, in the mouth of any of all those Fathers who went
before him; who is also so strongly contradicted, both by S. Augustine, and S.
Hierome, as we have seen in those Passages before alleged out of them; and
who, besides, is full of Obscllre Passages, and Inexplicable Ambiguities?
Vincent. Lirin. Common. 1. c. 39. ubi supra.
So that, Ho^^ Le^^ned and Holy a Man soever, he might be, whe^he^ he were a
Bishop, Confessor, or Martyr, (which yet he was not) this Proposal of his
(according to his own Maxims) ought to be excluded from the Authority of
Public Determinations, and to be accounted of only as his own Particular
Private Opinion. Let us therefore in this Business rather follow the Judgment
of S. Augustine, which is grounded upon evident Reason; a Person whose
Authority (whenever it shall be questioned) will be found to be Incomparably
Greater than Vincentius Lirinensis his: and let us not henceforth give any
Credit to any Sayings or Opinions of the Fathers, save only such, the Truth
whereof they shall have made appear Evidently unto us, either by the Canonical
Books of Scripture, or else by some Probable Reason.

CHAP. III.
Reason III. That the Fathers have Written after such a manner, as that it is
clear, that when they Wrote, they had no intention of being our Judges in
Matters of Religion. Some few Examples of their Mistakes and Oversights.

WHosoever will but take the pains diligently to consider the Fathers manner of
Writing, he will not desire any other Testimony for the proof of this Truth.
For, the very Form of their Writings witnesses clear enough, that in the
greatest part of them they had no intention of delivering such Definitive
Sentences as were to be Obliging, merely by the Single Authority of the Mouth
which uttered them: but their purpose only was, rather to communicate unto Us
their own Meditations upon diverse Points of our Religion; leaving us free to
our own Liberty of Examining them, and to approve, or reject the same,
according as we saw good. And thus has S. Hierome expressly delivered his Mind,
as we showed before, where he speaks of the Nature and Manner of Commentaries
upon the Holy Scriptures. And certainly, if they had had any other Design or
Intention, they would never have troubled themselves, as they ordinarily do, in
gathering together the several Opinions of other Men. This Diligence, I
confess, is Laudable in a Teacher; but it would be very Ridiculous in a Judge.
Their Style also should then be quite of another kind, than now it is: and
those Obscurities which we have observed in the Former Part of this Treatise,
proceeding either from the Rhetorical Ornaments, or the Logical Subtilties
which they made use of, should have no place here. For, what use would there be
of any such thing in pronouncing a Sentence of Judgment, or indeed, in giving
ones bare Testimony only to any thing? But that which makes the Truth of this
our Assertion, more clearly to appear than all the rest, is, the little care
and diligence that they took, in composing the greatest part of these Writings
of theirs, which we now would so very fain have to be the Rules of our Faith.
If these men, who were endued with such exquisite sanctity, had had any
intention of prescribing to Posterity, a true and perfect Tenor and Rule of
Faith; is it probable that they would have gone carelessly to work, in a
business of so great importance? Would they not rather have gone upon it with
their Eyes opened, their Judgments settled, their Thoughts fixed, and every
Faculty of their Soul attentively bent upon the business in hand; for fear,
lest that in a business of so great weight as this, something might chance to
fall from them, not so becoming their own Wisdom, or so suitable to the Peoples
advantage? A Judge, that had but never so little Conscience, would not
otherwise give sentence concerning the Oxen, the Field, and the Gutters of
Titius and Moevius. How much more is the same Gravity and Deliberation
requisite here, where the Question is touching the Faith, the Souls, and the
Eternal Salvation of all Mankind? It were clearly therefore the greatest injury
that could be offered to these Holy Persons, to imagine, that they would have
taken upon them to have passed Judgment in so weighty a Cause as this, but with
the greatest care and attention that could be. Now it is very evident on the
other side, that in very many of those Writings of theirs, which have come down
to our hands, there seems to be very much negligence, or, to speak a little
more tenderly of the business, security at least, both in the Invention,
Method, and Elocutio^. If therefore we tender the Reputation either of their
Honesty or Wisdom, we ought rather to say, that their design in these Books of
theirs, was not to pronounce definitively upon this Particular, neither are
their Writings judiciary Sentences, or final Judgments, but are rather
Discourses of a far different Nature, occasioned by diverse emergent
Occurrences; and are more or less elaborate, according to the Time, Judgment,
Age, and Disposition they were of when they wrote them. Now although this want
of diligence and of deliberation, appears of it self evidently enough to any
man, that reads the Fathers, but with the least attention that may be, yet
notwithstanding that I may not leave this Assertion of mine only said, and not
proved at all, I shall here give you some few Instances for a taste only.

First of all, there are very many Pieces, among the Works of the Fathers,
which were written in haste; and some too, which were mere Extemporary
Discourses, and such, as in all probability the Authors of them themselves
would have found many things therein, which would have required correction, had
they had but leisure to have reviewed the same. Hier. Prolog. in Hom. Orig. in
Jes. Nau.
St. Hierome in a Prologue of his to some certain Homilies of Origin,
translated by him into Latin, says that Origin made them and delivered them
in the Church, Ex tempore. Touching these therefore, we are pretty well
satisfied by St. Hierome; but how many in the mean time may there be of the
like nature, among those so many Homilies of St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine,
and others; all which we perhaps imagine to have been leisurely and
deliberately studied, digested, and composed, which yet some sudden occasion
might perhaps have put forth into the World upon an instant, and which were as
soon born as conceived, and as soon published as made? St. Hierome often
tells us, that he dictated what he wrote in haste. Hier. Ep. 128. ^d Fabiol.
T. 3. vid. and in Epi^aph. Marcel. Epist. 16. Extr.
Thus at the end of that long Epistle, which he wrote to Fabiola, he
confesses, that he had dispatched it in one Evening only, when he was now
setting sail for a journey. And (which is a matter of much more importance) he
says in another place, Id. Praef. in Prove. Itaque, etc. tridui opus nomini
vestro consecravi, interpretationem videlicet trium Salomonis voluminum.
That he had allotted himself but three days, for the translating of the three
Books of Solomon; namely, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Canticles; which
yet a man will hardly be able to read over, well, and exactly, in a month, by
reason of the great difficulties he will there meet withal, as well in the
Words and Phrases, as in the sense. And yet for all this (if, what the Church
of Rome pretends to, be true) this little Three-days Work of St. Hierome has
proved so fortunate, as to deserve, not only to be approved, and highly
esteemed, but even Canonized also by the Council of Trent. Now whether the will
of God be, that we should receive this Translation of his, as his pure Word, or
not, I shall leave to those, who have a desire and ability to examine: However
I dare confidently affirm, that St. Hierome himself never had any the least
thought, or hope, that ever this Piece of his, should one day come to this
honor, it being a thing not to be imagined, but that he would have taken both
more time, and more pains in the thing, if ever he had either desired, or
foreseen this. And thus it sometimes falls out, that Men have better Fortune,
than ever they wished for. The same Author says, at the end of another Piece
of his, Id. Ep. 47. Extemporalis est dictatio, and tanta ad lumen lucernulae
facilitate profusa, ut Notariorum manus lingua praecurreret, and signa ac furta
verborum volubilitas sermonum obrueret.
That it was an Extemporary, and Running business, as he there speaks, and
hudled out so fast, as that his Tongue overrun the Hands of his Amanuenses,
and by its Volubility and swiftness, in a manner confounded them and their
Cifres, and Abbreviations. He elsewhere excuses in like manner another Work of
his of no small importance neither, which is, his Commentary upon the Gospel of
St. Matthew; telling us, that by reason he had been straightened in time, he was
constrained to dictate it in very great haste. And so likewise in the Preface
to his Second Commentary, upon the Epistle of St. Paul to the Ephesians, he
confesses, that he wrote it in so great haste, as that he many times made as
much of it, as came to a thousand lines in a day. In a word, that I may not
cloy the Reader with producing all the Instances of the same kind, that I could
here bring in, it is his ordinary way of excusing himself either in his
Prefaces, or else at the closing up of all his Discourses, to say, that either
the Messenger was in haste, or some other design called him away; or else some
other the like cause, whatsoever it were, was pretended. So that he never did
any thing almost but in haste, and at full speed. Sometimes again, either some
sickness had taken him off his metal; or else, the study of the Hebrew had let
his Tongue grow rusty* or his Pen is not now able to reach its wonted pitch.
Now I would fain know if so be he would have us receive all his sayings, as
Oracles; and did not indeed desire us to excuse rather some things in him, and
to forgive him some others; why should he use these speeches unto us? Who ever
heard a Judge excuse himself, by reason of the shortness of the Time? Would not
this be rather to accuse, than to excuse himself, by making such an Apology as
this for himself; for as much as the giving of overhasty Judgment, in any
Cause, is a very great fault? And in my Opinion, the Fathers could not more
clearly have deprived themselves of this Dignity of being our Judges, wherewith
we will invest them, whether they will or no, than by writing and speaking
after this manner. But yet although St. Hierome had not given us these
Advertisements, which yet ought to make us look well also to the rest of the
Fathers; it appears evidently enough, out of their very Writings themselves,
how little both time and diligence they bestowed, in composing the greatest
part of them. For, otherwise how could so many small trifling Faults, both in
History, Grammar, Philosophy, and the like, have escaped so great and Eminent
Persons, who were so well furnished with all sorts of Literature? How happened
it, that they so either forgot, or else mistook themselves, as they have
sometimes done?

I shall here give the Reader some few examples of this kind, not to take off
any thing from the Praises due to these Learned Persons; as if we thought them
really to have committed these Errors out of ignorance; but rather to let the
World see, that they did not alway^ make use of their whole stock of Worth and
Learning; and that sometimes they either could not, or else would not make use,
but of some part only of their Knowledge, and of their Time: which is a most
certain Argument, that they had never any intention of being received by us as
Judges in Points of Faith. I shall not say much of their Errors in matter of
Time, which are both very notable ones, and also very frequent with them: as,
for example, where Justin Martyr Just. Apol. 2. (...).
says, that David lived Fifteen Hundred years before the Manifestation of the
Son of God; it being very apparent, by observing the Course of Times, derived
along through Histories, both Sacred and Profane, that from the death of David,
to the Birth of our Savior Christ, there passed no more than a Thousand and
Twenty five, or Thirty years, or thereabout. So likewise, when Epiphan. in
Aneor. number. 11^. (...), (...). Vide Petav. in eum locum.
Epiphanius writes, that Moses was but Thirty years old, when he brought forth
the Children of Israel out of Egypt: whereas the Scriptures clearly testify,
that he was Fourscore years of age: And so, where he affirms, Epiphan. lib.
de Ponder. and Men's. number. 12 (...).
That the taking of the City of Jerusalem, happened sixty five years after the
Passion of our Savior Christ. And truly the Chronology of all the Ancients is
generally very strange, and for the most part very far wide of the truth; as
has been observed, and also proved at large, by all the Moderns, as Scaliger,
Petavius, and others. But these matters are so very nice and ticklish, that
oftentimes the most diligent Inquirers into them, may chance to mistake: I
shall therefore forbear to insist any longer upon this Particular; and shall
now lay before you some examples of another nature, and such as shall most
evidently discover the security and negligence of these Authors. Justin Martyr,
speaking of the Translation of the LXX Interpreters, says, Justin. Mart. Apol.
2. (...), (...).
that Ptolemy, King of Egypt, sent his Ambassadors to Herod King of Judaea.
Whereas the truth of the story is, that he sent to Eleazar the High Priest, Two
hundred forty and odd years, before Herod came to be King of Judaea. Epiphan.
in Panar. lib. 1. and Anaceph. page 127, 128, 133.
Epiphanius tells us, in two or three places, that the Peripateticks and
Pythagoreans were one and the same Sect of Heathen Philosophers; which yet were
as much different one from the other, as the Stoics and Epicureans were, as
every Child knows. The same Author confidently affirms also, though
contrary to the says of all Ancient History, Id. contr. Haeres. lib. 1.
that the several Sects and Opinion in Philosophy sprung from some certain
Mysteries brought to Athens, by Orpheus, a Id. Haeres. 5.
and others; and, that the Stoics believed the Immortality, and Transmigration
of Souls; both which are as false, the one as the other: and likewise Id.
Panar. lib. 1.
that Nebuchadonosor sent a Colony, into the Country about Samaria, after the
taking of Jerusalem; whereas in truth, it was Salmanassar, who had so done,
long before the others time. What can you think of him, when you find him
mistaken in such things, as happened not many years before he was born: as
namely, when he says Id. Haer. Arrian. 69. number.
that Arius died before the Council of Nice: and when he relates the story of
Meletius, and his Schism, clean otherwise than the Truth of it was? Justin
Martyr likewise assures us, for a certain Truth, Justin. Mart. Apol. 2. (...),
(...).
that in the Reign of the Emperor Claudius, there was erected at Rome a Statue
to Simon Magus, in the River Tiber, betwixt the two Bridges, with this
Inscription, TO THE HOLY GOD SIMON: whereas, as our Learned Desider. Herald. in
Apol. Tertuk
Critics now inform us, it was only an Inscription to one of the Pagan
D^mi^gods, in these Words, ^SEMONI DEO SANCO; which this Good Father mistook,
instead of Semoni, reading Simoni, and for Sanoo, reading Sancto. Eusebius. in
Chron. and (...). 8. page 250.
Eusebius says, and Hier. Epist. 150. Hedibiae. Comment. 4. in Matthew. ep. 17.
quae est Paul. and Eustoch.
St. Hierome diverse times repeateth it after him, that Josephus, the Jewish
Historian reports, that at the time of our Saviors Passion, the Heavenly
Powers forsook the Temple of Jerusalem; and that there was a great noise
heard, and a voice saying, (...), Let us depart hence; and yet nevertheless the
Truth of the story is, that Josephus reported this to have happened at the same
time, when the City was besieged, that is to say, above Thirty five years after
the Death of our Savior. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 15, 16. Hier. lib.
de Script. Eccles.
The same Authors, and in a manner all others after them, have constantly
delivered as a certain Truth, that Philo Judaeus in that Book of his, entitled
De Vita Contemplativa, describes unto us the manner of Life of the Christian
(...), or Monks: and yet that Book of Philo, which we have at this day under
this Title, proclaims loud enough, that he there speaks, not of the
Christians, but of the Essenes, who were one of the three Sects among the Jews;
as has been observed by Scalig. de Emend. Temp. l. 6 c. 1.
Scaliger, and by diverse others after him. We have touched, how Ambr^s. l. 2.
de fide ad Gratian.
St. Ambrose, without giving us any Account of his Reasons why he does so,
understands by Gog and Magog, mentioned in Ezech. 33.
Ezckiel, the Nation of the Goths, who in his time overrun all Christendom. He
tells us in another place, with the very same confidence that Ambros. Comment.
in Luc.
Zacharias, the father of John Baptist, was the High Priest of the Jews; which
yet Baron. in Apparat. number. 69.
Baronius has clearly proved to be false. Thus you see how little the Later
Writers are beholding to those that went before them, as to this Particular.
Epiphan. in Ancor. (...).
Epiphanius affirms, that Pison, which was one of the Four Rivers that
watered the Terrestrial Paradise, mentioned by Moses, was the same that the
Indians and Ethiopians call Ganges, and the Greeks Indus: which River passing
at length through Ethiopia, discharged it self at last into the Ocean at Cales.
What wonderful strange Geography have we got here, (if at least we may call it
by this name,) which jumbleth together the East and the West, and confounds,
and makes all one, Places, which are very near a whole Hemisphere distant from
each other. Basil. Hom. 3. in Isa. (...), etc.
St. Basil also, who is otherwise an Excellent Author, has mistaken likewise,
though not so much, the course of the River Danubius; for he has only made it
to spring out of the Pyrenean Mountains.

The speaking of these Rivers puts me in mind, that Theoph Antioch l. 2.
Ambros. l. de Parad. c. 3. Ep. Panar. haer. 66. Hieron. de locis Hebr. voc.
Geon alii.
all the Fathers do unanimously understand by Gihon, one of the Rivers of
Paradise, the River Nilus; which has so deceived Cardinal Du Perron en sa
Repl. page* ^50.
Perron also, as that he so delivers it to us, as the express Text of the
Scriptures, by this means making it guilty of a manifest absurdity, how
innocent soever in it self it be, and free from intending any such thing;
seeing that it is evident, that neither in the Hebrew, Greek, nor Latin Text,
it is ever said, that the River Nile watered the Land of Paradise: it being
only a Dream of the Fathers, that one of these Rivers of Paradise, must needs
have been the Nile; though this Fancy of theirs (as Scalig. de Emend. Temp.
Petav. in Epiph. p. 371.
Scaliger makes it appear, and as it is confessed by Petavius also) is built
upon no ground, or reason at all. Neither has their Philosophy also been
sometimes less wonderful, than their Geography: as for example; when Tertul.
lib. de An. c. 19.
Tertullian maintains, that Plants are endued both with sense, and
understanding too. So likewise where Epiphan in Ancor. number 90.
Epiphanius holds, that it is possible for a Dead Man to return to Life again,
without the Reunion of the Soul to the Body. As also where Ambrose Hexaem. l.
2. c 3. Frequenter solemn videmus madi^um, atque rorantem, in quo evidens dat
indicium quod alimentum sibi aquarum ad temperi^m sui sumpserit.
S. Ambrose says, That the Sun, to the end he may allay his extreme Heat,
refreshes himself with the Nourishment which he draws up from the Waters:
and that from hence it is, that we sometimes see him appear as it were all over
wet, and dropping with Dew. And so again, where you have some of them
entertaining the Doctrine of the Spherical Figure of the Heavens, with very
great scorn; and Justin. Quaest. and Respons. Qu. 130. ad Autolye.
maintaining, That it is only as it were an Arch, which is built upon the
Waters, as on its Base. Lactant. Instit. l. 3. c 34. August. de Civ. Det, l.
16. c. 9.
Some others of them you have, who will not endure to hear of the Earths being
of a Round, Spherical Figure, or of the Antipodes; and account those Men little
less than Infidels, that shall offer to maintain any such Opinions. But these
are not bare Mistakes, and Oversights only; but are rather Errors which
proceeded from the want of a due Examination, and a right Apprehension of
things. As for their Grammatical Errors, they are more frequent and usual with
them, than any other: and the reason of their so often mistaking here, is, the
little knowledge they had in the Hebrew Tongue; as, for Instance, when Opt. l.
2. contr. Don. Omnium Apostolorum caput Petrus, unde and Cephas appellatus est.
Optatus, and some others of them, will needs deduce the Name Cephas, from the
Greek (...), which signifies a Head, whereas Copha is a Syriack word, and
signifies Joan. 1. 42.
a Stone, as the Evangelist expressly testifies. S. Ambrose is in the like
manner mistaken, where he derives the word Ambros. 1. de Pasc. c. 1. Quod
quidem sacrum nomen ab ipsius Domini passione descendir. Innoc. III. Ser. 1. in
Conc. Later.
Pascha, which is of Hebrew Extraction, and which signifies properly a
Passing, from a Greek word, signifying to Suffer; in which Etymology of his he
is faithfully followed by Pope Innocent III. in an Oration of his, which he
made at the Opening of the Council of Lateran.

We have formerly given a touch at some Errors of theirs of this nature,
observed by S. Hierome, to whom the Church is very much obliged, both for the
great pains that he took, in endeavoring to attain unto so exquisite knowledge
in the Hebrew Tongue; as also for the great courage that he had, in taking so
much liberty to himself, as freely to note all such Impertinences, whenever
he met with them; who, or how great Persons soever the Authors of them were.
All the rest of the Fathers, a very few only excepted, do here but, as it were,
grope out their way in the dark: and hence it is, that we have so many wild
Etymologi^s given by them, of the Proper Names that we meet with in the
Scriptures. Who can read, without amazement, that which Iren contr. Her. l. 2.
c. 41. Jesus autem nomen secundum propriam Hebraenrum linguam, literarum est
duarum, and dimidiae, etc. Matthew. 1. 12. Iren. l. 2. c. 66.
Irenaeus has delivered, touching the Derivation of the Name of JESUS, which
he will have to be composed of two Letters and a half; adding moreover, that in
the Ancient Language of the Hebrews it signifies the Heavens, notwithstanding
that the Angel expressly testified, at the very beginning of S. Matthew's
Gospel, that our Savior Christ was called JESUS, because He was to save His
people from their sins. Of the like nature is that, where he says, That the
Name of God, Adonai, signifies Wonderful: or, if you write it thus, Addhonei,
it then signifies. Him that boundeth and separateth the Earth from the Water.
And the like Etymologies does he give us of the Word Sabbath, and of Jaoth.
Like to these, are those Mysteries which he informs us of, Id. ibid.
in the afore-cited Treatise of his, which no Author else, either Ancient or
Mode^n, ever heard of: telling us withal, That Barneth is the Name of God in
Hebrew; and that the First and most Ancient Hebrew Letters, which were called
Sacerdotales, were only Ten in number, and were written Five manner of ways.
Out of the same Storehouse has ^lem. Alex. Strom. l. 4. (...), (...). Id. p.
222. (...), (...).
Clemens Alexandrinus produced us that precious Etymology which he has given
of the Name of Abraham, saying, It is by Interpretation, The Elect Father of a
Sound: and that other of the Name Rebecca, which he will have to signify, The
Glory of God. Hilar. in Ps. 132. Seon infructuosae arboris interpretatio est.
S. Hilary says, That Schon signifies a fruitless Tree. But S. Hieron. ep.
141. ad Marcell.
Hierome informs us, That S. Hilary understanding nothing at all in Hebrew, and
being not so very excellent at the Greek neither, he was fain to make use of a
certain Priest named Heliodorus, to interpret to him out of Origin whatsoever
he himself understood not, who no^ discharging his Trust sometimes so
faithfully as he should have done, was the cause of this Father's committing
some certain Errors of this nature, in his Commentaries. Theoph. Antioch. l. 2.
ad Autol.
Theophilus Antiochenus says, That before Melchisedeck's time the City of
Jerusalem was called Hierosolyma; but that afterward it was called Jerusalem,
from Him: which is a very strange Fancy of his, and such a one, as it is no
very easy matter to guess what Ground he should have for it. What strange
Dreams does Ambros. Ep. l. 10. ep. 82.
S. Ambrose entertain his Readers withal, where he expounds the Names of
Chorah, and of Oreb; the one whereof, with him, signifies, The Understanding,
and the other, The whole Heart, or, As the Heart? And so likewise in Ambros in
Psalm. 118.
his Exposition of the CXVIII Psalm, where he gives us the meaning of each of
the Hebrew Letters wherewith the first Verses begin of every one of the 22
Octonaries whereof the said CXVIII Psalm, according to the Hebrew reckoning,
consists. But Id. lib. de Incarn. Da^. Socr. c. 9.
he is by no means to be pardoned, where he is so much out in the Greek Tongue,
which he understood reasonably well, as to derive the word (...), Essence, from
(...), Always, and (...), Being: which is so gross a Mistake, as would not have
been pardoned a Schoolboy at the Grammar School. And as for S. Hierome, it is
true, that he is sometimes at this Sport too; though I should think he does it
of purpose, and to make himself merry only, rather than any way mistaking
himself: as for example, Hier. in Sophon. cap. 3. ver. 8.
when he derives the Latin word Nugae from the Hebrew (...) Noge, which you
read in the Prophet Zephaniah, chap. 3. verse. 8. And so likewise when Id. Comm.
in Ep. ad Philem.
he searches in the Hebrew for the signification of Paul, Philemon, Onesimus,
Timothy, and other words which are purely Greek. And even in the very
Scriptures themselves, which they were both better acquainted with, and which
they had also in greater Veneration than any other Books whatsoever, they often
mistake themselves in citing them. As for example, when Id. Apol. 2.
Justine Martyr alleges a Passage out of the Prophet Zephaniah, which yet is
not found any where but only in the Prophet Zechariah; and in another place,
Id. ibid.
where he names Jeremiah in stead of Daniel. So likewise when Hilar. in Psalm. 2.
S. Hilary tells us, That S. Paul, in the 13 Chapter of the Acts, alleges a
certain Passage out of the First Psalm, which yet is found only in the Second^
whereas S. Paul in that place speaks not one Syllable of the First Psalm, but
expressly names the Second. So also when Epiphan. in Ancor.
Epiphanius says, out of the 27 Chap. Ver. 37. of the Acts of the Apostles,
That the number of those that were in the Ship with S. Paul, when he suffered
Ship wrack, was one while 70. and by and by 80 Souls; whereas the Text says
expressly, that they were in all 276. So likewise when in another place he
affirms, out of the Gospel, Id in Panar. l. 3. Haer. 80. (...), etc. (...),
(...).
That our Savior Christ said to his Mother, Touch me not; whereas it appears
plainly out of the Text, that these words were spoken only to Mary Magdalene.
So where Hier. Comm. 1. in Abac.
S. Hierome troubles himself very much in reconciling a certain Passage
alleged by S. Paul out Habakkuk, to the Original, telling us, that S. Paul had
cited it in these words, The Just shall live by My Faith: whereas it is most
evident, that he Apostle, both in the First Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, as also in the Epistle to the Galatians, has it only thus, The Just
shall live by Faith; and not, The Just shall live by My Faith. Athanasius in
his Synopsis (or whoever else was the Author of that Piece) reckoning up the
several Books of Scriptures, evidently takes the Third Book of Esdras, which
has been always accounted Apocryphal by the common consent of all Christendom,
for the First, which is received by all, both Christians and Jews, into the
Canon of the Scriptures. We might reckon to this number (if at least so foolish
a Piece deserve to have any place among the Writings of the Fathers) that gross
mistake which we meet with in an Epistle of Pope Gregory II. who raileth
fiercely against Vzziah, Greg. II. in ep. ad Leon. Ifaur. de col. Imag.
for breaking the Brazen Serpent; calling him, for this Act of his, The Brother
of the Emperor Leo the Iconoclast, which, as he thought, was all one, as to
reckon him amongst the most mischievous and wretched Princes that ever had
been: and yet all this while the Scripture tells us, that this was the Act, not
of Vzziah, but of the Good King Hezekiah; and that he deserved to be rather
commended for the same, than blamed. As for their slips of Memory, he had need
to have a very happy one himself, that should go about to reckon them all up.
For example; Ambros. l. 2 de Poenit. c. 2. Quod etiam aquila, cum fuerit
mortua, ex suis reliquiis renascatur.
S. Ambrose tells us somewhere, That the Eagle dying, is revived again out of
her own Ashes. Who sees not, that in this place he would have said, the
Phoenix? But however, in another place giving us an Account of the Story of the
Phoenix, Id. lib. de fid. Resur. Atqui hoc relatione crebra, and Scripturarum
authoritate cognovimus, memoratam avem, etc.
as it is commonly delivered, he says, That this we have learned from the
Authority of the Scriptures. By a like mistake it was, that he affirmed, that
these words, Ambros. Ser. 10. Denique iterum Moyfi dicit, quia in hoc ipsum te
suscitavi, ut ostendam in te virtutem meam.
For this very purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in
thee, were spoken to Moses; to whom notwithstanding the Lord never said any
such word, but rather to Pharaoh. In like manner does he attribute to the Jews
those words in the ninth Chapter of S. John, which were indeed spoken by
Christ's Disciples, who asked him, saying, Ambros. ep. l. 9. ep. 75. Quam
stolidi autem Judaei qui interrogant, Hic peccavit, an Parents? Id. l. 2. de
Sanct Jacob. c. 11.
Master, who did sin, this Man, or his Parents, that he was born blind? I
impute that other mistake of his, to the heat of his Rhetoric, where he brings
in one of the seven Brethren in the Maccabees, who suffered under King
Antiochus, and makes him, in his height of Gallantry, allege the Example of
John, and of James, the Sons of Thunder, two of our Savior Christ's Apostles,
who came not into the World, as every one knows, till a long time after this.
It was a slip of memory also in Tertullian, where he tells us, Tertul. contr.
Marc. l. 4. c. 24.
That the Lord said unto Moses, They have not rejected Thee, but they have
rejected Me; which words were indeed spoken to 1 Samuel 8.
Samuel, and not to Moses. S Hierome also was overtaken in the like manner,
Hieron. l. contr. Helvid. In quo primum adversarius superfluo labor desudat,
cognoscendi verbum ad coitum magis quam ad scientiam esse referendum, quasi hoc
quisquam negaverit.
when he tells us, That none of the Fathers ever understood the word Knew, in
the Last Verse of the First Chapter of S. Matthew, otherwise than of the
Conjugal Act; not remembering, that his own dear Friend Epiphanius takes the
word in a quite different sense, and will have the meaning of the place to be,
That Joseph, before the Miraculous Birth of our Savior Christ, knew not what
Glory and Excellency was to befall the Blessed Virgin; Epiphan. in Panar. Haer.
78. Antidicom. (...).
knowing nothing else of her before, save only that she was the Daughter of
Joachim and of Annae, and Cousin to Elizabeth, who was of the House of David:
whereas he at that time knew clearly, that God had done him that Honor of
sending his Angel to him, and of choosing his Espoused Wife Mary to be the only
Woman on Earth, on whom he would confer that so great and wonderful Benefit and
Advantage, above all others. But we intend not here to give you an Inventory of
all the Errors of this nature, which are to be found in the Writings of the
Ancients: these Patterns may well enough serve to show, what the whole Pieces
are.

I shall only add here, That, besides this Carelessness and Security, which is
so ordinary with them, in writing thus confidently whatsoever came in their
mind, or whatever others had delivered over unto them, for Sound and Good,
without ever examining it thoroughly, they had yet another kind of Custom, which
seems not to suit so well with the Person of Judges, as we will needs have them
to be.

And this is, that in their Writings they are sometimes so jolly and sportful,
coming over us with such rare Allegorical Observations as have scarcely any
more Solidity or Body, than those Castles of Cards that little Children are
wont to make. Perron's Repl. p. 743.
These Cardinal Perron calls, Des Gayetez joyeuses, Cheerful Frolickings. I
know very well, that Allegories are useful, and many times also necessary; if
so be they be but sober, clear, and well-grounded. But I speak not here save
only of such as rack the Text, and, as it were, drag it along by the Hair, and,
which make the Sense of the Scripture evaporate in empty Fumes. And of these
are the Writings of the Fathers full. S. Hierome often complains of the strange
Liberty that Origin and his Disciples took herein. Certainly he himself often
flies out in this kind; and whosoever has a mind to fee it, may read but his
146 Epistle, where he expounds the Hier. in ep. 146. ad Damas. paene tot.
Parable of the Prodigal Son: or let him but turn to the Discourse which he
has made touching the Id. Comm. in Soph.
Genealogy of the Prophet Zephaniah, and concerning the City of Damascus; and
also upon the History of Id. ep. ad Nepot.
Abishag the Shunamite; and also upon the Five and twenty Men, and the Two
Princes, spoken of in Id. Comm. 3. in Ezech.
Ezechiel, chap. 11. and upon the Destruction of Tire, of Id. Comm. in Ezech.
Egypt, and of Id. Comm. 9. in eundem.
Assyria, foretold by the same Prophet; as also his subtle Observations upon
Id. Comm. 10. in eund.
Numbers, and upon King Id. Comm. in Agg.
Darius, and upon that Command of our Savior Id. Comm. 1. in Matthew.
Christ, where he bideth us turn the Left Cheek to him that has smitten us on
the Right: and many other the like Discourses of his. S. Hilary is so much
taken with this manner of writing, as that his Expositions upon the Scripture
are half full of these Allegories: and to be sure to make himself the more
work, he sometimes frames Hilar. in Ps* 136.
certain Impossibilities and Absurdities, which he would make the Scripture
seem to be guilty of, which yet it is not; only that he may have some pretense
to have recourse to his Allegories. As for example, in the 136 Psalm, he will
needs have the Letter of the Text to be utterly inexplicable, where it says,
That the Jews sat down by the Rivers of Babylon, and hanged up their Harps
upon the Willows; as if, in this Country, that was watered with Tigris and
Euphrates, there had been neither River, nor Willow, nor any Aquatick Tree.

The same Id. ibid. fol. 108.
Author also demands, as if it had been a most indissoluble Question, if
taken in the Literal sense, who the Daughter of Babylon is; and, why she is
called Miserable? which is so easy a Question, as that any Child almost might
very easily resolve it, without torturing the Text with Allegories. So
likewise, in his exposition of the 146 Psalm, he understands by the Id. in
Psalm. 146. fol. 128. Haec ita intelligere, non dicam erroris, sed
irreligiositatis est.
Clouds wherewith God is said to cover the Heavens, the Writings of the
Prophets; and by the Rain which he prepares for the Earth, the Evangelical
Doctrine; by the Mountains which bring forth Grass, the Prophets and Apostles;
by the Beasts, he understands Men; and by the young Ravens, the Gentiles:
assuring us withal, that it would not be only Erroneous, but rather very
Irreligious, to take these words in the Literal sense. May not this be called
rather Sporting with, than Expounding of the Scriptures?

So likewise in another place, speaking of the Fowls of the Air, which our
Savior said, neither reaped nor gathered into Barns, Id. Can. 5. in Matthew. 6.
26. fol. 7.
he understands, by these, the Devils; and by the Lilies of the Field, which
spin not, the Angels. I should much abuse the Readers patience, if I should
here set down the strange Discourses he has upon the Story of the two
Possessed with Devils, who were healed by our Savior in the Country of the
Gergesens; Id. Can. 8. in Matthew. 8. 28. fol. 10.
and upon the Leap which the Devils made the neighboring Herd of Swine take
into the Sea; and of the Swine-herds running away into the City, and of the
Citizens coming forth, and entreating our Savior to depart out of their
Coasts: or if I should but give you the whole entire Exposition which he has
made of these words, Id. Can. 10. fol. 13.
Verse. 29. Chap. 10. of St. Matthew: Are not two Sparrows sold for a Farthing,
etc. where by the two Sparrows, he understands Sinners, whose Souls and
Bodies having been made to fly upward and to mount on high, sell themselves to
sin for mere Trifles, and things of no value by this means becoming both as
one, the Soul by sin thickning, as it were into a Body: and such other like
wild Fancies, the reading whereof would astonish a man of any judgment, rather
than edify him. Neither is St. Ambrose any whit more serious, Ambros. in Ps.
36. page 503. Matthew. 17. 20. Si habuer^tis fidem sicut granum sinapis, dicetis
huic monti, Tollere and j^ctare in mare. Huic; Cui? Daemonio inquit, a quo iste
invasus fuerat, etc.
where expounding those words of our Savior, Matthew. 17. 20. If you have Faith
as a grain of Mustard seed, ye shall say to this Mountain, Remove hence to
yonder, place, etc. By this Mountain (says St. Ambrose) is meant the Devil. It
would be too tedious a business, to set down here at length all that might be
collected, of this nature, out of him: he that has any mind to see more
Examples of this kind, may read but his Homilies upon the 118. Psalm; which
Piece of his, will indeed be otherwise very well worth any man's reading, as
being a very excellent one, and full of Eloquence and sound Doctrine. But yet
perhaps a man would find it a troublesome business to make any handsome defense
for him, where he makes bold sometimes to use the Sacred words of the
Scriptures in his own sportful Fancies: Idem Tract. de obit. Valent. page 11,
12. Qu^s dabit te frater fratrem m^hi, lactantem ubera matris meae? etc. Cant.
8. 1. Promittit fratri augustae memoriae, Gratianus, praesto sibi fructus
diversarum esse virtutum.
as where he applies to Valentinian and Gratian, that which is spoken of Christ
and the Church, in the Canticles: O that thou were as my Brother, that sucked
the breasts of my Mother! When I should find thee without I would kiss thee,
etc. I would lead thee, and bring thee into my Mothers house, etc. I would
cause thee to drink of Spiced Wine, and of the juice of my Pomegranates. His
left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should embrace me. In
this place (says he) is mean^ the Emperor Gratian, of R^nowned Memory, who
te^^eth his Brother that he is furnished with the fruits of diverse Virtues. And
to the same purpose does he make Application of diverse other Passages of this
Sacred Canticle; and with so great License, as to say the truth, no Poet ever
lashed out with more liberty and freedom than he has done in that Book of his.
I shall here purposely pass by, what I might produce, of this nature, out of
Gregory Nazianzen, St. Augustine, and almost all the rest of the Fathers: for,
this that we have already brought, is enough, and indeed more than we needed
for our present purpose. Let the Reader therefore now judge, whether or no the
Fathers, by this their manner of Writing, have not clearly enough witnessed
against themselves, that their Intention, when they wrote these their Books,
never was either to bound and determine our Faith, or to decide our differences
touching the same. I must needs confess, that they were Persons who were endued
with very large Gifts of the Spirit; and with a most lively and clear
Understanding, for the diving into the Truth. But yet those, that have the
greatest ^hare of these Gifts, have it yet to very little purpose, if so be
they employ it not all, and every part of it, to the utmost of their power,
when the business they are to treat of is of so great both difficulty and
importance; and such, as to the deciding and discussing whereof we can never
bring either more attention or diligence, than is needful. Now that the Fathers
have not observed this Course in their Writings, appears clearly enough by
what has been formerly said: Their Books therefore are not to be received by
us, either as Definitive Sentences, or Final Judgments upon our present
Controversies. I confess that these small, trivial Errors ought not to take off
any thing of the Opinion we have of the Greatness and Gallantry of their Parts.
I believe they might very easily have avoided the falling into them, if they
would but have taken the pains to have looked a little better about them. And I
^m of Opinion, that they fell into them merely by inadvertency only, which may
also sometimes happen even to the greatest Masters that are, in any Sciences
whatsover. I shall as willingly also yield to you, (if you desire it,) that
they have sometimes done these things purposely; letting fall here and there
throughout their Writings such little slips from their Pen, sportingly, and by
way of Recreation; or else out of a design of exercising our Wits.

But certainly, whatsoever the Reason were, seeing that they had no mind to use
any more either care or diligence in the composing of their Books, we may very
well, and indeed we ought to conclude from hence, that they had never any
Intention that these Books of theirs should be our Judges.

These Innocent Faults, these Mistakes, these Oversights, these
Forgetfulnesses, and these Sportings of theirs, do sufficiently declare for
their part, that we are to make our Addresses to some others; and, that they
have not so sadly delivered their Opinions, as if they had sat on the Seat of
Judgment; but rather have spoken as in their Chamber, venting their own private
Opinions only; and not as our Judges.

These Considerations, joined to what has been said, in this particular, by
some of the chiefest and most eminent among themselves, as we have formerly
showed, do make it, in my Judgment, evidently enough appear* that their own
will and desire is, that we should not embrace their Opinions, as Oracles, or
receive them as Definitive Sentences, but that we should rather examine them by
the Scriptures, and by Reason; as being the Opinions of Doctors, who were
indeed very able and excellent Men; but yet notwithstanding they were still
Men, subject to Error, and who had not always the good Fortune to light upon
what was true and sound, and who peradventure, even in this very Case in hand,
have not always done what they might; by reason of their employing either less
time, or less and diligence, than they should have done, if at least they had
had any serious purpose of doing their utmost endeavor in this Particular.

CHAP. IV.
Reason IV. That the Fathers have erred, in diverse Points of Religion; not only
singly, but also many of them together.

I Conceive, that that which has been delivered in the two preceding Chapters,
is sufficient to make it appear to any moderate man, that the Authority of the
Fathers is not so Authentic, as People commonly imagine it to be. Thou
therefore whosoever thou art, if thou be but an indifferent and impartial
Reader, may omit the reading of this, and the following Chapter; both which
I am fain to add, though much against my will, to answer all Objections that
may yet be made by perverse and obstinate persons. For the prejudice, wherewith
they are beforehand possessed, may hinder them perhaps from seeing the
clearness of Reason, and from hearing the voice of the Fathers themselves;
whose words they perhaps will be ready to impute to their modesty, rather than
they will consent to yield unto them no more honor than they themselves
require. The stubbornness therefore of these men, and not any need that thou
have of my doing so, has constrained me to lay aside some of that Respect,
that I bear toward Antiquity; and has obliged me to give them a sight of some
Errors of the Fathers, which are of much more importance than the former, if
by this means at least I may be able to overcome this their obstinacy. For,
when they shall but see, that the Fathers have erred in diverse very
considerable Points; I hope they will at length confess, that they had very
good Reason, gravely to advise us not to believe, or take upon Trust any of
their Opinions, unless we find that they are grounded either upon the
Scriptures, or else upon some other Truth. I confess, I enter upon this Inquiry
very unwillingly, as taking very little pleasure in discovering the Infirmities
and Failings of any Men, especially of such, as are otherwise thought worthy of
so great Estimation and Honor: but yet there is nothing in the World, ^how
precious or dear unto us soever it be, that we ought not to account as Dung, if
it be compared with Truth, and the Edification of men. And I am verily
persuaded, that even these blessed Saints themselves, were they now alive
again, would give us thanks for the pains we have taken, in endeavoring to
make men see, that they were but men; and would account themselves beholding to
us, for having taken the boldness upon us, for the same reason to discover
those Imperfections and Failings of theirs, which Divine Providence has
suffered them to leave behind them in their Writings, to the end only that they
might serve as so many Arguments to us of their Humanity. If there be any
notwithstanding, that shall take offense hereat, I must entreat them once again
to consider, that the perverseness only of those men, with whom I have to deal,
has forced me to this Irreverence, (if at least we are to call it so) together
with the desire I have to manifest to the World so important a Truth as this
is. If I would go about to defend my self by Examples, I could here make use of
that of Cardinal Perron; Du Perron, Repliq. lib. 6. cap 6 p. 949.
who, to justify the Church of Romes interdicting the reading of the Bible to
any of the Laity, save only such as should be allowed so to do; makes no more
ado but falls to laying open to the view of the World (not all the Faults) for
there are no such there; but) all the False Appearances of Faults, that are
found in the Bible, making a whole Chapter expressly of the same. How much more
lawfully then may we adventure here, to expose to public view some few of the
Failings of the Fathers, unto whom we owe infinitely less Respect, than unto
God; only to moderate a little, and to allay the heat of that excessive
Devotion, that most men bear toward their Writings; that so the one Party may
be persuaded to seek out for some other Weapons, than the Authority of these
men, for the defense of their Opinions; and that the other Party may not so
easily be induced to give ear to the bare Testimony of Antiquity. It was the
Saying of a Great Prince long since, that the vilest and most shameful
Necessities of his Nature, were the things that most clearly evinced him, that
he was a Man, and no God, as his flattering Courtiers would needs have made him
believe he was. Seeing therefore it stands us so much upon, to know, that the
Fathers were but Men, let us not be afraid to produce here this so clear and so
evident Argument of their Humanity. Let us boldly enter into their most hidden
Secrets, and let us see what ever Marks of their Humanity they have left us in
their Writings; that we may no longer adore and reverence their Authority, as
if it were wholly Divine. Yet I protest here, before I begin, that I will not
make any advantage at all of those many Arguments of their Passion, which we
meet withal; partly in their own Writings, and partly in the Histories of their
Life. I heartily wish rather, that all of this kind might be buried in an
Eternal Oblivion, and that we would account of them, as of Persons that were
most accomplished for Purity and Innocence of Life, as far forth at least, as
the frail Condition of Humane Nature can bear. I shall only touch upon the
Errors of their Belief, and those things wherein they have failed, not in
Living, but in Writing. The most Ancient of them all is Justin Martyr, a man so
renowned in all Ancient Histories for his great Knowledge, both in Religion and
Philosophy; and also for the Fervency of his Zeal, which is so evidently
manifesied, by his suffering a Glorious Martyrdom for our Savior Jesus Christ.
And yet for all this, how many odd Opinions do we meet withal in his Books,
which are either very trivial, or else are manifestly false? Do but hear how he
speaks of the Last Times, immediately preceding the Day of Judgment, and the
end of the World. Justin. contr. Tryph. p. 307. (...) etc.
As for me, (says he) and the rest of us that are true Christians, we know
that there shall be a Resurrection of the Flesh, and that the Saints shall
spend a thousand years in Jerusalem, which shall be rebuilt, enriched, and
enlarged, as the Prophets assure us, Ezechiel, Isaiah, and others. And to this
purpose he cites that which is written Isaiah, Chap. 65. and besides, that
other Passage in the Revelation, where it is said, Id (...).
That those which had believed in Christ, should live and reign with him a
thousand years in Jerusalem; and that after this there should be a General and
Final Resurrection and Judgment. In which words you see plainly, that he holds
with the Chiliasts, that the Saints shall reign a thousand years in Jerusalem,
before the Resurrection be perfectly accomplished. Which is an Opinion that is
at this day condemned as Erroneous, by the whole Western Church, both on the
one side, and on the other. He seems in another place to have held, that the
Essence of God was finite, and was not present in all places; where he
endeavors to prove against a Jew, that it was not the Father, Idem contr.
Tryph page ^83. and 357. (...), etc.
who rained fire and brimstone upon Sodom, because that he could not then have
been at that time in Heaven. That which he has delivered, concerning the
Angels, is altogether as senseless, though not so dangerous; namely, Idem in
Apol. pr^^ing ad Senate. page 44. (...).
That God having in the beginning committed unto them the Care and Providence
over men and all sublunary things, they had broken this Order, by suffering
themselves to be overcome by the Love of Women, by companying with whom had
been also born Children, which are those we now call Demons, or Devils. I know
not neither, whether he will be able easily to bring any one over to that other
Opinion of his where he says; that Justin. contr Tryph. p. 333. (...), etc.
All the Souls of the Saints, and of the Prophets, had fallen under the power
of Evil Spirits, which were such, as were the Spirits of Python: and that this
was the reason, why our Savior Christ, being now ready to give up the Ghost,
Ibid. (...).
recommended his Spirit to God. I pray you tell me, out of what part of Gods
Word he learnt this Doctrine, which he delivers in his second Apology: where
he says, Id. Apol. 2. p. 83. (...), etc.
That all those, who lived according to the Rule of Reason, were Christians,
notwithstanding that they might have been accounted as Atheists; such as among
the Greeks, were Socrates, Heraclitus, and the like; and among the Barbarians,
Abraham and Azarias: repeating the same Doctrine, within a few Lines afterward,
and saying, that Ibid. (...).
All those who lived, or do now live according to the Rule of Reason, are
Christians, and are in an assured, quiet condition. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lion,
who lived very near his time, was also* of the same Opinion with Justin,
touching the state of the Soul, after it is once departed out of the Body, till
the hour of Judgment. For, toward the conclusion of that Excellent Book of
his, which he wrote against Heresies; after that he has told us, that our
Savior Christ had descended into Hell, and had been in the place where the
Dead were; which place he opposed to the Light of this World: he further
adds, That Iren. l. 5. contr Haeres. c. 26. M^nifestum est, quia and
discipulorum ejus, propter quos and haec operatus est Dominus, animae abibunt
in invisibilem locum, definitum eis a Deo, and ibi usque ad Resurrectionem
commorabuntur, Su^^inente^ Resurrectionem, etc.
it is evident, that the Souls of the Disciples of our Savior, for the love of
whom he did all these things, shall go also into a certain Invisible place,
which is pr^vided for them by God, there to expect the Resurrection; and shall
afterward resume their Bodies, and be raised up again in all Perfection; that
is to say, Corporally, in the same manner as our Savior was raised up again,
and so shall they come into the presence of God. And this Opinion he opposes
against that of the Valentinians, and Gnostics, which he had before produced
in the beginning of that Chapter of his, who held, That the Souls of Men,
immediately after they were departed out of the Body, were carried up above the
Heavens, and the Creator of the World, and went to that Mother, or that Father,
which these Heretics had fancied to themselves: Which Opinion of theirs, is in
like manner rejected by Justin Martyr, Justin. contra Tryph. p. 307.
in the Passage a little before alleged, out of his Book against Tryphon:
Whence it plainly appears, (that we may not trouble our selves to produce any
other Proofs) that Justin and Irenaeus were both of the same Belief, touching
the State of the Soul after Death. But to return to Irenaeus, in his Second
Book against Heretics, Iren. contr. Haer. l. 2. c. 39.
he maintains very s^iffely* That our Savior Christ was above Forty years of
age, when he suffered death for us: bringing in, in defense of this Opinion of
his, which so manifestly contradicts the Evangelical Histories, certain
Probabilities only; as namely, That our Savior passed through all Ages, as
heing come into the World to sanctify and save People of all Ages; urging also
those words of the Jews to our Savior, Thou art not yet fifty years old, Joh.
8. 57.
and have thou seen Abraham? In the Conclusion of all, saying, That S. John had
delivered it by Tradition to the Priests of Asia, That Christ was somewhat
Ancient when he began to preach, being then about the age of Forty or Fifty
years. This Fancy of his appeased so ridioulous to Cardinal Baronius, Baron.
Annal. T. 1. ar. 34 number. 137.
as that, notwithstanding the Faith of all the Copies of this Father, and the
Contexture, which appears evidently to be his, together with the Vein and Marks
of his Fancy and Style; he has yet had the confidence to say, That this whole
Passage had been soisted into the Text of Irenaeus, either by some ignorant, or
some malicious Person, and that it could not be Irenaeus his own.

But it seems, that he had no great reason for this his suspicion, as the
Jesuit Petav. in Epiphan. p. 143.
Petavius has clearly made it appear, in his Notes upon Epiphaniu^. However
you may hence perceive, that Baronius thinks that very Possible, which we have
endeavored to prove in the Former Part of this Treatise, namely, That there
may Possibly have been very many and great Alterations and Corruptions in the
Books of the Writers of the First Ages, by many Passages and Clauses having
been either inserted into them, or else maliclously rased out of them.

The same Iren. l. 2. contr. Haer. c. 62. Animas, etc. Characterem corporis, in
quo etiam adaptantur, custodire cundem, etc. etc. 63. Animas hominis habere
figuram ut etiam cognoscantur.
Irenaeus holds, and endeavors to prove, in the same Book, That the Souls of
Men, after death, retain the Character (that is to say, the Figure) of the
Bodies to which they were formerly united, and that they represent the shape of
the said Bodies, so as to make Men take them for the same. I shall here pass by
that which he Iren. contr. Haer. l. 2. c. 49.
says in the 49 Chapter of the same Book, namely, That our Savior Christ did
not at all know when the Day of Judgment should be, neither according to the
one, nor according to the other of his Natures: although these words of his
look as if they would very hardly be reconciled to any good fense. Neither
shall I yet take notice of what both he and Justin Martyr have in diverse places
so rashly delivered, touching the strength of Humane Nature, in the Business of
Salvation; because I conceive, with Cassand. in defens libelli de Offic. pii
Viri.
Cassander, that all those Passages may, and indeed ought to be understood with
respect had to the scope and drift of these Authors, whose Business there was
to confute those Heretics of Their time, who maintained, That there was a
Fatal Necessity in the Actions of Men, by this means depriving them of all
manner of Election, or Judgment. Neither has the great Learning of Clem. Alex.
Strom. lib. 1. (...).
Clemens Alexandrinus kept him from falling* in^o very many the like, Errors:
as for instance, where in diverse places he says plainly, That the Heathen, who
lived before the coming of our Savior Christ, were justified by Philosophy,
Ili^. p. ^^7. (...).
which was then Necessary for them whereas it is now only Useful unto them; and
that this Philosophy was tho^^ choolmister of ^he Gentiles, which brought them
to Christ, or served to guide them till the time of his Coming, in like manner
as the Law did the Jews; and that the Greeks were justified by i^ alone^; and,
that it was given unto them, as their Id. lib. 6. Strom. p. 279. (...).
Covenant, being a step to, and, as it were, a Foundation laid for Christian
Philosophy. He was of Opinion also, in order to this, Id. Strom lib. 6. p. 269.
(...), etc. fuse.
That our Savior went down into Hell, to preach the Gospel to the Departed
Souls; and that he saved many of them, that is, all that believed: And that the
(...) (in inferis) (...).
Apostles also, after their Death, descended likewise into the same place, and
for the same purpose: Conceiving, that God otherwise should have been Unjust,
and an Accepter of Persons, if so be he should have condemned all those who
died before the Coming of his Son. For (says he) if Id. p. 271. (...);
He preached to the Living, to the end they might not be condemned Unjustly;
why should ^e not, for the same Reason, preach also to those who were departed
this Life before his Coming? From these and the like Considerations, he
concludes, That it was necessary that the Souls of all the Dead, as well
Gentiles, as Jews, should have been made Partakers of the Preaching of our
Savior, Ibid. p. 270. (...).
and should have had the Be^^fit of the same Dispensation, which he used
toward others here upon Earth, in order either to their Salvation, through
Repentance; or their just Condemnation, for their Impenitency.

He plainly maintains also, in several places of his Works, That all the
Punishments which God inflicts upon M^n, tend to their Salvation, and are sent
them for their Instiuction and Amendment; comprehending also within this
number, even those very Pains which the Damned endure in Hell: and from hence
it is, that he somewhere also affirms, That wicked Men are to be purged by
Fire: And hereto does he refer the Conflagration spoken of by the Stoics,
alleging also to this purpose certain Passages out of Plato, Id. Strom. l. 5.
p. 227.
and out of a certain Philosopher of Ephesus, which I conceive to be
Heraclitus; by all which it clearly appears, that he had the same Belief
touching the Pains of Hell, that his Scholar Origin had, who maintains in an
infinite number of places up and down his Works, That the Pains of Hell are
Purgative only; and consequently are not Eternal, but are to have an end, when
the Souls of the Damned are once thoroughly Cleansed and Purified by this Fire.
Id. Strom. l 5. p. 227. (...), etc.
He believes also with Justin Martyr, That the Angels fell in love with the
First Women, and that this Love of theirs transported them so far, as to make
them indiscreetly to discover unto them many Secrets which they ought to have
concealed. But now, quite contrary to Irenaeus, who maintains, That our Savior
Christ lived upon Earth to the Age of Fifty years; Clemens will have him to
have Preached in the Flesh but one year only, Id. Strom. p. 127. (...).
and to have died in the Thirty first year of his Age. But since it is
confessed by both Parties, That there are very many absurd Tenets in this
Author, I shall not meddle any further with him. As for Tertullian, I confess
his very turning Montanist, has taken off indeed very much of the repute which
he before had in the Church, both for the Fervency of his P^ety, and also for
his Incomparable Learning. But yet, besides that a great part of his Works were
written while he was yet a Catholic; we are also to take notice, that this his
Montanism put no separation at all betwixt him and other Christians, save only
in point of Discipline, which he, according to the Severity of his Nature,
would have to be most Harsh and Rigorous. For, as for his Doctrine, it is very
Vid. lib. de M^n. cap. 2. etc. and l. contr. Psych. cap. 1.
evident, that he constantly kept to the very same Rule, and the same Faith,
that the Catholics did: whence proceeded that tart Speech of his, Id. contr.
Psych c. 10 Si Paracleto controversiam saciunt propter hoc, prophetiae novae
recusantur, non quod alium Deum praedicant Montanu, and Priscilla, and
Maxim^lla, etc. sed qud plane doceant saepius jejunare, quam nubere.
That People rejected Montanus, Maximilla, and Priscilla, not because they had
any whit departed from the Rule of Faith, but rather because they would have us
to Fast oftener than to Marry. And this is evident enough out of all those Books
which were written by him, during the time of his being a Montanist, wherein he
never disputes or contendeth about any thing, save only about Discipline. And
this is ingenuously confessed also by the Learned Nicol. Rigaltius Prolog. in
animad. ad Tertul. 9. Tract. an. Lutet. 1628.
Nicalaus Rigaltius, in his Preface to those IX Books which he has lately
published. Now notwithstanding the great Repute which this Father had in the
Church, and his not departing from it in any thing, in Point of Faith; yet how
many Wild Opinions and Fancies do we meet withal, in his Books? I shall here
speak only of some of the principal of them, passing by his so Dangerous
Expressions touching the Person of the Son of God, as having touched upon this
Particular before. But how strange is his manner of Discourse touching the
Nature of God, Tertul. l. 1. ad^. Mare. c. 25. and l. 2. c. 16.
whom he seems to render subject to the like Passions that we are; as namely,
to Anger, Hatred, and Grief? He attributes also to him a Id. adv. Orig. cap. 7.
and l. 2. contr. Marc. c. 16. Quis negabit Deum corpus esse, etsi Spiritus est?
Corporeal Substance, and does not believe (as he says himself) that any man
will deny, but that God is a Body: So that we need the less to wonder, that he
so confidently affirms, Id. lib. adv. Hermog c. 35. Cum ipsa substantia corpus
sit cujusque.
That there is no Substance which is not Corporeal: or, that with Justin
Martyr, and Clemens Alexandrinus, he makes the Id. l. de Idol. cap. 9. Angelos
esse illos desertores Dei, Amatores soeminarum, etc.
Angelical Nature obnoxious to the Carnal Love of Women; which occasioned those
words in that Book of his, De Virginibus velandis, where he says, Id. de Virg.
veland. cap. 7. Debet and adumbrari facies tam periculosa, quae usque ad coelum
scandala jaculata est.
That it is necessary that so dangerous a Face should be veiled, which had
scandalized even Heaven it self. We need no, after this, think strange of his
Doctrine, touching the Id. lib. de Anim. passim: nominatim c. 22. Definimus
Animum dici statu naturam immortalem, Corporalem, effigiatam, etc. and una
redundantem, etc.
Nature of Man's Soul, which he will have to be Corporeal, and endued with Form
and Figure, and to be propagated and derived from the Substance of the Father,
to the Body of the Son, and sowed and engendered with the Body, increasing and
extending it self together with it; and many other the like Dreams: in the
maintaining whereof, he uses so much Subtilty, strength of Reason, and
Eloquence, as that you will hardly meet with, throughout the whole Stock of
Antiquity, a more Excellent and more Elegant Piece, than that Book of his De
Anima. He also, with Irenaeus, shuts up the Souls of Men, after they are
departed this Life, into a certain Subterraneous place, where they are to
remain till the Day of Judgment; the Heavens not being to be opened to any of
the Faithful, till the end of the World: only he allows the Martyrs their
entrance into Paradise, which he fancies to be some place beneath the Heavens;
and here he will have them continue till the Last Day. Id. lib. de An. c. 55,
56, 57, 58. Quo (in inferis) spe(...) sequestratur, tota Paradis^ (...) sangu^s
tuus est, cap. 55. Nulli patet coelum, terra ad^^uc salva, ne dixerim clausa.
It is thy Blood (says he) which is the only Key of Paradise. And this place,
whither the Souls of the Dead go, is to continue close shut up till the end of
the World, according to him; who besides is of a quite contrary Opinion from
that of Justin Martyr, spoken of before, and maintains, That all Apparitions of
Dead Men are only mere Illusions, and Deceits of the Devil; and that this
Enclosure of the Souls of Men shall continue till such time as the City of the
Id lib. 3. adv. Marc. c. 24 Nam and confitemur in terra nobis regnum
repromissum post resurrectionem ^n mill annos in civitate divini operis,
Jerusalem coelo delata, etc. inter quam aetatem (1000 annorum) concluditur
Sanctorum resurrectio, pro meritis maturius, vel tardius resurgentium.
New Jerusalem, which is to be all of Precious Stones, shall descend
Miraculously from Heaven upon the Earth, and shall there continue a Thousand
years, the Saints so long living in it in very great Glory: and, that during
this space, the Resurrection of the Faithful is to be accomplished by degrees;
some of them rising up sooner, and some later, according to the difference of
their Merits. And hence are we to interpret that which he says in another
place, to wit, That Id. l de An* c. 58. Modicum quoque delictum mora
resurrectionis illic luendum.
small Sins shall be punished in Men, by the Lateness of their Resurrection:
and, That Id. lib. 3. adv. Marc. c. 29. Post cujus mill annos, etc. tunc and
mundi destructione, and judicii conflagratione commis^a, demutari in atomo in
Angelicam Substantiam; Scilicet per illud Incorruptionis superindumentum
transferemur in coeleste Regnum, etc.
when the Thousand years are expired, and the Destruction of the World, and the
Conflagration of the Day of Judgment is past, we shall all be changed in a
moment into the Nature of Angels.

I pass by his Invectives against Second Marriages, and also his evil Opinion
of all Marriage in General; these Fancies being a part of the Discipline of
Montanus his Paraclete.

But as for his Opinions touching the Baptism of Heretics, he has many
Fellows among the Fathers, who held the same; namely, That their Tertul. l. de
Bapt. adv. Quint. c. 15. and de Pudi^. l. 19. Apod nos ut ethnico par, imo and
super ethnicum Haercricus etiam per Baptisma veritatis utroque homine purgatus
admittitur.
Baptism signified nothing: and therefore they never received any Heretic into
the Communion of the Catholic Church, but they first rebaptized him, Cleansing
him (says he) both in the one, and in the other Man; that is to say, both in
Body and Soul, by the Baptism of the Truth, accounting an Heretic to be in the
same, or rather in a worse condition than any Pagan. And as for the rest, he is
so far from pressing Men to the Baptizing of their Children while they are
young, which yet is the present Custom of these Times, that he allows, and
indeed persuades the Contrary, not only in Children, but even in Persons of
Riper years; counselling them to defer it, every Man according to his Id. l. de
Baptism. c. 18. Itaque pro cujusque personae condition, ac dispositione, etiam
aetate cunctatio baptismi utilior est, etc.
Condition, Disposition, and Age. And as his Opinion, touching this Particular,
is not much different from that of the Anabaptists of our Time; so does he not
much dissent from them neither in some other. For, he will not allow, no more
than they do, that a Christian should take upon him, or execute any Office of
Judicature, or Id. lib. de Idol^ c 17. and 19. etc. and lib 1. de Cor. Mil. c.
11. Jam vero quae sunt potestatis. neque judicet de capite alicujus, vel
pudore, (feras enim de pecunia,) neque damner, neque praedamnet, neminem
vinciar, neminem recludat, aut torqueat, etc. omnem postea militem Dom^nus in
Petro exarmando discinxit.
That he should condemn, or bind, or imprison, or examine any Man; or that he
should make War upon any, or serve in War under any other; saying expressly,
That our Savior Christ, by disarming S. Peter, has from henceforth taken off
every Soldiers Belt: Which is as much as to say, That the Discipline of Christ
allows not of the Profession of Soldiery. So that I cannot but extremely
wonder at the Confidence (shall I say, or rather the Inadvertency) of Pamel. in
Scap. Tertul. c 2. number 15. and in l ad Scap c. 2. number. 7.
some, who will needs persuade us, from a certain Passage of this Author, which
themselves have very much mistaken, that this so Innocent and Peaceable Father
maintained, That Heretics are to be punished, and to be suppressed, by
inflicting upon them temporal punishments: which rigorous proceeding was as far
from his thoughts, as Heaven is from Earth.

I shall add here, before I go any further, that Tertul. lib. adv. Jud. c. 8.
Christus annos habens quasi triginta cum pateretur, etc.
he held, that our Savior Christ suffered death in the Thirtieth year of his
Age, which is manifestly contrary to the Gospel: And he thought also that the
Id. de Bapt. adver. Quint. cap. 10.
Heavenly Grace, and Prophecy ended in St. John Baptist, the Fullness of the
Spirit being from henceforth transferred unto our Savior Christ. St. Cyprian,
who was Tertullians very great Admirer, calling him absolutely, The Master, and
Hieron. lib. de Script. Eccles. in Tertul. Vidi ego quondam Paulum, etc. qui se
B. Cypriani, etc. Notarium, etc. Romae vidisse diceret, referrique sibi
solitum, nunquam Cyprianum absque Tertulliani lectione unum diem praeteriisse,
ac sibi crebro dicere, Da Magistrum, Tertullianum videlicet significans.
who never let any day pass over his head, without reading something of him,
has confidently also maintained some of the aforesaid Opinions; as namely,
among others, that of the Nullity of Baptism by Heretics, Cypr. Epist. 47. ad
Steph. and alibi passim.
which he desendeth every where very stiffely; having also the most Eminent Men
of his time consenting with him in this Point; as namely, Firmil. Epist. 75.
inter Ep. Cypr.
Firmilianus, Metropolitan of Cappadocia, Hieron. lib. de Script. Eccles.
Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, together with the Councils of Africa,
Cappadocia, Pamphilia, and Bithynia, notwithstanding all the Anger, and the
Excommunication also of Stephen, Bishop of Rome, Cypr. epist. 74. init. ubi
referuntur haec Stephani verba. Si quis ergo a quacunque haeresi venerit ad
nos, nihil innovetur, nisi quod traditum est, ut manus illi imponatur ad
poenitentiam, etc.
who for his part held a particular Opinion of his own, allowing of the Baptism
of all sorts of Heretics, without rebaptizing any of them; as it appears by
the Beginning of the LXXIV Epistle of St. Cyprian; whereas the Church, about
some LXV years after, at the Con. Nic. Can. 19. (...).
Council of Nice, declared Null the Baptism of the Samosatenians, by
permitting, as it seems, that all other Heretics whatsoever should be received
into the Church, without being rebaptized. But the Fathers of the * II. General
Council went yet further, rebaptizing all those, no otherwise than they would
have done Pagans, who came in from the Communion either of the Eunomians,
Montanists, Phrygians, or Sabellians; or indeed any other Heretics whatsoever,
save only the Arrians, Macedonians, Sabbatians, Novatians, Quartodecimani, and
Apollinarians; all which they received without Rebaptization, as you may see in
the Greek Copies of the said Council, and the VII. Canon, which Canon you also
have in the Greek Code of the Church Universal, Number. CLXX. And thus you see,
that Stephen and Cyprian maintained each of them their own particular Opinion
in this point; the one of them admitting, and the other utterly rejecting the
Baptism of all manner of Heretics: whereas the two aforenamed General
Councils, neither admitted, nor rejected, save only the Baptism of some certain
Heretics only. But St. Cyprian however seems to have dealt herein much more
fairly than his Adversary; seeing that Cypr. Praefat. Conc. Carth. Neminem
judicantes, aut a jure Communionis aliquem, si diversum senserit, amoventes.
He patiently endured, and was not offended with any of those, who were of the
contrary Opinion; as it appears clearly by the Synod of Carthage, and as it is
also proved by Hier. contr. Lucifer. T. 2. p. 197. etc.
St. Hierome: whereas Stephen, according to his own hot, choleric Temper,
Firmil. epist. ad Cypr. quae est 75. inter epist. Cypr. page 204.
declared publicly against Firmilianus his Opinion, and Cypr. epist. 74. page
194. and epist. 75. quae est Firmil.
Excommunicated all those, that dissented from himself.

The same blessed Cyp. ep. 59. p. 137. Ut intra octavum diem eum qui natus est
baptizandum, and sacrificandum non putares.
Martyr of our Savior Jesus Christ, was carried away with that Error also of
his time, touching the Necessity of administering the Sacrament of the Holy
Eucharist to all persons when they were Baptized, and even to Infants too, as
appears by his LIX Epistle, where, by the suffrages of LXV other Bishops, he
admits Infants to Baptism, and the Lords Supper, so soon as ever they are
born; against the Opinion of one Fidus, who would not admit of them till the
Eighth Day after they were born: and also by that story of his, that he tells
us of a certain young Girl, who being not as yet of years to speak, by a
remarkable Miracle, put back the Liquor which had been consecrated for the
Blood of our Savior, and was presented unto her by a Deacon to drink in the
Church; as judging her self unworthy to receive it, by reason that not long
before, she had been carried to the celebration of some certain Pagan
Sacrifices. Now the Original of this Error of theirs was, the Belief they had,
that the Eucharist was as necessary to Salvation, as Baptism; as may easily be
collected out of the words of the said Author, delivered Lib. 3. Test. ad
Quirin. Where having first laid down this for a Ground; to wit, Id. l. 3. Test.
ad Quir. Ad regnum Dei nisi baptizatus, and tenatus quis fuerit, pervenire non
posse: in Evang. secundum Joan. Nisi quis natus fuerit, etc. item illic: nisi
ederitis carnem Filii hominis, and biberitis sanguinem ejus, non habebitis
vitam in vobis.
That no man can come into the Kingdom of God, unless he be baptized and
regenerated; he produces, for a proof hereof, first that Passage out of St.
John, where it is said, that Except a man be born of Water, and of the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, etc. and then this other: Except you
eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you:
urging the first of these places to prove the necessity of Baptism; and the
other for that of the Eucharist, accounting each of them necessary to
Regeneration. And hence it is, that we find him speaking so often of being born
again, by virtue of the one, and of the other Sacrament: in which words he does
not mean Baptism and Confirmation (as some will needs persuade us) but rather
Baptism, and the Lords Supper; as is evident also by the following words,
namely, that Id. ibid. c. 26. Parum esse baptizari and Eucharistiam accipere,
nisi quis factis and opere proficiat, al. perficiat.
It is to very little purpose to be baptized, and to partake of the Holy
Eucharist, unless a man proceed in good Works, etc. I shall here pass by some
words, which he has sometimes let fall, Id. epist; 63. Quando nec oblatio
sanctificare illic possit, ubi Spiritus Sanctus non sit, nec cuiquam Dominus
per ejus orationes and preces prosit, qui Dominum ipse violavit.
touching the Point of the Baptism of Heretics, by which he seems to make the
Efficacy of the Sacrament, to depend upon the Integrity and Sanctity of the
person who administreth it.

We should now come in the next place to speak of Origin; but since that there
have been some since his time, who have very much cried down both him and his
Doctrine; and others again on the other side, who have as stiffly defended him,
we shall forbear to say any thing of him, that we may not engage our selves in
so long and tedious a Quarrel: we shall only observe, from this example of his,
that neither the Antiquity, nor yet the Learning or holy Life of any man,
necessarily withholdeth him from falling into very strange and gross Errors.
For, Origin was one of the most Ancient among the Fathers, having lived about
the middle of the Third Century; and having been so eminent for those two other
excellencies, of Innocence and Learning, as that his fiercest Adversaries
cannot deny, but that he had them both in a very high degree.

Neither ought the Epiphan. 64. Haer. quae est Orig.
Story of his Fall, related by Epiphanius, to take off any thing from the
Reputation of his Virtue: for though perhaps it might have been true, yet has
it frequently happened to others of the Faithful to fall into great Temptations
also; as appears evidently enough, by the Example of Saint Peter himself.

But, that I may not dissemble, I profess my self much inclined to be of
Cardinal Baron. Annal. ad An. 253. number. 120, 121, 122.
Baronius his Opinion; who thinks this story to be an arrant Fable, maliciously
devised by those who envied the Fame of this excellent, admirable Wit; and that
it was soisted into Epiphanius by some such hand; or else (as I rather
believe,) was taken upon trust by himself, and thrust into that Book of his,
without any further Examination, as many other things have been; in the
relating whereof this Father has showed himself a little over-credulous; as is
also observed by his Petav. Not. ad Haer. 55. p. 217.
last Interpreter.

And yet Origin, notwithstanding all those excellent Gifts of his, has not
spared to broach very many Opinions, which by reason of the absurdness of them,
have been utterly rejected (and certainly very deservedly too) by the Church in
all the Ages succeeding: which is an evident Argument, that how ancient,
learned, and holy soever an Author may have been, we ought not however
presently to believe him, and to urge him as infallible: since there is no
reason in the world to be given, why the same thing which has befallen Origin,
in so many Points, may not in some or other have also befallen any other
Author, whosoever he be. But this I am very well assured of, that those very
men, who have written against Origin, have not been so thoroughly happy in their
undertaking; but by opposing to the utmost some certain Error of his, have
sometimes fallen into as great a one of their own. Method. apud Epiphan. in
Panar. haer. 54. quae est Orig. (...). Id. ibid. (...).
One of them for example, Methodius by name, as he is cited by Epiphanius,
maintains, that after the Resurrection, and Final Judgment, we shall dwell for
ever upon the Earth, leading there a holy, blessed, and everlasting life,
exercising our selves in all good things, like as the Angels do in Heaven.

He also as well as the rest, makes the Angels obnoxious to the Love of Women:
and he will have Gods Providence to extend it self only to Universal Causes,
affirming, that Id. ibid. (...).
He has committed the Care of Parlicular things to the Angels: which Opinions
of his, if they be thoroughly examined, will be found to be not much less
dangerous, and contrary to the Scriptures, than some of those very Opinions,
which he reproves in Origin. I shall also, for the same reason, pass by
Eusebius, Didymus, Apollinaris, and the like; who though they are very Ancient
Authors, yet there is ordinarily little account made of them, by reason of the
hard Opinion, that the greatest part of the Church had of them.

As for the two first of these, (although perhaps their Faith may not have been
much freer from stains than the rest,) they have yet been more favorably dealt
withal by Posterity, than their brethren; whether it were, because that the
time they lived in being so far distant from the Ages of our Aristarchi, and
Censors of other men, they have so much the less moved their envy and passion:
or else because that they were willing to spare them, by reason of the Great
Opinion that the Ordinary sort in the Church had of them. Lactantius Firmianus,
whose Repute was scarcely questioned at all among the Ancients, had
notwithstanding his Errors too. For it is a long time since, that Hieron.
epist. 65. ad Pani. and Octav. Lanctantius in libris suis, ut maxim in
Epistolis ad Demetrianum, Spiritus Sancti omnin^ negat substantiam, and errore
Judaico dicit, eum vel ad Patrem referri, vel ad Filium, and sanctificationem
utriusque personae sub ejus nomine demonstrari.
St. Hierome observed one very strange one in him, in an Epistle that he wrote
to Demetrianus; where he denies, that The Holy Ghost is a Distinct Person in
the Godhead, subsisting together with the Father and the Son. His other Errors
are not so dangerous, and are indeed common to him, with some other of the
Fathers: as, where he says, Lact. Firm. lib. 2. divin. Instit. cap. 15.
that the Angels defiled themselves with Women; and that from this their
companying with them were born Demons, or Devils. As likewise where he
teaches, Id. lib. 7. cap. 21. extr. Omnes (Animae) in una communique custodia
detinentur, donec tempus adveniat, quo maximus judex meritorum faciat examen
That the Souls of Men, after this life, are all shut up together in one Common
Prison, where they are to continue till the Day of Judgment: and, That our
Savior Christ shall come again upon the Earth, before the Last and Final
Resurrection; and that Id. lib. 7. c. 24. Tum qui erunt in corporibus vivi, non
morientur, sed per eosdem mill annos infinitam multitudinem generabunt, etc.
qui autem ab inferis suscitabuntur, ii praeibunt viventibus velut Judices.
those who shall then be found alive, shall not dye at all, but shall be
preserved alive, and shall beget an infinite Number of Children, during the
space of a Thousand years; living all of them peaceably together, in a most
happy City, which shall abound with all good things, under the Reign of our
Savior Jesus Christ, and of some of the Saints, who shall be raised from the
Dead.

But what will you say, if St. Hilary also himself who flourished about the
middle of the Fourth Century, has his Tares also; which are so much the more
observable in him, by how much the greater his estimation was among the
Ancients. The principal and most dangerous of all is, that strange Opinion
which he held, touching the Nature of Christ's Body, which he maintained had no
sense, or feeling of those stripes and torments which he suffered, Hilar. de
Trin l. 10. Passus quidem Dominus Jesus Christus dum caeditur, dum suspenditur,
dum crucifigitur, dum moritur; sed in corpus irruens Passio, nec non fuit
Passio, nec tamen naturam Passionis exercuit, dum and poenali ministerio illa
desaevit, and virtus corporis sine sensu poenae vim poenae in sedesaevientis
excepit; habuit sane illud Domini corpus doloris nostri naturam, si corpus
nostrum id naturae habet, ut calcet undas, and super fluctus eat, and non
deprimatur ingressu, neque aquae insistentis vestigiis cedant: ponatur etiam
solida, nec clausae domus obstaculis arceatur. Et paulo post: Et homo ille de
Deo est, habens ad patiendum quidem corpus, ut passus est; sed naturam non
habens ad dolendum. Naturae enim propriae, ac suae corpus illud est, quod in
coelestem gloriam, transformatur in morte.
But that he really suffered indeed at that time, when he was beaten, and when
he was put upon the Cross, and fastened unto it, and died upon it: but, that
this Passion falling wholly upon his Body, notwithstanding that it was a real
Passion; yet did it not show upon him the Nature of a Passion; and that while
the furious strokes were dealt upon him, the strength and vigor of his Body
received the force of the strokes upon it, yet without any sense of the pain. I
shall confess (says he) that the Body of our Savior had a Nature susceptible
of our griefs, if the Nature of our Body be such, as that it is able to tread
upon the water, and to walk upon the stoods without sinking, or without the
Waters yielding to our Footsteps, when we stand thereon: if it can penetrate
solid bodies, or can pass with ease through doors that are shut. And within two
or three lines after: Such is the Man sent from God, having a Body capable of
Suffering, (for he really suffered; Id. ibid. In quo quamvis aut ictus
inciderit, aut vulnus descenderit, aut nodi concurrerint, aut suspensio
elevarit, afferunt quidem haec impetum passionis, non ^amen dolorem passionis
inferunt: aut telum aliquod, aut aquam perforans, aut ignem compungens, aut
era vulnerans, omnes quidem has passiones naturae suae infert, ut persoret, ut
compungat, ut vulneret, sed naturam suam in haec passio illata non retinet, dum
in natura non est vel aquam forari, vel pungi ignem, vel era vulnerari,
quamvis natura teli sit vulnerare, compungere, and forare.
) but not having a Nature capable of pain. When the blows (said he a little
before) fell upon him, or a stripe pierced his skin, it brought indeed with it
the violence and impetuosity of Passion, but yet it wrought no pain in him: in
like manner as when a sword is thrust through and through the water, or through
and through the fire; it goes through indeed, and pierces the water, or the
fire, but it wounds it not; these things having not a Nature that may be
wounded or hurt, notwithstanding that the Nature of the sword be to work the
said effect. And in conclusion, that you may not think this to be a sudden
fancy, that he fell upon by chance, before he was aware; you must know that he
repeats the same thing in diverse several places: as namely, in his Comment upon
the Psalm. 53. Hilar. in Ps. 53. Suscepta voluntary est (passio) officio quidem
ipsa satisfactura poenali, non tamen poenae sensu laesura patientem, etc.
The Passion of Christ (says he) was undergone by him voluntarily, to make an
acknowledgment, that pains were due; not that he that suffered, was at all
touched by them. Id. in Ps. 138. Putatur dolere, quia patitur; caret vero
doloribus ipse, quia Deus est.
And again, in another place; Christ is thought to have felt pain, because he
suffered; but he was really free from all pain, because he is God. Do but think
now, whereunto all this tends, and what will become of our Salvation, if the
Passion of our Savior Christ, which is the only Foundation whereon it is
built, were but a mere imaginary Passion, without any sense of pain at all.
And, as one absurdity being granted, there will necessarily others always
follow upon it; so has this strange particular Fancy of his made him to
corrupt and spoil the whole story of our Saviors Passion.

For, he supposes that, in that dismal night, wherein Christ was delivered up
for our sins, all his anguish, his Distress, and Drops of Bloody Sweats,
proceeded not from the consideration of the Torments, and the Death which He
was now going to suffer, (and indeed, according to his Account, since he will
not allow him to have felt any Pain, he was neither bound to be, nor indeed
could be in any Agony,) but rather from the fear that he was in, Id. in Matthew
Can. 31. Scribit exterrendos, sugandos, negaturos; sed quia spiritus
blasphemiae nec hic, nec in aeternum temittitur, metuit ne se Deum abnegent,
quem caesum, and consputum, and crucifixum essent contemplaturi; quae ratio
servata est in Petro: qni cum negaturus esset, ita negavit, Non novi hominem:
quia dictum aliquod in filium hominis remittitur.
lest his Disciples, being scandalized at these Sad sights, might happily have
sinned against the Holy Ghost, by denying his Godhead: And that from hence it
was, that S Peter, in his Denial of his Master, used these words, Non novi
hominem, I know him not as Man; because that whatsoever is spoken against the
Son of Man, may be forgiven. Id. ibid. Transeat Calix a me, id est, quomodo a
me bibitur, ita ab iis bibatur, sine spei diffidentia, sine sensu doloris, sine
metu mortis, etc.
And so likewise in these words of our Savior, O my Father, if it be Possible,
let this Cup pass from me: His Opinion is, that our Savior did not here desire
that He himself might be delivered from his Passion, but rather, that after He
had suffered, His Disciples might also suffer in like manner: that this Cup
might not rest at Him, but that it might pass on to His Disciples also; that is
to say, that it might be drunk by Them in the same manner, as He himself was
now going to taste of it; to wit, without any touch of Despair or Distrust, and
without any sense of Pain, or fear of Death. What could have been written more
Coldly, or more disagreeing with the Truth and Simplicity of the Gospel? But
yet I cannot sufficiently wonder at him, that having thus ratified the Flesh of
our Savior Christ into a Spirit, he should in another place condense Our
Spirits into Bodies. Ser. in Matthew. Can. 5. Nihil est quod non in substantia
sua, and creatione corporeum sit, etc. Nam and animarum species sive
obtinenrium corpora, sive corporibus exulantium, corpoream tamen naturae suae
substantiam sortiuntur.
There is nothing (says he) which is not Corporeal in its Substance and
Creation, etc. For, the Species of our Souls themselves, whether they be united
to the Body, or are separated from them, are still a Nature whose Substance is
Corporeal. He believes also, that Id. in Ps. 118. tit. Gimel. Est ^rgo,
quantum licet existimare, perfectae illius emundatio puritatis, etiam post
Baptismi aquas reposita, etc.
Baptism does not cleanse us from all our Sins; and therefore he holds, That
all Men must at the last Day pass through the Fire. Id. ibid. In quo ( die
Judicii) nobis est ille indefessus ignis obeundus, in quo subeunda sunt gravia
illa Expiandae a peccatis Animae supplicia. Beatae Mariae animam gladius
petransibit, ut revelentur multorum cordium cogitationes. Si in judicii
severitatem capax illa Dei Virgo ventura est, desiderare quis audebit a Deo
judicari?
We are Then (says he) to endure an, Indefatigable Fire: Then is the time that
we are to undergo those grievous Torments, for the Expiation of our Sins, and
Purging our Souls. A Sword shall pierce through the Soul of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, to the end that the Thoughts of many Hearts may be revealed. Seeing
therefore, that That Virgin, who was capable of receiving God, shall taste of
so-severe a Judgment, where is he that dares desire to be judged of God? I know
not whether he might heretofore have persuaded any store of People to embrace
this Doctrine of his, or not: but sure I am, that were he alive at this day, he
would take but a vain piece of Labor in hand, if he should go about to win the
Franciscan Friars over to this Belief.

S. Ambrose, one of the most Firm Pillars of the Church in his Time, is not yet
free from the like Failings, no more than the rest.

For, first of all, he agrees with S. Hilary in this last Point, and maintains,
That All in General shall be proved by Fire at the Last Day; and, that the Just
shall pass through it, but that the Unbelievers shall continue in it. Ambr. in
Ps. 118. Ser. 5. Si quidem post consummationem saeculi missis Angelis qui
segregent bonos and malos, hoc futurum est Baptisma, quando per caminum ignis
iniquitas exuretur, ut in Regno Dei sulgeant Justi, sicut sol, in Regno Patris
sui. Et si aliquis, ut Petrus sit, ut Johannes, baptizatur hoc igne. Veniet
ergo Baptista Mignut, (sic enim eum nomino) quo modo Gabriel, etc.
After the end of the World ( says he) the Angels being sent forth to sever
the Good from the Bad, shall that Baptism be performed; when all Iniquity shall
be consumed in a Furnace of Fire, that so the Just may shine like the Sun in
the Kingdom of God their Father. And although though a Man be such a one as
Peter, or as John, yet nevertheless shall he be Baptized with this Fire. For
the Great Baptizer shall come, (for so I call Him, as the Angel Gabriel did,
saying, He shall be Great) and shall see a multitude of People, standing before
the Gate of Paradise, and shall brandish the fiery Sword, and shall say unto
those who are on his Right Hand, who are not guilty of any grievous Sins, Enter
ye in, etc.

He says the same in another place also, where he exempteth none from this
Fiery Trial, save only our Savior Christ alone. Id. in Pseund Ser 20. Omnes
oportet per ignem probari quicunque ad Paradisum redire desiderant. Non enim
otiose scriptum est, quod ejectis Adam and Eva, posuit Deus in exitu Paradisi
gladium igneum versatilem. Omnes oportet transire per flammas, sive Joannes
Evangelista sit, quem ita dilexit Dominus ut de eo diceret ad Petrum, etc. Sive
ille sit Petrus qui Claves accepit Regni coelorum, qui supra mare ambulavit,
oportet dicat Transivimus per ignem, etc. Sed Joanni cito versabitur igneus
gladius, quia non invenitur in eo iniquitas, quem dilexit aequitas, etc. Sed
ille (Petrus) examinabitur ut argentum; Ego examinabor ut plumbum, donec
plumbum tabescat ardebo, si nihil argenti in me inventum fuerit, (heu me!) in
ultima inferni detrudar.
It is Necessary ( says he) that All that desire to return into Paradise,
should be proved by this Fire. For it is not without some Mystery that it is
written, That God having driven Adam and Eve out of Paradise, He is said to
place at the Entrance of Paradise a Flaming Sword, which turned every way. All
must pass through the Flames, whether it be John the Evangelist, whom our
Savior loved so much, that He said concerning him, to Peter, etc. Or whether
it be Peter himself, who had the Keys of Heaven committed unto him, and who
walked upon the Sea; He must be able to say, We have passed through the Fire,
etc. But as for S. John, this Brandishing of the Flaming Sword will soon be
dispatched for him, because there is no Iniquity found in him, who was so
beloved of the Truth, etc. But the other ( that is, Peter) shall be tried as
Silver is; and I shall be tried like Lead, I shall burn till all the Lead is
quite melted down: and if there be no Silver at all found in me, (wretched Man
that I am!) I shall be cost into the lowest Pit of Hell.

As for the Resurrection of the Dead, his Opinion is, That Id. l. de Fid.
Resurrectionis. Licet in momento resuscitentur omnes, omnes tamen meritotum
ordine suscitantur.
All shall not be raised at once, but by degrees, one after another, by a Long,
yet Certain Order; those who were Believers rising first, according to the
degrees of their Merits: Whereto we are to refer that which he has elsewhere
delivered, saying, That Id. in Ps. 1. Beati qui habent partem in prima
resurrectione: isti enim sine judicio veniunt ad gratiam. Qui autem non veniunt
ad primam resurrectionem, sed ad secundam reservantur, isti urentur donec
impleant tempora inter primam and secundam resurrectionem: aut si non
impleverint, diuitius in supplicio permanebunt.
Those who are raised up in the First Resurrection, shall come to Grace,
without Judgment; but as for the rest, who are reserved for the Second
Resurrection they shall burn with Fire, till they have fulfilled the full space
of time betwixt the First and the Second Resurrection: or, if they do not
finish this time, they shall continue very long in their Torments. I shall
leave to the Reader to take the pains in examining, whether or no that Passage
of his can be reconciled to any good sense, where he says, That before the
Publication of the Law of Moses, Adultery was not an unlawful thing. Ambros l.
1. de Abr. Patr. c. 4. Sed consideremus primum, quia Abraham ante Legem Moysis
and ante Evangelium fuit, nondum interdictum adulterium videbatur. Poena
criminis and tempore Legis est, nec ante Legem ulla rei damnatio est, sed ex
Lege.
We are to take notice in the first place (says he) that Abraham living before
the giving of the Law by Moses, and before the Gospel, in all Probability,
Adultery was not as yet forbidden: the Crime is punished after the time of the
Law made, which forbids it; for things are not condemned before the Law, but
by the Law: and whether those Discourses of his, which you meet with in his
Books, De Instit. Virg. and ad Virg. and de Virg. and in other places, do not
much disgrace, and cast Slurs upon the Honor of Marriage.

I shall also leave to the Consideration of the Judicious Reader, whether there
be more of Solidity, or of Subtilty, in that Exposition which he gives us of
the Promise made by God to Noah after the Flood; telling him, That he had set
his Bow in the Clouds, to be a Token of a Covenant betwixt him and the whole
Earth: upon which words, S. Ambrose utterly and fiercely denies, that by this
Bow is meant the Rainbow; but will have it to be I know not what strange
Allegorical Bow. Id. lib. de Noe, and Arca, c. 27. Absit ut hunc arcum Dei
dicamus; hic enim arcus, qui Iris dicitur, per diem videri solet, per noctem
non apparet, etc. Est ergo virtus invisibilis Dei, etc.
Far be it from us (says he) that we should call This God's Bow; for This Bow,
which is called Iris, ( the Rain bow) is seen indeed in the Day time, but never
appears at all in the Night. And therefore he understands by this Bow, the
Invisible Power of God, by which He keeps all things in one certain Measure,
enlarging and abating it as he sees cause. Neither do I know whether that
Opinion of his, which you have in his First Book De Spiritu Sancto, is any whit
more justifiable, where he affirms, That Id. lib. 1. de Spir. Sanct. cap. 3.
Baptism is avialable and Legitimate, although a Man should Baptize in the Name
either of the Son, or of the Holy Ghost only, without mentioning the other two
Persons of the Trinity.

Epiphanius, as he was a Man of a very good, honest, and plain Nature, and (if
I may have leave to speak my own Opinion) a little too Credulous, and withal
very eager and fierce in maintaining whatsoever he thought was Right and True;
so has he the more easily been induced both to deliver and to receive things
for Solid, which yet were not so; and to stand stiffly in the defending of them,
after he had once embraced the same. It would take up both too much time and
Paper, if I should go about to give you a List of all those things wherein he
has failed: if you please, you may have an Account of a good number of them in
the Notes of the Jesuit Petavius, his Interpreter; who makes bold to correct
him many times, and sometimes also very uncivilly too.

As, first of all, he accuses him of Obscurity, and of Falsehood also, in the
Opinion he held touching the Year, and Day of our Savior's Nativity; Petav. in
Epiphan. p. 127. 132.
saying, that some of his Expressions, touching this Point, are more Obscure
and Dark than the Riddles of Sphinx. And truly he has reason enough to say so,
of what he has delivered touching the Year of our Saviors Nativity; but, as
for the Day of that Year, whether it were the Sixth of January, as Epiphan.
Haer. 51. quae est Alog.
Epiphanius held, with the Church of Egypt, or else, whether it were the Twenty
fifth of December, which is the General Opinion at this day; I think it very
great rashness for any Man to affirm either the one or the other, neither of
these Opinions having any better Ground the one than the other.

He likewise in plain terms gives him the Lie, Petav. ibid. ad Haer. 70. number.
10.
upon that place where he says, That in the beginning of the Church the
Apostles had ordained, That the Christians should celebrate the Passover at
the same time, and in the same manner that those of the Circumcision did: and
that those who were then made Bishops at Jerusalem being of the Circumcision,
it was necessary that all the World should follow them, and should likewise
keep the Passover as they did.

Neither do I see whereupon he could ground that Fancy of his, which he
proposes to us as a Certain Truth; namely, Epiphan. in Pan. cap. 1. Haer 39.
(...), etc.
That the Devil, before the coming of Christ, was in hopes of Grace and Pardon;
and that, out of this Persuasion of his, he never all that while showed himself
Refractory toward God: but that having understood by the Manifestation of our
Savior, that there was left him no hopes of Salvation, he front thenceforth
had grown exceedingly enraged, doing as much mischief as possibly he could
against Christ and his Church.

S. Hierome, the Boldest and most Judicious Censurer of the Ancients, has also
left to Posterity something whereon they may exercise the same Critical Faculty
that he has so happily employed upon others. For, how should a Man be able to
make good that which he has affirmed so positively, touching God's Providence,
where he says, That it takes care of All Men indeed in General, and also of
each Particular Man; but not of other things, whether they be Inanimate, or
Irrational.

Hier. Com. 1. in Abac. Caeterum absurdum est ad hoc Dei deducere Majestatem,
ut sciat per singula momenta quot nascantur culices, quotve moriantur, quot
cimicum, and pulicum, and muscarum sit in terra multitudo, quanti pisces in
aqua natent, and qui de minoribus majorum praedae cedere debeant. Non simus tam
fatui adulatores Dei, ut dum potentiam ejus ad ima detrahimus, in nos ipsos
injuriosi simus, eandem rationabilium quam irrationabilium providentiam esse
dicentes.
It is an absurd thing (says he) so to abase the Majesty of God, as to make
him take particular notice how many Gnats are bred, or die every hour; and how
many Puneses, Fleas, and Flies there are through the whole Earth; and, how many
Fishes swim in the Water; and, which among the smaller Fishes are to be a Prey
to the greater. Let us not be such foolish Flatterers of God, as by making His
Power descend even to the Lowest things, to disparage our selves, while we say,
that His Providence in like manner extends both to Rational and Irrational
Creatures. I shall not examine here, whether this Opinion be justifiable, or
not: but this I am sure of, that you will hardly be able to make it good, out
of these Words of our Savior Christ, Are not two Sparrows sold for a Farthing?
and yet one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. But yet
supposing that this Opinion might be defended, it is however evident, that this
Father has lashed out a little too much, when he derides all those, as Fools,
and absurd People, who choose rather to adore the Knowledge of God, as Infinite,
than to bound it, and make it Finite: and for my part, I should rather fear,
that there would be much more Rashness in the one, than Foolishness in the
other.

This same Man, who here limiteth the Knowledge and Providence of God, in
another place extends to an Infiniteness the Presence of the Souls of
Departed Saints; by no means enduring them to be confined, and shut up in any
certain place. And the Reason which he gives us of this his Opinion, is indeed
very wonderful: For, Hier. contr. Vigil. Tom. 2. p. 161. Sequuntur Agnum
quocunque vadit: si Agnus ubique, etc. and sic qui cum Agno sunt ubique esse
credendi sunt.
They always follow the Lamb (says he) whithersoever He goes; forasmuch
therefore as the Lamb is present everywhere, we ought to believe that They
also, who are with the Lamb, are present every where.

Where are those Logick-Schools, how loose and remiss soever they be, that
would not give a Scholar the Ferula, if he should but offer to argue thus,
confounding the Divinity and Humanity of our Savior together; and from that
which is spoken in respect of the one, concluding that which is proper to the
other? So in another place, for to bring all the several pieces of an Allegory
together, and to make them meet in their proper Point, Id. Ep 164. ad Pamm. T.
3. p. 210. Nulli periculosum, nulli videatur esse blasphemum, quod and in
Apostolos invidiae venenum diximus poruisse subrepere, cum etiam de Angelis hoc
dictum putamus, etc.
he makes the Souls of the Blessed Saints, and of the Angels themselves,
subject to Sin.

I shall pass by what he has spoken so reproachfully, both against Marriage in
General, and against Second Marriages in Particular; where he uses such
unsavory Expressions, as that though we should in the explaining of them,
follow those very Rules which he himself has laid down to us, in an Epistle of
his, written to Pammachius, upon this very subject; it seems notwithstanding an
impossible thing to acquit him from holding the same Opinion touching Marriage,
that Tertullian did, which was condemned by the Church, as being contrary to
the Honor of Marriage, and the Authority of the Scripture. As for example,
What Honey, or how much Sugar would be sufficient to sweeten that which he
says, Id. ep. 10. ad Fur. T 1. p. 89 and 101. Ut non tam laudanda, si vidua
perseveres, quam execranda, si id Christiana non serves, quod per tanta saecula
Gentiles foeminae custodierunt. Mox p. 90. Canis revertens ad vomitum, and sus
lota ad volutabrum luti.
writing to a certain Widow, named Furia, where he tells her, That she was not
so worthy to be Commended, if she continued a Widow, as she would be to be
cursed, if she married again; seeing she was not able, being a Christian, to
preserve that, which many Women of her Family bad done, being but Pagans. Which
Expressions of his he repeateth again in the following Epistle, where he
disswadeth one Ageruchia from marrying again; Id. 1. Ep. 11. ad Ageruch. T. 1.
p. 101. Haec brevi Sermon perstrinxi, ut ostendam adolescentulam meam non
praestare monogamiam generi suo, sed reddere; nec tam laudandam esse si tribit,
quam omnibus execrandam si negare tentaverit.
and for this purpose makes use of very unbeseeming Comparisons; applying to
such Women as marry again, that Proverb which St. Peter made use of in another
sense; The Dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the Sow that was washed,
to her wallowing in the mire. Is not this all one, as if he in plam terms
ranked second Marriages among unclean and polluted things? Not unlike to this
is that which he says in another place, in these words. Id lib. 1. adv. Jovin.
p. 4 Non damno digamos, imo nec trigamos, and si dici potest octogamos: Plus
aliquid inferam, etiam scortantem recipio poenitentem.
I do not at all condemn those, who marry the second, third, or (if any such
thing may be) the eighth time: nay, more than so, I receive also even a
Penitent Whore: placing those Women that marry the second time, in the same
rank with those that keep in the stews. And he is so full of such expressions
as these, as that the whole Canary Islands themselves would hardly be
sufficient to sweeten them.

Certainly if he had not believed, that there was some Uncleanness in Marriage,
he would never have been so unwilling, Id. lib. 1. adv. Jovin. p. 51. Quod si
objeceris, antequam peccarent, sexum viri and foeminae suisse divisum, and
absque peccato eos potuisse conjungi, quid futurum suerit incertum est, etc.
as he was, to speak out, and confess in plain terms, that Adam should
nevertheless have had carnal knowledge of Eve his Wife, though they had both of
them contiued in their state of Innocence: which thing is evident enough to any
one that shall but consider the second Chapter of Genesis, from verse. 18. to
the end of the Chapter.

Nevertheless this Father durst not positively affirm any such thing, fearing
lest he might so impose some unclean thing upon the state of Innocence, in case
he should have allowed them the Use of Marriage. Neither is his Opinion more
sound, touching the Eating of Flesh, which being unknown to the World before
the Flood, was afterward permitted unto Mankind; but (as he believes) in the
very same manner, as Divorce was heretofore permitted to the Jews, only for the
hardness of their heart.

Whence it follows, (as he also says in express Terms) that it also was
abolished by our Savior Christ, in like manner as Divorce and Circumcision
were. Hieron. lib. 1. adv. Jovin. Quod autem nobis objicit in secunda Dei
benedictione comedendarum carnium licentiam datam, quae in prima concessa non
suerat; sciat, quomodo repudium juxta eloquium salvatoris ab intitio non
dabatur, sed propter duritiem cordis nostri per Moysem humano generi concessum
est, sic and esum carnium usque ad diluvium ignotum suisse; post diluvium vero
quasi in eremo murmuranti populo coturnices, ita dentibus nostris nervos, and
virulentias carnis ingestas.
And whereas it is objected against us by Jovinian, ( says he) that God in the
Second Benediction permitted the Eating of Flesh, which he did not in the
First: he is to take notice, that in like manner as the liberty to put away a
man's wife, according to the words of our Savior, was not granted from the
beginning, but was afterward permitted to mankind, for the hardness of their
heart: in like manner was the Eating of Flesh unknown, until the Flood; but
after the Flood, the Sinews and Virulency of Flesh were thrust into our Mouths,
as the Quails were given to the People of Israel murmuring in the Wilderness.
Certainly Divorce is a thing which is evil in it self, and is contrary to the
Creation of the Man and of the Woman, and to Marriage also, which was
instituted by God in Paradise: as is divinely proved by our Savior, disputing
with the Jews touching this Point.

If therefore the Eating of Flesh be like it, this also is evil and unlawful in
it self. Marcion, and the Manichees could hardly have said more than this.

In another place he seems to be of Opinion, Hieron. Com. in Matthew. T. 6. p.
15. Hoc quasi parvulis Judaeis fuerat lege concessum, ut quo modo victimas
immolabant Deo, ne eas Idolis immolarent, sic and ju^are permitterentur in
Deum; non quod recte hoc sacerent, sed quod melius esset hoc Deo id exhibere,
quam Daemonibus. Evangelica autem veritas non recipit juramentum, etc.
that our Savior has utterly forbidden the use of an Oath to Christians:
which piece of Doctrine is evidently contrary both to the Scriptures, and to
Reason.

It will be a hard matter also to clear him from the suspicion of that Error,
some Traces whereof are apparently to be seen in St. Cyprian, touching the
Efficacy of the Sacraments; as we have observed before. For, do but hear what
he says. Id. Com. in Soph. Tom. 5. p. 489. Sacerdotes quoque qui Eucharistiae
serviunt, and sanguinem Domini populis ejus dividunt, impie agunt in legem
Christi, putantes Eucharistiam imprecantis facere verba, non vitam; and
necessariam esse tantum solennem Orationem, and non Sacerdotum merita.
The Priests also, ( says he) who serve at the Eucharist, and distribute the
Blood of our Savior to his People, commit a great impiety against the Law of
Christ, in thinking that the Eucharist is made by the Words, and not by the
Life of the Person that Consecrates it; and that the Solemn Prayers only of the
Priests are necessary, and not their Merits also.

Touching the state of the Blessed after the Resurrection, he says neither but
very faintly, that they shall live without eating. Idem Epist. 61. ad Pammach.
Tom. 2 page 252. Ergo, inquies, and nos post Resurrectionem comesuri sumus?
Nescio; non enim scriptum est: and tamen si quaeritur, non puto comesuros.
What then will you say, (these be his own words,) shall we then eat after the
Resurrection? I know not that, I confess; for we find no such thing written:
Yet if I were to speak my Opinion, I do not think we shall eat.

And to give our Judgment in general of this Author, I do not know whether or
no we may allow for good, and perfectly conformable to the Discipline of our
Saviour-Christ, the course which he ordinarily observes in his Disputations,
wresting the words of his Adversaries, quite besides the Authors intention; and
framing to himself such a sense, as is not at all to be found in them; and then
fiercely encountering this Giant of his own making, mixing withal strange
abusive language, and biting Girds, and the like tart expressions borrowed from
profane Authors; in which kind of Learning he was indeed very excellent. St.
Augustine in the Contestation that he had with him, said, that the Aug. Ep. ad
Hier. quae est 87. inter Ep. Hier. Tom. 2. page 518.
Holy Ceremonies of the Jews, though they were abolished by Jesus Christ, might
yet notwithstanding in the beginning of Christianity be observed by those, who
had been brought up in them from their Infancy, even after they had believed in
Jesus Christ, provided only, that they did not put their trust in them: because
that that Salvation, which was signified by these Holy Ceremonies, was imparted
unto us by Jesus Christ: which Doctrine of his is both godly and consonant also
to what is urged by St. Paul, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and
elsewhere, touching Christian Liberty, by which we both may, and ought to use,
or abstain from such things, as are in themselves indifferent, according as
shall be requisite for the Edification of our Neighbor. Now Hier. ep 89 ad
Aug. Tom. 2. page 525. Hoc si placer, imo quia placet, ut quicunque credunt ex
Judaeis debitores sint legis faciendae; tu, ut Episcopus in toto orb
notissimus, debes hanc promulgare sententiam, and in assensum tuum omnes
coepiscopos trahere.
St. Hierome here will needs make him believe, that his meaning is, that all
those who believed among the Jews, were subject to the Law, and that the
Gentiles were the only People, whom the Faith in Christ had exempted from this
Yoke. And then presently does he hereupon take occasion to pass as tart, and as
biting a Jear upon him, as he could; saying, that since it was so, that all the
Believers among the Jews were bound to observe the Law, St. Augustine himself,
who was the most Eminent Bishop in the whole World, should do well to publish
this his Opinion, and to endeavor to bring over all his fellow Bishops to be
of his mind. But he had then to deal with an able Adversary, and one that knew
well enough how to make good his words, and to clear them from that
Interpretation that the other had put upon them, and to overthrow whatsoever he
had impertinently urged against him; as any may see, in that Aug. Epist. Hier.
quae est 97. inter Epist. Hier. Tom. 2. page 550.
Excellent and Divine Answer of his to St. Hierome, touching this Point, and
the whole substance of his Letter. The Case was otherwise betwixt him and
Ruffinus: for there he grappled with one much below his Match, and dealt his
blows upon an arrant Wooden Statue; one that had scarcely any Reason in what he
said, and yet much less dexterity in defending himself.

But the sport of it is, to see that after he has handsomely belabored, and
pricked this pitiful thing, from head to foot, and sometimes till the blood
followed, he at length protests, Hier. lib. 1. contr. Ruff. T. 2. page 311.
Sentisne quid taceam, quod aestu^nti pectori verba non commodem? and cum
Psalmista loquar, pone Domine custo^iam ori m^o, etc.
at the end of his first Book, that He had spared him for the Love of God, and
that he had not afforded words to his troubled breast, and had set a watch
before his mouth; according to the Example of the Psalmist.

And in another place he reads him a long Lecture, Id in Apol adv. Ruff. Tom.
2. page 373. Quis omissa causa in superslua criminum objectione vers^tus est?
quae non Chartae Ecclesiatticae, sed libelli debent Judicum continere.
telling him that they were not to use railing Language in their Disputations,
nor to leave the Question in hand; and to labor to bring in what Accusations
they could against each other, which are more proper at a Bar, than in the
Church, and fitter to stuff a Lawyers Bill, than a Church-mans Papers.

It Is true indeed, that those who have been galled by him, are themselves to
blame: for as much as Id. Apol. 1. contr. Ruff T. 2. pap. 311. Hoc unum
denuncio, and repetens iterum iterumque monebo, cornutam bestiam petis.
He, out of his own candid disposition, courteously gave them warning himself;
telling them beforehand, that Those that meddle with him, had to do with a
Horned Beast. And yet some perhaps may still very much wonder, how it should
come to pass, that all those Watchings, and strict Discipline which he endured
in Bethlehem, and the Desert of Arabia should not have mortified these Horns:
to which I have no more to say, but this; that God by a certain secret and wise
Judgment, has suffered these Holy men, notwithstanding all those excellent
Gifts of Charity, Patience, and Meekness wherewith they were abundantly endued,
sometimes to let fall such slips as these upon several particular occasions; to
let us understand, that there is nothing absolutely perfect, but God alone; all
men, how accomplished soever they can possibly be, carrying always about them
some Relics of Humane Infirmity.

But however it be, this Course of St. Hierome's makes me doubt, that he has
dealt no better with others than he has with St. Augustine, wresting their
words much further than he ought to have done. But sometimes he goes further
yet, and speaks even of the Penmen of the Old and New Testament in so
disrespectful a manner, as that I am very much unsatisfied with these his
doings. As, for example, where he says in plain Terms without any
Circumlocution, that the Hier. Com. in Epist. ad Tit. Tem 6. Inscriptio autem
a^ae non ita erat, ut Paulus asseruit, Ignoto Deo, sed ita: Deis Europae,
Asiae, and Africae, Deis ignotis and peregrinis.
Inscription of the Altar at Athens was not expressed in those very words which
are delivered by St. Paul, in the Acts, Chap. 17. TO THE UNKNOWN GOD, but in
other Terms, thus: To the Gods of Europe, Asia, and of Africa; to the Unknown
and Foreign Gods. So likewise where he tells us, and repeats the same too in
many several places, that Hier. Com. 3. in Epist ad Gal 348 Tom. 6. Hebraeus ex
Hebraeis profundos sensus aliena lingua exprimere non valebat. Et Comm. 2. in
Epist. ad Ephesians. Tom 6. page 384. Isle qui Soloecismos in verbis facit, qui non
potest hyperbaton reddere, sententiamque concludere, audacter sibi vindicat
sapientiam, etc. Com. in Epist. ad Tit. Tom 6. page 440. Qui non juxta
humilitatem, ut plerique aestimant, sed vere dixerit, Imperitus Sermon, non
tamen scientia, Hebraeus ex Hebraeis, etc. prosundos sensus Graeco sermon non
explicat, and quid cogitat, in verba vix promit. Epist. 15. ad Algas. Q 10.
Tom. 3. page 167. Illud, etc etsi imperitus Sermon, etc. nequaquam Paulum de
humilitate dixisse: profundos enim, and reconditos sensus lingua non explicat,
and cum ipse sentiat, quid loquatur, in alienas aures puro non potest
transfer Sermon.
St. Paul knew not how to speak, nor to make a Discourse hang together: and,
that he makes Soloecisms sometimes; and that he knew not how to render an
Hyperbaton, nor to conclude a Sentence: and that he was not able to express his
own deep Conceptions in the Greek Tongue: and that he had no good utterance,
but had much ado to deliver his mind. And again in another place he tells us,
that It was not out of modesty, but it was the plain, naked truth that he told
us, when the Apostle said of himself; that he was Imperitus Sermon, Rude in
Speech; because that the truth is, He could not deliver his mind to others, in
clear and intelligible Language. And he says moreover, which is yet much worse
than all the rest, that Id. Com. 1. Epist. ad Gal. Tom 6 page 305. Unde
manifestum est id fecisse Apostolum quod promisit, nec reconditis ad Gal. usum
esse sensibus, sed quo idianis, and vilibus, and quae possent, nisi
praemisisset, Secundum hominem dico, prudentibus displicere. Et paulo ante page
304. Apostolus Galatis quoque, quos paulo ante stultos dixerat, factus est
stultus: non enim ad eos his usus est argumentis, quibus ad Romanos, sed simpl
cioribus, and quae stulti possent intelligere, and pene de trivio.
the Apostle disputing with the Galatians counterfeited ignorance, as knowing
them to be a dull, heavy People, and that he had let f^ll some such
Expressions, as might possibly have offended the more intelligent sort of
people, had he not before hand told them, that he spoke after the manner of
men. Whosoever shall have had but the least taste of the force and vigor, and
of the Candor of the Spirit, and Discourse of this Holy Apostle, can never see
him thus used, without being extremely astonished at it: especially if he but
consider, that these kinds of speeches, although they had perhaps some Ground,
(which yet they have not,) must needs scandalize, and give offense to the
weaker sort of People, and therefore ought not to have been uttered, without
very much Qualification, and sweetning of the business.

St. Augustine, I confess, is much more discreet in this particular, every
where testifying (as there is very great Reason he should) the great Respect he
bare to the Authors of the Books of the Holy Scriptures; and never speaking of
any of them, whether it be of their Style, or of their Sense, but with a
singular admiration.

But as for his own private Opinions, and those of other men which he
embraces, he is not without his Errors also. Such is that harsh Sentence of
his, which he has pronounced upon all Infants that dye before Baptism; whom he
will have not only to be deprived of the Vision of God, which is the punishment
that the ordinary Opinion of the Church condemns them to; but he will further
have them to be Aug. T 10. Sermon. 14. de verb. Ap.
Tormented in Hell fire: wherein he is also followed by Gregorius Armininensis,
Greg. Arim. in ^. sent. d 33. 9. 3.
a Famous Doctor in the Schools, where he is called, by reason of this Rigor
of his, Tormentum Infantium. He maintains also, that the Eucharist is
necessary for little Infants, as we have formerly noted, to another purpose. To
which we must also add that other Opinion, to which he evidently inclines;
namely, Aug. T. 2. Ep. 28 tot Mox F. 21 M T 3 de Genesis ad lit. lib. 10 c. 1. T.
7. c. 2. de An. and ejus Orig. c. 14.
that the Soul is derived from the Father to the Son, and is engendered of his
Substance, as well as the Body, and is not immediately Created by God, which is
the Common Opinion at this day.

There is no man but knows, that Idem Tom. 1. lib. 1. contr. Acad. cap. 7. See
also toward the latter end of this Chapter.
He every where attributes to the Angels a Corporeal Nature: and also that he
conceives, against all sense and reason, Idem Tom. 3. lib. imperf. de Genesis ad
lit. cap. 7. and lib. 4. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 31, 33, 34. and lib. cap. 5. 11.
that the whole World was created all in an instant of time; and refers, the
six days space of time, wherein the Creation is said to have been perfected, to
the different degrees of the knowledge of the Angels. He believed also, with
the most of the Ancient Fathers, Idem Tom. 5. Euch ad Laur. cap. 109. Tempus
quod inter hominis mortem and ultimam resurrectionem interpositum est animas
abditis recepraculis continet, etc. Vide and Tom. 4. c. de cur. pro mortuis,
cap. 2. and lib. 1. de Civitate Dei, cap. 12. Tom. 9. Tract. 49. in Joh. fol.
74.
that the Souls of Men departed, are shut up into I know not what secret, dark
Receptacles, where they are to remain from the hour of their departure, till
the Resurrection.

But we need not trouble our selves any further, in proving that he also might
err in matters of Religion, seeing that himself has made so clear and so
Authentic a Confession hereof, in his Books of his Retractations, where he
corrects many things which he had formerly written, either besides, or
against the Truth.

I must here confess also, that in my Opinion, it would have added very much to
the great and high Esteem, which we generally have of his Parts and Worth; if
he had been more positive, and more resolved, in the Decision of things, which
he has handled, for the most part, after the manner of the Academicks,
doubtingly and waveringly all the way; insomuch that he leaves undecided not
only Id. T. 3. Euchar ad Laur. c. 58. de Genesis ad lit. l. 2. c. 18.
whether the Sun and the other Stars be endued with Reason, but also, Id. lib
1. Retract. cap 11.
whether the World it self be a Living Creature, or not.

He that will but exactly and carefully read the rest of the Fathers, may very
easily observe in their Writings diverse Errors of the like nature; and a man
shall scarcely meet with any one Father, of any Note or Repute, from whom some
such thing or other has not escaped.

As for my own part, who have taken upon me this troublesome Business very
unwillingly, I shall content my self with these few Instances already set down,
seeing they do, in my Judgment, make this Business very clear; the discovery
whereof, I have been necessitated to undertake, though I wish rather they might
have been concealed. For, seeing that these so eminent Persons, who were of the
greatest Repute amongst all the Ancients, have through Humane Infirmity fallen
into such Errors, in Point of Faith; what ought we to expect from others, who
come very much behind these, both in respect of their Antiquity, Learning, and
Holiness of Life? Since Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Hilary, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, and
Epiphanius, that is to say, the most Eminent, and most Approved Persons that
ever were, have yet stumbled in many places, and have quite fallen in some
other; what has Cyril, Leo, Gregorius Romanus, and Damascene done, who have
come after them, and in whom has appeared both much less Gallantry of Spirit,
and Sanctity, than in the Former? Besides, if these Men have been mistaken in
matters of so great Importance; some of them, for Instance, in the Point
touching the Nature of God; some, touching the Humanity of our Savior Christ;
others, touching the Quality of our Soul; and some, touching the State and
Condition thereof after Death, and touching the Resurrection; why, for Gods
sake, must they needs be Infallible, when they speak of the Points now debated
amongst us? Why may not the same thing have happened to them in the one, that
has so manifestly befallen them in the other? It is not very probable (as we
have said before) that they so much as ever thought of our Differences: and it
is much more improbable, that ever they had any intention of being our Judges
in the Decision of them, as we have before proved.

But now put the Case that they were acquainted with the Business, and that
they did intend to clear our Doubts, and to give us their Positive
Determination touching the same in their Books; who shall assure us, that they
have had better success here, than they had in so many other things, wherein we
have before heard them, give their Verdict, so utterly against all Justice and
Reason? He that has erred touching the Point of the Resurrection, is it not
possible that he should be in an Error touching the State of the Soul after
this Life? He that could be ignorant what the Nature of Christ's Body was, must
he Necessarily have a Right Judgment touching the Eucharist? I do not see what
solid Reason of this Difference can possibly be given. It cannot proceed, but
from one of these two Causes, neither of which have yet any place here. For it
happens sometimes, that he who is deceived in one Particular, has yet better
fortune in another; by reason perhaps of his taking more heed to, and using
more Attention in the Consideration of the Later, than he did in the Former, or
else, by reason that one of the Points is easier to be understood, than the
other. For, in this Case, though his Attention be as great in the one, as in
the other; yet notwithstanding he may perhaps be able to understand the easy
one, but shall not be able to master the hard one. But now, neither of these
Reasons can be alleged here: For, why should the Ancients have used less Care
and Attention in the Examination of those Points wherein they have erred? Or,
why should they have used more in those Points which are at this day
controverted amongst us? Are not those Ancient Points of Religion of as great
Importance, as these Latter? Is there less danger in being ignorant touching
the Nature of God, than touching the Authority of the Pope? or touching the
State of the Faithful in the Resurrection, than touching the Punishment of
Souls in Purgatory? the Real Qualities of the Body of Christ, than the Nature
of the Eucharist? the Cup of His Passion, than the Cup of His Communion? Is it
more Necessary to Salvation, to know Him Sacrificed upon the Altar, than Really
Suffering upon the Cross? Who sees not, that these Matters are of equal
Importance? or, if there be any Difference betwixt them, that those Points
wherein the Fathers have erred, are in some sort more Important than those
which we now dispute about?

We shall therefore conclude, That if they had had both the one and the other
before their eyes, they would questionless have used as much Diligence at
least, and Attention, in the Study of the one, as of the other; and
consequently, in all probability, would have been either as successful, or else
have erred as much in the one, as in the other.

Neither may it be here objected, That those Points wherein they have failed,
are of more difficulty than those other wherein these Men will needs have them
to have been Certainly in the Right: for whosoever shall but consider them more
narrowly, he will find that they are equally both easy and difficult: or, if
there be any difference betwixt them in this Particular, those which they have
erred in, were the easier of the two to have been known.

For, I would fain have any Man tell me what he thinks in his Conscience,
whether it be not as easy to judge by Reason, and by the Scripture, whether or
no the Saints shall dwell upon the Earth after the Resurrection; as it is to
determine, whether, after they are departed this Life, they shall go into
Purgatory, or not? Is it a harder matter to know, whether the Angels are
capable of Carnal Love; than it is to judge, whether the Pope, as he is Pope,
be Infallible, or not? And if it be answered here, That the Church, having
already determined these Latter Points, and having not declared it self at all
touching the other, has taken away all the Difficulty of the one, but has
left the other in their former Doubtful State: this is to presuppose that which
is the main Question; or rather, it is manifestly False: the Church in the
First Ages having not, that we know of, passed any Public and Authentic
Judgment, touching the Points now in controversy, as we have before already
proved.

Forasmuch therefore as these Holy Men (if at least they had any thought at all
of these our Quarrels) had an equally Clear Insight in these things; both
according to all Reason, and all Probability, they would have also come unto
them with an equal both Attention and Affection. And I believe that there is no
Man but sees, that if they might err in the Decision of the one, it is
altogether as Possible that they might be mistaken also in their Judgment upon
the other.

Now those Books of theirs, which are left us, proclaim aloud, and openly
enough, (as we have seen by those few Testimonies which we have but just now
produced out of them) that they have erred, and sometimes also very grievously,
touching those First Questions: it remains therefore that we say, That their
Judgment is not any whit more Infallible in our present Controversies. I could
be content that you had demonstrated to any Protestant, by clear and undeniable
Reasons, that S. Hilary, in those Passages which are produced out of him for
the same purpose, has Positively taught the Real Presence of Christ in the
Eucharist: and I could be well contented that he should grant you the same,
which yet perhaps he will never do. However, after all, he has this still to
put you in mind of, namely, that this is the self-same S. Hilary, who in the
same Book maintains, That the Body of Christ felt no Pain at all upon the
Cross. And if he were in an Error in this Particular, why must he Necessarily
be in the Right in the other? The Question touching the Body of Christ, is of
as great Importance as that of the Eucharist: and it is besides much more
Clearly decided in the Scriptures, where there is nothing in the Earth that
obliges in the least degree to fancy any such thing of the Body of Christ, as
S. Hilary has done: but where, on the contrary, there seems to be some kind of
Ground for the Opinion which he is pretended to have had, touching the
Eucharist. Forasmuch therefore (will the Protestant say) as that in a thing
which is of equal Importance, and of much less Difficulty, he has manifestly
erred, who can assure me, that in this Point here, which is both less
Necessary, and more Difficult he may not also be mistaken? The same has he to
reply upon you, touching those other Allegations which you produce out of the
rest of the Fathers; every one of whom has either Really erred, o^ else
Possibly might have erred in Matters of Religion. Neither can you hope, that
any Solid Answer should be given to these things; especially if you but
consider, that the Practice both of the Fathers, and also of our Adversaiies
themselves, has clearly confirmed this our Position. For, Aug. Ep. ad Hier:
inter Ep. Hier. 47. T. 2. p. 551. and inter Epist. Aug. 19. T. 2.
S. Augustine, in that Dispute of his which he maintained against S. Hierome,
seeing him produce the Testimonies of Seven Authors, he (taking no notice at
all of the words of the first four of them) answers no more but this, That some
of them were guilty of Heresy, and the rest of Error: Which Answer is very
Insufficient, unless you allow, that the Testimony of a Man who has erred in
any one particular Point of Faith, is Null and Invalid.

The Fathers of the II Council of Nice took the very same Course in answering
an Objection brought against them by the Iconoclasts, who alleged a certain
Passage for themselves out of Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, Conc. VII. Act. 6.
Tom 3. Conc. Genesis p. 627.
answering them no more but this, That the Author they cited was an Arian. We
need not examine whether this Answer of theirs be true, or no; and if so,
whether it be to the purpose, or not: It is sufficient for us, that it appears
hence, by their making use of this kind of Answer, that they took it for
granted, that he that had failed in one Point, was not to be trusted in any
other. Cardinal Perron, and the rest of the Learned of that Party, oftentimes
makes use of the same Shift, rejecting the Testimonies that are brought against
them out of Socrates, or Sozomen, two Ecclesiastical Historians, because they
say they were Novatians. Those who put forth the General Councils at Rome
disauthorize Gelasius Cyzicenus, In Praefat praefixa Act. Conc. Niceni Gelas.
Cyzic. in Edit. Rom Conc. Genesis Tom. 1.
who was the Compiler of the Acts of the Council of Nice, by producing many
gross Oversights committed by him in that Piece of his.

Forasmuch therefore, as we are not to build upon the Authority of any Author
that may justly be accused of Error; it is most evident, that the Authority of
the greatest part, and indeed in a manner of all the Fathers, may very well be
called in Question: seeing that you will hardly find any one of them that is
not liable to this Exception.

But it will here be objected perhaps, by some especially, that although it be
confessed, that the Opinion of one Single Father possibly may be, and many
times is really False; yet however it is a very hard, or indeed an impossible
thing, that what has been delivered unanimously by many of them together,
should be otherwise than True.

But we have answered something already to this Objection, where we took
occasion to examine that Maxim of Vincentius Lirinensis, touching this
Particular.

And in short, this is all one, as if having confessed that every particular
Person of such a Company is sick of some Disease, we should notwithstanding
still deny, that the whole Company, taken all together, can possibly fall into
any Common Distemper of Body. It is not indeed altogether so probable, that
Many should be sick of any Disease, as that One single Person should: yet
neither is the thing altogether impossible, especially when the Disease is
Contagious, and besides, not so well Known; as for the most part the Errors of
Great Persons are, whose very Name bears them out, and makes them easily
received by the Ordinary sort, who run after them, and suck them in without the
least suspicion at all.

But yet if Reason will not do the turn, let Experience however persuade us to
receive this Truth. For it is most evident, that some of those Errors
before-specified, have been maintained, not by One, nor by Two, nor by Three of
the Fathers only; but by Many, by the Major part, and sometimes also by All
the Fathers of the same Age, at least of all those whose Names and Writings
have come to our hands. We have heard how that Justin Martyr maintained the
Opinion of the Millenaries, which is both manifestly false in it self, and also
very dangerous in its Consequences. Now this Opinion he did not maintain alone,
the rest of the Learned of his time were in a manner all of the same
Persuasion, as it appears by his own words.

For, writing against Tryphon, and the Jews that held with him, he says, Just.
contr. Tryph^ p. 306. (...), etc.
That if they had by chan^e met with some who bare the Name of Christians, but
did not believe this Article of Faith, blaspheming the God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob, and saying, That there shall be no Resurrection of the
Dead, but that the Souls, immediately after Death, are transported up to
Heaven; they must not take these Persons for Christians, no more than, in
speaking truly and precisely, the Samaritans, or any other Sect of Judaism,
ought to be called Jews. The False Christians which he here speaks of, were the
Valentinians, and others of the Gnostick^. He goes on by and by, and says, Id.
ibid p 307 (...), etc.
But as for me, and the rest of us, who are Right and Orthodox in our Opinions,
and who are perfectly Christians, we know, that there shall be both a
Resurrection of the Flesh, and that the Saints shall afterward also spend a
thousand years in Jerusalem, which shall be rebuilt, beautified, and enlarged.
By which words of his he seems to testify, That all the Catholics in his time
maintained this Erroneous Opinion, and that the Heretics only rejected it. I
know very well, that he confesses before, Id. ibid. p. 306. (...).
That there were diverse who were Perfect and Religious Christians, who yet did
not embrace the said Opinion: But let any Man that can, reconcile these two
contrary Sayings; That all Orthodox Christians held this Opinion; and, That
there were some of the Orthodox Party, that did not receive the same.

Let any Man that will, search also into Justin's Works, and see whether this
Contradiction has not been foisted in by the Zeal of the following Ages, who
happily might take offense at the Business, in seeing such an Opinion fathered
upon all the True Christians, by so great a Martyr. It is sufficient for us,
that however it appears clearly by this Passage, that a very great part of the
Doctors, and of the Faithful People of those times, maintained this Error. We
see that Irenaeus, who lived in the same time, and also Tertullian, who
followed not long after him, were both of the same Persuasion; no one Man all
this while, that we hear of, offering to contradict them. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l.
3. c. 39.
Eusebius, and Hieron. l. de Scrip. Eccles in. Papia.
S. Hierome, and diverse other Authors inform us, That Papias Bishop of
Hierapolis, who flourished about the Year of our Lord CX, was the Author of
this Opinion.

It follows then from hence, That the Consent of all the Fathers that are now
extant, who lived in the same Age, and maintained all the same Opinion, is no
infallible Argument of the Truth.

And if you go down ^ower, you will find that the very same Error was defended
by several Doctors of very great Repute in the Church.

S. Hierome, who in diverse places of his Commentaries has excellently and
solidly refuted this foolish Fancy, says, Id. Comm. (...). in Ezech. T. 4. ^.
984.
That many among the Learned Christians had maintained the same, and to those,
whom we have already mentioned Id. Com. 18. in Isa. in Praefat. Quem (
Apollinarium) nostrorum in hac part duntaxat plurima sequitur multitudo, ut
praesaga mente jam cernam, quantorum in me rabies concitanda sit.
He adds Lactantius, Victorinus, Severus, and Apollinaris, who is followed in
this Point, (says he in another place) by great multitudes of Christians about
us, insomuch that I already foresee and presage to my self, how many folks
anger I shall incur hereby: namely, because he every where spoke against this
Opinion.

Whence it plainly appears, that in his time, that is to say, about the
beginning of the Fifth Century, it was still in great request in the Church.
And indeed how fierce soever he seem to be in his Onset, yet he dares not
condemn this Opinion absolutely. Hier. Com. 4. in Hierem. T 4. p. 598. Quae
licet non sequamur, tamen damnare non possumus, quia multi Ecclesiasticorum
virorum, and Martyrs ista dixerunt: and unusquisque in suo sensu abundet, and
Domini cuncta judicio reserventur.
Although we embrace not this Opinion, (says he) yet can we not condemn it;
for as much as there have been diverse Eminent Personages, and Martyrs in the
Church, who have maintained the same. Let every man abound in his own sense,
and let us leave the judgment of all things to God.

Whence you see, (as we may observe by the way) that the Fathers have not
always held an Opinion in the same degree that we do. For, St. Hierome
conceived this to be a Pardonable Error, which yet we at this day will not
endure to hear of.

If it be here answered, that the Church in the Ages following condemned this
Opinion, as erroneous; this is no more, than to say, that the Churches in the
Ages following acknowledged, that the joint Consent of many Fathers together,
touching one and the same Opinion, is no solid Proof of the Truth of the same.
If Dionysius Alexandrinus had been of any other judgment, he would never have
written against Irenaeus as he did; as Id. Com. 18. in Es. in Praefat.
St. Hierome also testifies, in one of his Books of Commentaries before cited.
And if we are to have regard to Authority only, the Judgment of the succeeding
Church cannot then serve us, as a certain Guide in this Question, to inform us
on which side the Truth is: For, to allege it in this Case, were rather to
oppose one Authority against another, than to decide the Controversy. As
Dionysius Alexandrinus, St. Hierome, Gregory Nazianzene, and others, conceived
not themselves bound to submit to the Authority of Justin Martyr, Irenaeus,
Lactantius, Victorinus, Severus, and others; so neither are we any more bound
to submit to theirs: For, their Posterity owes them no more Respect, than they
themselves owed to their Ancestors. It seems rather, that in Reason they
should owe them less, because that look how far distant in time they are from
the Apostles, who are as it were the Spring and Original of all Ecclesiastical
Authority; so much does the Credit and Authority of the Doctors of the Church
lose and grow less.

If Antiquity (as we would have it) be the Mark of Truth, then certainly that
which is the most Ancient, is also the most Venerable, and the most
Considerable. And if there were no other Argument but this, against the
Authority of many Fathers, unanimously consenting in any Opinion; yet would it
clearly serve to lessen the same: but there are yet behind many others; some
whereof we shall here produce. We have heard before, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus,
Tertullian, and St. Augustine, affirming all of them, that Heaven shall not be
opened, till the Day of Judgment; and that during this space of time the Souls
of all the Faithful are shut up in some subterraneous place, except some small
number of those who had the Privilege of going immediately to Heaven. The
Author of those Questions and Answers, that go under the name of Justin Martyr,
maintains the same Opinion, as you may see in the Answers to the LX, and LXXIV
Questions.

And that I may not unprofitably spend both Time and Paper, in bringing in all
the particular Passages, I say in General, that both the Major Part, and also
the most Eminent Persons among the Ancient Fathers held this Opinion, either
absolutely, or at least in part. For, besides Justin Martyr, Irenaeus,
Tertullian, and St. Augustine, and the Author of those Questions and Answers we
before mentioned, which is a very Ancient Piece indeed, though falsely fathered
upon Justin Martyr, it is clear, that Origin, Lactantius, Victorinus, St.
Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Aretas, Prudentius,
Theophylact, St. Bernard, and, among the Popes, Clemens Romanus, and John XXII.
were all of this Opinion, as is confessed by all; neither was this so admirable
and general Consent of theirs contradicted by any Declaration of the Church,
for the space of Fourteen Hundred years; neither yet did any one of the Fathers
so far as we can discover, take upon him to refute this Error, as Dionysius
Alexandrinus, and St. Hierome did to refute the Millenaries; all the rest of
the Fathers being either utterly silent, as to this Particular, and so by this
their silence going over in a manner into the Opinion of the Major Part; or
else contenting themselves with declaring sometimes here and there in their
Books, that they believed that the Souls of the Saints should enjoy the sight
of God, till the Resurrection, never formally denying the other Opinion.

But that which does further show, that this Opinion is both very Ancient, and
has been also very Common among the Christians, is, because that even at this
day it is believed, and defended by the whole Greek Church: neither is there
any of all those, who make Profession of standing to the Writings of the
Fathers, as the Rule of their Faiths, who have rejected it, save only the
Latins, Conc. Flor. in defin. Diffinimus insuper, etc. illorum animas qui post
susceptum Baptisma nullam omnino maculam incurrerunt illas etiam quae post
contractam peccati maculam vel in suis corporibus, vel eisdem exutae
corporibus, pro ut superius dictum est, sunt purgatae, in coelum mox recipi,
and intueri clare ipsum Deum, trinum and unum, Tom. 4. Conc. page 584.
who have expressly also established the contrary, at the Council of Florence,
held in the year of our Lord 1439. which is not above Two Hundred and Twelve
years ago. Do but fancy now to your selves a Vicentius Lirinensis, standing in
the midst of this Council, and laying before them his own Oracle, before
mentioned; which is, That we ought to hold for most certainly, and undoubtedly
true, whatsoever has been delivered by the Ancients unanimously and by a
Common Consent: and do but think, whether or no he should not have been hissed
out by these Reverend Fathers, as one that made the Truth, which is holy and
immutable, to depend upon the Authority of Men? For, these men regarded not at
all neither the Multitude, nor the Antiquity, nor the Learning, nor the
Sanctity of the Authors of this foolish Opinion; but, finding it to be false,
without any more ado rejected it, as they thought they had good Reason to do,
and withal ordained the contrary.

Now I am verily persuaded, that there are very few Points of Faith, among all
those which the Church of Rome would have the Protestants receive, for which
there can be alleged either more, or more clear and evident Testimonies out of
the Fathers, than for this.

For as much therefore as that after all this it has not only be called in
Question, but has been even utterly condemned also; who sees not, that the
Consent of many Fathers together, although any such thing were to be had, upon
all the Points now in Debate, would yet be no sufficient Argument of the Truth
of the same? But I shall pass on to the rest.

We have before heard, how that Tertullian, St. Cyprian, who was both a Bishop
and a Martyr, Firmilianus Metropolitan of Cappadocia, Dionysius Patriarch of
Alexandria, together with the Synods of Bishops both of Africa, Cappadocia,
Cilicia, Basil. Epist. ad Amph^loch. T. 2. p. ^58, 759.
and Bithynia, held all, that the Baptism of Heretics was invalid and null.
St. Basil who was one of the most Eminent Bishops of the whole Eastern Church,
held also in a manner the very same Opinion; and that a long time too after the
Determination of the Council of Nice; as appears by the Epistle which he
wrote to Amphilochius; which is also put in among the Public Decrees of the
Church, by the Greek Canonists. And yet this Opinion is now confessed by all to
be Erroneous.

Many in like manner of the Fathers, as namely Tertul. lib. contr. Jud. cap. 8.
Tertullian, Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. 6.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Lactant Firmian lib. 4. cap. 10.
Lactantius, and African. apud Hieron Com. in Dan. cap. 10. Tom. 4. cap. 1147
Africanus, believed, that our Savior Christ kept the Feast of the Passover
but once only, after his Baptism. And yet notwithstanding this Consent of
theirs, the Opinion is known to be very false, as Petav. Not. in Epiph. page
203.
Petavius also testifies; and besides is expressly contrary to the Text of the
Gospel. I shall not here say any thing of the Opinion of Chrysost^m. Hom. in
statuas, and passim.
St. Chrysostom, St Hieron. Com. 1. in Matthew. T^m. 6. page 15.
St. Hierome, Basil. Hom. in Ps. 14. T. 1. page 154, and 155.
St. Basil, and the Fathers of the Council held at Act. Conc. Constable. act. 1.
Tom. 2. page 129. (...), etc.
Constantinople under the Patriarch Flavianus; who seem all to have held, that
an Oath was utterly unlawful for Christians, under the New Testament. Neither
shall I take any notice in this place of that Conceit of Athanasius, St. Basil,
and Methodius, as he is cited by Tom. 3. Conc. page 547. in act. Conc. VII.
act. 5.
John Bishop of Thessalonica, who all believed that the Angels had Bodies: to
whom we may also add, (as we have showed before,) St. Hilary, Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, and very many more of the Fathers, who would all of them have the
Nature of Angels to be such, as was capable of the Passions of Carnal love; of
which number is even August Tom. 1. lib. 1. contr. Acad. cap. 7. Tom. 2. Epist.
111. and Epist. 115. and Tom. 3. Enchir. ad Laur. cap. 59. de Trin. lib. 2.
cap. 7. and lib. 3. cap. 1. and lib. 8. cap. 2. and de Genesis ad lit. lib. 3.
cap. 10. and lib. 11. cap 22. and de divin. Daem. cap. 3, 4, 5. and Tom. 4.
lib. 93. quaest. 9 47 Tom. 5 lib. 11. de Civ. Dei. cap. 25. and lib. 15. cap.
23. and ibi Vives, and lib. 21. cap. 23. and cap. 10.
St. Augustine also. Whosoever should now conclude from hence, that this Fancy
of theirs (which yet is of no small importance) is a Truth; would he not be as
sharply reproved for it by the Romanists, as by those of Geneva? But I must not
forget, that besides St. Cyprian, St. Augustine, and Pope Innocent I. whose
Testimonies we have given in Supr. lib. 1. cap. 8.
before, all the rest of the Doctors, in a manner, of the first Ages
maintained, that the Eucharist was necessary for young Infants; if at least you
dare take Maldonat's word, Maldon. in Joh. 6. 53.
who affirms, that this Opinion was in great Request in the Church, during the
first Six Hundred years after our Savior Christ.

Cassand. Consult. ad Fer. and Max. p. 936 and lib. de Bapt. Inf. p. 747.
Cassander also testifies, that he has often observed this Practice in the
Ancients; as indeed is also witnessed by Carolus Magnus, and by Ludovicus Pius,
who lived a long time after the Sixth Century; both of which assure us, that
this Custom continued in the West, even in their time, as they are cited by
Cardinal Du Perr. traict. de St. August. page 1001.
Perron: and the Traces of this Custom do yet remain to this day, amongst those
Christians who are not of the Communion of the Latin Church. For Nicol. de
Lyra in Joh. Notandum quod ex hoc quod dicitur hic, Nisi manducaveritis, etc.
dicunt Graeci, quod hoc Sacramentum est tantae necessitatis, quod pueris dehet
dari, sicut Baptismus.
Nicolaus Lyranus, who lived somewhat above three hundred years since,
observed, That the Greeks accounted the Holy Eucharist so necessary, as that
they administered it to little Children also, as well as Baptism. And even in
our Fathers time, the Patriarch Hierem. Patr. Constable. Doctr. Exh. ad Germ.
Jeremias, speaking in the name of the whole Creek Church, said, We do not only
Baptize little Children, but we also make them partakers of the Lords Supper.
And a little after: we account (says he) both Sacraments to be necessary to
Salvation for all persons; namely, Baptism and the Holy Communion. The Alvarez.
in his Voyage to Ethiopia.
Abyssines also make their Children in like manner Communicate of the Holy
Eucharist, as soon as ever they are Baptized.

Which are most evident Arguments, that this false Opinion, touching the
Necessity of the Eucharist, has been of old maintained, not by three or four
of the Fathers only, but by the Major part, and in a manner by all of them.

For we do not hear of so much as one, among all the Ancient Fathers, who
rejected it in express Terms; as the Council of Trent has done, in these later
Times.

To conclude, the Jesuit Peter. in Rom c. 8. disp. 22. Epist. 23.
Pererius has informed us, (and indeed the observation is obvious enough to
any man, that is never so little conversant in the Writings of those Authors,
who lived before St. Augustines time) that all the Greek Fathers, and a
considerable part also of the Latins, were of Opinion, that the Cause of
Predestination was, the Fore sight which God had, either of Men's Good Works, or
else of their Faith: either of which Opinions, he assures us, is manifestly
contrary both to the Authority of the Scriptures, and also to the Doctrine of
St. Paul. So that I conceive we may, without troubling our selves any further
in making this envious Inquiry into the Errors of the Fathers, conclude from
what has been already produced, that seeing the Fathers have Erred in so many
Particulars, not on singly, but also many of them together; Neither the private
Opinion of each particular Father, nor yet the unanimous Consent of the Major
part of them, is a sufficient Argument certainly to prove the Truth of those
Points, which are at this day controverted amongst Us.

CHAP. V.
Reason V. That the Fathers have strongly contradicted one another, and have
maintained Different Opinions, in Matters of very Great Importance.

BEssarion, a Greek born, who was honored with the Dignity of Cardinal, by
Pope Eugenius IV. as a Reward of his earnest desires to, and the great pains he
took in endeavoring a Reconciliation betwixt the Eastern and the Western
Church, in a Book which he wrote upon this Subject to the Council of Florence,
Bessar Orat. (...), c. 2. p. 520, and 521. T. 4. Conc.
will have the whole Difference, betwixt the Greek and Latin Churches, to be
brought before the Judgment Seat of the Fathers.

And for as much as he knew, that unless the Judges did all agree, and were of
one Opinion, the Cause (especially in Matters of Religion,) necessarily remains
undecided; he strongly labors to prove, that he has all the Fathers
consenting not only with him, but, (which is yet much harder to prove) that
they are all of the same Opinion also among themselves; insomuch that he
commands us, when ever there appears any contrariety in their Writings, that
we should accuse our own ignorance, rather than blame them for contradicting
each other.

We may conclude therefore, from what is here laid down by this Author, who was
both as acute, and as Learned a man, as any was at this Council, that to render
the Fathers capable of being the Judges of our Controversies, it is necessary
that they should be all of the same Judgment and Opinion, in Point of Religion.
And certainly, this is a most clear Truth: For, if there be any Contradiction
amongst them, or Dissenting in Opinion, they will leave our Controversies more
Perplexed, rather than Decided; and in stead of Uniting, will rather Distract
us, and rend us into many Parts.

That we may therefore be able to come to the knowledge of the Truth in this
Particular, it will concern us first of all to examine, whether that which
Bessarion adds hereupon, be true also, or not; namely, That the Opinions of
the Fathers do never clash one with the other, touching the Points of our
Religion.

Now although this were so, yet would it not Necessarily follow from hence,
that their Judgment must needs be therefore Infallible; forasmuch as even an
Error may, either by the Consent of the several Parties, or by Accident, or
else by some other the like means, happen to meet with an Unanimous
Entertainment by several Persons.

But now in case this should prove to be false, then certainly we may make this
Infallible Conclusion, That we ought to seek out for other Judges of our
Controversies, than the Writings of the Fathers. We shall therefore show, by
way of addition to the rest of our Proofs, that this Assertion of his is more
Bold than True; and, that there are very many Real Differences to be found
among the Ancient Fathers, in Matters of Religion.

We have already touched before upon some of them, by the bye only, as lying
in our way, speaking of other Matters, and therefore we shall only lightly run
them over again; as namely, first of all, That Disagreement in Opinion of the
most Ancient among the Fathers, Justine Martyr, Irenaeus, and Tertullian, on
the one side; and Dionysius Alexandrinus, Gregory Nazianzene, and S. Hierome on
the other: the First of these promising us very seriously the Delights and
Pleasures of a Thousand years, and the Diamonds and the Saphires of a New
Earthly Jerusalem, with all its Glory and Prosperity: but the other very
coursely, and in downright Terms reproving this their Conceit, as being an idle
Fancy, fit to be entertained by Little Children, and Old Women only; and which
seems to have been derived rather from the Dreams of the Jews, than from the
Doctrine of the Apostles.

The like to this was that Difference betwixt the Bishops of Asia, and Pope
Victor, about the Observation of Easter Day; and of Cyprian, and Stephen, about
the Baptism of Heretics: in all which Differences, the Heat was so high, as
that it went on as far as to Excommunicating each other. If Bessarion now could
but make it appear to us, that these were not Real, but Seeming Contradictions
only, I should then make no question at all, but that he would as easily
reconcile Fire and Water, or whatever things else in Nature are the most
Contrary the one to the other.

We have heard that Tertullian maintained, That the Soul was Ex Traduce, and
was propagated from the Father to the Son, by the Natural Course of Generation;
and that S. Augustine likewise inclined to the same Opinion: to whom, if we
will believe Hieron. Ep. 82. T. 2. An certe ex traduce, ut Tertullianus,
Apollinarius and maxima pars Occidentalium autumant.
S. Hierome, we must add a very considerable number of the Western Church also,
who were all of the same Persuasion. But Id. Com. in Eccles. c. 12. T. 5. and
Ep. 61. ad Pamm. T 2. p. 242. and alibi passim.
S. Hierome rejects them all, and their Opinion, and says, That the Soul is
created Immediately by God, at the very instant that it is united to the Body;
adding withal, (as we have formerly noted unto you) That this is the Belief of
the Church in this Point.

S. Hierome, and those of his Faction held, That all that Reprehension used by
S. Paul to S. Peter, which we find mentioned in the Epistle to the Galatians,
was only a Feigned Business, purposely Acted betwixt the two Apostles, by an
Agreement made betwixt themselves. S. Augustine, with those of his Side,
maintains the contrary, and says, That the thing was Real, and was meant
heartily and seriously, and as it is related by S. Paul; and that there was no
Cunning, or Underhand Dealing in the Business, or any Scene laid betwixt S.
Peter and him. And S. Hierome pursued this Dispute with so much heat and
earnestness, as that besides those Epistles of his, which are full of Gall and
Choler, written against S. Augustine, touching this Particular, he yet in his
Vid. Com 4. in Es. T 4. p 378. and Com. 18. in eund p 485.
Commentaries also, which were Pieces that he wrote in his Quieter Tempe^, many
times takes occasion to gird underhand at S. Augustine, upon this old Quarrel
betwixt them. So that certainly he must needs be quite out of his Wits, whoever
shall seriously go about to maintain, that these two Fathers were perfectly of
One Opinion, and agreed upon this Point. Justin. contr. Tryph. p. 333. (...).
Justine Martyr is of Opinion, that it was the Real Ghost of Samuel, that
appeared to Saul, being raised up by the Enchantments of the Witch at Endor.
Pseudo. Just. l. Q. and R. Resp. ad q. 52. (...).
Others say it was but a Fantasm. Epiph. in Panar. Expos. Fid. p. 1104.
Some of them hold, That the meeting together of the Faithful at the Eucharist
thrice a week, is an Apostolical Tradition. August. in Ep 118. ad Jan. T. 3.
vid. Petav. in Epiph p. 354.
Others believe the contrary. Vide Petav. p. 359. in Epiph, Eccl. Romans ^p.
Socr. l. 5. c. 22. August. Ep. 86. and 118. Innoc. I. Ep. 1. c. 4.
Some enjoin us to Fast on Saturdays; Ignat. Ep. 4. ad Philip. Can. Apost. c.
68. Constit. Apost. l. 7. c. 24 Syn. Trull. Can. 55.
others forbid the same, under the penalty of being accounted no less than the
Murderers of Christ. Iren. l. 2. c. 39.
Some of them conceive, that our Savior Christ suffered Death in the Fortieth
or Fiftieth year of his Age: Tertul. Clem. Alex. Lactant. Afric. ubi supr.
Others again would persuade us, that he died in the Thirtieth or Thirty first
year of his Age: Both which Opinions are manifestly contrary to the Text of the
Gospel, which tells us clearly, That after his Baptism, that is to say, after
the Thirtieth year of his Age, he conversed above Three, and under Five years,
upon the Earth. Some of them (as we are informed by these Scholarius, Orat 3. T
4. Council. Genesis p. 658, 659.
Latinized Greeks) allow of these Terms, Cause, and Effect, in the Doctrine of
the Trinity; but some others again do not so.

Some of them are of Opinion, That there is a certain Order, or Distinction of
Priority, in the Persons of the Trinity: others again there are, who will not
endure to hear of this Expression.

Those of the Western Church call the Son only, The Image of the Father; but
the Greek Church makes this Name extend to the Holy Ghost also. S. Basil will
not allow of the word (...), in discoursing of the Son: Others again make use
of it, without any scruple at all.

I doubt very much, whether Bessarion had ever seen the Apologies and
Invectives of S. Hierome, and of Ruffinus; who were yet both of them Fathers,
and of good Repute too in the Church, both that of their own time, and of the
Ages following; although they were not both of them of equal Esteem. Neither do
I believe he remembered that Quarrel that there was betwixt Theophilus and
Epiphanius on the one part, and S. Chrysostom on the other.

For certainly, their Carriage toward each other in this their Debate, does not
show them to have been so very good Friends, and so well agreed upon the Point
debated. But now, to overthrow this Bold Assertion of his at once, we need go
no further than to the very Point it self, touching which he proposed it. For,
whom will he ever be able to persuade, that All the Fathers have written and
said the very same things, touching the Procession of the Holy Ghost? It is
evident, that sometimes they will have It to Proceed from the Son also; as S.
Basil by name has expressed himself, in that Passage of his, which is alleged
by the Latins out of his Book against Eunomius; (which Piece yet the Greeks say
is forged:) and as the Fathers of the Western Church have most expressly
declared themselves in many places. Conc. Flor. Act. 20. T. 4. Conc. p. 454.
But yet I cannot possibly see; how we can say, That they have All been of this
Opinion.

I shall not here meddle with those other Authorities, produced by the Greeks
out of the Fathers; which their Adversaries put by as well as they can,
oftentimes most miserably wresting and stretching upon the Rack the Words and
Meaning of the Fathers. But that Passage of Theodoret, in his Refutation of S.
Cyril's Anathema's, is so clear and express, as that nothing can be more.

Cyril. Anath 9. (...).
S. Cyril had said, in his IX Anathema, That the Holy Ghost proceeded Properly
from the Son. Theodor. Refut. Anath 9 Cyril. Act. Conc. Ephesians (...).
Theodoret answers, That it is both Impious and Blasphemous to say, that the
Holy Ghost has its Subsistence from the Son, or by the Son. If he mean (says
he) that the Holy Ghost proceeds properly from the Son, as heing of the same
Nature with It, and as proceeding from the Father, we shall willingly agree
with him, and shall receive his Doctrine as Sound and Pious: But if he mean,
that the Holy Ghost has its Subsistence from the Son, or by the Son, we must
then reject it, as Impious, and Blasphemous. He could not have thrown by this
Proposition of S. Cyril more bluntly, or in courser Terms: And yet for all this
so flat giving him the Lie, as it were, and his so insolent rejecting of an
Opinion that was then received by the Church, as the Latins pretend, Cyril.
Resp. ad Ref. Theod. Anath. 9. ibid. (...).
S. Cyril replies no more but this, That the Holy Ghost, altbough It proceed
from the Father, yet nevertheless is not a Stranger to the Son, since He has
all things common with the Father. Why did he not cry out against him as an
Heretic, as he many times elsewhere does, with much less reason; if at least
you must needs have it granted you, that the Opinion of the Church at that time
was, That the H. Ghost proceeded from the Son? Why did he not take it very ill
at his hands, that he should in so insolent a manner reject as Impious and
Blasphemous, a Proposition that was so Holy, and so True? Why did he not call
the Whole Church in, to be his Warrant for what he had said, if so be it had
Really been the General Belief of the Church at that time? And how comes it to
pass, that in stead of all this, he rather returns so tame an Answer, as seems
rather to betray his own Cause, and something also to incline to the contrary
Opinion of his Adversary? For, it is evident, that neither Theoderet, nor yet
any of the Modern Greeks ever held, That the Holy Ghost was a Stranger to, or
was Unconcerned in the Son, seeing they all confess, That these three, to wit,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are One and the same God, who is
Blessed for ever.

Whosoever shall but diligently consider these things* (for we cannot stand any
longer upon the Examination of them) he cannot, in my Judgment, but confess
that the Church had not as yet declared it self, or determined any thing
touching this Point; and, that these Doctors spoke herein each Man his own
Private Opinion only, and according as the Present Occasion of Disputation led
him to speak; where you shall have them contradicting one another, in like
manner as is usual in speaking of things not as yet thoroughly examined, or
expressly determined: insomuch that it would grieve a Man to see how the Greeks
and the Latins toil and sweat to no purpose, each of them laboring to bring
over the Fathers to speak to their Side, and fearfully wresting their Words,
whenever they seem to be but never so little ambiguous; and ever and anon
accusing one another of having corrupted the Ancients Writings, whenever they
are found to speak expressly against them: and when all is done, leaving those
who either read or hear them without any Prejudice, very much unsatisfied;
whereas it had been much more easy, to have honestly confessed at first, that
which is but too apparent, that the Fathers, as in this, so in many other
Points of Religion, have not all been of one and the same Persuasion.

And whereas Bessar. in Orat. Dogmat. sive de Vn^one Extra. cap. 9. in Act.
Conc. Flor. Sess. 28. T. 4. Conc. p. 551.
Bessarion, that he may clude this Testimony of Theodoret, affirms, That he was
cast forth of the Church for having denied that the Holy Ghost proceeded from
the Son; and that he afterward publicly confessed his Error, at the Council
of Cbalcedon, where he was received into the Church again: all this, I say, is
only a Piece of Grecian Confidence, which shows more clearly than all the rest,
how much this Man was carried away with his Passion, and the violence of his
Affection to the Latin Church.

For, I beseech you, in what Ancient Author had he ever read, that Theodoret
was, I do not say, Condemned, or Excommunicated, but so much as Reproved, or
Accused only, for having maintained any Erroneous Opinion touching the
Procession of the Holy Ghost? We have the Acts of the Council of Ephesus, where
he was Excommunicated: We have the Letters of S. Cyril, wherein he again
received into the Communion of the Church John Patriarch of Antioch, and all
his Followers, of which number Theodoret was the Chief. We have the Council of
Chalcedon, where Theodoret, after some certain Cryings out of his Adversaries
against him, was at length received by the whole Assembly as a Catholic
Bishop, and was admitted to sit amongst them. In which of all these Authentic
Pieces is there so much as one word spoken, touching this Opinion of his,
concerning the Point of the Proceeding of the Holy Ghost? S. Cyril himself,
that is to say, those of his Party, did not at all condemn what he said,
touching this Particular; but he rather contented himself in excusing, or, if
you please, in defending only his own Opinion. The Business for which
Theodoret was questioned in the Councils of Ephesus, and of Chalcedon, had
nothing in the World to do with this, touching the Procession of the Holy
Ghost: for, the Question was only there, touching the Two Natures of our
Savior Christ, whom Nestorius would needs divide into Two Persons; John
Patriarch of Antioch, Theodoret, and diverse other Eastern Bishops, favoring in
some sort his Person, or being indeed offended rather at the Proceeding of the
Council of Ephesus against him; and withal rejecting several things that were
contained in the Anathemas of S. Cyril.

Now with what face could this Man tell us, after all this, That Theodoret had
been deposed from his Bishopric, for having maintained an Erroneous Opinion
touching the Procession of the Holy Ghost? But enough of this.

I would in the next place fain know, how this Reconciler of Differences could
compose that Debate betwixt the DCXXX Fathers of the Council at Chalcedon, and
Leo Bishop of Rome; and how he can reconcile the XXVIII Canon of the one, with
those many Epistles written by the other, touching this Point, to Anatolius
Patriarch of Constantinople, to the Emperor Marcianus, and his Empress, to the
Prelates who were there met together in that Council, and to the Patriarch of
Antioch: the Fathers of this Council advancing the Throne of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, above those of Alexandria, and of Antioch, and making it equal
even with that of Rome it self: Pope Leo in the mean time sending out his
Thunderbolts against this Decree of theirs, and charging them as guilty of a
most insufferable Injury offered him. And when this our Conciliator shall have
done his business at Chalcedon, if he please, he may pass over into Africa, and
there also Reconcile the Fathers of that Country to the Bishops of Rome; the
former of these forbidding their Clergy to make any Appeals to Rome; and the
other in the mean time to their utmost endeavoring to prove, That it is their
Proper Right, to have such Appeals brought before them. And when he has
finished this Work, our Greek may then in the next place try to remove all
misunderstanding betwixt the Fathers of the Council of Francfort, and those of
the II. Council of Nice* touching the Point of the use of Images* the later of
these Ordaining Conc VII. Act 7. in d^fin. T. 3. Conc. p. 661. (...). Ib. p.
662. (...).
That we ought to pay unto them Salutations, and Adoration of Honor, and that
we ought to honor them with Incense and Lights: and the other, as every man
knows, having not only rejected this Greek Council; but having written (...)
expressly, against it, by the Command of the Emperor Carolus Magnus.

Certainly he that shall but read the Fathers themselves, will easily and
quickly perceive, that they clash and contradict each other, in most plain and
irreconcilable Terms, and that there is no other way of bringing them honestly
together, but by receiving every one of them, with his own private Opinions;
imitating herein the mavelous Wisdom of the Council of Synod. Quinisexta Can.
2. T. 3. Con.
Constantinople in Trullo; which receives and allows of all in gross,
without distinction, both the Canons of the Apostles, and the whole Code of the
Church Universal, together with those of Sardica, Carthage, and Laodicea;
amongst which notwithstanding there are found strong Contradictions.

As for Example, the Synod. Sard. Can. 3. and 7.
Council of Sardica will have the Right of receiving the Appeals of all Bishops
to belong to the Sea of Rome; whereas Synod. Chalced. cap. 9. and 17.
Chalcedon gives this Privilege to that of Constantinople. The Council of
Synod Laod. Can. 59.
Laodicea leaves out of the Canon of the Scriptures, the Maccabees,
Ecclesiasticus, the Book of Wisdom, Tobit, and Judith: Synod Carthag. III. cap.
47.
that of Carthage puts them in expressly. But now these honest Fathers of
Constantinople, to the end they may give content to all the World, take no
notice at all of these their Differences; but receive each of them, with their
own particular Canons, and Opinions, without obliging them to any one Common
Rule; doing this, I believe, upon condition, that themselves may not be
required, by those whom they thus admit, to receive any more from them, than
they shall think convenient. I know no man, that would not at this rate readily
admit of, as Canon, all the Writings of the Fathers; provided that he might but
have liberty to take, or leave therein what he thought good.

So that we may very well from henceforth rest satisfied, that, notwithstanding
Bessarion's resolution to the contrary, the Fathers have not always been of the
same Judgment in matters of Religion: and that consequently they ought not to
be received by us, as our Judges touching the same.

For, seeing that I find them contradicting each other, in so many several
Points of very great importance; how shall I be assured, that they are all
unanimously agreed, touching those Points which are now debated amongst us?

Why may they not have had the same diversity of Opinion, touching the Point of
the Eucharist, the Authority of the Church, the Power of the Pope, Free Will,
or Purgatory, that they had in those other Points which we have before
presented to the Readers view; which were of as great importance as these, and
no less easy to be determined; as we have proved in the Chapter preceding?

Epiphanius and St. Hierome are as opposite in their Judgments, touching the
Ancient Condition of Priests and Bishops, as Theodoret and St. Cyril are,
touching the Procession of the Holy Ghost. Neither are some Opinions of
Tertullian, and of Damascene; Theodoret, and of Eusebius Emisenus; of Eusebius
Caesareensis, and of the VII. Council, touching the Point of the Eucharist,
less opposite to each other; than are those of Cyprian and of Stephen^,
touching the Baptism of Heretics: and so likewise in many other particulars.

Why then should we take so much pains, and trouble our selves so to no
purpose, in reconciling these men, and making them speak all the same thing?

Why should we so cruelly, and so uncivilly rack them as we do, to make them
all of one Opinion, and to say the same things, whether they will or no; and,
sometimes too against our own Conscience; but, certainly, for the most part,
without any satisfaction to the Reader?

Why should we not rather honestly confess, that their Opinions were also
different, as well as their words?

We make no scruple at all to confess, that they have been of contrary
Opinions, touching those other Points of Religion; which are not at all now
controverted amongst us: How much greater harm, for Gods sake, would it be, if
we should confess, that they have not any better agreed among themselves,
touching these Points now in debate?

But we shall not need to press this matter any further: it is sufficient for
us that we have proved, that they were of different Opinions in Point of
Religion: so that it clearly follows from hence, that we ought not to admit of
their Writings, as the proper Judges of our Controversies.

I have formerly touched, though very lightly only, upon their Diversity of
Opinion, and Contrariety, in their Expositions upon the Scriptures, which yet
is a business of no very small consideration.

For if we take them for our Judges, we shall necessarily then have occasion
every minute of having recourse to them, touching the sense of those Passages
of Scripture, about which we disagree among our selves. If now there be as
great Contrarieties, and Difference in Judgment touching these things among
them, as there is amongst our selves* what have we then left us to trust to?
This Passage for Example, in the Gospel according to St. John, Joh. 10. 30. Ego
and Pater unum sumus.
I and my Father are one, is of very great importance, in the Disputes against
both Sabellius and Arius.

Would you now know the true sense and meaning of these words, lest otherwise
by misinterpreting the same, you might chance to fall into the one, or the
other of these two Precipices? If you have recourse to the Fathers in this
case, you shall have Tertul. contr. Prax. c 22. Unum non pertinet ad
singularitatem, sed ad unitatem, ad similitudinem* ad conjunctionem, ad
delectionem Patris, qui Filium diligit, and ad obsequium Filii, qui Voluntati
Patris obsequitur. Author libri de Trin. cap 22. Orig. contr. Celsum, lib. 8* p.
^93
some of them referring it to the Union of the Affection, and of the Will* and
Athanas. Greg. Nazianz. alii pene omnes passim.
others again, to the Unity of Essence and of Nature.

So likewise this other passage in the same Evangelist; Joh. 14. 28.
My Father is greater than I, is very considerable also, in the Question
touching the Divinity of Jesus Christ: And yet there are Epiphan. Ancor. p. 23.
some among the Fathers, who understand the words as spoken indefinitely of the
Son of God* although the rest of them do ordinarily restrain them to his
Humanity. These words also of St. John, Joh. 1. 14.
The Word was made Flesh, are of no small consideration, in the Disputes
against Nestorius and Eutyches. Now if you bring the business before the
Fathers, you shall have Ambros. l. de Incar. Sacr. c. C. T. 2. p. 183. Athan.
Ep. ad Epict. T. I. p. 587. and T. 2. p. 298.
some of them expounding these words, by comparing them with those passages in
St. Paul, where it is said that 2 Cor. 5 21.
Christ was made sin, and a Gal 3. 13.
Curse for us: but Cyrill. Apol. Athan. I. T. 1. Conc. Gener. p. 515.
St. Cyril says, that we must take heed how we interpret the words so.

It would be an endless Task, if I should here go about to reckon up all the
Differences, and Contrarieties of Judgment, that are to be found in the Fathers.

Those that have a mind to see any more of them, may have recourse to some of
our late Commentators, whose usual course is, to bring in all together the
several Interpretations of the Fathers, upon those Books which they Comment
upon: as Maldonate has done, upon the Gospels* Cardinal Tolet, upon St. John,
Bened. Justinianus, upon the Epistles of St. Paul, and others: where they will
find, that there is scarcely any one Verse, that the Ancients have understood
all of them after one and the ^ame manner. And which is yet worse than this,
besides this Contrariety and Difference of Interpretation, you will often meet
with very many cold and empty Expositions* and it is very seldom that you shall
find there that solid simplicity which we ought to expect from all those, who
take upon them the Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures.

For as much therefore as we many times meet with Contrariety of Judgment, as
well in their Expositions of the Scriptures, as in their Opinions, we may
safely conclude, that they are not of sufficient Authority to be admitted as
the Supreme Judges of our Controversies: that Contradiction, which is often
found amongst them, evidently showing, that they are not Infallible Judges,
such as it is requisite that they should be, for the making good of all those
Points, which are at this day maintained by the Church of Rome against the
Protestants.

CHAP. VI.
Reason VI. That neither those of the Church of Rome, nor the Protestants do
acknowledge the Fathers for their Judges in Points of Religion, but do both of
them reject such of their Opinions, and Practices, as are not for their Gust.
An Answer to two Objections, that may be made against what has been here
delivered in this Discourse.

THus far have we labored to prove that the Writings of the Fathers have not
Authority enough in themselves, for to be received as Definitive Sentences
passed upon our Differences in Religion.

Let us now in the last place see, how much they have in respect of us. For
although a Sentence of Judgment should be good, and valid in it self, as being
pronounced by one who is a competent and lawful Judge, duly and according to
the Forms of Law; yet notwithstanding would not this serve to determine the
Controversy, if so be the Authority of this Judge be denied by either of the
Parties, (unless, as it is in worldly Affairs, the Law be armed with such a
Power, as is able to force those that are obstinate to submit to Reason:) for
as much as the Question is here touching Religion, which is a Holy and Divine
thing, to the embracing whereof men ought to be persuaded, and not compelled,
since force has no place here. For although perhaps they could compel men
outwardly to render some such respect to the Writings of the Fathers, yet
notwithstanding would not this serve to make any impression of the Belief of
the same, in the heart of any one.

The same Divisions would still remain in the minds of men, which you are first
of all to pull up by the roots, if ever you intend to reconcile them to each
other, and to make them agree in Point of Religion.

For the certain determination therefore of all Differences of this nature, it
is necessary that both Parties be persuaded, that the Judge, who is to
pronounce Sentence upon the same, has as much Authority as it requisite for
that purpose. Notwithstanding therefore that the Fathers should have clearly
and positively pronounced what they had thought, touching the Point in hand,
which yet they have not done, as we have proved before: Let us suppose further,
that they had been endued with all those qualities, which are requisite for the
rendering a man fit to be a Supreme Judge, and from whom there can be no Appeal,
which yet is not so, as we have already clearly proved: yet notwithstanding
would all this be to no purpose, unless this Authority were acknowledged by
both Parties.

The Old Testament is a Book which was written by Divine Inspiration, and is
endued with so supreme an Authority, as that every part of it ought to be
believed. Yet does not this work any whit at all with a Pagan, because he does
not acknowledge any such excellent worth to be in it.

In like manner is it, between the New Testament and the Jew: neither can it
decide the Differences betwixt the Jews and us; not because it is not of
sufficient Authority in it self; but, because it is not so to the Jew. And
indeed he were worthy to be laughed at, whosoever should allege, in disputing
against the Pagans, the Authority of the Old Testament; or that of the New, for
the bringing of a Jew over to our Belief.

Suppose therefore, that the Writings of the Fathers were clear, upon our
Questions: nay which is more, let it be granted moreover (if you please,) that
they were written by Divine Inspiration, and are of themselves of a full and
undeniable Authority: I say still, that they cannot decide our Debates, if so
be that either of the Parties shall refuse to acknowledge this great and
admirable dignity to be in them; much less if both Parties shall refuse to
allow them to have this Privilege. Let us now therefore see, in what account
the several Parties have the Fathers; and, whether they acknowledge them as the
Supreme Judges of their Religion; or at least as Arbitrators, whose definitive
Sentence ought to stand firm and inviolable. As for our Protestants of France,
whom their Adversaries would fain persuade, if they could, to receive the
Fathers for Judges in Religion; and to whom consequently they ought not,
according to the Laws of a legitimate Disputation, to allege for the proof of
any Point in debate, any other Principles, than what they do allow of; it is
evident, that they attribute to the Fathers nothing less, than such an
Authority. For, in the Confessing of Faith they declare, Confess. de foy des
Eglis. Ref. de Fran: Art. 4.
in the very beginning of it, That they hold the Scriptures to be the Rule of
their Faith* and as for all other Ecclesiastical Writings, although they
account them to be useful, yet nevertheless do they not conceive, that a man
may safely build any Article of Faith upon them.

And indeed seeing that they believe, (as the tell you immediately after,) that
the Scripture contains all things necessary both for the service of God, and
the Salvation of men's Souls, they have no need of any other Judge, and should
in vain have recourse to the Writings of the Ancients; the Authority whereof,
how great soever it be, is still much less, both in it self, and also in
respect of us, than that of the Bible.

In the next place they seriously profess, that their intent is to reform the
Christian Doctrine according to this Rule; and to retain firmly what Articles
of Faith soever are therein delivered; and to reject constantly all those, that
are not there found laid down, how high and eminent soever the Authority be,
that shall resci^d the one, or establish the other in the Belief of Men. It is
not Lawful (say they) for Men, nor yet for the Angels themselves, either to add
to, or to diminish from, or to alter it; neither may Antiquity, nor Customs,
nor Multitude, nor Judgments, nor Humane Wisdom, nor Definitive Sentences, nor
Edicts, nor Decrees, nor Councils, nor Visions, nor Miracles be brought in
opposition to it: but on the contrary rather, all other things ought to be
examined, regulated, and reformed by it. These be their own Words. If therefore
they will not depart from this their Belief, which is as it were the Foundation
and Key of their whole Reformation, they cannot receive the Fathers who lived
in the Second, Third, and Fourth, and so in the following Centuries, as Judges,
nor yet Absolutely and Simply as Witnesses, in the Points of Faith. For they
all hold, That that Pure, Simple, and Holy Doctrine, which was taught and
preached by the Apostles at the beginning of Christianity, and delivered over
unto us by themselves in the New Testament, has been by little and little
altered and corrupted; Time, which changes all things, continually mixing
among it some Corruption or other; sometimes a Jewish or a Heathenish Opinion*
and sometimes again some Nice Observation; otherwhiles some Superstitious
Ceremony or other; whilst one building upon the Foundation with Stubble,
another with Hay, a third with Wood; the Body seems at length, by little and
little, to have become quite another thing than it Anciently was; we having, in
stead of a Palace of Gold, and of Silver, a House built up of Plaster, Stone,
Wood, and Mud, and the like pitiful Stuff. In like manner, (say they) as we
see, that Brooks of Water, the farther distant they are from their Springs, the
more Filth they contract, and the more does their Water lose of its first
Purity. And as a Man, the more he grows in years, the more does that Native
Simplicity which appeared in him in his Infancy, decay; his Body and his Mind
are changed, and he is so much altered by little and little, through Study,
Art, and Cunning, that at length he seems to be clean another Man: In like
manner (say they) has it ^ared with Christianity. And here they presently urge
that notable Passage out of S. Paul, in his Second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, where he speaks of a Great Falling away, which then in his time
began already to work secretly and insensibly, but was not to break forth till
a long time after; as you see it is in all Great Things, whether in Nature, or
in the Affairs and Occurrences that happen to Mankind, which are all conceived
and hatched slowly, and by degrees, and are sometimes a whole Age before they
are brought forth.

Now, according to this Hypothesis, which, as I conceive, is equally common to
us of France, and all other Protestants whatsoever, the Doctrine of the Church
must Necessarily* have suffered some Alteration in the Second Age of
Christianity, by admitting the Mixture of some New Matter into its Belief, and
Policy: and so likewise in the Third Age some other Corruption must necessarily
have got in; and so in the Fourth, Fifth, and the rest that follow; the
Christian Religion continually losing something of Its Original Purity and
Simplicity; and on the other side still contracting all along some new
Impurities, till at length it came to the highest Degree of Corruption: in
which condition, they say, they found it; and have now at last, by the Guidance
of the Scriptures, restored it to the self-same State wherein it was at the
Beginning; and have, as it were, fixed it again upon its true and proper Hinge,
from whence, partly by the Ignorance, and partly by the Fraud of Men, during
the space of so many Ages together, it had by little and little been removed.

This therefore being their Opinion, they cannot admit of, as the Rule of all
their Doctrine, the Writings of any of the Fathers, who lived from the Apostles
time down to ours, without betraying and contradicting themselves. For,
according to what they maintain, touching the Progress of Corruption in
Religion, there has been some Alteration in the Christian Doctrine, both in
the Second, Third, and all the following Ages.

And then again, according to what they conceive, and believe of their own
Reformation, their Doctrine is the very same that was in the time of the
Apostles, as being taken immediately out of their Books. If therefore they
should examine it by what the Fathers of the Second Century believed, there
must necessarily be something found in the Doctrine of the Fathers, which is
not in theirs: and the Difference will be much greater, if the Comparison be
made betwixt it, and the Doctrine of the Third, Fourth, and the following Ages;
in all which, according to their Hypothesis, the Corruption has continually
increased. For, if their Doctrines were in every respect conformable to each
other, and had in them neither more nor less the one than the other, there must
necessarily then follow one of these two things; namely, That either this
Corruption, which they presuppose to be in the Belief, and Polity of the
Church, is not that Secret which worked in S. Paul's time; or else, That their
Reformation is not the Pure and Simple Doctrine of the Apostles: the Members of
which Division are contradictory to those two Positions, which, as we have
said, they all of them unanimously maintain. So that to avoid this
Contradiction, it concerns them constantly to persevere in that which they
profess is their Belief, in their Confession of Faith: to wit, That there are
no Ecclesiastical Writings whatsoever, that are of so sufficient Authority, as
that a Man may safely build upon them, and make them the Judges of Faith: and,
That the Holy Scripture is the only Rule by which all these things are to be
examined.

And this is that which they All agree upon (as far as I have either read, or
known;) as any Man may see in the Books of Calvin, Bucer, Melancthon, Luther,
Beza, and the rest; who all rely upon the Authority of the Scriptures only,
and admit not of any part of the Authority of the Fathers, as a sufficient
Ground whereon to build any Article of their Belief.

It is true, I confess, that some of their First Authors, as namely, Bucer,
Peter Martyr, and J. Jewel Bishop of Salisbury, and in a manner all the Later
Writers also, allege the Testimonies of the Fathers; but (if you but mark it)
it is only by way of Confutation, and not of Establishing any thing: They do
it only to overthrow the Opinions of the Church of Rome, and not to strengthen
their Own. For, though they hold, That the Doctrine of the Fathers is not so
Pure as that of the Apostles; yet do they withal believe, that it is much
Purer, than that which is at this day taught by the Church of Rome; the Purity
of Doctrine having continually decayed, and the Impurity of it increased, in
such sort, as that the further they are removed from the Time of the Apostles,
the nearer they approach (as they say) toward the aforementioned Falling
away, spoken of by S. Paul.

Although the Protestants therefore allow the Scriptures only for the True
Foundation of their Faith; yet notwithstanding do they account the Writings of
the Fathers to be Necessary also, and of good use unto them; first of all, in
the Proving this Decay, which they say has happened in Christianity; and
secondly, for the making it appear, that the Opinions which their Adversaries
now maintain, were not in those days brought into any Form, but were as yet
only in their Seeds.

As for example, Transubstantiation was not as yet an Article of Faith;
notwithstanding that long ago they did, innocently, and not foreseeing what the
Issue might prove to be, believe some certain things, out of which, being
afterward licked over, by passing through diverse several Languages,
Transubstantiation was at length made up.

So likewise the Supremacy of the Pope had at that time no place in the belief
of Men: although those small Threads, and Root-strings, from whence this Vast
and Wonderful Power first sprung* long since appeared in the World.

And the like may be said of the greatest part of those other Points, which the
Protestants will not by any means receive. And that this is their Resolution
and Sense, appears evidently by those many Books which they have written upon
this Subject, wherein they show Historically the whole Progress of this Decay
in Christianity, as well in its Faith, as in its Polity, and Discipline.

And truly this their Design seems to be very sufficient, and satisfactory.
For, seeing that they propose nothing Positively, and as an Article of Faith,
Necessary to Salvation, which may not easily and plainly be proved out of the
Scripture; they have no need to make use of any other Principle* for the
Demonstration of the Truth.

Furthermore, seeing that those Positive Articles of Faith which they believe,
are in a manner all of them received, and confessed by the Church of Rome, as
we have said before in the Preface to this Treatise, there is no need of
troubling a Man's self to prove the same, those things which both Parties are
agreed upon, being never to be proved, but are always presupposed in all
Disputations.

Yet notwithstanding, if any one have a mind to be informed, what the Belief of
the Fathers has been touching the said Articles; it is an easy matter for
them to make it appear, that they also believed all of them, as well as
themselves: as, for Example. That there is a God, a Christ, a Salvation, a
Sacrament of Baptism, a Sacrament of the Eucharist, and the like Truths; the
greatest part whereof we have formerly set down, in the Beginning of this
Discourse.

And as for those other Articles which are proposed to the World, besides all
these, by the Church of Rome; it is sufficient for them, that they are able to
answer the Arguments which are brought to prove them, and to make it by this
means appear, that they have not any sure Ground at all, and consequently
neither may, nor ought to be received into the Faith of Christians. And this is
the Use that the Protestants make of the Fathers; evidently making it appear to
the World (out of them) that they did not hold the said Articles, as the Church
of Rome does at this day.

So that their alleging of the Fathers to this purpose only, and indeed their
Whole Practice in these Disputes, declare evidently enough, that they conceive
not the Belief of the Church of Rome to be so perfectly and exactly conformable
to that of Antiquity; especially of the Four or Five First Ages: which accords
very well with their Hypothesis touching the Corruption of the Christian
Doctrine: But yet no Man may conclude from hence, That they do allow of the
Authority of the Fathers as a sufficient Foundation to ground any Article of
Faith upon; for this is repugnant both to their Doctrine, and to the
Protestation which they upon all occasions make expressly to the contrary. So
that I cannot but extremely wonder at the Proceeding of some of our Modern
Authors, who in their Disputations with the Protestants endeavor to prove the
Articles of their Faith by Testimonies brought out of the Fathers; whereas the
Protestants never go about to make good their own Opinions, but only to
overthrow those of their Adversaries, by urging the Fathers Testimonies.

For seeing that they of the Church of Rome maintain, That the Church neither
has, nor can possibly err in Points of Faith; and, That its Belief in Matters
of Faith has always been the same that it is at this day; it is sufficient for
the Protestant to show, by comparing the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers with
that of the Church of Rome, that there is great Difference betwixt them:
neither does this in any wise bind them to believe throughout whatsoever the
Fathers believed; it being evident, according to their Hypothesis, that there
may have some Errors crept into their Belief; though certainly not such, nor so
gross ones, as have been since entertained by the Church in the Ages succeeding.

We shall conclude therefore, That the Protestants acknowledge not, neither in
the Fathers, nor in their Writings, any so Absolute Authority, as renders them
capable of being received by us, as our Supreme Judges in Matters of Religion,
and such from whom no Appeal can be made.

Whence it will follow, That although the Fathers might really perhaps have
such an Authority; yet notwithstanding could not their Definitive Sentence put
an end to any of our Controversies: and therefore it concerns the Church of
Rome to have recourse to some other way of Proof, if they intend to prevail
upon their Adversaries to receive the aforesaid Articles.

But what will you say now, if we make it appear to you, that the Church of
Rome it self does not allow that the Fathers have any such Authority? I
suppose, that if we are able to do this, there is no Man so perverse, as not to
confess, That this Proceeding of theirs, in grounding their Articles of Faith
upon the Sayings of the Fathers, is not only very Insufficient, but very
Inconvenient also. For, how can it ever be endured, that a Man that would
persuade you to the Belief of any thing, should for that purpose make use of
the Testimony of some such Persons as neither you nor himself believe to be
Infallibly True, and so fit to be trusted? Let us now therefore see whether
those of the Church of Rome really have themselves so great an Esteem of the
Fathers, as they would be thought to have, by this their Proceeding, or not.

Certainly several of the Learned of that Party have, upon diverse occasions,
let us see plain enough, that they make no more account of them, than the
Protestants do. For, whereas these require, That the Authority of the Fathers
be grounded upon that of the Scripture; and therefore receive nothing that they
deliver, as Infallibly True, unless it be grounded upon the Scripture, passing
by, or rejecting whatsoever they propose, either besides, or contrary to the
Sense of the Scripture: the other in like manner will have the Judgment of the
Fathers depend upon that of the Church in present being in every Age; and
approve, pass by, or condemn all such Opinions of theirs, as the Church either
approves, passes by, or condemns. So that although they differ in this,
That the one attributes the Supremacy to the Scripture, and the other to the
Present Church of their Age; yet notwithstanding they both agree in this, That
both the one and the other of them equally deprive the Fathers of the same.
Insomuch that they both of them spend their time unprofitably enough, whilst
they trouble themselves to plead their Cause before this Inferior Court, where
the wrangling and cunning Tricks of the Law have so much place; where the
Judgments are hard to be got, and yet harder to be understood; and, when all is
done, are not Supreme; but are such as both Parties believe they may lawfully
appeal from: whereas they might, if they pleased, let alone these troublesome
and useless Beatings about, and come at the first before the Supreme Tribunal,
whether it be that of the Scriptures, or of the Church; where the Suits are not
so long, and where the Subtilty of Pleading is of much less use; where the
Sentences also are more clear and express, and (which is the Chiefest thing of
all) such as we cannot appeal from. But that we may not be thought to impose
this Opinion upon the Church of Rome unjustly, let us hear them speak
themselves.

Cardinal Cajetan, Thom. de Vio. Card. Cajet. praef in Pentat. Si quando
occurrit novus sensus textui consonus, nec a sacra scriptura, nec ab Ecclesiae
doctrina dissonus, quamvis a torrente Doctorum sacrorum alienus, rogo Lectores
omnes ne praecipites derestentur, sed aequos se praebeant censores. Meminerint
jus suum unicuique tribuere: solis sacrae Scripturae auctoribus reservata
auctoritas haec est, ut ideo sic credamus esse, quia ipsi ita scripserunt.
Alios autem (inquit Augustinus) ita lego, ut quantalibet sanctitate doctrinaque
praepolleant, non ideo credam sic esse, quia ipsi ita scripserunt. Nullus
itaque detestetur novum S. Scripturae sensum, ex hoc quod dissonat priscis
Doctoribus; sed scrutetur perspicacius textum and contextum Scripturae, and si
quadrare invenerit, laudet Deum, qui non alligavit expositionem S. Scripturarum
priscorum Doctorum sensibus, sed Scripturae ipsi integrae sub Catholicae
Ecclesiae censura.
in his Preface upon the Five Books of Moses* sp^^king of his own Annotations
upon the same, says thus: If you chance there to meet with any New Exposition,
which is agreeable to the Text* and not Contrary either to tbe Scriptures, or
to the Doctrine of the Church, although perhaps it differ from that which is
given by the whole Current of the Holy Doctors; I shall desire the Readers,
that they would not too hastily reject it, but that they would rather censure
charitably of it. Let them remember to give every man his due: there are none
but the Authors of the Holy Scriptures alone, to whom we attribute such
Authority, as that we ought to believe whatsoever they have written. But as for
others, ( says St. Augustine) of how great Sanctity, and Learning so ever they
may have been, I so read them, as that I do not believe what they have written,
because they have written it.

Let no man therefore reject a new Exposition of any Passage of Scripture,
under pretense that it is contrary to what the Ancient Doctors gave; but let
him rather diligently examine the Text, and the contexture of the Scripture;
and if he find that it accords well therewith, let him praise God, who has
not tied the Exposition of the Scriptures, to the sense of the Ancient Doctors,
but to the whole Scripture it self, under the censure of the Catholic Church.
Melchior Canus, Bishop of the Canary Islands, having before declared himself,
according as St. Augustine has done, saying, that the Holy Scriptures only are
exempt from all error, he further adds: Melch. Can. loc Theol. l. 7. c. 3. number.
4. Caeteroqui nemo quantumvis eruditus, and sanctus, non interdum hallucinatur,
non alicubi caecutit, non quandoque labitur.
But there is no man, how holy, or learned soever he be, that is not sometimes
deceived, that does not sometimes dote, that does not sometimes slip. And then
alleging some of those examples, which we have before produced, he concludes
in these words: Id. ibid. Legendum itaque a nobis Patres veteres cum reverentia
quidem, sed ut homines, cum delectu atque judicio.
Let us therefore read the Ancient Fathers with all due Reverence, yet
notwithstanding for as much as they were but Men, with Choice and Judgment.

And a little after he says, That the Fathers sometimes fail, and bring forth
Monsters, besides the ordinary course of Nature. Ibid. number. 7. Reliqui vero
scriptores sancti inferiores and humani sunt, deficiuntque interdum, ac
monstrum quandoque p^riunt, praeter convenientem Ordinem, institutumque Naturae
And in the same place he says, that To follow the Ancients in all things and
to tread every where in their steps, as little Cbildren use to do in play, is
nothing else but to disparage our own Parts, and to confess our selves to have
neither Judgment, nor Skill enough, for the searching into the Trut^. No, let
us follow them as Guides, but not as Masters. Ambros Catharin. lib. 4. Annot.
in Cajet. p. 273. Verissimum ergo est, quod sanctorum dicta, vel scripta in se
non sunt firmae auctoritatis, ut in singulis teneamur illis praebere assensum.
It is very true ( says Ambrosius Catharinus in like manner) that the Sayings
and Writings of the Fathers have not of themselves any so absolute Authority,
as that we are bound to assent to them in all things. The Jesuits also
themselves inform us sufficiently in many places, that they do not reckon
themselves so tied to follow the Judgment of the Fathers in all things, as
people may imagine.

Petavius in his Annotations upon Epiphanius confesses freely, Petav. in
Epiph. page 205. Nos ea, qua par est, moderatione in divinorum hominum, sed
hominum, errores, ac lapsus non tam inquirimus, quam oblatos ultro, ac vel
invitis occurrentes, ne cui fraudi sunt, patefacimus: tueri tamen, ac defendere
nihilo magis quam eorum vitia, si quae fuerint, imitari debemus.
That the Fathers were men; that they had their failings; and, that we ought
not maliciously to search after their Errors, that we may lay them open to the
world; but that we may take the liberty to note them, when ever they come in
our way, to the end that none be deceived by them: and, that we ought no more
to maintain, or defend their Errors, than we ought to imitate their Vices, if
at least they had any: and again, Id. in Epiph. p. 244* Quanquam multa sunt a
sanctissimis Patribus, praesertim a Chrysostomo in Homiliis aspersa, quae si ad
exactae veritatis regulam accommodare volueris, boni sensus inania videbuntur.
That many things have slipped from them, which, if they were examined
according to the exact Rule of Truth, could not be reconciled to any good
sense: and, that Himself has observed, Id. ibid. page 285.
That they are out sufficiently, whenever they speak of such Points of Faith,
as were not at all called in question in Their time. And to say the truth, He
often rejects both Their Opinions, and Their Expositions also; and sometimes
very Uncivilly too, as we have touched Supr. c. 4.
before, speaking of his Notes upon Epiphanius. And in one place, the Authority
of some of the Fathers, which contradicted His Opinion, touching the Exposition
of a certain passage in St. Luke, being objected against Him, He never taking
the least notice at all of their Testimonies, answers; Petav. in Epiph. page
110. Nec est quod certorum Patrum opponatur auctoritas, qui non aliud affirmare
possunt, quam quod ex Luca didicerunt, neque est ulla ratio cur ex illorum
verbis Lucam interpretemur potius, quam ex Luca quae abillis asseverari
videntur.
That we ought to Interpret, and expound the Fathers by St. Luke, rather than
St. Luke by Them; because that They cannot herein say any thing, but what they
have received from St. Luke: Which, in my Judgment, was very Judiciously spoken
of him; and besides, Exactly agrees with what St. Augustine said before, and
which may very well be applied to the greatest part of our Differences; in all
which the Fathers could not know any thing, save what they learnt out of the
Scriptures: so that Their Testimonies, in these Cases, ought according to the
Opinion of this Learned Jesuit, to be expounded, and interpreted by the
Scriptures, and not the Scriptures by Them. And this is the language of all the
rest of them.

Ma^donate, who was a most bitter enemy of the Protestants, as ever there was
any, having delivered the Judgment of some of the Fathers, who were of Opinion
that the sons of Zebedee answered not so rightly, when being asked by our
Savior, whether or no they were able to drink of his Cup, and to be Baptized
with the Baptism that he was Baptized with, they said unto him, that they were
able; adds, Maldonat. in Matthew. 20 22. Malo ego credere, nec temere, nec
inscienter, sed amanter and vere respondisse, etc.
That for his part, he believes that they answered well. And in another place,
expounding the 2 Verse of the 19 Chapter of St. Matthew, having first brought
in the Interpretations of diverse, and indeed in a manner of all the Fathers, he
says at last, Id. in Mat. 19. 11 Quam interpreta^ionem adduci non possum ut
sequar, etc.
That he could not be persuaded to understand the place; as they did.

And here you are to note by the way, that the meaning of that place is still
controverted at this day.

How then can this man conceive, that the Protestants should think themselves
bound necessarily to follow the Judgment of this Major part of the Fathers,
which themselves make so light of? In another place, where he has occasion to
speak of those words of our Savior; which are at this day in debate amongst
us, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. He is yet much more
downright, and says, Id. in Matthew. 16. 18 Quorum verborum sensus non videtur
mihi esse, quem omnes praeter Hilarium, quos legisse memini, auctores putant.
The sense of these words is not rightly given by any Author, that I can
remember; except St. Hilary. So likewise upon the 11 Chapter of St. Matthew,
verse. 11. where it is said, The least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than
John Baptist: Id. in Matthew. 11. 11. Habet ex multis opinionibus quameligat
lector; sed si meam quoque sententiam avet audire, libere fatebor, in nulla
prorsus carum meum qualecunque judicium acquiescere.
The Opinions of the Fathers upon this passage (says he) are very different:
and to speak my mind freely, none of them all pleases me.

In like manner upon the sixth Chapter of St. John; Id. in Joh. 6. verse 44.
Ammonius, Cyrillus, Theophylactus, and Euthymius, respondent, non omnes tral^i,
quia non omnes digni sunt: quod nimis affine est Pelagianorum errori.
Ammonius ( says he) St. Cyril, Theophylact, and Euthymius answer, that all
are not drawn, because all are not worthy. But this comes too near to
Pelagianism. Salmeron, a famous Jesuit says thus: Salmer. in ep. ad Rom 5.
disput 51. p. 468. Tertio, argumentum petunt a Doctorum Antiquitate, cui semper
major honor est habitus; quam novitatibus. Respondetur, quamlibet aetatem
Antiquitati semper detulisse, etc. sed illud efferimus quo juniores, eo
perspicaciores esse Doctores.
Our Adversaries bring Arguments from the Antiquity of the Fathers; which I
confess has always been of more esteem than Novelties.

I answer, That every Age has yielded unto Antiquity, etc. But yet we must
take liberty to say, that the later the Doctors are, the more quick sighted
they are. And again, Ibid. col. 1. Denique contra hanc quam objectant
multitudinem, respondemus ex verbo Dei; Exodus 23. In judicio plurimorum non
acquiesces sententiae, ut a vero devies.
Against all this great multitude, which they bring against us, we answer, (
says he) out of the Word of God. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil;
neither shall thou speak in a cause, to decline after many, to wrest judgment.
Michael Medina, disputing at the Council of Trent, touching the superiority of
a Bishop above a Priest; the Authority of St. Hierome, and of St. Augustine
being produced against him, who both held, that the difference betwixt them was
not of Divine, but only of Positive, and Ecclesiastical Right, Pietr. S^avez
Po^. hist. del Council. Trident. lib. 7. page 570.
answers before the whole Congregation, That it is no marvel, that they, and
some others also of the Fathers fell into this Heresy; this point being not as
then clearly determined of.

And that no man may doubt of the honesty of the Historian, who relates this,
do but hear Bellarmine^ who testifies; Bellarm, de Cler. l. 1. c. 15. Michael
Medina in lib. 1. de sacr. hom. orig and contin. d. 5. affirmat S. H^eronymum
idem omnino cum Aerian^s sensisse: neque solum Hieronymum in ea haeresi fuisse,
sed etiam Ambrosium, Augustinum* S^dulium, Primasium, Theodoretum, Occumenium,
and Theophylactum.
That Medina assures us, that St. Hierome was in this point of Aerius his
opinion; and, that not only be, but also St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, Sedulius,
Primasius, Chrysostom; Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophylact maintained all
of them the same Heresy.

We need not bring in here any more Examples: do but read their Commentaries,
their Disputations, and their other Discourses, and you will find them almost
in every page, either rejecting, or correcting the Fathers. But I must not pass
by the Testimony of Cornelius Mussus, Bishop of Bitonto, who indeed is more
ingenuous, and more clear than all the rest.

Gorn. Muss Episcop. Bitont. in ep ad Romans c. 14. page 606. A^quo; Roma,
quaerenda sunt divina Consilia, nisi ab illis, quibus mysteriorum Dei
dispensatio credita est? Quem ergo pro Deo habemus, in hi^ quae Dei sunt,
quicquid ipse dixerit tanquam Deum audire debemus. Ego (ut ingenue fate^r) plus
uni summo Pontifici crederem in his, quae fidei mysteria tangunt, quam mill
Augustinis, Hieronymis, Gregoriis; ne dicam Richardis, Scotis, Gulielmis Credo
enim, and scio, quod summus Pontifex, in his quae fidei sunt, errare non
potest; quoniam auctoritas determinandi quae ad fidem spectant, in Pontifice
residet.
O Rome (says he) to whom shall we go for Divine Counsels, unless to those
persons to whose trust the Dispensation of the Divine Mysteries has been
committed. We are therefore to hear him, who is to us instead of God, in things
that concern God, as God himself. Certainly, for my own part (that I may speak
my mind freely) in things that belong to the Mysteries of Faith, I had rather
believe one single Pope, than a thousand Augustines, Hieromes, or Gregory's,
that I may not speak of Richards, Scotusses, and Williams. For, I believe, and
know, that the Pope cannot Err, in matters of Faith, because that the
Authority, and Right of determining all such things, as are at all Points of
Faith, resides in the Pope. This Passage may seem to some, to be both a very
bold, and a very indiscreet one: but yet whosoever shall but examine the thing
seriously, and as it is in it self, and not as it is in its outward appearances
only, which are contrived for the most part only to amuse the simpler sort of
people. I am confident he will find, that this Author has both most
ingenuously, and most truly given the world an account, what Esteem the Church
of Rome has of the Fathers. For, seeing that these men maintain that the Pope
is Infallible, and they confess withal that the Fathers may have erred: who
sees not, that they set the Pope very much above the Fathers? Neither may it
be here replied, that they do not all of them hold, that the Pope is
Infallible. For, besides that those among them, who do contradict this Opinion,
are both the least, and the least considerable part also of the Church of Rome;
these very men attribute to the present Church in being, in every Age, this
Right of Infallibility, which they will not allow the Pope: insomuch that a
Council, now called together, is, according to their account, of much greater
Authority than the ancient Fathers. So that there is no more difference at all,
betwixt these men and the forementioned Italian Bishop, save only that whereas
they will have the Authority of the ancient Fathers to submit to the whole Body
of Modern Bishops assembled in a General Council; He will have their Authority
to be less, than that of a single Pope alone. All that can be found fault with
in that speech of his, is perhaps that his Hyperbolical way of Expression, of a
thousand Augustines, Hieromes, and Gregory's; all which joined together, he, in
too disdainful a manner, casts down beneath the feet of one single Pope. But
this height of Expression may be somewhat excused in him, considering that such
Excesses as these, are very ordinary with all high and free-spirited Persons.

But the Practice of the Church of Rome it self will be able to inform us more
truly and clearly, what esteem they have of Antiquity. For, if we ought to
stand to the Fathers, and not to depart from any thing that they have
Authorized; nor to Ordain any thing that they were ignorant of, how comes it to
pass, that we at this day see so many several Observations and Customs, which
were observed by the Ancients, now quite laid aside? And whence is it, that we
find in Antiquity no mention at all of many things, which are now in great
request amongst us? There are as it were three principal Parts in Religion;
namely, Points of Belief, of Ceremony, and of Discipline. We shall run them
over lightly all three, and so far as is necessary only for our present
purpose; that so we may let the world see, that in every one of these three
parts they have both abolished, and established very many things, expressly
against the Authority of the Ancients.

As for the first of these, we have formerly given the Reader some Tastes only,
in the preceding Chapters. For we have seen, that the Opinion of the greatest
part of the Ancient Church, touching the State of the Soul, till the time of
the Resurrection, which besides is at this day also maintained by the Greek
Church, was condemned, not much above two hundred years since, by the Church of
Rome, at the Council of Florence; and a quite contrary Belief there
established, as an Article of the Christian Faith.

We have seen besides, that the Opinion of the Fathers of the Primitive Church,
and even down as far as to the end of the sixth Century after our Savior
Christ, and afterward, was, that the Eucharist was as necessary to Salvation,
as Baptism; and that consequently it was therefore to be administered to little
Children. And yet for all this, the Council of Council. Trident. Sess. 21. Can.
Si quis dixerit, parvulis, antequam ad annos discretionis perveniant,
necessariam esse Eucharistae communionem, anathema sit.
Trent has condemned this Opinion, as an Error in Faith; withal
Anathematizing, by a Canon made expressly for that purpose, all those who ever
should maintain the same. Let him be Accursed (say they) whoever shall say,
that the Eucharist is necessary for little Children, before they are come to
years of discretion. Only, that the Fathers might not take offense hereat, as
having so fearful an Affront put upon them; these men have endeavored to
persuade both them and others, that they never did believe that, which
themselves have most clearly, and in express Terms protested that they did
believe, as we have before made it appear: which is, to double the injury upon
them, rather than to make them any reparations for it; seeing that they deal
with them now, not as Heretics only, but as Fools also; whom a man may at
pleasure persuade that they do not believe that which they really do believe.

We have abundantly heard out of St. Hierome's mouth, how that the Opinion of
the Chilasts was of old maintained, by several of the Ancient Fathers; which
yet is now condemned as an Error in Faith. And indeed the number of these kind
of differences in Opinions is almost infinite.

It was accounted no Error in those days to believe, that the Soul was derived
from the Father down to the Son, according to the ordinary course of
Generation: but this Opinion would now be accounted an Heresy.

Epiphan ep. ad Joh. Hierosol. T. 2. p. 218. c. 2. Cum ergo haec vidissem in
Ecclesia Christi contra auctoritatem Scripturarum, hominis pendentem imaginem,
etc.
The Ancients held, That it would be an opposing of the Authority of the
Scriptures; if we should bang up the Picture of any Man in the Church: and
Conc. Eliberi. Can. 36. Placuit picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod
colitur aut adoratur, in parietibus depingatur.
that we ought not to have any Pictures in our Churches, that That which we
worship and adore, be not painted upon a Wall. But now the Council of Trent
has Ordained the quite contrary; and says, Council* Trid. Sess. 25. Decreto de
Invocat. etc. Sanctorum. Imagines porro Christi, Deiparae Virginis, and aliorum
Sanctorum, in templis praesertim habendas and retinendas, eisque debitum
honorem and venerationem impertiendam.
That we ought to have, and to keep, especially in our Churches, the Images of
Christ, of the Virgin the Mother of God, and of the other Saints; and that we
are to yield unto them all due Honor and Veneration.

Ambros August. Chrysostom. etc. de quibus vide Melch, Canum de loc. Theolog. l.
7. number. 3.
All the Ancient Fathers, as far as we can learn out of their Writings,
believed, That the Blessed Virgin Mary was conceived in Original Sin. If now
the Fathers of the Council of Trent accounted them to be the Judges of Faith,
what moved them then to imagine, that we ought not to believe, that they
maintained any such Opinion? For, having delivered their Definitive Sentence in
a Decree there passed to this purpose, and declared, That this Sin, which has
spread it self over the whole Mass of Mankind, by Propagation, and not by
Imitation, has seized on every Person in particular; Conc. Trident. Sess. 5.
Decreto de Pecc. Origin. Declarat tamen haec ipsa Sancta Synodus, non esse suae
intentionis comprehendere in hoc Decreto, ubi de Peccato Originali agitur, B.
and immacula^am. Virginem Mariam, Dei genitricem.
They at length conclude, That their Intention is not to comprehend within this
number the Blessed and Unspotted Virgin Mary, the Mother of God: Which Words of
theirs it is impossible so to expound, as that they shall not in plain Terms
give the Lie to All the Fathers.

For, if they mean by these Words, that the Virgin Mary was conceived without
Sin, they flatly establish an Opinion which is contradictory to that of the
Fathers; which is the grossest manner of giving them the Lie that can be.

If they mean here no more than this, (which Sense yet their Words will hardly
be ever made to bear,) that it is not known as a certain Truth, that the Virgin
Mary was conceived in Sin; they however honestly say in plain Terms, That these
Good Men affirmed, as True, that which is yet Doubtful; and maintained as
Certain, that which was but Problematical only, and Questionable.

The Council of Laodicea, which is inserted into the Code of the Church
Universal, Conc. Laod. Can. ^9, 60. Cod. Graec. Can. Eccles. Universe. Can. 163.
puts not into the Canon of the Old Testament any more than Twenty two Books
only; excluding by this means out of this number the Book of Tobit, of Judith,
the Book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the two Books of the Maccabees. Melit.
Sard. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4 c. 27.
Melito Bishop of Sardis, Origin. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 26. and in
Philocal. c. 3.
Origin, Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 4.
Cyril of Jerusalem, Greg. Nazianz. Carm. 33. T. 2. p. 98.
Gregory Nazianzene, Hilar. Praefat. in Psalm. fol 2.
S. Hilary, Epiphan. l. de Ponder and Men's. T. 2. p. 162.
and Epiphanius, do all of them the same. Athan. ep. Festal. T. 2. p. 38, 39.
and Synops. Script. p. 58.
Athanasius, Ruffin. Expos. Symb. inter opera Cypr. p. 552.
Ruffinus, and Hac Prol. Galeato, and Prol. in lib. Salom. ad Paul and Eustoch.
and Prol. in libr. Sal. ad Chron. and Heliod. and Praefat. in Esdr.
S. Hierome expressly reject these very Books, and cast them out of the Canon.
And yet notwithstanding, the aforesaid Council of Conc. Trident. Sess. 4. Decr.
de Can. Script. Siquis autem libros ^psos integros, cum omnibus suis partibus,
prout in Ecclesia Catholica legi consueverunt, and in veteri vulgata Latina
Editione habentur, pro sacris and Cano^icis non susceperit, etc. Anathema esto.
Trent Anathematizeth all those who will not receive, as Holy and Canonical,
all these Books, with every part of the same, as they are wont to be read in
the Church, and as they are found in the Old Latin Edition, commonly called the
Vulgar Translation. Where, besides the Affront which they have offered to so
many of the Ancient and most Eminent among the Fathers, and indeed to the Whole
Primitive Church it self, which received this Conon of Laodicea in amongst its
Universal Rules; they have also established a Position here, which was not till
then so much as ever heard of in Christendom, namely, That the Old Vulgar
Translation of the Bible is to be allowed of as Canonical and Authentic in the
Church of God.

The CL Fathers of the Council. Constant. I. Can. 3. (...).
Second General Council, and the DCXXX. of the Conc Chalced Can. 28 (...).
Fourth, were all of them of Opinion, That the Ancients had advanced the Sea of
Rome above that of other Bishops, by reason of the Preeminence and Temporal
Greatness of the City of Rome, over other Cities: and for the same reason they
also thought good to advance, in like manner, the Throne of the Patriarch of
Constantinople to the same Height with the former, by reason of the City where
he resided being now arrived to the self-same Height of Dignity with Rome it
self. I assure you, that for all this, he should now be Anathema Maranatha,
whosoever should go about to derive the Supremacy of the Pope from any other
Original, than from TV ES PETRVS; and, PASCE OVES MEAS.

The Council of Trent Anathematizeth all those, whosoever shall deny, that
Conc. Trid. Sess. 23 cap. 4. and Con. 7. Si quis dixerit, Episcopos non esse
Presbyteris superiores, etc. anathema sit.
Bishops are a Higher Order than Priests: and yet Hieron. passim: vide supra,
lib. 1. c. ult.
S. Hierome, and diverse others of the Fathers have openly done the same.

We have already told you here before, That the Church of Rome long since
Excommunicated the Greeks, because they hold, That the Holy Ghost proceeds
not from the Son, but from the Father only.

And yet for all this, Theodoret, who expressly also demed in Terms, that the
Holy Ghost proceeded from the Son, as we have showed in the preceding Chapter,
was received by the Ancient Church, and in particular by Pope Leo too, as a
True Catholic Bishop, without requiring him to declare himself any otherwise,
or to give them any Satisfaction touching this Point.

And indeed, we might reckon up very many the like Differences betwixt the
Roman and the Ancient Church: but these Examples we have here produced will
suffice, to let the World see, how the Church of Rome holds, That the
Authority of the Opinions of the Ancients ought to be accounted Supreme.

We shall proceed in the next place to say something of the Ceremonies in the
Christian Religion.

The first of all is Baptism, which takes us out of Natures Stock, and engraffs
us into Jesus Christ. Now it was a Custom heretofore in the Ancient Church, to
plunge those they Baptized over head and ears in the Water, as both Tertul. lib
de Cor. Mil. c. 3.
Tertullian, Cypr. ep. 76. p. 211. ubi vide Pamel.
S. Cyprian, Epiphan Pan. Haer. 30. p. 128.
Epiphanius, and others testify. And indeed they plunged them thus three
several times, as the same Tertul. lib. de Cor. Mil. c. 3. and lib. adv. Prax.
c. 26.
Tertullian, and Hieron Dial. advers. Lucifer. T. 2. p. 187. In lavacro ter
caput mergitare.
S. Hierome both inform us. And this is still the Practice both of the Greek,
and of the Russian Church, even at this very day. And yet notwithstanding, this
Custom, which is both so Ancient, and so Universal, is now abolished by the
Church of Rome. And this is the reason that the Cassand. l. de Bapt. Inf. p.
693.
Muscovites say, That the Latins are not Rightly and Duly Baptized, because
they are not wont to use this Ancient Ceremony in their Baptism, which, they
say, is expressly enjoined them in the Canons of Joannes Metropolitanus, whom
they hold to have been a Prophet.

And indeed Greg. Mon. Protosync. in Apol. contr. ep. Marc. p. 721. Tom 4 Conc.
Genesis (...), etc.
Gregory, the Greek Monk, who was notwithstanding a great Stickler for the
Union in the Council of Florence, does yet confess, in his Answer to the
Epistle of Mark Bishop of Ephesus, that it is Necessary in Baptism, that the
Persons to be Baptized should be thrice dipped over Head and Ears in the Water.
At their coming out of the Water; in the Ancient Church they gave them to eat
Milk and Honey, as the same Tertul. and Hieron. ubi supr. Deinde egressos
lactis and mellis praegustare concordiam.
Authors witness; and immediately after this, they made them all Partakers also
of the Blessed Communion, both great and small: whence the Alvarez, in his
Voyage to Ethiopia. A tutti quelli che battezano, cosi maschi, come femine,
donno il sacramento in pocaquantita, etc.
Custom still remains in Aethiopia, of Administering the Eucharist to Little
Children, and making them take down a small quantity of it, as soon as ever
they are Biptised.

What have these our so great Adorers of Antiquity now done with these
Ceremonies? Where is the Milk, or the Honey, or the Eucharist, which the
Ancient Fathers were wont to administer to all, immediately after Baptism?
Certainly these things, notwithstanding the Practice of the Ancients, have been
now long since buried, and forgotten at Rome.

In Ancient Times they often deferred the Baptising both of Infants, and of
other People, as appears by the History of the Emperors Eusebius. de vita
Constant. l. 4.
Constantine the Great, of Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. ^. 37.
Constantius, of Id. (...). c. 6.
Theodosius, of Valentinian, and of Gratian, in Ambros. Orat. de obit.
Valentin. T. 3. p 9.
S Ambrose; and also by the Orations and Homilies of Greg Nazianz. Orat. 40.
Gregory Nazianzen, and of Basil. Homil. (...).
S. Basil upon this Subject.

And some of the Fathers too have been of Opinion, that it is fit it should be
deferred; as namely, Tertullian, as we have formerly noted of him.

How comes it to pass now, that there is not so much as any the least Trace or
Footing of this Custom to be found at this day in the Church of Rome?

Nay, whence is it besides, that they will not so much as endure the very
mention of it, and would abhor the Man that should but go about to put it in
practice?

I shall here forbear to speak of the Times of Administering Baptism; which was
performed ordinarily in the Ancient Church but only upon the Eves of
Easter Day, and of Whitsunday: Neither shall I say any thing of the Ceremony of
the Paschal Taper, and the Albes, or White Vestments, Cassand. in Hymno, p.
227, 328.
that the new baptized Persons were used to wear all Easter-Week; because that
it may be thought perhaps, that these are too light Circumstances: although, to
say the plain truth, if we are to regard the Authority of Men, and not the
Reason of the Things themselves, I do not at all see, why all the whole Rites
should not still be retained, as well as those Exorcisms, and Renouncings of
the Devil and the World, with all its Pomp and Vanities, which in Imitation of
Antiquity, are at this day, though very improperly, acted by them over little
Infants, though but of a day old.

As for the Eucharist, Cassand. in Liturg. c. 26.
Cassander shows clearly, That it was Celebrated in the Ancient Church with
Bread and Wine, offered by the People; and, that the Bread was first broken
into several Pieces, and then Consecrated afterward, and distributed among the
Faithful.

Notwithstanding, the contrary Use has now prevailed; neither do they
Consecrate any Bread which is offered by the People, which was the Ancient
Custom, but only little Wafer Cakes, made round in the Form of a Deneere, Apud
Cassand. in Liturg. c. 26. p. 60.
which yet is very sharply reproved in the Old Exposition of the Ordo Romanus,
etc.

The same Cassand. in Liturg. p. 63, 64. c. 28.
Cassa^der also gives us an Account at large, how that in Ancient Times the
Canonical Prayer, and the Consecration of the Eucharist was read out with a
loud Voice, and in such sort, as that the People might all of them be able to
hear it, that so they might say Amen to it: whereas the Conc. Trid. Sess. 22.
c. 5. and can 9.
Priest now pronounces it with a very low Voice, so that none of the
Congregation can tell what he says; and hence it is, that this part of the
Liturgy is called Secret.

We have Lib. 1. c. 5.
formerly showed, how that the Ancient Fathers concealed heretofore, as
carefully as they could, the Matter and the Rites used in the Celebration of
this Holy Sacrament; which they never performed in presence either of the
Catechumeni, or of Unbelievers. But now there is not any such care taken at all
herein, but they Celebrate the Eucharist Openly and Publicly, even before
Jews, Pagans, or Mahometans, without any more regard had to these Ancient
Rules, than as if there had never been any such thing.

And as if the Design of these Men were to run cross to Antiquity in all
things, whereas they concealed the Sacrament as much as they could, these show
it now openly, and carry it publicly abroad every day through the Streets, and
sometimes also go in Solemn Procession with it: which Custom of theirs is of
very late standing among Christians, and which heretofore would have looked not
only very strangely, but would have been accounted rather Profane and
Unlawful. And thus have the Customs and Observations of the Ancient Fathers
been quite laid aside, and other new ones, which they never heard of,
instituted in their place.

The fame Cassand. in Liturg. 55. c. 26.
Cassander also proves, That in Ancient Times they never celebrated the
Eucharist, save only in the presence of those that were to Communicate; and,
that all the rest withdrew. It is most clear, that S. Chrysostom very bitterly
reproves those who would assist at the Celebration of the Eucharist; though not
Communicate.

And indeed we at this day see in the Ethiopick Liturg. Aethiop.
Liturgy, that the Gospel being read, the Deacon cries aloud, All you that will
not receive the Sacrament, depart: Withdraw you, Catechumeni, And again, after
the Creed is sung, he says to the People, Ibid.
Let them that will not Communicate, depart.

But now a days, for the most part, none of those who assist at the
Celebration, Communicate of it: they content themselves with Adoring the
Sacrament only, without partaking of it at all: whence you have this manner of
speaking; To hear Mass; and, To see Mass. Chrysist. Homil. 3. in ep. ad Ephesians.
T. 3. p. 778. edit. Savilii. (...), etc. (...).
S. Chrysostom says, Whosoever shall stay here, and not participate of the
Mysteries, behaves himself like an impudent, shameless Person. I beseech you (
says he) if any one that were invited to a Feast, should come and sit down,
after he has washed his Hands, and fitted himself to come to the Table, and at
length should forbear to touch any of those Dishes which are served in upon it,
would not this be a very great Affront to him who invited him? Had he not
better to have forborne coming at all? It is the very same Case here. Thou have
come, and have Sung the Hymn; and, seeing thou have not retired with those that
were not worthy, have thereby also professed thy self to be of the number of
those who are Worthy. How comes it to pass, that seeing thou have staid behind,
thou do not Communicate of this Table? and so on, as follows in S.
Chry^ostome. If any Man should now preach this Doctrine to the Romanists, would
they not laugh at him, as a Ridiculous Fellow? forasmuch as their Custom in
this Particular is far different (as every one sees) from what it was
heretofore in the Ancient Church.

It is as clear as the day, that all along in the Ancient Church, it was Lawful
for any of the Faithful to take home with them the Holy Eucharist, which they
might keep in any Private place, to take it afterward by themselves alone,
whenever they pleased.

Whence it is, that Tertullian advises those who durst not Communicate upon
the days appointed for that purpose, for fear of breaking their Fast, to keep
the Body of Christ by them. Tertul. lib. de Orat. c. 4. Accepto corpore Domini,
and reservato, utrumque salvum est, and participatio Sacrificii, and executio
officii.
Receiving the Body of Christ ( says he) and keeping it by thee, both are
preserved entire, both the Participation of the Sucrifice, and the Discharge of
thy Duey. And this appears also by a Story related by S. Cyprian, of a certain
Woman, Cyprian. l. de Laps p 244. Cum quaedam arcam suam, in qua Domini sanctum
suit, manibus indignis tentasset aperire, igne inde surgente deterrita est, ne
auderet attingere.
Who going about to open, with unworthy hands, a Coffer of hers, where the
Eucharist was laid up, she presently saw Fire breaking forth thence, which so
amazed her, as that she durst not touch it. And S. Ambrose also, a long while
after S. Cyprian, testifies sufficiently, That this Custom in his time
continued in the Church; where he tells the story of his Brother Satyrus, who
being upon the Sea, and in danger of shipwreck, Ambros. de obit. Satyr. p. 19.
T. 3. Non mortem metuens, sed ne vacuus mysterii exiret e vita, quos initiatos
esse cognoverat, ab his divinum illud fidelium Sacramentum poposcit, non ut
curiosos oculos insereret arcanis, sed ut fidei suae consequeretur auxilium.
Etenim ligari fecit in orario, and orarium, involvit collo, atque ita se
dejecit in mare.
And fearing withal lest he should go out of the world without the Holy
Mysteries, ( for he was yet but of the number of the Catechumeni,) he made his
addresses to those whom he knew to have been initiated, and desired of them to
give him the Divine Sacrament of the Faitbful: not that he might therewith
satisfy the Curiosity of his Eyes, but that it might strengthen his Faith. And
so having put it into a handkerchief, and then tying the handkerchief about his
neck, he threw himself into the Sea, and was saved. If Rome does indeed bear so
great respect to the Fathers, as they would make us believe, why has it not
then retained this Custom? Why then should that which was then so ordinarily
practiced, be now in our days so much disliked, as that they will not by any
means Conc. Trid. Sess. 25 de regul. and Mon. cap. 10.
permit the Friars to keep the Eucharist in their Covent, nor yet in their
Quire, nor in any other place, save only the Public Church. St. Ambrose
informs us moreover, that in those times they made no scruple at all of
carrying the Eucharist upon the Sea: which Custom of the Ancients is so much
disliked by the Church of Rome in our days, as that they hold it an unlawful
thing, either to Consecrate, or to carry the Sacrament ready consecrated, upon
any water whatever, whether it be that of the Sea, or of Rivers.

This very Custom of the Ancients keeping the Sacrament by them, proves unto us
very clearly, that the Faithful in those days received the Sacrament with their
Hands: which is also plainly enough intimated unto us by Tertullian; where
inveighing against those among the Christians, who were Gravers, or Painters by
their Profession; he reproves them, Tertul. lib. de ^^ol. cap. 7. E^s manus
admov^re corpori Domini, quae Daemoniis corpora conferunt.
for touching the Body of our Savior with those very hands, which bestowed
bodies on Devils: that is to say, with those hands, wherewith they made Idols.
Cyprian. epi^t. 56. and lib. de bo^^ Patientiae p. 3* 6.
St. Cyprian is clear in this point in diverse several places: Gr^g. Naz. Ca^m.
6. 3. (...), etc.
Gregory Nazi^nzene also testifies the same in his LXIII Poem. And in the
Canons of the Council of Constantinople in Trullo, holden in the year of our
Lord DC. LXXX. there is one, Synod. Quinis. Can. 101. (...), etc.
which appoints, That he, who is to Communicate, place his hands in the form
of a Cross, and so receive the Communication of Grace: which had been the
Practice, down from the time of St. Cyril of Jerusalem. And yet notwithstanding
there is no man but knows, that this Custom has no place now in the Church of
Rome; where the Communicants receive the Eucharist, not with their hand, but
with their mouth, into which it is put by the Priest.

I would also very gladly be informed, by what Canon of the Ancient Church
those single Masses, which are now celebrated, and said every day, where none
Communicates but the Priest alone who Consecrates the Host, were instituted, or
permitted: and withal, how that Respect, which they pretend they bear to
Antiquity, can stand with that Canon of the Council of Trent, which says:
Conc. T^id. Sess. 22. c. 6 and Can. 8. Si quis dixerit Missas, in quibus solus
Sacerdos sacramentaliter communica^, illicitas esse, ideoque abrogandas,
anathema sit
Whosoever shall say, that those Masses, wherein the Priest alone Communicates
Sacramentally, are unlawful, and fit to be abolished, let him be Accursed:
seeing that these kind of Masses were utterly unknown to the Ancient Church, as
Cassan. C^nsult. ^ad Ferdin. etc. p 995. and in Liturg p. 83. cap 33.
Cassander proves at large, in his Consultatio de Articulis Religionis,
written to the Emperor Ferdinand.

But that which most of all gives offense to those that are devoted to
A^^tiq^ity, is, the Custom which the Church of Rome has introduced, and
established, by the express Decrees and Canons of two of their General
Councils, the one holden at Conc. Constant. Sess. 13.
Constance, and the other at Conc Trid. Sess: 21. c. and 2. Can. 2.
Trent, of not allowing the Communion of the Cup to any, save only to the
Priest who Consecrates the same; excluding by this means, first of all, all the
Laity, and secondly all the Priests also, and other of the Clergy, who had not
the Consecrating of it: whereas the whole Ancient Church, for the space of
fourteen hundred years, admitted both the one and the other to the Communion of
the Holy and Blessed Cup, as well as to the participation of the Consecrated
Bread; as those of these two Councils themselves confess, in the Ibid. c. 2.
Licet ab initio Christianae Religionis non infrequens utriusque specici usus
fuisset, etc.
Preface to this New Constitution. And this is still the practice also at this
day, among all Christians throughout the World, both Russians, Jerem. P. CN.
Resp. 1. ad Wi^emb.
Greeks, Armenians, Alvarez. in his V^yage, chapter 11. Quanti si communicano col
corpo, si communicano ^uche col sangue.
Ethiopians, Confess Eccles. Angl. art. 12.
Protestants, and all others in general, except the Latins only, who are of
the Communion of the Church of Rome. But besides that the Ancients permitted
this Communion under both Kinds, (as they use to speak,) it seems (which is
yet much more,) that, unless it were in some extraordinary Cases, they did not
at all permit the Communicating under one Kind only. For otherwise, why should
Pope Leo ^ P. R. Sermon. 4 de Quadrag page 108. Cumque ad tegendam infidelitatem
suam nostris audeant interesse mysteriis, ita in Sacramentorum communione s^
temp^ra^t, ut ^terdum ^utius lateant, ore ind^gno Christi corpus accipiunt,
Sanguinem autem* redemptionis nostrae omnino haurire decli^nt. Quod ideo
vestram volumus scire sanctitatem, ut vobis huiusmodi homines and his manifest
entur indiciis, etc.
Leo give this very thing, as a mark to distinguish the Manichees from the
Catholics? When they sometimes are present at our Mysteries (says he) that so
they may hide their infidelity, they so order the matter in their participating
of these Mysteries, as that they receive the body of Christ into their unworthy
mouth, but will no^ take into it one drop of the Blood of our Redemption: and
he further adds; That he gives his Auditory this advertise^^^^, that they may
know these men by this Mark. Should this Pope now arise from his grave, and
come into the World again he would certainly believe, that all those, who
adhere to his See, were turned Manichees, except the Consecrating Priests only.
How besides will you be able, without this Hypothesis, to explain that D^cree
of Pope Gelas. Joh. and Maj Episc. Decre^. de Consecrat. did 2. cap. 12
Comperimus autem, quod qu^dam sumpta tantummodo corporis sacri portione, a
calice sacri cruoris abstineant, etc. quia, divisio unius ej^sdemque Mysterii
sine grandi sacrilegio non potest provenire.
Gelasius, which says: We are informed, that there are some, who having taken
a small portion of the Sacred Body only, forbear to partake of the Cup of the
Consecrated Blood; doing this, as we hear, out of I know not what superstitious
conceit wherewith they are possessed: We therefore will, that they either
partake of the whole Sacrament, or else that they be wholly put back from
communicating of either: for as much as there cannot, without very great
Sacrilege, any division be made in one and the same Mystery. And in the last
place, what can you otherwise say to that story which is related by the
Accusers of Act. Council. Ch^llced. act. 16. page 356. Tom. 2. Council. Genesis
(...).
Ibas, Bishop of Edessa; how that having one time made but a very scanty
provision of Wine for the service of the Altar, which, after it had been begun
to be distributed about to the Communicants, began quickly to fail; He
perceiving this, beckned to those, who delivered about the Holy Body, that they
should come back again; because there was no more left of the blood of our
Savior? For, what need was there of making them to give over their business,
because there was no more Wine, if so be it was at that time lawful, to
distribute the Bread alone, without the other Kind, of Wine? If the Councils of
Trent, and of Constance had accounted the Authority of the Fathers to have been
Supreme, how came it to pass that they abolished that, which had for so long
time, and so constantly been observed by them* And, how again does this other
Canon of the Council of Trent suit with that Respect, which they pretend to
bear toward Antiquity; where it is said, that, Conc. Trid. Sess 21. Can. 2. Si
quis dixerit sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam non justis causis and rationibus
adductam fuisse, ut laicos, atque etiam Clericos non conficientes sub panis
tantummodo specie communicaret, aut in eo errasse, anathema sit.
Whosoever shall say, that the Holy Catholic Church has not been induced by
just Causes, and Reasons, to communicate to the Laity, and even to the Priests
too, who do not Cons^^rate, under the Kind of Bread only; or that it has ^rred
in this Point, let him be Accursed? For, it seems to be no very easy matter,
to be able to acquit the Modern Church, without condemning the Ancient, seeing
their Practices have been manifestly contradictory to each other; the Modern
Church forbidding that, which the Ancient permitted; and the Ancient Church
seeming to have expressly forbid that; which the Modern commands. How can you
say, that the one had just Reasons for what it did; unless you withal grant,
that the other in doing the contrary, had either no Reason at all, or else but
very unjust ones? seeing it is most clear, that neither the World, nor the
Times are any whit changed, within this two hundred years, from what they were
before. For, it is impossible for any man to allege any Reason, for the
Practice of the Moderns, which should not in like manner have obliged the
Ancients: nor again to produce any Reason for the contrary Practice of the
Ancients, which does not in like manner oblige the Moderns. So that of
necessity, either the one or the other of them must needs have been guilty
either of Error, or at least of Negligence, and of Ignorance. We may very well
therefore conclude, that the Church of Rome, seeing it believes it self to be
Infallible, manifestly in this particular condemned the Ancient Church, as
guilty of Ignorance, or of Negligence at the least; which, in my Judgment,
seems not so well to become those persons, who do nothing else but continually
preach unto us the Honor of Antiquity. But here now will all the true
Honourers of Antiquity have as good sport as can be. For, as for those Reasons,
by which the Fathers of the Council of Trent were induced to make the
aforementioned Decree; how (will they say) may we be able to come to the
knowledge, whether they were just or not; seeing that they themselves produce
none at all? Whereas the Reasons, which moved the Ancients to do as they did,
and which you have set down at large in a certain Discourse printed at Paris,
Inter Opera Cassand. page 1019.
at the end of Cassanders Works, are very solid, and clear, and, in my
judgment, very full both of Wisdom and of Charity. But we shall not need to
enter any further into this Contestation: it is sufficient for my purpose, that
the Church of Rome, in doing thus, has manifestly abolished a very ancient
Custom in the Church.

Besides these Ceremonies, which were practiced by the Fathers in Baptism, and
in the Eucharist, they have said by many other also, which have been heretofore
in use in the Church. I shall not here speak of the Fasting upon Saturdays,
which is observed by the Church of Rome, contrary to the ancient practice of
the whole Christian Church besides, who all accounted it unlawful: because this
difference in Practice is as ancient as August. T. 2. Ep. ^6. ad Casulan. p.
74. and 75.
St. Augustine's time, and therefore ought not to be imputed to the Modern
Church of Rome. I shall for the same reason also pass by that which Firmil. in
ep. ad Cypr. quae est inter Epist. Cypr. 75. Eos qui Romae sunt non ea in
omnibus observare, quae sint ab origin tradita, ut frustra Apostolorum
Auctoritatem praetendere, scire quis etiam inde potest, etc.
Firmilian^s says; namely, how that in his time, that is to say, about two
hundred and fifty years after the Nativity of our Savior Christ, Those of
Rome, did not in all things observe, whatsoever had been delivered from the
beginning; and, that they did in vain allege the Authority of the Apostles.
But this I shall desire the Reader to take notice of, that anciently it was a
general Custom throughout all Christendom, not to Kneel, neither upon the Lords
days, nor upon any day b^twixt Easter day and Whitsunday; which Custom has
been generally abolished by the whole Church of Rome: and yet notwithstanding,
whether you consider, the Antiquity, or whether you look upon the Authority of
those who both practiced this themselves, and also recommended it to our
observation, you will hardly find any more venerable Custom than this. For, the
Pseud. Just. Q. and R. Quaest. 115. (...), etc.
Author of the Questions and Answers, attributed to Justin Martyr, makes
mention of this Custom, and withal gives the Reason and Ground of it; and
besides, proves by a certain passage, which he produces out of Irenaeus, that
it had its beginning in the Apostolical Times. Epiph. lib. de Coron. milit.
cap. 3.
Tertullian also speaks of it; and both Epiph. in Panar. in conclus. ope^is.
Epiphanius, and Hieron. Dial. contr. Lucifer. p. 187. T. 2.
St. Hierome reckon it among the Institutions of the Church: and, which is yet
more than all this, the Sacred General Council of Nice authorized the same, by
an express Canon, made to that purpose. Conc. Nic. Can. 20. (...).
For as much as there are some, (say these CCC. XVIII. Venerable Fathers) who
Kneel upon the Lords Day; and upon the days of Pentecost, to the end that in
all Parishes, or (as we now speak) Dioceses, there may be the same Order
observed in all things, this Holy Synod ordains, that (on these days) they
all pray Standing.

And this ancient Constitution was revived again, and explained, in the Synod.
Quinisex. Can. 90.
Council of Constantinople in Trullo, toward the end of the seventh Century;
where it was expressly forbidden to Kneel, during the space of those twenty four
hours that pass betwixt Saturday Evening, and Sunday Evening. Every body knows
also, how that they have abrogated the Fast, that was wont to be observed upon
the Fourth day of the week, that is to say, on Wednesday; which yet was the
Practice of the Ancients, as appears by what we find in Ignat. Epist. 5.
Ignatius, in Petr. Alexand. in MS.
Peter, Bishop of Alexandria and a Martyr, in Epiph. Panar. haer. 75. Acrii,
page 910. (...);
Epiphanius, Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7. p. 317.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and others.

By the same Liberty have those Vigils been abolished, which were ordinarily
kept by the Ancient Church, and both approved, and defended also by Hieron. l.
cont. Vigil p. 163. De Vigiliis and pernoctationibus Martyrum saepe
celebrandis, etc.
St. Hierome, against Vigilantius, who found fault with them; though his
Opinion has now at length found more favor in the World, than St. Hierome's.
The same Id Com 4. in Matthew. p. 121. Unde reo^ and Traditionem Apostolicam
permansiss^, ut in die Vigiliarum Paschae ante noctis dimidium populos
dimittere non liceat, expectantes adventum Christi.
Father in another place delivers unto us, for an Apostolical Tradition, that
Custom, which they had in his time, of not suffering the people to depart out
of the Church, upon Easter Eve, till midnight was past. What is now become of
this Custom; which was not only an ancient one, but was derived also from the
Apostles themselves, if you dare believe St. Hierome?

We are informed from several Hands, that that Command of Abstaining from
Blood, and from Things strangled, was for a long time observed in the Church.
And it appears evident enough, that i^ was most Religiously kept in the
Primitive times, both by the Testimony of Tertul. Apolog. p. 38.
Tertullian, and of Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 5 c. 2.
Eusebius. And the Synod. Quinise. Can. 7.
Council of Constantinople in Trullo excommunicates all those of the Laity, and
deposes all those of the Clergy, that shall offend therein. And Pamel. in
Apolog. Tertull. number. 38.
Pamelius, in his Notes upon Tertullians Apologeticks, informs us, that it is
not long since the observation of this Custom was first laid a side among
Christians; it being not much above four hundred (...), since there was some
certain Penalties appointed for those that should violate the same. And yet
notwithstanding, for all its Antiquity, and Universality, it is at length quite
vanished; the Church of Rome having in very gentle wise, and by little and
little laid it asleep; ^no man, that I know of, having taken the least notice
either of the Time, when, or the Manner, how this was done: Only this we all
see plainly enough, that it is now quite out of Use.

The like may be said of that Custom of Praying for the Saints Departed, which
was clearly the Practice of the Ancients. Epiph. Pan. Haer. 75. Acrii page 911.
(...), etc.
We pray (says Epiphanius) for the Just, the Fathers, the Patriarchs, the
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, etc. that we may distinguish the Lord
Jesus Christ from the order of Men, by that Honor which we pay unto Him. We
have also some of their Prayers to this purpose yet remaining; as namely, in
the Liturgy of Liturg. Jacob. page 29. Edit. Par. An. 1560. apud Guliel Morel.
(...), etc.
St. James. And in the Liturg. Syriac Basil.
Syriack Liturgy of St. Basil, after they had mentioned the Patriarchs, the
Prophets, John Baptist, St. Stephen, the Virgin Mary, and all the rest of the
Saint, they at last added; We daily send up our Prayers and Supplications unto
thee for them. And a little after; Lord, remember also (says the Priest) all
those, who are departed this life, and the Orthodox Bishops, who have made a
clear and open Profession of the true Faith, from the Apostles, Peter and
James, to this day; of Ignatius, Dionysius, etc. And then he says, with a loud
voice: Remember also, Lord, those who have persevered even to Blood, for the
Word of a Good Fear. So likewise in the Liturgy of Liturg. Chrysostom. (...),
etc. vide and Liturg. St Marc. T. 2. Gr. Lat. Bibl. PP. page 34. (...), (not.)
etc. Mox: (...), etc.
St. Chrysostom; We offer unto thee this Reasonable Service, for all those who
have departed in thy Faith, etc. And yet notwithstanding the Church of Rome
has utterly abolished this Custom; and without all question, believes, that
you could not do the Saints a greater injury, than if you should now make any
such Supplications for them. Those that are curious may observe many other the
like differences betwixt the Ancients and the Church of Rome, in their Customs
and Ceremonies.

Neither is there any whit less in their Discipline. One of the chiefest of
these Differences, and which is indeed the Original of a great part of the
rest, is, in the Elections and Ordinations of Ecclesiastical Ministers, which
is the true Basis and Groundwork of the Discipline and Ministry of the Church.
It is clear, that in the Primitive times they depended partly on the People;
and not wholly on the Clergy; but every Company of the Faithful, either chose
their own Pastors, or else had leave to consider, and to approve of those, that
were proposed unto them for that purpose. Pont. Diac. in vita Cypr. Judicio
Dei, and plebis ^avore, ad officium Sacerdot^^, and Episcopatus gradum adhuc
neophytus, ut putabatur, novellus, electus est.
Pontius, a Deacon of the Church of Carthage, says, that St. Cyprian, being
yet a Neophyte, was elected to the Charge of Pastor, and the Degree of Bishop,
by the Judgment of God, and the Favor of the People. St. Cyprian also tells
us the same in several places. Cyprian, epist. 52. page 97. Factus est aurem
Cornelius Episcopus, de Dei and Christi ejus judicio, de Clericorum pene omnium
testimonio, de plebis, quae tunc affluit suffragio, and de Sacerdotum
antiquorum, and honorum virorum Collegio.
In his LII. Epistle, speaking of Cornelius, he says, That he was made Bishop
of Rome, by the Judgment of God, and of his Christ, by the Testimony of the
greatest part of the Clergi^, by the Suffrage of the People, who were there
present, and by the College of Pastors, or Ancient Bishops, all Good and Bious
men. And in another place he says; that Idem. Epist. 68. page 166. Quando ipsa
(plebs) maxim habeat potestatem vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos
recusandi. Quod and ipsum videmus de divina auctoritate descendere, ut Sacerdos
plebe praesente sub omnium oculis deligatur, and dignus atque idoneus publico
judicio ac testimonio comprobetur. Ibid. page 166. Propter quod diligenter de
traditione divina, and Apostolica observatione observandum est, and tenendum,
quod apud nos quoque, and fere per provincias universas tenetur, ut ad
ordinationes rite* celebrandas, ad eam plebem, cui Praepositus ordinatur*
Episcopi ejusdem provinciae proximi quique conveniant, and Episcopus deligatur
plebe praesente, quae singulorum vitam plenissime novit, and uniuscujusque
actumde ejus conversatione perspexerit.
It is the people, in whom the power chiefly is, of choosing Worthy Prelates, or
refusing the Unworthy. Which very thing (says he) we see is derived from
Divine Authority, that a Bishop is to be thosen in the presence of all the
People; and is declared either Worthy or Unworthy, by the Judgment and
Testimony of all. Therefore (says he a little after) ought men diligently to
retain, and observe, according to Divine Tradition, and Apostolical Custom,
that which is also observed by us, and in a manner by all other Provinces:
namely, that for the due and orderly Proceeding in all Ordinations, the
Neighboring Bishops of the same Province are to meet together at that place,
where a Bishop is to be chosen; and the Election of the said Bishop is to be
performed, in the presence of the People of that place, who fully know every
man's life, and by their long conversation together, understand what their
behavior has been. And hence it was that Eusebius, Bishop of Nicomedia,
finding fault with many things in the Ordination of Athanasius, reckoned this
also among the rest, c that it had been performed without the Consent of the
People. To which answer was made again, by the d Council of Alexandria, that
the whole People of Alexandria had all with one voice de^ired him for their
Bishop, giving him the largest Testimonies that could be, both for his Piety
and his Fitness for the undertaking that Charge. In like manner Julius, Bishop
of Rome, among other faults which he found in the Ordination of Gregory, who
had been made Bishop of Alexandria, adds, Julius ap. Athan. Apol. 2. page 748,
749. (...), etc.
That he had not been desired by the People.

And it appears clear enough both out of Hieron. lib. 1. advers. Jovin. page
57. Tom. 2. and Com. 10. in Ezech. page 968. Tom. 4. and Com. in Agg. page 512.
Tom. 5. and Com. 1. in Epist. ad Gal. page 271. Tom. 6.
St. Hierome, and by the Acts of the Councils of Conc. Constable. 1. in Epist. ad
Damas. page 94, and 95. Tom. 1. Conc. Gene^.
Constantinople, and of Conc. Chalced. act. 11. p. 375. Tom. 2. Conc. Genesis and
act. 16. page 430, etc.
Chalcedon, and also by the Pontific. Rom in Ordinat. Presbyter. fol. 38. vide
supr. l. 1. c. 4.
Pontificale Romanum, and several other pieces, that this Custom continued a
long time in the Church. But it is now above seven Hundred and Eighty years,
since the Church of Rome ordained, in the VIII. Council, (which notwithstanding
has been always unanimously and constantly rejected by the Eastern Church to
this very day,) that the Promotions and Consecrations of Bishops should be
performed by the Election and Order of the College of Bishops only;
forbidding, upon pain of Excommunication, all Lay persons whatsoever, even
Conc. VIII. Can. 22. Tom. 3. Conc. page 282. Neminem Laicorum principum, vel
potentum semet inserere electioni vel promotioni Patriarchae, vel Metropolitae,
aut cujuslibet Episcopi, etc. praesertim cum nullam in talibus potestatem,
quenquam potestativorum, vel caeterorum Laicorum habere convenist, sed potius
silere, ac attendere sibi, usque quo regulariter a Collegio Ecclesiae suscipiat
finem electio futuri Pontificis.
Princes themselves, to meddle in the Election or Promotion of any Patriarch,
Metropolitan, or any other Bishop whatsoever; declaring withal, that it is not
fit, that Lay persons should have any thing at all to do in these matters: it
becoming them rather to be quiet, and patiently to attend, till such time as
the Election of the Bishop that is to be chosen be Regularly finished, by the
College of Clergymen. And thus have they by this one Canon-shot beaten down
the Authority of the Fathers, and of the Primitive Church; who always allowed
to the faithful People some share in the Elections of their Pastors: neither
has this Custom been able ever since to lift up its head again; the People
being (as every man knows) now, more than ever, defrauded of this their Right,
and having not the least share in the Elections, not of Popes, Primates, or
Archbishops only, but not so much as of the meanest Bishop that is.

And as the People Anciently had their voice in the Election of their Pastors;
so probably also they had the like in all other Affairs of Importance, that
happened in the Church. There happening in St. Cyprians time a very great
Persecution, many, who had been forced to yield by the cruelty of the Pagans,
being afterward touched with a sense of their fault, desired to return to the
Church again: but yet to avoid the shame, and the length, and rigor of those
Penances, which were usually imposed upon all such Offenders, the greatest part
of them begged of their Confessors to be favorably dealt withal, and corrupted
their Priests, that so they might be received again into the Communion of the
Church, without undergoing Canonical Penance. St. Cyprian, who was a strict
Observer of Discipline, wrote many things against this Abuse; by which it
evidently appears, that the People had their Right also in the hearing and
judging of these Causes. For in his X. Epistle he says, Cyprian. Epist. 10.
page 30. Acturi and apud nos, and apud Confessores ipsos, and apud plebem
universam causam suam.
that those Priests that had received any such Offenders rashly, and contrary
to the Discipline of the Church, Should give an account of what they had done,
to himself, to the Confessors, and to the whole People. And in another place,
writing to the People of Carthage, Id. Epist. 12. page 33. Cum pace nobis
omnibus a Domino prius data, ad Ecclesiam regredi coeperimus, tunc
examinabuntur singula, praesentibus and judicantibus vobis.
When the Lord (says he) shall have restored peace unto us all, and that we
shall be all returned to the Church again, we shall then examine all these
things, praesentibus vobis, and judicantibus, You also being present, and
judging of them. And it is in this same Epistle, and touching this very Point,
where he adds that Passage, which we have before produced, in the Chapter
touching the Corruption of the Writings of the Ancients. I desire them (says
he) that they would patiently hear our Council, etc. to the end that, when many
of us Bishops shall have met together, we may examine the Letters and desires
of the Blessed Martyrs, according to the Discipline of the Lord, and in the
presence of the Confessors, and also according as you shall think fit. And
hence it is, that in one of his former Epistles he protested to his Clergy,
Cypr. ep. 6. p. 19. Quando a primordio Episcopatus mei statuerim nihil sine
consilio vestro, and sine consensu plebis meae, privata sententia gerere.
That from his first coming to his Bishopric he had ever resolved to do
nothing of his own head, without their Advice, and the Approbation of his
People. He that would yet be more fully satisfied in this particular, may read
the Id. epist. 14. and 28. and 40. and 59. quaescripta est nomine LXVI.
Episcoporum: and epist, 68. and in praefat. Council Carthag.
XIV. Epistle of the same Father, and the XXVIII. touching the business of
Philumenus and Fortunatus, two Subdeacons; as also the XL. touching the
business of Felicissimus; and the LXVII. which he wrote to the Clergy and
People of Spain jointly, commending them for having deposed their Bishops, who
were guilty of heinous crimes. But now that no man may think that this was the
Practice of the Church of Carthage only, I shall here take occasion to inform
the Reader, that the Epist. quae est inter Cypr. ep. 31. Quanquam nobis in tam
ingenti negotio placeat, quod and tu ipse tractasti prius, Ecclesiae pacem
sustinendam, deinde sic collatione Consiliorum cum Episcopis, Presbyteris,
Diaconis Confessoribus, pariter ac stantibus Laicis facta, lapsorum tractare
ratio^em.
Clergy of Rome also approved of this Resolution of his, of bringing to trial,
so soon as they should be at rest, this whole business, touching those who had
fallen, during the Persecution, in a full Assembly of the Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, and Confessors, together with those of the Laity, who had continued
constant, and had not yielded to Idolatry. And that which, in my judgment, is
very well worth our Observation, is, that Cypr. ep. 55. ad Cornel. page 121.
Quanquam sciam frater charissime, pro mutua dilectione quam debemus and
exhibemus invicem nobis, florentissimo illic Clero tecum praesidenti, and
sanctissimae atque amplissimae plebi legere te semper literas nostras; tamen
nunc and admoneo and peto, ut quod alias sponte atque honotifice facis, etiam
petente me facias, ut hac epistola mea lecta, etc.
St. Cyprian himself writing to Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, says, that He does
not doubt but that, according to that Mutual Love which they ought, and paid to
each other, he did always read those Letters which he received from him, to the
most Flourishing Clergy of Rome that were his Assistants, and to the most Holy
and most numerous People. Whence it appears, that at Rome also the People had
their Vote, in the managing of Ecclesiastical Affairs.

I shall not need here to add any more, to show how much the Authority and
Example of the Ancients in this Particular are now slighted and despised: it
being evident enough to every man, that the People are not only excluded from
the Councils and Consistories of the Bishops, but that besides, that man would
now be taken for^an Heretic, that should now but propose, or go about to
restore any such thing. But I beseech you now, do but a little fancy to your
selves an Archbishop, who writing to the Pope, should say unto him thus: Most
dear Brother, I exhort you, and desire of you, that what you are wont
honorably to do of your own accord, you would now do it at my request: namely,
that this Epistle may be read to the Flourishing Clergy, that are your
Assistants there; and also to the most holy and most numerous People. Should
not the writer, think you, of such a Letter as this be laughed at, as a
senseless, foolish Fellow; if at least he escaped so, and met with no worse
usage? And yet notwithstanding, this is the very Request that St. Cyprian made
to Pope Cornelius.

But as the Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy, have deprived the People of
all those Privileges, which had been conferred upon them by Antiquity, as well
in the Election of Prelates, as in other Ecclesiastical Affairs: in like manner
is it most evident, that the Pope has engrossed into his own hands not only
this Booty, which they had robbed the People of; but also in a manner all the
rest of their Authority and Power; as well that which they heretofore enjoyed,
according to the Ancient Canons and Constitutions of the Church; as that which
they have since, by many several admirable means, by little and little
acquired, in the space of some whole Centuries of years. All this is now quite
vanished, I know not how, and swallowed up by Rome, in a very little time. The
CCC. XVIII. Fathers of the Council of Nice ordained, Conc. Nic. Can. 4. (...),
etc.
That every Bishop should be created by all the Bishops of that Province, if it
were possible; or at least by three of them, if so be the whole number could
not so conveniently be brought together: yet with this Proviso, that the absent
Bishops were conse^ting also to the said Ordination: and that the Power and
Authority in all such Actions should belong to the Metropolitan of each several
Province. Which Ordinance of theirs is both very agreeable to the Practice of
the preceding Ages; as appears by that LXVIII. Epistle of St. Cyprian, which we
cited a little before: and was also observed for a long time afterward, by the
Ages following: as you may perceive by the Epistle of the Fathers of the I. *
Conc. Constable. I. in Ep. ad Damas. p. 94. T. 1. Conc. Gener.
Council of Constantinople to Pope Damasus; and also by the Discourse of those
that sat Presidents at the Council of Chalcedon, touching the Rights of the
Patriarch of Constantinople in his own Diocese.

And yet notwithstanding all this, the whole World knows and sees, what the
Practice of the Church of Rome at this day is, and how that there is not at all
left to the Metropolitans, and to their Councils, any true Power or Authority,
in the Ordinations of the Bishops within their own Diocesses; but the whole
Power, in this Case, depends upon the Church of Rome, and upon those whom it
has entrusted herein, either with their own liking, or otherwise. And indeed
all Bishops are to make their Acknowledgments of Tenure to the Pope; neither
may they exercise their Functions, without his Commission; which they shall not
obtain neither, without first paying down their Money, and compounding for
their First Fruits, calling themselves also in their Titles thus; We N. Bishop
of N. by the grace of God, and of the Apostolical See; of which strange Custom
and Title, you shall not meet with the least Trace or Footstep, throughout all
the Records of Antiquity, not so much as any one of all that vast number of
Bishops, whose subscriptions we have yet remaining, partly in the Councils, and
partly in their own Books, and Histories, having ever thus styled himself. And
as for Provincial and Diocesan Synods, where Anciently all sorts of
Ecclesiastical Causes were heard, and determined; as appears both by the
Canons of the Councils, and also by those Examples that we have left us; as in
the History of Arius, and of Eutyches, who were both Anathematized; the one in
the Synod of Alexandria, and the other in that of Constantinople; they dare not
now meddle with any thing, Conc. Trid. Sess. 24. Decret. de ref. c. 5. Minores
criminales Causae Episcoporum in Concilio tantum Provinciali cognoscantur and
terminentur, etc*
except some small, petty Matters, being of no use in the Greater Causes, save
only to inquire into them, and give in their Informations at Rome. Neither may
any, the meanest Bishop that is, be judged, in any Case of Importance, and
which may be sufficient to Depose him, by any but the Pope of Rome: his
Metropolitan, and his Primate, and the Synod of his Province, and that of his
Diocese, (in the sense that the Ancients took this word,) having not all of
them any Power at all in these Matters, unless it be by an Extraordinary
Delegation; and having then only power to draw up the Business, and make it
ready for Hearing, and so to send it to Rome: None but the Ibid Causae
criminales graviores contra Episcopos. etc. quae depositione, aut privatione
dignae sunt, ab ipso tantum summo Romano Pontifice cognoscantur, and
terminentur, etc.
Pope alone having power to give sentence in such Cases, as it is expressly
ordained by the Council of Trent. I shall here pass by their taking away from
the Bishops, contrary to the Canons, and Practice of Antiquity, all
Jurisdiction, and power over a good part of the Monasteries, and other
companies of Religious persons, both Seculars and Regulars, within their
Diocesses; Their assuming wholly to themselves the Power of Absolving, and of
Dispensing in several Cases, which they call Reserved Cases: whereas in Ancient
times this Authority belonged equally to all Bishops; as also their giving of
Indulgences, and their proclaiming of Jubilees: a thing which was never heard
of in any of the first Ages of Christianity. And as for the Discipline which
was Anciently observed in the Church toward Penitentiaries, whether in the
punishing them for their offenses, or else in the receiving them again into the
Communion of the Church, it is now wholly lost and vanished. We have now
nothing left us save only a bare Idea and shadow of it* which we meet with in
the Writings of the Ancients; as namely, in the Canonical Epistles of Gr^gorius
Neo^aesare^ns^s, of St. Basil^* and others and in the Councils, both General
and Provincial. Where are now all those several Degrees of Penance, which were
observed in the Ancient Church; where some Offenders were to bewail their sins
without the Church* some might stand and hear the word among the C^tech^me^i;
others were to cast themselves down at the feet of the Faithful: Some of them
might partake of the Prayers only of the Church; and others were at length
received again into the Communion of their Sacraments also? Where are those
Eight, those Ten, those Twenty years of Penance, which they sometimes imposed
upon Offenders? All this whole Course of Penance, some kind of account whereof
we meet with in the Writings of the Ancients, is now wholly swallowed up by
Auricular Confession, wherein no part of the Penance appears at all to the
World.

And as these kinds of Punishments, which were most wholesome for the
Penitentiaries have been quite abolished by them; so have they on the other
side introduced other kinds of Penalties, which are indeed very beneficial and
advantageous to the temporal Estate of the Church of Rome, but are most
pernicious for the Souls of Offenders; such as are their Interdictions, when,
for the offense (and that oftentimes too, rather a pretended, than a true one,)
of one, or two single persons, or perhaps of a Corporation, They will
Excommunicate a whole State, wherein there are perhaps many millions of people;
depriving them of the benefit of partaking of the Holy Sacraments; which are
the means, by which the Grace and the Life of Jesus Christ is communicated unto
poor Mortals: an Example of which kind of proceeding I remember to have been
practiced by them, since my time, against the State of Venice. In what Code of
the Ancient Church can you find, where any such strange kind of punishment was
ever instituted, as that for the offense of a few, many millions of Souls
should be damned? How can you call that Power Apostolical, that punishes in
this manner; seeing that the Apostolical Power was given for Edification, and
not for Destruction?

I would also very fain learn of any man, that could tell me, upon what Canons
of the Ancient Church that Bloody Discipline of the Inquisition is grounded;
where after they have got out of a poor soul, by crafty, subtle dealing, and
many times also by such barbarous, inhumane usage, as would make a man tremble
to read, a Confession of his being guilty of Heresy; instead of Instruction,
they give him the sentence of death; and so he is forthwith delivered over to
the Secular Magistrates: to whom notwithstanding, in a plain Mockery both of
God and Men, Nicol. Eyme. vic. Director. Inquis. page 2. c. 27. p 127. and ibi
Pegna. item p. 3. p 512.
they give an express Charge, that they do not put him to death. Pegna in
Direct Inquis. p. 3. q. 36.
Yet in case they fail of so doing, and if within six or seven days after at
the most, they do not burn him alive; and all this Direct. Inquis. p. 3. Q. 36.
and ibid. Pegna. p 563. Comm. 85. page 564.
without ever hearing his Cause, or what his Offense is; They themselves shall
be prosecuted by Ecclesiastical Censures, and shall be Excommunicated, Deposed,
and deprived of all Dignities, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal. And, that
which yet surpasses all belief, is, that although the person questioned should
confess his fault, and should express his hearty sorrow for the same, and
should by way of satisfaction submit himself to the sharpest penance that could
be; yet notwithstanding should not the poor wretch escape death; Direct.
Inquis. p. 3. modo 9. termin. process. p 510. and ibi Pegna.
if so be he be of the number of those, whom they call, The Relapsed. O most
inhumane cruelty! and worthy of the Scythians, and of the Margaias only! but
very ill becoming the Disciples of him, who commanded his Apostle to pardon his
brother, not seven times only, but seventy times seven: and as ill beseeming
those, who so highly boast of being the successors and Inheritors of those mild
and tenderhearted Ancients, who taught, Athan. in ep. ad solit. vit. ag. Tom.
1. p. 55. (...), etc.
That it is the part of Piety not to constrain, but to persuade, according to
our Saviors Example; who constrained no man, but left every man to his own
liberty, to follow him or not. And, that the Ibid. p. 830. (...), etc.
Devil, as he has no Truth in him* comes with Axes and with Hammers to break
open the doors of those that must receive him. But our Savior is so meek as
that his manner of teaching is, If any one will follow me: and* He that will be
my Disciple; Neither does he constrainany one, that he comes unto, but rather
stands at the door of every one, and knocks, saying; Open to me, my Sister
my Spouse; and so enters, when any open unto him: but if they delay, and will
not open unto him, he then departs. Because the Truth is not to be pressed
with swords, and Arrows, nor with Soldiers, and Armed men, but by Persuasion,
and Counsel: who also so sharply reprehended the Arrians, for going about to
establish, and maintain their Religion by Force; saying, Athan. Ap^l. 1. de
fuga sua, page 716. Tom. 1. (...).
Of whom have they learnt to persecute their Brethren? Certainly they cannot
say, that they have learnt it of the Saints: no, they have rather had the Devil
for their Tutor herein. And again; Jesus Christ has commanded us to fly, and
the Saints have indeed fled sometimes: But Persecution is the Invention of the
Devil. And in another place they protest, that Id. contr. Arian. Or. 1. T. 1.
p. 288. (...).
By that very course which the Arrians took in banishing (which yet is much
less, than burning,) all those, who would not subscribe to their Decrees, they
clearly showed themselves to be contrary to all Christians, and to be the
friends of the Devil, and his Fiends. In like manner has another of the
Ancient Fathers exclaimed, against the Proceeding of these Arrians, who made
use not only of the Terror of Persecution, but of the Enticements also of
worldly ^iches, that so they might the more easily draw men over to their
Belief. Hilar. l. Contr. Aux. p. 86. At ^unc proh dolor (...) divinam fidem
suffragia terrena recommendant, inopsque virtutis suae Christus, dum ambitio
nomini suo conciliatur, arguitur. Terret exiliis, and carceribus Ecclesi^
credique sibi cogit, quae exiliis and carceribus es^ credita* Pende^ ad
dignationem Communicantium quae persequentium est consecrata terrore. Fugat
Sacerdotes, quae fugatis est Sacerdotibus propagata. Di^igi se gloriatur a
mundo, quae Christi esse non potuit, nisi eam mundus odisset.
But now alas! (says this Father,) these are the suffrages, that recommend the
Faith in God: Christ is now become weak and void of Power, and Ambition gains
Credit to his Name. The Church terrisieth by Banishment, and Imprisonment, etc.
She, that was consecr^ted* by the Terror of her Persecutors, depende^^ now
upon the Dignity of th^se, who are of her Communion. She, who has been
propagated by banished Priests, now her self banisheth Priests. She boasts
now, that she is beloved of the World; who could not be Christ's, unless the
world bated her: Agreeable to what Hieron. epist 62 ad Theoph. Tom. 2. page
274. Fu^dendo sanguinem, and pauendo magis quam faciendo contumelias, Christi
fund^ta est Ecclesia, Persecutionibus crevit, Martyriis coronata est.
another of them says; namely, That the Church of Christ was founded, by
shedding of Blood, and by suffering Reproaches rather, than by Reproaching
others: and, that it has grown up by persecutions, and has been crowned by
Martyrdoms. Another also of the chiefest among the Ancient Fathers reproached
an Arrian, for having made use of the Sword and Axe, in Ecclesiastical matters.
Ambros. epist. 32. Tom. 3. page 126. Qui ( A^xentius) quos non potuerit sermon
decipere, eos gladio putat esse feriendos; cru^ntas leges ore dictans, manu
scribens; and putans, quod Lex fidem possic hominibus imperare.
Those whom he could not deceive by his Discourse, (says he) he thought good
to make use of his sword upon, uttering with his mouth, and writing with his
hand Bloody Laws; and thinking that a Law can command men's Faith. And that you
may not imagine, that he himself thought that lawful, which he found fault with
in the Arrians, Id. lib. 2. 27. T^m. p. 106. Postea cum videret me abstinere ab
Episcopis qui communicabant ei, vel qui aliquos dev^os, licet a fide, ad necem
petebant, etc.
he says in another place that in a certain journey which he made into Gallia,
he refused to communicate with those Bishops, who would have some certain
Heretics to be put to death. The Emperor Marcianus in like manner, who called
together the Council of Chalcedon, and was a Prince that was highly commended
for his Piety, solemnly protests that Marcian. epist. ad Archimandr. and Mon.
Aeg. in Act. Conc. Chalcedon. T. 2. Conc. genesis page 453. (...).
He had forced no man to subscribe, or to assent to the Council of Chalcedon,
against his will. For, (says he) we will not draw any man into the way of life
by violence or by threats. And indeed Hujus epist. ad Constantium, apud Athan.
in epist. ad solit. vit ag. Tom 1. page 839. (...), etc.
Hosius, Bishop of Corduba, long before testified, that the most Catholic
Emperor Constans never compelled any man to be Orthodox. And this is the
course, which is approved of by all the Ancients. Hilar. lib. 1. ad Constable. fol.
84. Deus cognitionem sui docuit potius quam exegit; and operationum coelestium
admiratione praeceptis suis concilians auctoritatem, coactam confitendi se
aspernatus est voluntatem, etc. Deus Universitatis est; obsequio non eget
necessario: Non requirit coactam confessionem.
God (says St. Hillary) has rather taught us the knowledge of himself, than
exacted it of us; and authorizing his Commandments by the wonderfulness of his
heavenly works, he has refused to force us to confess his Name, etc. He is the
God of the whole world; He has no need of a compelled obedience; He requires
not any forced confession. Which are the Reasons this Author brought, with some
other the like, to dissuade the Emperor Constantius from using violence, and
forcing the Consciences of Men.

St. Ambrose says; Ambros. Com in Luc. lib. 7. page 99. Eos misit ad
seminandam fidem, qui non cogerent, sed docerent, nec vim potestatis
exercerent, sed doctrinam humilitatis attollerent.
Christ sent his Apostles to plant the Faith; not that they should compel, but
that they should instruct men; not that they should exercise the force of
Power, but that they should promote the Doctrine of Humility. And hence is that
which St. Cyprian has, comparing the manner of proceeding in the Old Testament
with that of the New: Cyprian epist. 62. page 143. Tunc quidem gladio
occidebantur, quando adhuc and circumcisio carnalis manebat. Nunc autem, etc.
spirituali gladio superbi and contumaces necantur, dum de Ecclesia ejiciuntur.
Then (says he) the proud and the dis^bedient were out off by the fl^shly
Sword, N^w they suffer by the spiritual, being thrown out of the Church.
Certainly then they still live, at this very day, under the Old Testament in
Spain and Italy, and all those other places, where the Inquisition is in force:
and, I b^lieve, he would find a very hard Task of it, that should take in hand
to reconcile this Passage of St. Cyprian to that Girolamo, Carena nella vita di
Pio Up 126.
Opinion of Pope Pius V. who said, that Bishops might have their Officers, and
Executioners of Justice, for the Causes that appertained to their Jurisdiction;
and might put their Sentences in Execution against Offenders; and, that the
reason of their having recourse upon all occasions to the Secular Powers, was,
not because the Church could not make use of its own proper Officers of Justice
in such Cases, but rather because it had no such; or if it had, they were so
weak, and so few in number, as that for the suppressing and punishing of
D^linquents, it would however stand in need of the assistance of the Temporal
Power.

I shall shut up this Point with Tertullian, the most ancient Author of the
Latin Church, whom Pamelius (as we have touched before) will needs have us
believe to have been a Persecutor of Heretics; who yet was a man, that would
not allow a Christian so much as to draw a sword, neither in war against a
Public Enemy, nor yet in discharging the Office of a Magistrate upon
Offenders; whom all Civil Laws whatsoever punish with death.

Let us now therefore see what he says, touching Religion. Tertul. Apolog. c
24. p. 58. Videte enim ne and hoc ad irreligiositatis elogium concurrat,
adimere libertatem religionis, and interdicere optionem divinitatis, ut non
liceat mihi colere quem velim, sed cogar colere quem nolim. Nemo se ab invito
coli vellet, ne homo quidem.
Consider (says he to the Pagans) whether this be not to add to the Crime of
Irreligion, to take away the Liberty of Religion, and to interdict a man the
choice of his God, by not suffering him to worship, whom he would; but to
compel him to worship, whom he would not. There is none, no not among men, that
takes pleasure in being served by any against their will. And some few Chapters
afterward: Id. Apolog. cap. 28. page 61. Quoniam autem facile iniquum videtur,
liberos homines invitos urgeri ad sacrificandum. Nam and alias divinae rei
faciendae libens animus inducitur.
This is a thing (says he) that seems very unjust, that Freemen should be
constrained to do sacrifice against their will. For, in the performing of
service to God, a willing heart is required. And in another Book, but speaking
of the same thing, he says: Id. lib ad Scapul. c. 2. Tatamen humani juris, and
naturalis potestatis est, unicuique quod putaverit colere: nec alii abest, aut
prodest alterius religio. Sed nec religionis est cogere religionem, quae sponte
suscipi debeat, non vi; cum and hostiae ab animo libenti expostulentur.
It is a Point of Humane Right, and a Natural Power that every man has to
worship that which he thinks fit. The Religion of another man neither hurts,
nor profits any one. Neither is it indeed the part of Religion; to compel
Religion; which ought to be entertained willingly, and not by force; forasmuch
as Sacrifices themselves are required only from willing minds. Upon which
passage of his Pamelius gives us a mavelous, rare gloss, saying; That we
ought not indeed directly to compel men to our Religion, but yet we may punish
them, if they will not change their opinion. Certainly he thinks it is no
Compelling of a man, to force him to do a thing under pain of Death. Let any
man that can, reconcile the Practice of the Inquisition, and the Popes
Thunderbolts against King Henry VIII. and his Daughter Queen Elizabeth, and
against some of the Kings of France also, to this constant opinion of all
Antiquity.

Now after they have thus boldly slighted the Beliefes, the Ceremonies, and the
Discipline of the Ancients, by changing, and abolishing whatsoever they have
thought good; with what face can they still cry up the Fathers, and allege
their Testimonies, and besides place them upon the Seat of Judicature, and make
them the Judges of our Differences? Or although they still do thus, who would
no^ be ready here to bring against them those words of Tertullian, which he
made use of i^ another the like Case? Id. Apol. c. 6. p. 31. Nunc
religiosissimi legum, and patornorum institutorum protectores and Sultores
respondeant velim de sua fide and honor, and obsequio erga majorum consulta,
si a nullo disciverunt? si in nullo exorbitaverunt? si non necessaria and
aptissima quaeque Disciplinae obli^^eraverunt (...) Quonam illae leges
abierunt, etc.
I would be very glad (says he) that these great^^ and most religious
Defenders and (...) of the I^w^ and Customs of their Fathers would (...) a
little touching their own says (...) and obedience toward the constitutions
of their Ancestors whether they have not departed from and forsaken some of
them? (...) they have not razed out those things (...) which were most
necessary, and most useful in their Science? What is become of those Ancient
Laws? Ib. p. 33. Ub; religio? ubi veneratio majoribus debita a vobis? Habitu,
victu, instructu, sensu ipso denique sermon proavis renunciastis: laudatis
semper antiquitatem, and nove de die vivitis.
etc. Where is the Religion? Where is the Reverence which is due from you to
your Ancestors? You have renounced your Forefathers, both in your Habit,
Apparel, Manner of Life, Opinion, and in your very Speech also. You are always
crying up Antiquity, yet every day your selves take up a New manner of Life.
Whether therefore they of the Church of Rome have upon Just Grounds dealt thus
with the Ancients, or not; it serves my turn however to conclude, That by this
their Proceeding they have given us a sufficient Testimony, that they do not
acount their Authority Supreme in Matters of Religion. And if so, what Reason
have they to urge it for such, against the Protestants? Seeing they have
weakened the Authority of so many of those Judgments, touching Points of
Religion, which have been given by the Fathers, how can they expect that their
Authority should pass for Authentic in any one? Let us suppose for instance,
that they held, that there was such a Place as Purgatory. But by your Favor,
(will the Protestant say) if you have found their Belief to be so erroneous
touching the State of the Souls of Departed Saints, till the Day of the
Resurrection; why would you impose upon me a Necessity of subscribing to what
they held touching Purgatory? The Laws of Disputation ought to be equal; and
therefore if you, by examining this Opinion of the Fathers by Reason, and by
the Scriptures, have found it to be Erroneous; why will you not give us leave
to try that other, touching Purgatory, by the same Touchstone? Certainly,
should we but speak the Truth, it is the plainest mocking of the World that can
be, to cry out, as these Men do continually, The Fathers, The Fathers, and to
write so many whole Volumes upon this Subject, as they have done; after they
have so dealt with them, as you have seen. And if it be here objected, That the
Protestants themselves do also reject many of those Articles which we have
before set down; we answer, That this is nothing at all to the purpose;
forasmuch as they take the Scriptures, and not the Fathers, for the Rule of
their Faith; neither do they press any Man to receive any thing from the hands
of the Ancients, unless it be grounded upon the Word of God. And if, lastly,
you say, That the Authority of the Fathers has no place, nor is at all
considerable, in the Points before set down, because that the Churcb has
otherwise determined touching the same; this is clearly to grant us that which
we would have, namely, That the Authority of the Fathers is not Supreme. And as
for the Church, that is to say, how far the Authority of it extends in these
things, this is a New Question to be disputed of, which I shall not meddle
withal at this time. Only thus much I shall say, That what Authority soever you
allow it, whether Little, or Much, you will still find, that it will very
hardly be able to do any thing, touching the Decision of our present
Controversies; forasmuch as you can never be able to make any use or benefit of
this Position, till such time as you are assured, both What, and Where the
Church is, seeing that the Protestants stiffly deny, That it is That which
appears at this day at Rome; and the greatest Difficulty of all consisting in
the Demonstrating this unto them. For, if they did but once believe, that the
Church of Rome was the True Church, they would immediately join themselves with
it; so that there would not henceforth be need of any further Dispute.

We shall here conclude therefore, That the Alleging the Testimonies of the
Fathers, upon the Differences that are at this day in Religion, is no proper
Course for the Decision of them, seeing it is no easy matter to discover what
their Judgment has been touching the same, by reason of the many Difficulties
that we meet with in the Writings of the Ancients: neither is it of so
sufficient Authority in it self, as that we may safely build our Belief upon
it; since the Fathers themselves have been also subject to Error: neither,
lastly, is it of any force, either a^^^nst the one, or the other Party; seeing
that they both regulate, and examine the Opinions, Ceremonies, and Discipline
of the Ancients; the One by the Rule of the Scriptures, and the Other by that
of the Church.

But here I find, that upon this Conclusion, Two Questions may arise. For,
seeing that the alleging the Fathers is not sufficient for the deciding of
those Points that are now in debate amongst us; it may be demanded, in the
first place, What other Course we ought to take, for the attaining to the Truth
in these Controversies? And then secondly, How, and in what Cases the Writings
of the Fathers may be useful unto us? Now although both these Questions are
without the compass of our present Design, yet notwithstanding, in regard they
so nearly border upon it, we shall in the last place say a word or two in
answer of them.

As for the First, it would be a hard matter, in my Judgment, to find out a
better way for Satisfaction herein, than that which one Scholarius, a Greek,
who is very highly accounted of by those who printed the General Councils at
Rome, has proposed. This Learned Man, in a certain Oration of his, which he
made at the Council of Florence, for the facilitating of the Union which was
then treated of betwixt the Latins and the Greeks, and was afterward concluded
on, lays down for a Ground, first, Scholar. Orat. 3. T. 4 Conc. Genesis p. 650.
(...).
That we ought not to reject all those things which are not clearly, and in
express Terms delivered in the Scriptures; which is a Pretext and Shift that
many of the Heretics make use of: but that we ought to receive with equal
Honor, whatsoever directly follows from that which is said in the
Scriptures; and to reject utterly whatsoever shall be found to be co^^trary to
those things which are undoubtedly True. He says further, That In those things
wherein the Scripture has not clearly expressed it self, we must have recourse
to the Scripture it self, as our Guide, to give us light therein, by some other
Passage where It has spoken more plainly. And after all this, he requires,
That we should use our utmost Endeavor fully to reconcile those seeming
Contradictions which we sometimes there meet withal, in several Passages; to
that purpose taking notice of the Diversity of Times, Customs, Senses, and the
like. And going on, he says, Ibid. p. 652, and 653.
That the Fathers of the Council at Nice after this manner concluded, by the
Scriptures, upon the True Belief touching the Son of God. and then applying all
this to his present purpose, he adds, Ibid. p. 654. (...), etc.
That the Scripture says clearly and expressly, that the Holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father; and that this is agreed upon by both Sides, both by the
Greeks, and the Latins: But that It has not so expressly declared it self,
whether the Holy Ghost proceed also from the Son, or not: and that this is the
thing now in Question, the Latins affirming it, and the Greeks on the other
side denying it. (...);
We ought therefore (says he) to prove this, from some other things which are
there more clearly delivered: Which he afterward performs, and indeed, in my
Judgment, very Learnedly, and Happily; proving this Doubtful Point out of other
Passages that are more Clear. And this was the Judgment of this Great Person;
which will not give any offense to those of the Church of Rome, because it came
from one that was of their Side. Neither do I see what could have been spoken
more rationally. And indeed, this is the Course that is observed in all
Sciences whatsoever: If thy Adversary doubt of the truth of what thou
proposest, thou art to prove it by such Maxims as are acknowledged and allowed
of by him, making good that which is Doubtful, by that which is Certain; and
clearing that which is Obscure, by that which is Evident. And this is the Rule
that I conceive we ought to walk by, in the Disputes that are betwixt us at
this day. The Word of God is our Common Book; let us therefore search into It,
for that upon which we may ground our own Belief, and by which we may overthrow
the Opinion of our Adversary. As for example, it is there said clearly and
expressly, That that which our Savior Christ took at his Last Supper, was
Bread: and herein we All agree. But it is not at all there expressed, whether
this Bread were afterward changed, or annihilated, or not. And this is now the
Question in Dispute amongst us. We ought therefore (according to the Counsel of
Scholarius) to prove this by some other things which are there delivered
clearly. And if thou do this, thou have got the Victory: If not, I do not at
all see why or how thou can oblige any one to believe it.

In like manner, the Scripture tells us, in as express Terms as may be, That
our Savior Christ commanded His Apostles to Take and Eat, and to Drink, that
which He gave them in Celebrating the Eucharist. But It does not at all say,
that he commanded them to Offer the same in Sacrifice, either Then, or
Afterward. And this is now the Question: which it concerns those of the Church
of Rome, if they will have us believe it, to prove by some other things, which
are clearly and expressly delivered in the Word of God.

The Scripture in like manner says expressly, That Jesus Christ is the Mediator
betwixt God and Man: and, That He is the Head of the Church; and, That He
purges us by His Blood from our Sins. Now in all this both Sides are fully
agreed. But it is not at all there expressed, That the Departed Saints are
Mediators; and, That the Pope is the Head of the Church; and, That our Souls
are in part cleansed from their Sins by the Fire of Purgatory. And herein lies
the Controversy betwixt us. The Learned Scholarius his Opinion herein would
now be, that certainly those who propose these Points as Articles of Faith,
deduce, and collect them from some things which are clearly delivered in the
Scriptures: for otherwise they are not to be pressed, as Truths. And although
that in matters of Religion, or indeed in any other things of Importance, a Man
may very well be excused for not believing a thing, when there appears not any
such Reason as may oblige him to believe it; yet notwithstanding, if those who
reject the Articles now debated betwixt us, have a mind to go further yet, and
to prove positively the Falseness of them; you see this Author has laid them
down the way by which they are to proceed. He accounts those very absurd,
that require at your hands that you should show them all things expressly
delivered in the Scripture: and this ought principally to be understood of
Negative Propositions, of which no Science gives you any certain account:
forasmuch as to go about to number them all up, would be both an infinite, and
also an unprofitable, useless piece of Work. It is sufficient to deliver the
Positive Truth. For, as whatsoever rightly follows thereupon, is True; in
like manner, whatsoever clasheth with, or contradicts the same, is False.
would thou therefore demonstrate those Propositions that are pressed upon
thee, to be False? Do but compare them with those things that are clearly and
expressly delivered in the Scripture. And if thou find them contrary to any
thing there set down, receive them not by any means. As for example, If a
Protestant, not contenting himself with having answered all those Reasons which
are brought to prove that there is such a Place as Purgatory, shall yet desire
to go further, and to make it appear, that the Opinion is False; he is in this
case to have recourse to the Scriptures, and to examine it by those things
which are there clearly and expressly delivered, touching the State of the Soul
after it is departed this Life, and touching the Cause and Means of the
Expiation of our Sins, and the like. And if the Opinion of Purgatory be found
to contradict any thing there delivered, then (according to Scholarius) it
ought not to be received by any means. But the brevity which we proposed to our
selves in this Discourse, permits us not to prosecute this Point any further.

As for the Second Question, it is no very hard matter to resolve it. For,
although we do not indeed allow any Supreme and Infallible Authority to the
Writings of the Fathers, yet do we not therefore presently account them
Useless. If there were nothing of Use in Religion, saving what was also
Infallible, we should have but little good of any Humane Writings. Those who
have written in our own Age, or a little before, are of no Authority at all,
either against the one or the other Party. Yet notwithstanding do we both read
them, and also reap much benefit from them. How much more advantage then may we
make, by studying the Writings of the Fathers, whose Piety and Learning was,
for the most part, much greater than that of the Moderns? S. Augustine believed
them not in any thing, otherwise than as he found what they delivered to be
grounded upon Reason; and yet notwithstanding, he had them in a very great
esteem. The like may be said of S. Hierome, who had read almost all of them
over, notwithstanding that he takes liberty sometimes to reprove them something
sharply, where he finds them not speaking to his mind. Though you should
deprive them not only of this Supremacy, which yet they never sought after;
but should rob them also of their Proper Nomes: yet notwithstanding would they
still be of very great Use unto us. For, Books do not therefore profit us,
because they were of such or such a Man's Writing, but rather because they
instruct us in those things that are Good and Honest, and keep us out of
Error, and make us abhor those things that are Vicious. Blot out, if you
please, the Name of S. Augustine out of the Title of those excellent Books of
his De Civitate Dei, or those other which he wrote De Doctrina Christiana. His
Writings will instruct you never a whit the less, neither will you find any
whit the less benefit by them. The like may be said of all the rest.

First of all, therefore, you shall find in the Fathers very many earnest and
zealous Exhortations to Holiness of Life, and to the Observation of the
Discipline of Jesus Christ. Secondly, you shall there meet with very strong and
solid Proofs of those Fundamental Principles of our Religion, touching which we
are all agreed: and also many excellent things laid open, tending to the right
understanding of these Mysteries, and also of the Scriptures wherein they are
contained. In this very particular their Authority may be of good use unto you,
and may serve as a Probable Argument of the Truth. For, is it not a wonderful
thing to see, that so many Great Wits, born in so many several Ages, during the
space of Fifteen hundred years, and in so many several Countries, being also of
so different Tempers, and who in other things were of so contrary Opinions,
should notwithstanding be found all of them to agree so constantly and
unanimously in the Fundamentals of Christianity? that amidst so great diversity
in Worship, they all adore one and the same Christ? preach one and the same
Sanctification? hope all of them for one and the same Immortality? acknowledge
all of them the same Gospels? find therein all of them Great and High
Mysteries? The exquisite Wisdom, and the inestimable Beauty it self of the
Discipline of Jesus Christ, I confess, is the most forcible and certain
Argument of the Truth of it: yet certainly this Consideration also is, in my
Opinion, no small proof of the same. For, I beseech you, what Probability is
there, that so many Holy Men, who were endued (as it appears by their
Writings) with such Admirable Parts, with so much strength and clearness of
Understanding, should all of them be so grossly overseen, as to set so High a
Price, and Esteem upon this Discipline, as to suffer, even to Death for it;
unless it had in it some certain Heavenly Virtue, for to make an Impression in
the Souls of Men? What likelihood is there, that Seven, or Eight Dogs, and as
many Atheistical Hogs, that Bark, and Grunt so Sottishly, and Confusedly
against This Sacred, and Venerable Religion, should have better luck in
lighting upon the Truth, than so many Excellent Men, who have all so
Unanimously born Testimony to the Truth? As for Atheists, their Vicious Life
ought to render their Testimony suspected to every one; notwithstanding they
may be otherwise (as indeed they conceive themselves to be) Able Men. For, I
beseech you, what wonder is it, if a Whoremaster, or a Bawd, or an Ambitious
person cry down that Discipline, that condemns these Vices to Everlasting
Fire? that he that drowneth himself every day, and at length vomiteth up his
Soul in Wine, should hate that Religion, which forbids Drunkenness, upon
pain of Damnation? The great Reason that these men have, to wish that it were
False, must needs make any man cease to wonder at their pronouncing it to be
False.

To take any notice of what such wretched Things as these say, is all one, as
if you should judge, by taking the Opinion of Common Strumpets, of the Equity,
or Injustice of the Laws that enjoin people to live Honest. But the case is
clean otherwise with these Holy Men, who have so Constantly, and so Unanimously
taught the Truth of the Christian Religion. For seeing they were Men, born, and
brought up in the very same Infirmities with other men; we cannot doubt but
that they also Naturally had strong Inclinations to those vices, which our
Savior Christ forbids; and very little Affection to those Virtues, which He
commands. For as much therefore, as notwithstanding all this, They have yet
all of them Constantly (...) intained, that His Doctrine is True; Their
Testimony certainly in this case neither can, nor ought in any wise to be
suspected. So that although They had not any of those Great, and Incomparable
Advantages of Parts, and Learning above the Enemies of Christianity; Their ^are
word however is much rather to be taken, than the Others^ seeing that these men
are manifestly carried away by the force of their own vile Affections, of which
the other cannot possibly be suspected Guilty. And as for those Differences in
Opinion, which are sometimes found amongst Them, touching some certain Points
of Religion, some whereof we have formerly set down; these thing are so far
from taking off any thing from the weight of Their Testimonies, as that on the
Contrary they add rather very much unto the same. For this must acquit their
Consenting of all suspicion, that some perhaps might have, that it proceeded
from some Combination, or some Correspondence, and Mutual Intelligence. When
thou findst them so disagreeing among themselves, touching so many several
Points; it is an evident Argument, that they have not learnt their knowledge
from one another, nor yet have all agreed upon the same thing by common
Deliberation; but have all of them collected it out of a serious Examination,
and Consideration of the things themselves. And if we received no other Benefit
by the Writings, of the Fathers than this, yet were this however very much.

But now, that the Benefit, and Contentment, which we shall receive from this
Consideration, may not be interrupted, and disturbed* by our meeting with so
many several Private Opinions of theirs; we are to take notice, that
Christianity consists not in Subtilties, nor in the great number of Articles.
The Efficacy of them is much more Considerable, than the Number. A great part
of these Points of Faith and the end of all the ^est, is, Sanctification; that
is to say, A pure worship of God, and, A Hearty Charity toward Men. Thou may
therefore boldly conclude, That Man to be a true Observer of This Discipline;
that thou shall find to have a True, and Right Sense, and Apprehension of these
Two Points. Though perhaps he be ignorant of those Other, that lie rather in
Speculation, than in Practice, thou ought not to reject him for that. And
if, being carried away with his own Curiosity, or some other reason, he chance
to err in some of those other Articles, bear with him notwithstanding. As God
forgives us our Sins, so does He also forgive us our Errors. The Hay, and the
Stubble, and the Chafe shall be consumed: But yet He that builds therewith,
shall be saved, if so be He but hold fast to the Foundation. Neither ought
thou to be troubled, if thou now and then meetest with some Ignorant, or
perhaps some Erroneous Passages in the Fathers, touching these Points. They are
never a whit the less Christians for this; and may for all this, have been most
Faithful Servants of Jesus Christ. There is not any Face in the World so
Beautiful, but that it has some Speckle, or Blemish in it. Yet is it not
either the less esteemed, or the less beloved for this. The Natural condition
of Mortal Men, and Things, is, to have some Mixture in it of Imperfection.

But now, besides what has been hitherto said, we may, in my opinion, make
another very Considerable Use of the Fathers. For there sometimes arise such
troublesome Spirits, as will needs broach Doctrines, devised of their own Head,
which are not at all grounded upon any Principle of the Christian Religion. I
say therefore, that the Authority of the Ancients may very Properly, and
Seasonably be made use of, against the Impudence of these Men: by showing, that
the Fathers were utterly Ignorant of any such Fancies, as these men propose to
the World. And if this can be proved, we ought then certainly to conclude, that
no such Doctrine was ever preached to Mankind; either by our Savior Christ, or
by His Apostles. For what Probability is there, that those Holy Doctors of
Former Ages, from whose hands Christianity has been derived down unto us,
should be Ignorant of any of those things, which had been Revealed, and
Recommended by our Savior, as Important, and Necessary to Salvation? It is
true indeed, that the Fathers, being deceived either by some False manner of
Argumentation, or else by some Seeming Authority, do sometimes deliver such
things, as have not been revealed by our Savior Christ; but are evidently
either False, or Ill grounded; as we have formerly showed in those Examples
before produced by us. It is true moreover, that among those things which have
been revealed by our Savior Christ in the Scripture, which yet are not
Absolutely Necessary to Salvation, the Fathers may have been ignorant of some
of them; either by reason that Time had not as yet discovered what the sense of
them was* or else, because that for lack of giving good heed unto them, or by
their being carried away with some Passion, They did not then perceive, what
has since been found out. But that they should all of them have been Ignorant
of any Article, that is Necessarily Requisite to Salvation, is altogether
Impossible. For, after this Account, They should all have been deprived of
Salvation; which, I suppose, every honest Soul would tremble at the thought of.

I say then, and, as I conceive, have sufficiently proved in this Treatise,
that an Argument which concludes the Truth of any Proposition, from the
Fathers having maintained the same, is very Weak, and Ill-grounded; as
supposing that, which is Clearly False; namely, That the Fathers maintained
nothing, which had not been Revealed by our Savior Christ. For, this would be
such a kind of Argumentation, as if a man should prove, by the General
Agreement herein of the Fathers, that all the Departed Souls are shut up
together in a certain Place, or Receptacle, till the Day of Judgment: or, that
the Encharist is Necessarily to be administered to Little Infants; and the like;
where every one sees, how Insufficient, and Invalid this way of Argumentation
is And, to say the truth, such is the Proceeding of the Church of Rome, when
they go about to prove, by the Authority of the Fathers, those Articles which
they propose to the World, and which are rejected by the Protestants.

I say moreover, that to conclude upon the Nullity, or Falseness of any
Article, that is not of the number of those that are Necessary to Salvation,
from the general Silence of the Fathers touching the same, is a very Absurd way
of Arguing; as supposing a thing which is also Manifestly False; Namely, that
the Fathers must Necessarily have seen, and Clearly known All, and every of
those things, which Jesus Christ has revealed in His Word.

Such a kind of Argument would it be thought among the Franciscans, if any one
should conclude against them, from the Silence of the Fathers, that our Savior
Christ has not at all revealed, that the Blessed Virgin Mary was conceived
without Sin. But yet I confess again on the other side, that in those Points
that are accounted as Absolutely Necessary to Salvation, an Argument that
should be drawn from the General Silence of the Fathers, to prove the Nullity
or Falseness of it, would be very Pertinent, and indeed Unanswerable. As for
example, His manner of Argumentation would be very Rational, and Solid, that
should conclude that those Means of Salvation which are proposed by a Mahomet,
suppose, or a David George, or the like Sectaries, are Null, and contrary to
the Will of our Savior Christ, (how much soever these Men may seem to Honor
Him,) seeing that none of ehe Ancient Christians speak so much as one syllable
of it, and are utterly ignorant of all those Secrets, that these Wretches have
preached to their Disciples, and delivered as Infallible and Necessary Means of
Salvation. After this manner did Irenaeus dispute against the Valentinians, and
other of the Gnostics; who vented their own sens^less Dreams, and Absurd
Issues of their Own Brain, saying, That the Creator of the World was but an
Angel^ and, that there were above Him certain Divine Powers, which They called
Aeones that is to say Ages: some of them making more of these, and others
fewer, and some reckoning to the number of CCCLXV. and an infinite number of
other the like Prodigies; never showing any Ground for the same, either in
Reason, or out of the Scripture. Irenaeus l. 3. Contr. Haer. c. 1, 2, 3, and 4.
Irenaeus therefore, that he might make it appear to the World, that this so
Strange Doctrine was produced out of their Own Brain only, goes about, and
visits the Arohives of all the Churches, that had been either Planted, or
Watered by the Holy Apostles, turns over all their Records, Evidences, and
Ancient Monuments; and these Aeones, Achamot, and Barbele of the Gnostics no
where appearing, Id. 3. c. 2.
nor so much as any the least Part or Trace of them. He concludes, that the
Apostles had never delivered over any such thing to their Disciples, neither by
Writing, nor by Word of Mouth, as these Impostors pretended they had. For
certainly if they had done so, the memory of it could not have been so utterly
lost. This is also the Method that Tertullian followed, in his Disputations
against these very Heretics, and others the like, in the 22 Chapter of his
Book De Praescriptionibus adversus Haereticos, and in other places. The
Practice of these Great Persons, who made use of it themselves, will here serve
to prove unto us, that this Course is Right, and Good.

And thus you see, that the Authority of the Fathers is of very great Use in
the Church, and serves as an Outwork to the Scriptures, for the repelling the
Presumption of those, who would forge a New Faith.

But forasmuch as those, who broach New Doctrines of their own Head, do
Ordinarily slight the Holy Scriptures; as those very Heretics did, whom
Iraeneus confuted; who impudently accused Them of not being Right; Iren: l. 3.
c. 2. Cum enim ex Scripturis arguuntur, in ac^nsarionem convertuntur ips^rum
Script urarum, quasi non recte habeant, neque sint ex ^cctio^^tate, and quia
vary sint dictae, and quia non possit ex his inveniri veritas, ab his qui
nesciant Traditionem. Non enim per litteras tradi^am illam, sed per vivam vocem.
and that they are of no Authority; and speak in very Ambiguous Terms; and that
they are not able to inform a man of the Truth, unless they are acquainted with
Tradition; the Truth having been delivered (as These men pretended) not in
Writing, but by Word of Mouth: For this Reason, I say, and for other the like,
are the Writings of the ^athers of very great Use in these Disputes; and I
conceive This to be one of the Principal ends for which the Divine Providence
has, in despite of So many Confusions, and Changes, preserved so many of them
safe, down to our times.

If therefore the Protestants should propose, of their Own Head, and should
press as Absolutely Necessary to Salvation; any Positive Article, which does
not at all appear in Antiqui^y; without all Question this Course might, with
very good Reason, be made use of against Them. But it is most Evident, that
there is no such thing at all in their Belief: for they maintain only such
things, as are eithe Expressly delivered in the Scriptures, or else are
Evidently deduced from thence; and such as have also been expounded, the
greatest part of them, and interpreted by the Ancients not in their own private
Writings only, but even in their Creeds and Synodical Determinations also. They
pretend not either to any Particular Revelation, o^ Secret Tradition, or any
other New Principle of Doctrine. Their Faith is grounded only upon the Old, and
(which is the Most Authentic Instrument of Christianity) the New Testament.
Only in their Expositions either of the Doctrines therein Contained, or other
Passages, They produce some few things, that are not at all found in the
Fathers. But these things being not Necessary to Salvation, the Argument which
is brought from the Silence of the Fathers herein, is not sufficient to prove
the Falseness of them. Time, Experience, Assistance of others, and the very
Errors also of the Fathers, having (as They say) now laid that Open to Them,
which was Heretofore more Difficult, and hard to be discovered and taken notice
of, in Divine Revelation. Who knows not that a Dwarf, mounted upon a Giants
shoulders, looks higher, and sees further, than the Giant himself? It would
be ridiculous in any man that should conclude, that That which the Dwarf
pretends to discover, is not at all in Nature, because then the Giant must also
have seen it. Neither would He be much wiser, that should accuse the Dwarf of
Presumption; because forsooth, He has told Us that, whereof the Giant said not
a word: seeing that it is the Giant, to whom the Dwarf is beholding for the
greatest part of His Knowledge. And this is Our Case, say the Protestants: We
are mounted upon the Shoulders of that Great, and High Giant, Antiquity. That
advantage which we have above it, by its means enables us to see many things in
Divine Revelation, which it did not see. But yet however this cannot be any
occasion of Presumption to us, because we see more than it did; for as much as
it is this very Antiquity, to which we owe a great part of this our Knowledge.

It is Certainly therefore very Clear, that as for the Protestants, and what
concerns the Positive Points of Their Faith, they are wholly without the
Compass of this Dispute. And as for those of the Church of Rome, They cannot,
for the Reasons before given, make any Advantage of the Testimony of the
Ancients, for the proving of any of those Points of Doctrine which They
maintain, save only of those wherein their Adversaries agree with them; and
therefore, if they would have us to come over to Their Belief, They must
Necessarily have recourse to some other kind of Proofs. But yet I do not see,
but that we may very well make Inquiry into Antiquity touching many Articles,
which are now maintained by those of the Church of Rome: and if we find, that
the Ancients have not said any thing at all of the same, we may then positively
conclude, That they are not to be accounted as any part of the Christian
Religion. I confess, that there are some of them, against which this Argument
is of no force at all; as namely, those which they do not account Necessary to
Salvation, and which both the Ancients heretofore might have been, and we also
at this day may be ignorant of. But certainly, this Argument, in my Judgment,
would be utterly unanswerable, against such Points as they press as Necessary,
and whereon indeed they would have our Salvation wholly to depend: As for
Example, The Supreme Authority of the Pope, and of the Church which owneth him
as Its Head; The Adoration of the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist; the
Sacrifice of the Mass; the Necessity of Auricular Confession, and the like.
For, if so be they are of so great Importance, as they would make us believe,
it would be a Point of high Impiety to say, That the Fathers knew not any thing
at all of them; in like manner as it would be a most absurd thing to maintain,
That though they did know them, they would not yet speak any one word of them,
in all those Books which we have of theirs at this day. And, if they had said
any thing at all of them in their Writings, we have no reason in the World to
suspect, that possibly those Passages, where mention was made of them, may have
been rased out, or corrupted and altered by false hands; seeing that this Piece
of Knavery would have been done to the disadvantage of those who had these
Books in their Custody. We have rather very good reason to suspect, that
whatsoever Alterations there are, they have been made in favor of the Church
of Rome, as we have proved before in the First Book. If therefore, after so
long a time, and after so many Indexes as they of the Church of Rome have put
forth, and so great a desire as they have had to find these Doctrines of theirs
in the Writings of the Fathers, and the little Conscience that they have
sometimes made of foisting into the Writings of the Fathers, what they could
not find there; We can still notwithstanding make it appear, that they are not
to be found there at all: After all this, I say, who can possibly doubt, but
that the Fathers were ignorant of them? Who will ever be persuaded to believe,
that they held them as Necessary to Salvation? And if they were not known to be
such then, how can any body imagine, that they should at length come to be such
now?

My Opinion therefore is, That although the Authority of the Fathers be not
sufficient to prove the Truth of those Articles which are now maintained by the
Church of Rome against the Protestants, although the Ancients should perhaps
have believed the same; it may notwithstanding serve to prove the Falseness of
them, in case that we should find by the Fathers, that the Ancients were either
wholly ignorant of them, or at least acknowledged them not for such, as they
would now have us believe them to be: which is a Business that so nearly
concerns the Protestants, as that to be able to bring about their Design, I
conceive they ought to employ a good part of their time in reading over the
Books of the Ancients.

Only it is requisite, that either Party, when they undertake so tedious and
so important a Business as this is, should come very well provided of all
Necessary Parts; as namely, of the Knowledge of the Language, and of History,
and should also be very well read in the Scriptures, and, that they use herein
their utmost Diligence and Attention, and withal read over exactly whatsoever
we have left us of the Fathers, not omitting any thing that Possibly they can
get; because a little short Passage many times gives a Man very much Light in
the finding out their Meaning: and not think (as some, who much deceive
themselves, do) that they perfectly know what the Sense and Belief of the
Ancients was, because perhaps they have spent four or five Months in the
reading of them over. But above all, it is Necessary that they come to this
Business void of all Passion and Prejudication: which is indeed the greatest,
and the most general Cause of that Obscurity which is found in these Writings
of the Fathers, whilst every one endeavors to make them speak to his sense;
whereas in the greatest part of these Points of Religion which are now
controverted amongst us, these Ancient Authors really believed much Less than
the one Party does, and some little matter More than the other does: and there
are but a very few Points of all this number, wherein they are fully and
absolutely of the same Judgment that either of the Two Parties is. Neither is
it sufficient in this Business to take notice of such Testimonies as either
positively affirm or deny those things which we look after; because that how
clear soever they perhaps may be, it will go very hard but a quick Wit will
find something to darken the sense of them: as you may observe in all Books of
Controversies, where you shall have them so baffle, and make nothing of such
Testimonies as are brought against them out of the Ancients, as that you would
hardly know what to hold to. But you must also observe, what the Necessary
Consequences are of each particular Article; it being impossible to conclude
upon any One Point, that is of any Importance, but that there will presently
follow upon it diverse Consequences, as well within, as without the Church.

As for example: you are to consider what the Consequences are of the
Transubstantiation of the Eucharist, as it is now held by the Church of Rome;
of Purgatory; and of the Monarchical Authority of the Pope: and when you have
observed them well, you are then to mark, in reading the Books of the Ancients,
whether they appear there in Whole, or in Part. For, if you find them not there
at all, it is a most Certain Argument, that the Doctrine from whence they
proceed, and upon which they follow, is New and Unsound. But I shall not
proceed any further in this Discourse, since diverse have already treated hereof
at large; it being, in my Judgment, no hard matter to collect, from what we
have here delivered, how we ought to read the Fathers.

FINIS.

