SIX METAPHYSICAL MEDITATIONS; Wherein it is Proved That there is a GOD. And
that Man's MIND is really distinct from his BODY. Written Originally in Latin By
RENATVS DESCARTES. Hereunto are added the OBJECTIONS made against these
Meditations. By THOMAS HOBBES Of Malmesbury. With the AUTHORS Answers. All
Faithfully Translated into ENGLISH, with a short Account of Des-Cartes's Life.
By WILLIAM MOLYNEVX.

London, Printed by B. G. for Benj. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1680.

Some Books sold by John Lawrence, at the Angel in Cornhill, near the Royal
Exchange.
A Collection of Letters for the improvement of Husbandry and Trade, intended
to be continued Monthly, by John Houghton, fellow of the Royal Society, it is
designed that every Letter shall be useful to Mankind, and by degrees for most
persons of both Sexes.

The Merchant Royal, (a very pleasant Seromon) Preached before the King at
White Hall, upon the Nuptials of an Honorable Lord and his Lady, in Quarto,
price 6 d.

Humane Prudence, or the Art by which a man may raise himself and Fortune to
Granduer, by A. B. the second Edition, with the Addition of a Table; in
Twelves, price Bound, 1 ^.

THE TRANSLATORS PREFACE. TO THE READERS.
HAd honor or applause and not the public advantage of English Readers been
the design of this Undertaking, the consideration of the ^ommon Fate of
Trans^actions had dis^ouraged Me from permitting this even to have seen the
light; for mere Versions do always carry with them this Property, that if not
well done they may much disgrace, but if well, not much commend the doers.

And certainly I might well have expected the same chance, had this been the
Translation of an History, Play or Romance; wherein there is requisi^e not
only a bare version but a conformation of Idiom and language, manner and
customary expression; But the nature of this present Work will not admit of the
like liberty, and therefore, I hope, amongst Judicious Re^ders it may be exempt
from the common Fate of Translations; for if we look upon it as a Philosophical
or Metaph^sical Tract, or rather as (really it is) a Ph^sico-Mathematical
Argumentation, we shall find that a great strictness of Expression is requisite
to be observed therein. Sothat had a Translator taken upon him to use his own
liberty of Phrase, he would thereby have endangered the sense and force of the
Arguments; for P^liteness of language might as well be expected in a
Translation of Euclide as in this. And all that are acquainted with this famous
Authors design, do very well know, that it was his intention in these
Meditations Mathematically to demonstrate, that there is a God, and that man's
mind is incorporeal. And it was his opinion, that metaphysics may as clearly
be demonstrated as mathematics, as witness his expression in the Dedicatory
Epistle of this Work to the Sorbone Doctors, Eas (Rations scilicet) quibus
hic* utor certitudine and evidentia Geometricas aequare, vel etiam superare
existimem; That he reputed his Arguments used in these Meditations, to equal if
not excel Geometrical certainty.

And this, I suppose, is sufficient to make the Reader, not expect herein any
smoothness of phrase or quaint^ess of Expression; what is here delivered in
English is immediately taken, as it is naturally in the Original. The words, we
hope, may be apposite enough, and fit to express what is here designed, and I
think it a derogation from the Authors skill to draw the Picture of his mind in
any other Colors, than what his own Copy expresses.

Thus far in vindication of the Philosophical plain style and rough Language of
the following Translation. I shall add a line or two, first relating to the
Readers, secondly of the Author, and lastly of the Meditations themselves,
together with the Motives which excited me to this Work.

As to the Readers, it is, I suppose, so evident, that candcur of mind, and
fr^edome from prejudice is requisite to all that desire to advantage themselves
by reading other men's notions, that it need not be here insisted on with much
earnestness; yet considering the Antiquity of this subject, and the novelty of
the Arguments here produced, it seems to be more than ordinarily requisite for
an impartial p^rusal of the ensuing Tract. Neither are the following
Meditations to be slightly passed over, but with diligence and attention to be
read; for as in mathematical demonstration, the careless missing of any one
single Position may render the Conclusion obscure and sometimes inconsequent,
so in these metaphysical Demonstrations, which (as before has been noted from
the illustrious Author thereof) for certainty do equal, if not excel
Geometrical Propositions, the slight attention to any one particular Argument
may frustrate the design of the whole discourse.

The Reasoning therefore here being close and solid, and (as in Mathematics)
the knowledge of the latter depending on the knowledge of what went before,
it is the duty of every Reader seriously to attend the Particulars, as also the
connection of the whole. Let him weigh the Arguments and perpend the
Conclusions, and after a clear and distinct Kn^wledge, let him pass his
judgment.

And to this end I shall make it my request to every Reader, that he would not
be content with a single perusual of the following Discourses, but that he
would often repeat his reading t^em over; for by this means the force of those
Arguments, which at first may by chance escape the most diligent and attentive
Peruser, by a second or third Essay may offer themselves more fully to his
Consideration. This Was the desire of our Author in an other of his pieces, I
mean his Principles of Philosophy, which I am sure do not require so strict an
attention of mind, as these abstracted specualtions; and therefore if it were
his Request in that case, we may Reasonably think that'twas no less his desire
in this.

When we come to speak of the Incomparable Author of these Meditations, we have
reason to lament our own Ignorance, and to blame the Ingratitude of the Age
wherein he lived, for not transmitting to Posterity more certain and ample
Records of the Life and Conversation of this Excellent Philosopher, all that
has been Written in this kind gives us only so much light into the Life of this
Prodigious Man, as may make us wish for more; imparting which, I shall
recommend the Readers to a further enquiry into the inward Thoughts, (largly
discovered in the Writings) of our Famous Author, of whose outward actions and
condition we have so small knowledge.

Renatus Descartes was born on the last day of March in the year 1596. at
Tours, or at Castrum Eraldum a Town near Tours in France; He came of an Ancient
and Noble Family, being by Descent Lord of Perron, His Father was a Senator of
his Country, and a Man of no mean estate, leaving to this his only Son by a
second Wife between six and seven thousand pounds a year.

He was Educated in his younger years according to the manner of his Country
(and as he himself recommends in one of his Epistles, viz. Epist. 90. partis
secundae to One for the Instruction of his Son) in the Aristotelian principles
of Philosophy, a whole course whereof he had run through at the Age of
se^enteen in the Schools of Flexia, or La Flesche a Town in the Province of
Anjou, fa^ous for the College of Jesuits there estalish'd by Henry the 4 th.

But to this he did not Continue long devoted, giving early testimonies of his
dislike to the unsatisfactory Notions, and verbose emp^iness of the
Peripatetick Philosophy; He used therefore his utmost endeavors (as he himself
testifies in his Dissertatio de Methodo) to get loose from those Chains and
Fetters of Mind, to which the weakness of his tender years had subjected him.

To this end he betook himself to a long course of Travel, that by the variety
of Objects, which he was likely to meet with in his journeys, the memory of his
past Notions might be blotted out; In his travel ^e applied himself much to the
study of the Art Military, and Mathematics; In the latter he has left the
World large testimonies of his Exeellence in his Book of Geometry; and in the
former we have reason to believe him most expert, for He was personally present
at some Sieges and Battles both in France and Germany, as particularly at the
Siege of Rochel, of Gava near Genoa, of Breda, at the Battle of Prague, etc. so
that we may conclude that he had a Genius fitted (according to the Motto of the
noble Sir W. Raliegh) Tam Marti, quam Mercurio, For the Pike as well as Pen.
And as the Glorious Roman Emperor became a Caesar by his Book as well as
Sword, by the Conquests of his mind as well as those of his arm; so our Famous
Author was Ex Utroque Clarus.

In his Travels he spent many years, in all which time he was not Idle, but
highly improved himself by his converse with the Beaux Esprits, which he met
with in the several Regions he visited; The first Place he betook himself to,
was Italy, then he went into Denmark, Germany, Hungary, etc. And after a Long
but ad^antagious Peregrination he returned to Amsterdam, where he intended to
take up hi^ Rest, had he not been called by the French King upon very
Honourableterms to Paris; During his Continuance there he so ordered his annual
Revenue, that he might be supplied by the hands of a Friend wherever he was. He
staid at Paris three years, and then retired Himself to a solitary village in
Holland called Egmond, where he lived twenty five years, during which time he
applied himself wholly to the Restoration of true Philosophy, wherein he gave
the World such mighty testimonies of his Excellence* that in a short time he
became celebrated in the mouths of all Learned Men. Neither were the Courts of
Princes silent in his deserved Praises; for after a Retirement of twenty five
years he was Invited by Christina Queen of Sweedland to her Court; Thither upon
the entreaty of this brave and Learned Princess he betook himself, where he had
not continued Long before he was struck with a Peripneumonia or Inflammation of
the Lungs (contracted, as it is thought by the long Discourses which he used to
hold bare headed with the Queen, continuing them sometimes till far in the
Night,) of which unhappy distemper he Died the seventh Day after he sicken'd.

Thus Expired this Wonder of his Own and succeeding Ages, desired and lamented
by all men, Aequal'd by none. He was buried in a costly Monument consisting of
four sides, upon which were inscribed Epitaphs; bestowed upon him by many
Renowned Persons.

What shall we now say sufficient to express our Gr^^ for the untimely Decease
of this Worthy Philosopher? But Especially what shall we now do to recover our
Loss? Let us endeavor to Redeem what we have lost by well Husbanding and
careful improvement of what is left; which may be done in Part by a Diligent
Perusal of the Works written by this Excellent Author; This, This only is the
way of Reviving him again, and of giving him Immortality in spite of his
untimely Fate. And so let him for ever live celebrated by the Deserved Praises
of all ingenious Enquirers after truth, and Learning.

Let us therefore cast our eye upon the Present Work of this extroardinary
Philosopher, and therein let us admire his profound Judgment and vigorous
Fancy, for if w^ seriously consider it, we shall hardly find a more solid close
piece of Reasoning either in this or Foregoing ages; Here, what was commonly
asserted without proof, is not only proved but Mathematically Demonstrated,
viz. That God is the Fountain and Original of Truth; His sharp Wit, like
Hannibals Vinegar, has eaten through the Mazing and overtowring hills of Errors,
a Plain and Pleasant Way to the Divine seat of Knowledge.

In fine, such is the Excellence of these six Meditations, that I cannot
resemble his Performan^e herein better than to the Six Days Work of the Supreme
Architect; and certainly next to the Creation of All things out of Nothing, the
Restoration of Truth out of Errors is the most Divine Work; so that (with
Reverence be it spoken) the Incomparable Des-Cart^s does hereby deserve as it
were the name of a Creator. In the first Meditation we are Presented with a
Rude and Indigested Choas of Errors and Doubts, till the Divine spirit of the
Noble Descartes (Pardon the Boldness of the Expression) moves upon the
confused face of these Waters, and thereout produces some clear and distinct
Light; by which Sunshine he proceeds to bring forth and cherish other Branches
of Truth; Till at last by a six Days Labor he Establishes this Fair Fabric
(as I may call it) of the Intellectual World on foundations that shall never be
shaken. Then sitting downwith rest and satisfaction he looks upon this his
Offspring, and Pronounces it Good.

These Things Considered, I need not make any long Apologies for my undertaking
a translation thereof; The excellency of the Original is sufficient to
vindicate my endeavors to present the English World with a Copy, and he that
sha'l blame my Intentions of Communicating the Methods of Truth to those that
have only the English Tongue, may as well find fault with those English that
propagate the Christian Religion among savage Indians, and translate the
Scriptures into their Language, because they have not the English Tongue. To
understand Latin is no (or at most a very small) part of Learning* and that
which certainly every Cobbler in Rome was once endowed with; and therefore must
there then be no translations out of Greek into Latin? I doubt not, but there
are many Persons in our Nations, who tho wanting Latin, are notwithstanding
very capable of the most abstracted speculations; the late disturbances of our
Kingdoms occasioned many Youths, who were then in a fair way of Instruction,
to forsake their learning, and divert their intentions from Literature to Arms,
and yet many of these have afterward become Men of extraordinary abilities and
qualifications for learning notwithstanding their deficiency in the Roman
Tongue. And I see no Reason why it should not be the desire, and consequently
the endeadeavour of every true English man, to make his language as universal
as is now the French, into which the best Books in all sorts of Learning, both
Poetry and Prose, are daily translated out of all languages, but especially out
of Greek and Latin. Among which these Meditations are to be found, entitled,
Les Meditations Metaphysiques De Rene Des Carts touchant la Premiere
Philosophy, This was translated out of the Authors Latin into French by
Monsieur le D. D. L. N. S. The several Objections also, which were made by
diverse learned Persons against these Meditations, with the Authors Answers,
were translated into French by M. B. L. R. And, I hope, no one will assert,
that the French are more fit to receive those metaphysical Notions delivered
herein than the English Nation.

But 'twas none of the smallest motives I had to this undertaking, that tho
some famous English Authors have taken notice of the Arguments here produced
(for the proof of a Deity drawn from the Idea we have of God in our Mind, etc.)
Particularly the most excellent and learned Dr. Stillingfleet in the first
Chapter of the third Book in his Origines Sacrae, who refers his Readers to a
further search into these Meditations in the 400 page of that Discourse; as
also the Reverend Dr. Henry More in his Antidote against Atheism, and more
fully in his Appendix annexed thereto, has treated of our Authors
demonstration; and yet nothing of the genuine original from whence they have
borrowed all their Copies (tho some of them drawn in a larger size, yet I
question whether so expressive) nothing of our Authors proper management has
ever appeared in English. Those that assert these Arguments to have been long
before thought upon by some of the Fathers, I shall refer to our Authors just
vindication of himself in his several Answers to Objections made against these
Discourses.

And here I shall dismiss the Reader detaining him no longer from that
satisfaction which ^e may reasonably expect from the perusal of the following
Meditations; this Translaltion is dedicated to no one in particular, but is
h^^bly submitted to the moderate censure of all candid Readers, by

Dablin Feb, 19. 1679/80. Their humble Servant Will. Molyneux.

The Contents.
Meditation 1. Of Things Doubtful. Page I. Meditat. 2. Of the Nature of Man's
Mind, and that it is easier Proved to Be then our Body. p. II. Meditat. 3. Of
God, and that there Is a God. p. 27. Meditat. 4. Of Truth and Falsehood. p. 55.
Meditat. 5. Of the Essence of Things Material, and herein again of God, and
that He does Exist. p. 70. Meditat. 6. Of Corporeal Beings and their Existence,
as also of the Real Difference between Mind and Body. p. 83. Objections and
Answers. p. 155.
ERRATA.
Page 1. line ^, dele off. p. 3. l. 21. there ^ants the sign of Interrogation.
p. 8. l. 10. r. Premeditated. ib. l. 14. r falsehoods. p. 18. l. 1^. r. that it
may. p. 20. l. 11. r. suffers. In the two or three first Chapters there are
Astericks wanting. p. 33. l. 10. dele l. p. 9 l. 2^. r formally. p. 49. l. 14.
r. Duraration and Continuance. p. ^4. l. ^. for the Point put a C^mma. p. 61.
l. u^e. r. ^enquire. p. 91. r. in themargin doubted. p. 124..6. r. have no
affinity.

THE Metaphysical Meditations OF Renatus Descartes, etc.
MEDITAT. I.
Of Things Doubtful.
SOME years past I perceived how MANY Falsities I admitted off as Truths in my
Younger years, and how Dubious those things were which I raised from thence;
and therefore I thought it requisite (if I had a design to establish any thing
that should prove firm and permanent in sciences) that once in my life I
should clearly cast aside all my former opinions, and begin a new from some
First principles. But this seemed a great Task, and I still expected that
maturity of years, then which none could be more apt to receive Learning; upon
which account I waited so long, that at last I should deservedly be blamed had
I spent that time in Deliberation which remained only for Action.

This day therefore I conveniently released my mind from all cares, I procured
to my self a Time Quiet, and free from all Business, I retired my self Alone;
and now at length will I freely and serioulsy apply my self to the General
overthrow of all my former Opinions.

To the Accomplishment of Which, it will not be necessary for me to prove them
all false (for that perhaps I shall never atcheive) But because my reason
persuades me, that I must withdraw my assent no less from those opinions which
seem not so very certain and undoubted, then I should from those that are
Apparently false, it will be sufficient if I reject all those wherein I find
any Occasion of doubt.

Neither to effect this is it necessary, that they all should be run over
particularly (which would be an endless trouble) but because the Foundation
being once undermined, whether is built there on will of its own accord come to
the ground, I shall therefore immediately assault the vey principle, on which
whatever I have believed was grounded. Viz.

Whatever I have hitherto admitted as most true, that I received either from,
or by my Senses; but these I have often found to deceive me, and it is prudence
never certainly to trust those that have (tho but once) deceived us.

1 Doubt. But tho sometimes the senses deceive us being exercised about remote
or small objects, yet there are many other things of which we cannot doubt tho
we know them only by the senses? as that at present I am in this place, that I
am sitting by a fire, that I have a Winter gown on me, that I feel this Paper
with my hands; But how can it be denied that these hands or this body is mine;
Unless I should compare my self to those mad men, whose brains are disturbed by
such a disorderly melancholic vapor, that makes them continually profess
themselves to be Kings, tho they are very poor, or fancy themselves clothed in
Purple Robes, tho they are naked, or that their heads are made of Clay as a
bottle, or of glass, etc. But these are mad men, and I should be as mad as they
in following their example by fancying these things as they do.

1 Solution. This truly would seem very clear to those that never sleep, and
suffer the same things (and sometimes more unlikely) in their repose, then
these mad men do whilst they are awake; for how often am I persuaded in a Dream
of these usual occurrences, that I am in this place, that I have a Gown on me,
that I am sitting by a fire, etc. Tho all the while I am lying naked between
the Sheets.

But now I am certain that I am awake and look upon this Paper, neither is this
head which I shake asleep, I knowingly and willingly stretch out this hand, and
am sensible that things so distinct could not happen to one that sleeps. As if
I could not remember my self to have been deceived formerly in my sleep by the
like thoughts; which while I consider more attentively I am so far convinced of
the difficulty of distinguishing sleep from waking that I am amazed, and this
very amazement almost persuades me that I am asl^ep.

2. Doubt. Wherefore let us suppose our selves asleep, and that these things
are not true, viz. that we open our eyes, move our heads, stretch our hands,
and perhaps that we have no such things as hands or a body. Yet we must
confess, that what we see in a Dream is (as it were) a painted Picture, which
cannot be devised but after the likeness of some real things; and that
therefore these Generals at least, viz. eyes, head, hands, and the whole body
are things really existent and not imaginary; For Painters themselves, (even
then when they design Mermaids and Satyrs in the most unusual shapes) do not
give them natures altogether new, but only add the diverse Parts of different
Animals together; And if by chance they invent any thing so new that nothing
was ever seen like it, so that it is wholly fictitious and false, yet the colors
at least of which, they make it must be true Colors; soupon the same account,
tho these General things as eyes, head, hands, etc. may be imaginary; yet
nevertheless we must of necessity confess the more simple and universal things
to be True, of which (as of true Colors) these Images of things (whether true
or false) which are in our minds are made; such as are the nature of a body in
General, and its Extension, also the shape of things extended, with the
quantity or bigness of them, their number also, and place wherein they are, the
time in which they continue, and the like, and therefore from hence we make no
bad conclusion, that Physic, both Natural, and Medicinal, Astronomy, and all
other ^ciences, which depend on the consideration of compound things, are
Doubtful. ^ut that Arithmetic, Geometry, and the ^ille (which treat only of
the most simple, and General things not regarding whether they really are or
not) have in them something certain and undoubted; for whether I sleep or wake,
two and three added make five; a square has no more sides then four, etc.
neither seems it possible that such pla^^ truths can be doubted off.

2. Solution. But all this While there is rooted in my mind a certain old
opinion of the being of an Omnipotent God, by whom I am created in the state I
am in; and how know I but he caused that there should be no Earth, no Heaven,
no Body, no Figure, no Magnitude, no Place, and yet that all these things
should seem to me to be as now they are? And as I very often judge others to
Err about those things which they think they Thoroughly understand, so why may
not I be deceived, whenever I add two and three, or count the sides of a
Square, or whatever other easy Matter can be thought of?

3. Doubt. But perhaps God wills not that I should be deceived, for he is said
to be Infinitely Good.

3. Solution. Yet if it were Repugnant to his Goodness to create me so that I
should be always deceived, it seems also unagreable to his Goodness to permit
me to be deceived at any time; Which last no one will affirm: Some there are
truly who had rather deny Gods O^nipotence, then believe all things uncertain;
but these at present we may not contradict. And we will suppose all this of God
to be false; yet whether they will suppose me to become what I am by Fate, by
Chance, by a continued chain of ca^ses, or any other way, because to err is an
Imperfetion, by how much the less power they will Assign to the Author of my
Being, so much the ^^re Probable it will be, that I am so Imperfect as to be
always deceived.

To which Arguments I know not what to answer but am forced to confess, that
there is nothing of all those things which I formerly received as Truths,
whereof at present I may not doubt; and this doubt shall not be grounded on
inadvertency or Levity, but upon strong and premeditating reasons; and
therefore I must hereafter (if I design to discover any truths) withdraw my
assent from them so less then from apparent falsehood.

But it is not sufficient to think only Transiently on these things, but I must
take care to remember them; for daily my old opinion return upon me, and much
against my Will almost possess my Belief tied to them, as it were by a
continued use and Right of Familiarity; neither shall I ever cease to assent
and trust in them, whilst I suppose them as in themselves they really are, that
is to say, something doubtful (as now I have proved) yet notwithstanding highly
Probable, which it is much more Reasonable to believe then disbeleive.

Wherefore I conceive I should not do amiss, if (with my mind bent clearly to
the contrary side) I should deceive my self, and suppose them for a While
altogether false and Imaginary; till at length the Weights of prejudice being
equal in each scale, no ill custom may any more Draw my Judgment from the
true Conception of things, for I know from hence will follow no dangerous
Error, and I cannot too immoderately pamper my own Incredulity, seeing What I am
about, concerns not Practice ^ut Speculation.

To Which end I will suppose, not an Infinitely perfect God, the Fountain of
truth, but that some Evil Spirit which is very Powerful and crafty has used all
his endeavors to deceive me; I will conceive, the Heavens, Air, Eearth,
Colors, Figures, Sounds, and all outward things are nothing else but the
delusions of Dreams, by which he has laid snares to catch my easy belief; I
will consider my self as not having hands, Eyes, Flesh, Blood, or Senses, but
that I falsely think that I have all these. I will continue firmly in this
Meditation; and tho it lies not in my power to discover any truth, yet this is
in my power, not to assent to Falsities, and with a strong resolution take care
that the Mighty deceiver (tho never so powerful or cunning) impose not any
thing on my belief.

But this is a laborious intention, and a certain sloth reduces me to the usual
course of life, and like a Prisoner who in his sleep perhaps enjoyed an
imaginary liberty, and when he begins to suppose that he is asleep is afraid to
waken, but is willing to be deceived by the Pleasant delusion; so I willingly
fall into my old opinions, and am afraid to be Roused, least a toilsome waking
succeeding a pleasant rest I may hereafter live not in the light, but in the
confused darkness of the doubts now raised.

MEDITAT. II.
Of the nature of Man's mind, and that it is easier proved to be then our body.
BY yesterdays Meditation I am cast into so great Doubts, that I shall never
forget them, and yet I know not how to answer them, but being plunged on a
sudden into a deep ^ulf, I am so amazed that I can neither touch the bottom,
nor swim at the top.

Nevertheless, I will endeavor once more, and try the way I set on yesterday,
by removing from me whatever is in the least doubtful, as if I had certainly
discovered it to be altogether false, and will proceed till I find out some
certainty, or if nothing else, yet at least this certainty, That there is
nothing sure.

Archimedes required but a point which was firm, and immovable, that he might
move the whole Earth, so in the present undertaking ^reat things may be
expected, if I can discover but the least thing that is true and indisputable.

Wherefore I suppose all things I see are false, and believe that nothing of
those things are really existent, which my deceitful memory represents to me;
it is evident I have no senses, that a Body, Figure, Extension, Motion, Place,
etc. are mere Fictions; what thing therefore is there that is true? perhaps
only this, (...) there is nothing certain.

But how know I that there is nothing distinct Doubts and Soluti^ns.
from all these things (which I have now reckoned) of which I have no reason to
doubt? Is there no God (or whatever other name I may call him) who has put
these thoughts into me? Yet why should I think this? When I my self perhaps am
the Author of them. Upon which Account, therefore must not I be something? it is
but just now that I denied that I had any senses, or any Body. Hold a while --
Am I so tied to a Body and senses and I cannot exist without them? But I have
peswaded my self that there is nothing in the World, no Heaven, no Earth, no
Souls, no Bodies; and then why not, that I my self am not? Yet surely if I
could persuade my self any thing, I was.

But there is I know not what sort of Deceivour very powerful and very crafty,
who always strives to deceive Me; without Doubt therefore I am, if he can
deceive me; And let him Deceive me as much as he can, yet he can never make me
not to Be, Whilst I think that I am, Wherefore I may lay this down as a
Principle, that whenever this sentence I am, I exist, is spoken or thought of
by Me, it is necessarily True.

But I do not yet fully understand who I am that now necessarily exist, and I
must hereafter take care, least I foolishly mistake some other thing for my
self, and by that means be deceived in that thought, which I defend as the most
certain and evident of all.

Wherefore I will again Recollect, what I believed my self to be heretofore,
before I had set upon these Meditations, from which Notion I will withdraw
whatever may be Disp^oved and the Forementioned Reasons, that in the End, That
only may Remain which is True and indisputable.

What therefore have I heretofore thought my self? A Man, But what is a man?
shall I answer, a Rational Animal? By no means; because afterward it may be
asked, what an Animal is? and what Rational is? And so from one question I may
fall into greater Difficulties; neither at present have I so much time as to
spend it about such Niceties.

But I shall rather here Consider, what heretofore represented it self to my
thoughts freely, and naturally, whenever I set my self to understand What I my
self was.

And the first thing I find Representing it self is, that I have Face, Hands,
Arms, and this whole frame of parts which is seen in my Body, and which I call
my Body.

The next thing represented to me was* that I was nourished could walk, had
senses, and could Think; which functions I attributed to my Soul. Yet what this
soul of mine was, I did not fully conceive; or else supposed it a small thing
like wind, or fire, or air, infused through my stronger parts.

As to my Body truly I doubted not, but that I rightly understood its Nature,
which (if I should endeavor to describe as I conceive it) I should thus
Explain, viz. By a Body I mean whatever is capable of Shape, or can be
contained in a place, and so fill's a space that it excludes all other Bodies
out of the same, that which may be touched, seen, heard, tasted, or smelt, and
that which is capable of various Motions and Modifications, not from it self,
but from any other thing moving it, for I judged it against (or rather above)
the nature of a Body to move it self, or perceive, or think, But rather admired
that I should find these Operations in certain Bodies.

But How now (since I suppose a certain powerful and (if it be lawful to call
him so) evil deluder, Doubts and Solutions.
who uses all his endeavors to deceive me in all things) can I affirm that I
have any of those things, which I have now said belong to the nature of a Body?
Hold -- Let me Consider --, Let me think --, Let me reflect -- I can find no
Answer, and I am weary with repeating the same things over-again in vain.

But Which of these Faculties did I attribute to my Soul, my Nutritive, or
Motive faculty? yet now seeing I have no Body, these also are mere delusions,
Was it my sensitive faculty? But this also cannot be performed without a Body,
and I have seemed to perceive many things in my sleep, of which I afterward
understood my self not to be sensible. Was it my Cogitative Faculty? Here I
have discovered it, it is my Thought, this alone cannot be separated from Me, I
am, I exist, -- it is true, but for what time Am I? Why I am as long as I think;
For it May be that When I cease from thinking* I may cease from being. Now I
admit of nothing but what is necessarily ture: In short therefore I am only a
thinking thing, that is to say, Places noted with their Asterisk are referred to
in the following Objections.
a mind* or a soul, or understanding, or Reason, words which formerly I
understood not; I am a Real thing, and Really Existent, But what sort of thing?
I have just now said it, A thinking thing.

But am I nothing besides? I will consider -- I am not that structure of parts,
which is called a Man's Body, neither am I any sort of thin Air insfused into
those Parts, nor a Wind, nor Fire, nor Vapor, nor Breath, nor whatever I my
self can feign, for all these things I have supposed not to Be. Yet my Position
stands firm, Neverthless I am something. Yet perhaps it so falls out that these
very things which I suppose not to exist (because to me unknown) are in reality
nothing different from that very Self, which I know. I cannot tell, I dispute
it not now, I can only give my opinion of those things whereof I have
knowledge. I am sure that I exist, I ask who I am whom I thus know, certainly,
the knowledge, of Me (precisely taken) depends not on those things* whose
existence I am yet ignorant off; and therefore not on any other things that I
can feign by my imagination.

And this very Word ( feign) puts me in mind of my error, for I should feign in
deed, if I should imagine my self any thing; for to imagine is nothing else but
to think upon the shape or image of a corporeal thing; but now I certainly know
that I am, and I know also that it is possible that all these images, and
g^nerally whatever belongs to the Nature of a Body are nothing but deluding
Dreams. Which things Considered I should be no less Foolish in saying, I will
imagine that I may more thoroughly understand what I am, then if should say, at
Present I am awake and perceive something true, but because it appears not
evidently enough, I shall endeavor to sleep, that in a Dream I may perceive it
more evidently and truly.

Wherefore I know that nothing that I can comprehend by my imagination, can
belong to the Nation I have of my self, and that I must carefully withdraw my
mind from those things it that may more distinctly perceive its own Nature.

Let me ask therefore What I am, A Thinking Thing, but What is That? That is a
thing, doubting, understanding, affirming, denying, willing, hilling, imagining
also, and sensitive. These truly are not a few Properties, if they all belong
to Me. And Why should they Not belong to me? For am not I the very same who at
present doubt almost of All things; yet understand something, which thing only
I affirm to be true, I deny all other things, I am willing to know more, I
would not be deceived, I imagine many things unwillingly, and consider many
things as coming to me by my senses. Which of all these faculties is it, which
is not as true as that I Exist, tho I should sleep, or my Creator should as
much as in him lay, strive to deceive Me? which of them is it that is distinct
from my thought? which of them is it that can be separated from me? For that I
am the same that doubt, understand, and will is so evident, that I know not how
to explain it more manifestly, and that I also am the same that imagine, for
tho perhaps (as I have supposed) no thing that can be imagined is true, yet the
imaginative Power it self is really existent, and makes up a part of my
Thought; and last of all that I am the same that am sensitive, or perceive
corporeal things as by my sense, yet that I now see light, hear a noise, feel
heat, these things are false, for I suppose my self asleep, but I know that I
see, hear, and am heated, that cannot be false; and this it is that in me is
properly called Sense, and this strictly taken is the same with thought.

By these Considerations I begin a little better to understand My self what I
am; But yet it seems, and I cannot but think that Corporeal Things (whose
Images are formed in my thought, and which by my sense, I perceive) are much
more distinctly known, then that confused Notion of My Self which imagination
cannot afford me. And yet it is strange that things doubtf^l, unknown, distinct
from Me, should be apprehended more clearly by Me, then a Thing that is True,
then a thing that is known, or then I myself; But the Reason is, that my Mind
loves to wander, and suffer not it self to be bounded within the first limits
of Truth.

Let it therefore Wander, and once more let me give it the Free Reins, that
hereafter being conveniently curbed, it may suffer it self to be more easily
Governed.

Let me consider those things, which of all Things I formerly conceived most
evident, that is to say, Bodies which we touch, which we see, not bodies in
General (for those General Conceptions are usually Conf^s^d) but some one Body
in particular.

Let us choose for example this piece of Beeswax, it was lately taken from the
Comb, it has not yet lost all the taste of the Honey, it retains something of
the smell of the Flowers from whence 'twas gathered, its color, shape, and
bigness are manifest, it is hard, it is cold, it is easily felt, and if you will
knock it with your singer, 'twill make a noise: In fine, it has all things
requisite to the most perfect notion of a Body.

But behold whilst I am speaking it is put to the Fire, its taste is purged away,
the smell is vanished, the color is changed, the shape is altered, its bulk is
increased, its become soft, it is ^ot, it can scarce be felt, and now (though
you strike it) it makes not noise. Does it yet continue the same Wax? surely it
does, this all confess, no one denies it, no one doubts it. What therefore was
there in it that was so evidently known? surely none of those things which I
perceived by my senses; for what I smelt, tasted, have seen, felt, or heard,
are all vanished, and yet the Wax remains. Perhaps 'twas this only that I now
think on, viz, that the Wax it self was not that taste of Honey, that smell of
Flowers, that whiteness, that shape, or that sound, but it was a Body which
awhile before appeared to me so and so modified, but now otherwise. But what is
it strictly that I thus imagine? let me consider: And having rejected whatever
belongs not to the Wax, let me see what will; remain, viz. this only, a thing
extended, flexible, and mutable. But what is this flexible, and mutable? is it
that I imagine that this Wax from being round may be made square, or from being
square can be made triangular? No, this is not it; for I conceive it capable of
innumerable such changes, and yet I cannot by my imagination run over these
Innumerables; Wherefore this notion of its mutability proceeds not from my
imagination. What then is extended? is not its Extension also unknown? For when
it melts it is greater, when it boils it is greater, and yet greater when the
heat is increased; and I should not rightly judge of the Wax, did I not think
it capable of more various Extensions than I can imagine. It remains therefore
for me only to confess, that I cannot imagine what this Wax is, but that I
perceive with my Mind what it is. I speak of this particular Wax, for of Wax in
general the notion is more dear.

But what Wax is this that I only concieve by my mind? It Is the same which I
see, which I touch, which I imagine, and in fine, the same which at first I
judged it to be. but this is to be noted, that the perception thereof is not
the sight, the touch, or the imagination thereof; neither was it ever so,
though at first it seemed so. But the perception thereof is the inspection or
beholding of the Mind only, which may be either imperfect and confused, as
formerly it was; or clear and distinct, as now it is; the more or the less I
consider the Composition of the Wax.

In the interim, I cannot but admire how prone my mind is to err; for though I
revolve these things with my self silently, and without speaking, yet am I
entangled in mere words, and am almsot deceived by the usual way of expression;
for we commonly say, that we see the Wax it self if it be present, and not,
that we judge it present by its color or shape; from whence I should
immediately thus conclude, therefore the Wax is known by the sight of the eye,
and not by the inspection of the mind only. Thus I should have concluded, had
not I by chance looked out of my window, and seen men Passing by in the Street;
which men I as usually say that I see, as I do now, that I see this Wax; and
yet I see nothing but their Hair and Garments, which perhaps may cover only
artifical Machines and movements, but I judge them to be men; so that what I
though I only saw with my eyes, I comprehend by my Iudicative Faculty, which is
my Soul, But it becomes not one, who desires to be wiser than the Vulgar, to
draw matter of doubt from those ways of expression, which the Vulgar have
invented.

Wherefore let us proceed and consider, whether I perceived more perfectly and
evidently what the Wax was, when I first looked on it, and believed that I knew
it by my outward senses, or at least by my common sense (as they call it) that
is to say, by my imagination; or whether at present I better understand it,
after I have more diligently enquired both what it is, and how it may be known.
Surely it would be a foolish thing to make it matter of doubt to know which of
these parts are true; What was there in my first perception that was distinct?
What was there that seemed not incident to every other Animal? But now when I
distinguish the Wax from its outward adherents, and consider it as if it were
naked, with it is coverings pulled off, then I cannot but really perceive it
with my mind, though yet perhaps my judgment may err.

But what shall I now say as to my mind, or my self? (for as yet I admit
nothing as belonging to me but a mind.) Why (shall I say?) should not I, who
seem to perceive this Wax so distinctly, know my self not only more truly and
more certainly, but more distinctly and evidently? For if I judge that this Wax
exists, because I see th^s Wax; surely it will be much more evident, that I my
self exist, because I see this Wax; for it may be that this that I see is not
really Wax, also it may be that I have no eyes wherewith to see any thing; but
it cannot be, when I see, or (which is the same thing) when I think that I see,
that I who think should not exist. The same thing will follow if I judge that
this Wax exists, because I touch, or imagine it, etc. And what has been said of
Wax, may be applied to all other outward things.

Moreover, if the notion of Wax seems more distinct after it is made known to
me, not only by my sight or touch, but by more and other causes; How much the
more distinctly must I confess my self known unto my self, seeing that all sort
of reasoning which furthers me in the peroeption of Wax, or any other Body,
does also increase the proofs of the nature of my Mind. But there are so many
more things in the very Mind it self, by which the notion of it may be made
more distinct, that those things which drawn from Body conduce to its knowledge
are scarce to be mentioned.

And now behold of my own accord am I come to the place I would be in; for
seeing I have now discovered that Bodies themselves are not properly perceived
by our senses or imagination, but only by our understanding, and are not
therefore perceived, because they are felt or seen, but because they are
understood; it plainly appears to me, that nothing can possibly be perceived by
me easier, or more evidently, than my Mind.

But because I cannot so soon shake off the Acquaintance of my former Opinion,
I am willing to stop here, that this my new knowledge may be better fixed in my
memory the longer I meditate thereon.

MEDITAT. III.
Of GOD, and that there is a God.
NOw will I shut my eyes, I will stop my ears, and withdraw all my senses, I
will blot out the Images of corporeal things clearly from my mind, or (because
that can scarce be accomplished) I will give no heed to them, as being vain and
false, and by discoursing with my self, and prying more rightly into my own
Nature, will endeavor to make my self by degrees more known and familiar to my
self.

I am a Thinking Thing, that is to say, doubting, affirming, denying,
understanding few things, ignorant of many things, willing, nilling, imagining
also, and sensitive. For (as before I have noted) though perhaps whatever I
imagine, or am sensible of, as without me, Is not; yet that manner of thinking
which I call sense and imagination (as they are only certain Modes of Thinking)
I am certain are in Me. So that in these few Words I have mentioned whatever I
know, or at least Whatever as yet I perceive my self to know.

Now will I look about me more carefully to see Whether there Be not some other
Thing in Me, of Which I have not yet taken Notice. I am sure That I am a
Thinking Thing, and therefore Do not I know what is Required to make me certain
of any Thing? I Answer, that in this My first knowledge it is Nothing but a
clear, and distinct perception of What I affirm, Which would not be sufficient
to make me certain of the Truth of a Thing, if it were Possible that any thing
that I so clearly and distinctly Perceive should be false. Wherefore I may lay
this Down as a Principle. Whatever I Clearly and Distinctly perceive is
certainly True.

But I have formerly Admitted of many Things as very Certain and manifest.
Which I afterward found to be doubtful Therefore What sort of Things were
they? Viz. Heaven, Earth, Stars, and all other things which I perceived by my
Senses. But What did I Perceive of These Clearly? Viz. That I had the Ideas or
Thoughts of these things in my mind, and at Present I cannot deny that I have
these Ideas in Me. But there was some other thing Which I affirmed, and Which
(by Reason of the common Way of Belief) I thought that I Clearly Perceived;
Which nevertheless, I did not really Perceive; And that was, that there were
Certain Things Without Me from whence these Ideas Proceeded, and to which they
were exactly like. And this it was, Wherein I was either Deceived, or if by
Chance I Judged truly, yet it Proceeded not from the strength of my Perception.

But When I was exercised about any single and easy Proposition in Arithmetic
or Geometry, as that two and three, added make five, Did not I Perceive them
Clearly enough to make me affirm them True? Truly concerning these I had no
other Reason afterward to Doubt, but That I thought Perhaps there may be a God
who might have so created me, that I should be Deceived even in those things
which seemed most Clear to me. And as often as this Pre-conceived opinion of
Gods great Power comes into my Mind, I cannot but Confess that he may easily
cause me to Err even in those things which I Think I perceive most Evidently
with my Mind; yet as often as I Consider the Things themselves, which I Judge
my self to perceive so Clearly, I am so fully Persuaded by them, that I easily
Break out into these Expressions, Let Who can Deceive Me, yet he shall never
Cause me Not to Be whilst I think that I Am, or that it shall ever be True,
that I never was, Whilst at Present it is True that I am, or Perhaps, that Two
and Three added make More or Less then Five; for in These things I Percieve a
Manifest Repugnancy; And truly seeing I have no reason to Think any God a
Deceiver, Nor as yet fully know Whether there Be any God, or Not, It Is but a
slight and (as I may say) Metaphysical Reason of Doubt, which depends only on
that opinion of which I am not yet Persuaded.

Wherefore That this Hindrance may be taken away, When I have time I ought to
Enquire, Whether there Be a God, And if there be One, Whether he can be a
Deceiver, For whilst I am Ignorant of this, I cannot possibly be fully Certain
of any Other thing.

But now Method seems to Require Me to Rank all My Thoughts under certain
Heads, and to search in Which of them Truth or Falsehood properly Consists. Some
of them are (as it were) the Images of Things, and to these alone the Name of
an Idea properly belongs, as When I think upon a Man, A Chimera or Monster,
Heaven, an Angel, or God. But there are Others of them, that have superadded
Forms to them, as when I Will, when I Fear, when I Affirm, when I Deny. I know
I have always (when ever I think) some certain Thing as the subject or object
of my Thought, but in this last sort of thoughts there is something more which
I Think upon then Barely the likeness of the Thing. And of these Thoughts some
are called Wills and Affections, and Others of them Judgments.

Now as touching Ideas, if they be Considered alone as they are in themselves,
without Respect to any other Things, they cannot Properly be false; for Whether
I Imagine a Goat or a Chimera, it is as Certain that I Imagine one as to other.
Also in the Will and Affections I need not Fear any Falsehood, For tho I should
Wish for evil Things, or Things that are Not, it is not therefore Not true that
I Wish for them.

Wherefore there only Remains my Judgments of Things, in which I must take
Care that I be not deceived. Now the Chief and most usual Error that I discover
in them is, That I Judge Those Ideas that are within me to be Conformable and
like to certain things that are without Me; for truly if I Consider those
Ideas as certain Modes of my Thought, without Respect to any other Thing, they
will scarce afford me an Occasion of Erring.

Of these Ideas some are Innate, some Adventitious, and some Others seem to Me
as Created by my self; For that I understand what A Thing Is, What is Truth,
What a Thought, seems to Proceed merely from my own Nature. But that I now hear
a Noise, see the Sun, or feel heat, I have* always Judged to Proceed from
Things External. But Lastly, Mermaids, Griffins, and such like Monsters, are
made ^erly by My self. And yet I may well think all of them either
Adventitious, or all of them Innate, or all of them made by my self, for I have
not as yet discovered their true Original.

But I ought chiefly to search after those of them which I count Adventitious,
and which I consider as coming from outward objects, that I may know what
reason I have to think them like the things themselves, which they represent.
Viz. Nature so teaches Me; and also I know that I they depend not on my Will,
and therefore not on me; for they are often present with me against my
inclinations, or (as they say) in spite of my teeth, as now whether I will or
no I feel heat, and therefore I think that the sense or Idea of heat is
propagated to me by a thing really distinct from my self, and that is by the
heat of the Fire at which I sit; And nothing is more obvious then for me to
judge that That thing should transmit its own Likeness into me, rather then
that any other thing should be transmitted by it. Which sort of arguments
whether firm enough or not I shall now Try.

When I here say, that nature so teaches me, I understand only, that I am as it
were willingly forced to believe it, and not that it is discovered to me to be
true by any natural light; for these two differ very much. For whatever is
discovered to me by the Light of nature (as that it necessarily Follows that I
am, because I think) cannot possibly be doubted; Because I am endowed with no
other Faculty, in which I may put so great confidence, as I can in the Light of
nature; or which can possibly tell me, that those things are false, which
natural light teaches me to be true; and as to my natural Inclinations, I have
heretofore often judged my self led by them to the election of the worst part,
when I was in the choosing one of two Goods; and therefore I see no reason why
I should ever trust them in any other thing.

And then, tho these Ideas depend not on my will, it does not therefore follow
that they necessarily proceed from things external. For as, Although those
Inclinations. (which I but now mentioned) are in me, yet they seem distinct and
different from my will; so perhaps there may be in me some other faculty (to me
unknown) which may prove the Efficient cause of these Ideas, as hitherto I have
observed them to be formed in me whilst I dream, without the help of any
External Object.

And last of all, tho they should proceed from things which are different from
me, it does not therefore follow that they must be like those things. For often
times I have found the thing and the Idea differing much. As for example, I
find in my self two diverse Ideas of the Sun, one as received by my senses (and
which chiefly I reckon among those I call adventitious) by which it appears to
me very small, * another as taken from the arguments of Astronomers (that is to
say, consequentially collected, or some other ways made by me from certain
natural notions) by which it is rendered something bigger then the Globe of the
Earth. Certainly both of these cannot be like that sun which is without me, and
my reason persuades me, that that Idea is most unlike the Sun, which seems to
proceed Immediately from it self.

All which things sufficiently prove, that I have hitherto (not from a true
judgment, but from a blind impulse) believed that there are certain things
different from my self, and which have sent their Ideas or Images into me by
the Organs of my senses, or some other way.

But I have yet an other Way of inquiring, whether any of those Things (whose
Ideas I have within Me) are Really Existent without Me; And that is Thus: As
those Ideas are only Modes of Thinking, I acknowledge no Inequality between
them, and they all proceed from me in the same Manner. But as one Represents
one thing, an other, an other Thing, it is Evident there is a Great difference
between them. * For without doubt, Those of them which Represent Substances are
something More, or (as I may say) have More of Objective Reallity in them, then
those that Represent only Modes or Accidents; and again, That by Which I
understand a Mighty God, Eternal, Infinite, Omniscient, Omnipotent Creator of
all things besides himself, has certainly in it more Objective Reallity, then
Those Ideas by which Finite Substances are Exhibited.

But Now, it is evident by the Light of Nature that there must be as much at
least in the Total efficient Cause, as there is in the Effect of that Cause;
For from Whence can the effect have its Reallity, but from the Cause? and how
can the Cause give it that Reallity, unless it self have it?

And from hence it follows, that neither a Thing can be made out of Nothing,
Neither a Thing which is more Perfect (that is, Which has in it self more
Reallity) proceed from That Which is Less Perfect.

And this is Clearly True, not only in those Effects whose Actual or Formal
Reallity is Considered, But in Those Ideas also, Whose Objective Reallity is
only Respected; That is to say, for Example of Illustration, it is not only
impossible that a stone, Which was not, should now begin to Be, unless it were
produced by something, in Which, Whatever goes to the Making a Stone, is either
Formally or Virtually; neither can heat he Produced in any Thing, which before
was not hot, but by a Thing which is at least of as equal a degree of
Perfection as heat is; But also it is Impossible that I should have an Idea of
Heat, or of a Stone, unless it were put into me by some Cause, in which there
is at Least as much Reallity, as I Conceive there is in Heat or a Stone. For
tho that Cause transfers none of its own Actual or Formal Reality into my Idea,
I must not from thence conclude that it is less real; but I may think that the
nature of the Idea it self is such, that of it self it requires no other formal
reality, but what it has from my thought, of which it is a mode. But that this
Idea has this or that objective reallity, rather then any other, proceeds
clearly from some cause, in which there ought to be at least as much formal
reallity, as there is of objective reallity in the Idea it self. For if we
suppose any thing in the Idea, which was not in its cause, it must of necessity
have this from nothing; but (tho it be a most Imperfect manner of existing, by
which the thing is objectively in the Intellect by an Idea, yet) it is not
altogether nothing, and therefore cannot proceed from nothing.

Neither ought I to doubt, seeing the reallity which I perceive in my Ideas is
only an objective reallity, that therefore it must of necessity follow, that
the same reallity should be in the causes of these Ideas formally. But I may
conclude, that it is sufficient that this reallity be in the very causes only
objectively. For as that objective manner of being appertains to the very
nature of an Idea, so that formal manner of being appertains to the very nature
of a cause of Ideas, at least to the first and chiefest causes of them; For tho
perhaps one Idea may receive its birth from an other, yet we cannot proceed in
Infinitum, but at last we must arrive at some first Idea, whose cause is (as it
were) an Original copy, in which all the objective reallity of the Idea is
formally contained. So that I plainly discover by the light of nature, that the
Ideas, which are in me, are (as it were) Pictures, which may easily come short
of the perfection of those things from whence they are taken, but cannot
contain any thing greater or more perfect then them: And the longer and more
diligently I pry into these things, so much the more clearly and distinctly do
I discover them to be true.

But what shall I conclude from hence? Thus, that if the objective reallity of
any of my Ideas be such, that it cannot be in me either formarlly or eminently,
and that therefore I cannot be the cause of that Idea, from hence it
necessarily Follows, that I alone do not only exist, but that some other thing,
which is the cause of that Idea, does exist also.

But if I can find no such Idea in me, I have no argument to persuade me of the
existence of any thing besides my self for I have diligently enquired, and
hitherto I could discover no other persuasive.

Some of these Ideas there are (besides that which represents my self to my
self, of which in this place I cannot doubt) which represent to me, one of them
a God, others of them Corporeal and Inanimate things, some of them Angels,
others Animals, and lastly some of them which exhibit to me men like my self.

As touching those that represent Men or Angels or Animals, I easily understand
that they may be made up of those Ideas which I have of my self, of Corporeal
things, and of God, tho there were neither man (but my self) nor Angel, nor
Animal in being

And as to the Ideas of Corporeal things, I find nothing in them of that
perfection, but it may proceed from my self; for if I look into them more
narrowly, and examine them more particularly, as yesterday ( in the second
Medit.) I did the Idea of Wax, I find there are but few things which I perceive
clearly and distinctly in them, viz. Magnitude or extension in Longitude,
Latitude, and Profundity, the Figure or shape which arises from the termination
of that Extension, the Position or place which diverse Figured Bodies have in
respect of each other, their motion or change of place; to which may be added,
their substance, continuance, and number; as to the other, such as are, Light,
Colors, Sounds, Smells, Tastes, Heat, and Cold, with the other tactile
qualities, I have but very obscure and confused thoughts of them, so that I
know not, whether they are true or false, that is to say, whether the Ideas I
have of them are the Ideas of things which really are, or are not. For although
falsehood formally and properly so called, consists only in the judgment (as
before I have observed) yet there is an other sort of material falsehood in
Ideas, when they represent a thing as really existent, tho it does not exist;
so, for example, the Ideas I have of heat and cold are so obscure and confused,
that I cannot collect from them, whether cold be a privation of heat, or heat a
privation of cold, or whether either of them be a real quality, or whether
neither of them be real. And since every Idea must be like the thing it
represents, if it be true that cold is nothing but the privation of heat, that
Idea which represents it to me as a thing real and positive may deservedly be
called false. The same may be applied to other Ideas.

And now I see no necessity why I should assign any other Author of these
Ideas but my self; for if they are false, that is, represent things that are
not, I know by the light of nature that they proceed from nothing; that is to
say, I harbor them upon no other account, but because my nature is deficient
in something, and imperfect. But if they are true, yet seeing I discover so
little reality in them, that that very reality scarce seems to be realy, I see
no reason why I my self should not be the Author of them.

But also some of those very Ideas of Corporeal things which are clear and
distinct, I may seem to have borrowed from the Idea I have of my self, viz.
Substance, duration, number, and the like; For when I conceive a stone to be a
substance (that is, a thing apt of it self to exist) and also that I my self am
a substance, tho I conceive my self a thinking substance and not extended, and
the stone an extended substance and not thinking, by which there is a great
diversity between both the conceptions, yet they agree in this, that they are
both substances. So when I conceive my self as now in being, and also remember,
that heretofore I have been; and since I have diverse thoughts, which I can
number or count; from hence it is that I come by the notions of duration and
number; which afterward I apply to other things.

As to those other things, of which the Idea of a body is made up, as
extension, figure, place and motion, they are not formally in me, seeing I am
only a thinking thing; yet seeing they are only certain modes of substance, and
I my self also am a substance, they may seem to be in me eminently.

* Wherefore there only Remains the Idea of a God, wherein I must consider
whether there be not something included, which cannot possibly have its
original from me. By the word God, I mean a certain Infinite Substance,
Independent, Omniscient, Almighty, by whom both I my self, and every thing else
that is (if any thing do Actualy exist) was created. All which Attributes are
of such an high nature, that the more attentively I consider them, the less I
conceive my self possible to be the Author of these notions.

From what therefore has been said I must conclude that there is a God; for tho
the Idea of substance may arise in me, because that I my self am a substance,
yet I could not have the Idea of an Infinite substance (seeing I my self am
finite) unless it proceeded from a substance which is really Infinite. Neither
ought I to think that I have no true Idea of Infinity, or that I perceive it
only by the negation of what is finite, as I conceive rest and darkness by the
negation or absence of motion or light. But on the contrary I plainly
understand, that there is more reality in an Infinite substance, then in a
Finite; and that therefore the perception of an Infinite (as God) is antecedent
to the notion I have of a finite (as my self) For how should I know that I
doubt or desire, that is to say, that I want something, and that I am not
altogether perfect, unless I had the Idea of a being more perfect then my self,
by comparing my self to which I may discover my own Imperfections.

Neither can it be said that this Idea of God is false Materialiter, and that
therefore it proceeds from nothing, as before I observed of the Ideas of heat
and cold, etc. For on the contrary, seeing this notion is most clear and
distinct, and contains in it self more objective reality then any other Idea,
none can be more true in it self, nor in which less suspicion of flalshood can
be found. This Idea (I say) of a being infinitely perfect is most true, for tho
it may be supposed that such a being does not exist, yet it cannot be supposed
that the Idea of such a being exhibites to me nothing real, as before I have
said of the Idea of cold. This Idea also is most clear and distinct, for
whatever I perceive clearly and distinctly to be real, and true, and perfect,
is wholly contained in this Idea of God.

Neither can it be objected, that I cannot comprehend an Infinite, or that
there are innumerable other things in God, which I can neither conceive, nor in
the least think upon; for it is of the very nature of an Infinite not to be
apprehendable by me who am finite. And it is sufficient to me to prove this my
Idea of God to be the most true, the most clear, and the most distinct Idea of
all those Ideas I have, upon this account, that I understand that God is not to
be understood, and that I judge that whatever I clearly perceive and know
Implys any perfection, as also perhaps other innumerable perfections, which I
am ignorant of, are in God either formally or eminently.

Doubt. But perhaps I am something more then I take my self to be, and perhaps
all these perfections which I attribute to God, are potentially in me, tho at
present they do not show themselves, and break into action. For I am now fully
experienced that my Knowledge may be increased, and I see nothing that hinders
Why it may not increase by degrees in Infinitum, nor why by my knowledge so
increased I may not attain to the other perfections of God; nor lastly, why the
power or aptitude of having these perfections may not be sufficient to produce
the Idea of them in me.

Solution. But none of these will do; for first, tho it be true that my
Knowledge is capable of being increased, and that many things are in me
potentially, which actually are not, yet none of these go to the making an Idea
of God, in which I conceive nothing potentially, for it is a certain argument of
imperfection that a thing may be increased Gradually. Moreover, tho my
knowledge may be more and more increased, yet I know that it can never be
actually Infinite, for it can never arrive to that height of perfection, which
admits not of an higher degree. But I conceive God to be actually so Infinite,
that nothing can be added to his perfections, And lastly, I perceive that the
objective being of an Idea cannot be produced only by the potential being of a
thing (which in proper speech is nothing) but requires an actual or formal
being to its production.

Of all which forementioned things there is nothing that is not evident by the
light of reason to any one that will diligently consider them. Yet because that
(when I am careless, and the Images of sensible things blind my understanding)
I do not so easily call to mind the reasons, why the Idea of a being more
perfect then my self should of necessity proceed from a being which is really
more perfect; It will be requisite to enquire further, whether I, who have this
Idea, can possibly be, unless such a being did exist. To which end let me ask,
from whence should I be? From my self? or from my Parents? or from any other
thing less perfect then God? for nothing can be thought or supposed more
perfect, or equally perfect with God.

But first, If I were from my self, I should neither doubt, nor desire, nor
want any thing, for I should have given my self all those perfections, of which
I have any Idea, and consequently I my self should be God; and I cannot think
that those things I want, are to be acquired with greater difficulty then those
things I have; but on the contrary, it is manifiest, that it were much more
difficult that I (that is, a substance that thinks) should arise out of
nothing, then that I should acquire the knowledge of many things whereof I am
Ignorant, which is only the accident of that substance, And certainly If I had
that greater thing (viz being) from my self, I should not have denied my self
(not only those things which may be easier acquired, but also) All those
things, which I perceived are contained in the Idea of a God; and the reason
is, for that no other things seem to me to be more difficultly done, and
certainly if they were Really more difficult, they would seem more difficult to
me (if whatever I have, I have from my self) for in those things I should find
my Power put to a stop.

Neither can I Evade the force of these Arguments by supposing my self to have
always Been, what now I am, and that therefore I need not seek for an Author
of my Being. For the Durance or Continuation of my life may be divided into
Innumerable Parts, each of which does not at all depend on the Other Parts;
Therefore it will not follow, that because a while ago, I was, I must of
necessity now Be. I say, this will not follow, Unless, I suppose some Cause to
Create me (as it were) anew for this Moment (that is, Conserve me) For it is
evident to one that Considers the Nature of Duration, that the same Power and
Action is requisite to the Conservation of a Thing each Moment of its Being, as
there is to the Creation of that Thing anew, if it did not exist. So that it is
one of those Principles which are Evident by the Light of Nature: that the Act
of Conservation differs only Ratione (as the Philosophers term it) from the Act
of Creation.

Wherefore I ought to ask my self this Question, whether I, who now Am; have
any Power to Cause my self to Be hereafter? (for had I any such power, I should
certainly know of it, seeing I am nothing but a Thinking Thing, or at least at
present I only treat of that part of me, which is a Thing that Thinks) to
which, I answer, that I can discover no such Power in Me; And consequently, I
evidently know that I depend on some Other being distinct from my self.

But what if I say that perhaps this Being is not God, but that I am produced
either by my Parents, or some other Causes less perfect then God? In answer to
which let me consider (as I have said before that it is manifest that whatever
is in the effect, so much at least ought to be in the cause; and therefore
seeing I am a thing that thinks, and have in me an Idea of God, it will
confessedly follow, that whatever sort of cause I assign of my own Being, it
also must be a Thinking Thing, and must have an Idea of all those Perfections,
which I attribute to God; Of which Cause it may be again Asked, whether it be
from it self, or from any other Cause? If from it self,'it is evident (from what
has been said) that it must be God; For seeing it has the Power of Existing of
it self, without doubt it has also the power of actually Possessing all those
Perfections whereof it has an Idea in it self, that is, all those Perfections
which I conceive in God. But if it Be from an other Cause, it may again be
asked of that Cause whether it be of it self, or from an other; Till at length
We arrive at the Last Cause of All, Which will Be God. For it is evident, that
this Enquiry will not admit of Progressus in Infinitum, especially when at
Present I treat not only of that Cause which at first made Me; But chiefly of
that which conserves me in this Instant time.

Neither can it be supposed that many partial Causes have concurred to the
making Me, and that I received the Idea of one of Gods perfections from One of
them, and from an other of them the Idea of an other; and that therefore all
these Perfections are to be found scattered in the World, but not all of them
Joined in any one which may Be God. For on the contrary, Unity, Simplicity, or
the inseparability of All Gods Attributes is one of the chief Perfections which
I conceive in Him; and certainly the Idea of the Unity of the Divine
Perfections could not be created in me by any other cause, then by That, from
whence I have received the Ideas of his other perfections; For it is Impossible
to make me conceive these perfections, conjunct and inseparable, unless he
should also make me know what perfections these are.

Lastly as touching my having my Being from my Parents. Tho whatever Thoughts I
have heretofore harbored of Them were True, yet certainly they contribute
nothing to my conservation, neither proceed I from them as I am a Thing that
Thinks, for they have only predisposed that material Thing, wherein I, that
is, my mind (which only at present I take for my self) Inhabits. Wherefore I
cannot now Question that I am sprung from them. But I must of necessity
conclude that because I am, and because I have an Idea of a Being most perfect,
that is, of God, it evidently follows that there is a God.

* Now it only remains for me to examine, how I have received this Idea of God.
For I have neither received it by means of my Senses, neither comes it to me
without my Forethought, as the Ideas of sensible things use to do, when such
things Work on the Organs of my Sense, or at least seem so to work; Neither is
this Idea framed by my self, for I can neither detract from, nor add any thing
thereto. Wherefore I have only to conclude that it is Innate, even as the Idea
of me my self is Natural to my self.

And truly it is not to be Admired that God in Creating me should Imprint this
Idea in me, that it may there remain as a stamp impressed by the Workman God on
me his Work, neither is it requisite that this stamp should be a Thing
different from the Work it self, but it is very Credible (from hence only that
God Created me) that I am made as it were according to his likeness and Image,
and that the same likeness, in which the Idea of God is contained, is perceived
by Me with the same faculty, with which I perceive my Self; That is to say,
whilst I reflect upon my self, I do not only perceive that I am an Imperfect
thing, having my dependence upon some other thing, and that I am a Thing that
Desires more and better things Indefinitely; But also at the same time I
understand, that He on whom I depend contains in him all those wished for
things (not only Indefinitely and Potentially, but) Really, Infinitely; and
that therefore he is God. The whole stress of which * Argument lies thus,
because I know it Impossible for Me to Be of the same Nature I am, Viz, Having
the Idea of a God in me, unless really there were a God, a God (I say) that
very same God, whose Idea I have in my Mind (that is, Having all those
perfections, which I cannot comprehend ^ut can as it were think upon them) and
who is not subject to any Defects.

By which it is evident that God is no Deceiver; for it is manifest by the Light
of Nature, that all fraud and deceit depends on some defect. But before I
prosecute this any farther, or pry into other Truths which may be deduced from
this, I am willing here to stop, and dwell upon the Contemplation of this God,
to Consider with my self His Divine Attributes, to behold, admire, and adore
the Loveliness of this Immense light, as much as possibly I am able to
accomplish with my dark Understanding. For as by Faith we believe that the
greatest happiness of the next Life consists alone in the Contemplation of the
Divine Majesty, so we find by Experience that now we receive from thence the
greatest pleasure, whereof we are capable in this Life; Tho it be much more
Imperfect then that in the Next.

MEDITAT. IV.
Of Truth and Falsehood,
OF late it has been so common with me to withdraw my Mind from my senses, and
I have so thoroughly considered how few things there are appertaining to Bodies
that are truly perceived, and that there are more Things touching Man's mind,
and yet more concerning God, which are well known; that now without any
difficulty I can turn my Thoughts from things sensible, to those which are only
Intelligible, and Abstracted from Matter. And truly I have a much more
distinct Idea of a Man's mind (as it is a Thinking Thing, having no Corporeal
Dimensions of Length, Breadth, and Thickness, nor having any other Corporeal
Quality) then the Idea of any Corporeal Thing can be. And when I reflect upon
my self, and consider how that I doubt, that is, am an imperfect dependent
Being, I from hence Collect such a clear and distinct Idea of an Independent
perfect Being, which is God, and from hence only that I have such an Idea, that
is, because I that have this Idea do my self Exist; I do so clearly conclude
that God also Exists, and that on him my Being depends each Minute; That I am
Consident nothing can be known more Evidently and Certainly by Humane
Understanding.

And now I seem to perceive a Method by which, (from this Contemplation of the
true God, in whom the Treasures of Knowledge and Wisdom are Hidden) I may
attain the Knowledge of other Things.

And first, I know it is impossible that this God should deceive me; For in all
cheating and deceit there is something of imperfection; and tho to be able to
deceive may seem to be an Argument of ingenuity and power, yet without doubt to
have the Will of deceiving is a sign of Malice and Weakness, and therefore is
not Incident to God.

I have also found in my self a Iudicative faculty, which certainly (as all
other things I possess) I have received from God; and seeing he will not
deceive me, he has surely given me such a Judgment, that I can never Err,
whilst I make a Right Use of it. Of which truth I can make no doubt, unless it
seems, that From hence it will follow, That therefore I can never Err; for if
whatever I have, I have from God, and if he gave me no Faculty of Erring, I may
seem not to be able to Err. And truly so it is whilst I think upon God, and
wholly convert my self to the consideration of him, I find no occasion of Error
or Deceit; but yet when I return to the Contemplation of my self, I find my
self liable to Innumerable Errors. Enquiring into the cause of which, I find in
my self an Idea, not only a real and positive one of a God, that is, of a Being
infinitely perfect, but also (as I may so speak) a Negative Idea of Nothing;
that is to say, I am so constituted between God and Nothing or between a
perfect Being and No-being, that as I am Created by the Highest Being, I have
nothing in Me by which I may be deceived or drawn into Error; but as I partake
in a manner of Nothing, or of a No-Being, that is, as I my self am not the
Highest Being, and as I want many perfections, it is no Wonder that I should be
Deceived.

By which I understand that Error * (as it is Error) is not any real Being
dependant on God, but it is only a Defect; And that therefore to make me Err
there is not requisite a faculty of Erring given me by God, but only it so
happens that I Err merely because the Iudicative faculty, which he has given
me, is not Infinite.

But yet this Account is not fully satisfactory; for Error is not only a mere
Negation, but it is a Privation, or a want of a certain Knowledge, which ought
(as it were) to be in me. And when I consider the Nature of God, it seems
impossible that he should give me any faculty which is not perfect in its kind,
or which should want any of its due perfections; for if by how much the more
skilful the Workman is, by so much the Perfecter Works proceed from him. What
can be made by the Great Maker of all things which is not fully perfect? For I
cannot Doubt but God may Create me so that I may never be deceived, neither can
I doubt but that he Wills whatever is Best; Is it therefore better for me to be
deceived, or not to be deceived?

These things when I Consider more heedfully, it comes into my Mind, First,
that it is no cause of Admiration that God should do Things whereof I can give
no account, nor must I therefore doubt his Being, because there are many things
done by him, and I not comprehend Why or How they are done; for seeing I now
know that my Nature is very Weak and Finite, and that the Nature of God is
Immense, Incomprehensible, Infinite; from hence I must fully, understand, that
he can do numberless things, the Causes whereof lie hidden to Me. Upon which
account Only I esteem all those Causes which are Drawn from the End (viz. Final
Causes) as of no use in Natural Philosophy, for I cannot without Rashness Think
my self able to Discover Gods Designs.

I perceive this also, that whenever we endeavor to know whether the Work's of
God are perfect, we must not Respect any one kind of Creature singly, but the
Whole Universe of Beings; for perhaps what (if considered alone) may Deservedly
seem Imperfect, yet (as it is a part of the World) is most perfect; and tho
since I have doubted of all things, I have discovered nothing certainly to
Exist, but my self, and God, yet since I have Considered the Omnipotency of
God, I cannot deny, but that many other things are made (or at least, may be
made) by him, so that I my self may be a part of this Universe.

Furthermore, coming nigher to my self, and enquiring what these Errors of
mine, are (which are the Only Arguments of my Imperfection) * I find them to
depend on two concurring Causes, on my faculty of Knowing, and on my faculty of
Choosing or Freedom of my Will, that is to say, from my Understanding, and my
Will together. For by my Understanding alone I only perceive Ideas, whereon I
make Judgments, wherein ( precisely so taken) there can be no Error, properly
so called; for tho perhaps there may be numberless things, whose Ideas I have
not in Me, yet I am not properly to be said Deprived of them, but only
negatively wanting them; and I cannot prove that God ought to have given me a
greater faculty of Knowing. And tho I understand him to be a skilful Workman,
yet I cannot Think, that he ought to have put all those perfections in each
Work of his singly, with which he might have endowed some of them.

Neither can I complain that God has not given me a Will, or Freedom of Choice,
large and perfect enough; for I have experienced that it is Circumscribed by no
Bounds.

And it is worth our taking notice, that I have no other thing in me so perfect
and so Great, but I Understand that there may be Perfecter and Greater, for if
(for Example) I consider the Faculty of Understanding, I presently preceive
that in me it is very small and Finite, and also at the same time I form to my
self an Idea of an other Understanding not only much Greater, but the Greatest
and Infinite, which I perceive to belong to God. In the same manner if enquire
into memory or imagination, or any other faculties, I find them in my self Weak
and Circumscribed, but in God I Understand them to be Infinite, there is
therefore only my Will or Freedom of Choice, which I find to be so Great, that
I cannot frame to my self an Idea of One Greater, so that it is by this chiefly
by which I Understand my self to Bear the likeness and Image of God. For tho
the Will in God be without comparison Greater then Mine, both as to the
Knowledge and Power which are Joined therewith, which make it more strong and
Effective, and also as to the Object thereof, for God can apply himself to more
things then I can. Yet being taken Formally and Precisely Gods Will seems no
greater then Mine. For the Freedom of Will consists only in this, that we can
Do, or not Do such a Thing (that is, affirm or deny, prosecute or avoid) or
rather in this Only, that we are so carried to a Thing which is proposed by Our
Intellect to Affirm or Deny, Prosecute or Shun, that we are sensible, that we
are not Determin^d to the Choice or Aversion thereof, by any outward Force.

Neither is it Requisite to make one Free that he should have an Inclination to
both sides. For on the contrary, by how much the more strongly I am inclined to
one side (whether it be that I evidently perceive therein Good or Evil, or
Whether it be that God has so disposed my Inward Thoughts) By so much the more
Free am I in my Choice.

Neither truly do Gods Grace or Natural Knowledge take away from my Liberty,
but rather increase and strengthen it. For that indifference which I find in my
self, when no Reason inclines me more to one side, then to the other, is the
meanest sort of Liberty, and is so far from being a sign of perfection, that it
only argues a defect or negation of Knowledge; for if I should always Clearly
see what were True and Good I should never deliberate in my Judgment or
Choice, and Consequently, tho I were perfectly Free, yet I should never be
Indifferent.

From all which, I perceive that neither the Power of Willing precisely so
taken, which I have from God, is the Cause of my Errors, it being most full and
perfect in its kind; Neither also the Power of Understanding, for whatever I
Understand (since it is from God that I Understand it) I understand aright, nor
can I be therein Deceived.

From Whence therefore proceed all my Errors? To which, I answer, that they
proceed from hence only, that seeing the Will expatiates it self farther then
the Understanding, I keep it not within the same bounds with my Understanding,
but often extend it to those things which I Understand not, to which things it
being Indifferent, it easily Declines from what is True and Good; and
consequently I am Deceived and Commit sin. * Thus, for example, when lately I
set my self to enquire, Whether any thing does Exist, and found that from my
setting my self to Examine such a thing, it evidently follows that I my self
Exist, I could not but Judge, what I so clearly Understood, to be true, not
that I was forced thereto by any outward impulse, but because a strong
Propension in my Will did follow this Great Light in my Understanding, so that
I believed it so much the more freely and willingly, by how much the less
indifferent I was thereto. But now I understand, not only, that I Exist as I am
a Thing that Thinks, but I also meet with a certain Idea of a Corporeal Nature,
and it so happens that I doubt, whether that Thinking Nature that is in me be
Different from that Corporeal Nature, or Whether they are both the same: but in
this I suppose that I have found no Argument to incline me either ways, and
therefore I am Indifferent to affirm or deny either, or to Judge nothing of
either; But this indifferency extends it self not only to those things of which
I am clearly ignorant, but generally to all those things which are not so very
evidently known to me at the Time when my Will Deliberates of them; for tho
never so probable Guesses incline me to one side, yet the Knowing that they are
only Conjectures, and not indubitable reasons, is enough to Draw my Assent to
the Contrary Part. Which Lately I have sufficiently experienced, when I
supposed all those things (which formerly I assented to as most True) as very
False, for this Reason only that I found my self able to doubt of them in some
manner.

If I abstain from passing my Judgment, when I do not clearly and distinctly
enough perceive what is Truth, it is evident that I do well, and that I am not
deceived: But if I affirm or deny, then it is that I abuse the freedom of my
will, and if I turn my self to that part which is false, I am deceived; but if
I embrace the contrary Part, it is but by chance that I light on the Truth, yet
I shall not therefore be Blameless, for it is Manifest by the light of Nature
that the Perception of the Understanding ought to preceed the Determination of
the Will. And it is in this abuse of Free Will that That Privation consists,
which Constitutes Error; I say there is a Privation in the Action as it
proceeds from Me, but not in the Faculty which I have received from God; nor in
the Action as it depends on him.

Neither have I any Reason to Complain that God has not given me a larger
Intellective Faculty, or more Natural Light, for it is a necessary Incident to a
finite Understanding that it should not Understand All things, and it is
Incident to a Created Understanding to be Finite: and I have more Reason to
thank him for what he has bestowed upon me (tho he owed me nothing) then to
think my self Robbed by him of those things which he never gave me.

Nor have I Reason to Complain that he has given me a Will larger then my
Understanding: for seeing the Will Consists in one thing only, and a^ it were
in an Indivisible (viz. to Will, or not to Will) it seems contrary to its
nature that it should be less then it is; And certainly by how much the Greater
it is, so much the more Thankful I ought to be to him; that Gave it me.

Neither can I Complain that God concurrs with me in the Production of those
Voluntary Actions or Judgments in which I am deceived: for those Acts as they
depend on God are altogether True and Good; and I am in some measure more
perfect in that I can so Act, then if I could not: for that Privation, in which
the Ratio Formalis of Falsehood and Sin consists, wants not the Concourse of
God; For it is not A Thing, and having respect to him as its Cause, ought not
to be called Privation, but Negation; for certainly it is no Imperfection in
God, that he has given me a freedom of Assenting or not Assenting to some
things, the clear and distinct Knowledge whereof he has not Imparted to my
Understanding; but certainly it is an Imperfection in me, that I abuse this
liberty, and pass my Judgment on those things which I do not Rightly
Understand.

Yet I see that it is Possible with God to effect that (tho I should remain
Free, and, of a Finite Knowledge) I should never Ern, that is, if he had
endowed my Understanding with a clear and distinct Knowledge of all things
whereof I should ever have an Occasion of deliberating; or if he had only so
firmly fixed in my Mind, that I should never forget, this, That I must never
Judge of a thing which I do not clearly and distinctly Understand; Either of
which things had God done, I easily perceive that I (as considered in my self)
should be more perfect then now I am, yet nevertheless I cannot deny but that
there may be a greater perfection in the whole Universe of Things, for that
some of its parts are Obnoxious to Errors, and some not, then if they were all
alike. And I have no Reason to Complain, that it has pleased God, that I should
Act on the Stage of this World a Part not the chief and most perfect of all; Or
that I should not be able to abstain from Error in the first way above
specified, which depends upon the Evident Knowledge of those things whereof I
deliberate; Yet that I may abstain from Error by the other means
abovementioned, which depends only on this, That I Judge not of any Thing, the
truth whereof is not Evident. For tho I have experienced in my self this
Infirmity, that I cannot always be intent upon me and the same Knowledge, yet I
may by a continued and often repeated Meditation bring this to pass, that as
often as I have use of this Rule I may Remember it, by which means I may Get
(as it were) an habit of not erring.

In which thing seeing the greatest and chief perfection of Man consists, I
repute my self to have gained much by this days Meditation, for that therein I
have discovered the Cause of Error, and Falsehood; which certainly can be no
other then what I have now Declared; for whenever in Passing my Judgment, I
bridle my Will so that it extend it self only to those things which I clearly
and distinctly perceive, it is impossible that I can Err. For doubtless; All
clear and distinct Perception is something, and therefore cannot proceed from
Nothing, but must necessarily have God for its Author (God, I say, Who is
infinitely Perfect, and who cannot Deceive) and therefore it Must be True.

Nor have I this Day learnt only what I must beware off that I be not deceived,
but also what I must Do to Discover Truth, for That I shall certainly find, if
I fully Apply my self to those things only, which I perfectly understand; and
if I distinguish between those and what I apprehend but confusedly and
obscurely; Both which hereafter I shall endeavor.

MEDITAT. V.
Of the Essence of Things Material. And herein Again of God. And that he does
Exist.
THere are yet remaining many Things concerning Gods Attributes, and many
things concerning the nature of my self or of my Mind, which ought to be
searched into: but these perhaps I shall set upon at some other Opportunity.
And at Present nothing seems to me more requisite (seeing I have discovered
what I must avoid, and what I must Do for the Attaining of Truth) then that I
employ my Endeavors to free my self from those doubts into which I have lately
fallen, and that I try whether I can have any certainty of Material Things.

But before I enquire whether there be any such things Really Existent without
Me, I ought to consider the Ideas of those things, as they are in my Thoughts
and try which of them are Distinct, which confused.

In which search I find that I distinctly imagine Quantity, that which
Philosophers commonly call continued, that is to say, the Extension of that
Quantity or thing continued into Length, Breadth, and Thickness, I can count in
it diverse Parts, to which parts I can assign Bigness, Figure, Position, and
Local Motion, to which Local Motion I can assign Duration. Neither are only
these Generals plainly discovered and known by Me, but also by attentive
Consideration, I perceive Innumerable particulars concerning the Shapes,
Number, and Motion of These Bodies; The Truth whereof is so evident, and
agreeable to my Nature, that when I first discovered them, I seemed not so much
to have Learnt any thing that is new, as to have only remembered what I have
known before, or only to have thought on those things which were in me before,
tho this be the first time that I have examined them so diligently.

One thing there is worthy my Consideration, which is, that I find in my self,
innumerable Ideas of certain things, which tho perhaps they exist nowhere
without Me, yet they cannot Be said to be Nothing; and tho they are Thought*
upon by me at my will and pleasure, yet they are not made by Me, but have their
own True and Immutable Natures. As when, for example.

* I Imagine a Triangle, tho perhaps such a Figure Exists no where out of my
Thoughts, nor ever will Exist, yet the Nature thereof is determinate, and its
Essence or Form is Immutalle and Eternal, which is neither made by me, nor
depends on my mind, as appears for that many properties may be demonstrated of
this Triangle, viz. That its three Angles are equal to two right ones, that to
its Greatest Angle the Greatest side is subtended, and such like, which I now
clearly know whether I will or not, tho before I never thought on them, when I
imagine a Triangle, and consequently they could not be invented by Me. And it is
nothing to the purpose for me to say, that perhaps this Idea of a Triangle came
to me by the Organs of sense, because I have sometimes seen bodies of a
Triangular Shape; for I can think of Innumerable other Figur^s, which I cannot
suspect to have come in through my senses, and yet I can Demonstrate various
properties of them, as well as of a Triangle, which certainly are all true,
seeing I know them clearly, and therefore they are something, and not a mere
Nothing, for it is Evident that what is true is something.

And now I have sufficiently Demonstrated, that what I clearly perceive, is
True; And tho I had not demonstrated it, yet such is the Nature of my Mind,
that I could not but give my Assent to what I so perceive, at least, as long as
I so percei^e it; and I remember (her^tofore when I most of all relied on
sensible Objects) that I held those Truths for the most certain which I
evidently p^rceived, such as are concerning Figures, Numbers, with other parts
of Ari^^^metick, and Geometry, as also whatever relates to pure and abstracted
Mathematics.

Now therefore, i^ from this alone, That I can frame the Idea of a Thing in my
Mind, it follows, That whatever I clearly and distinctly perceive belonging to
a thing, does Really belong to it; Cannot I from hence draw an Argument to
Prove the Existence of a God? Certainly I find the Idea of a God, or infinitely
perfect Being, as naturally in me, as the Idea of any Figure, or Number; and I
as clearly and distinctly understand that it appertains to his Nature Always to
Be, as I know that what I can demonstrate of a Mathematical Figure or Number
belongs to the Nature of that Figure or Number: so that, tho all things which I
have Meditated upon these three or four days were not true, yet I may well be
as certain of the Existence of a God, as I have hitherto been of Mathematical
Truths.

Doubt. Yet this Argument at first sight appears not so evident, but looks
rather like a sophism; for seeing I am used in all other things to Distinguish
Existence from Essence, I can easily persuade my self that the Existence of God
may be distinguished from his Essence, so that I may Imagine God not to Exist.

Solution. But considering it more strictly, it is manifest, that the Existence
of God can no more be separated from his Essence, then the Equality of the
Three Angles to two right ones can be separated from the Essence of a Triangle,
or then the Idea of a Mountain can be without the Idea of a valley; so that
it is no less a Repugnancy to think of a God (that is, A Being infinitely
perfect) who wants Existence (that is, who wants a Perfection) then to think of
a Mountain, to which there is no Valley adjoining.

Doubt. But what if I cannot imagine God but as Existing, or a Mountain without
a Valley? yet supposing me to think of a Mountain with a Valley, it does not from
thence follow, that there Is a Mountain in the World; so supposing me to think
of a God as Existing, yet does it not follow that God Really Exists. For my
Thought imposes no necessity on Things, and as I may imagine a Winged Horse,
tho no Horse has Wings, so I may imagine an existing God, tho no God exist.

Solution. It Is true the Sophism seems to lie in this, yet tho I cannot
conceive a Mountain but with a Valley, it does not from hence follow, that a
Mountain or Valley do Exist, but this will follow, that whether a Mountain or a
Valley do or do not Exist, yet they cannot be separated: so from hence that I
cannot think of God but as Existing, it follows that Existence is Inseparable
from God, and therefore that he Really Exists; Not because my Thought does all
this, or Imposes any necessity on any Thing, but contrarily, because the
n^cessity of the thing it self ( viz. of Gods Exist^nce) Determines me to think
(thus; for ^tis not in my Power to think a God without Existence (that is, A
Being absolutely perfect without the Chief Perfection) as it is in my Power to
imagine a Horse either with or without Wings.

Doubt. And here it cannot be said, that I am forced to suppose God Existing,
after I have supposed him endowed with all Perfections, seeing Existence is one
of them; but that my First Position (viz. His Absolute Perfection) is not
necessary. Thus, for example, it is not necessary for me to think all
Quadrilateral Figures inscribed in a Circle; But supposing that I think so, I
am then necessitated to Confess a Rhombe Inscribed therein, and yet this is
evidently False.

Solution. For tho I am not forced at any time to think of a God; yet as often
as I cast my Thoughts on a First and Chief Being, and as it were b^ing forth
out of the Treasury of my Mind an Idea thereof, I must of necessity attribute
thereto all Manner of Perfections, tho I do not at that time count them over,
o^ Remark each single One; which necessity is sufficient to make me hereafter
(when I come to consider Existence to be a P^rfection) conclude Rightly, That
the First and Chief Being does Exist. Thus, for example, I am not obliged at
any time to imagine a Triangle, yet whenever I please to Consider of a
Right-lined Figure having only three Angles, I am then necessitated to allow it
all those Requisites from which I may argue rightly, That the Three Angles,
thereof are not Greater then Two Right Ones, Tho upon the first consideration
this came not into my Thought. But when I enquire what Figures may be inscribed
within a Circle, I am not at all necessitated to think that all Quadrilateral
Figures are of that sort; neither can I possibly imagine this, whilst I admit
of nothing, but what I clearly and distinctly Understand: and therefore there
is a great Difference between these False suppositions, and True natural Ideas,
the first and Chief whereof is that of a God; For by many ways I understand
That not to be a Fiction depending on my Thought, but an Image of a True and
Immutable Nature; As first, because* I can think of no other thing but God to
Whose Essence Existence belongs. Next because I cannot Imagine Two or More
Gods, and supposing that he is now only One, I may plainly perceive it
necessary for Him to Have been from Eternity, and will Be to Eternity; And
Lastly because I perceive many Other Things in God, Which I cannot Change, and
from which I cannot Detract.

But whatever way of Argumentation I use, it comes All at last to this one
Thing, That I am fully persuaded of the Truth of those things only, which
appear to me clearly and distinctly. And tho some of those things, which I so
perceive, are obvious to every Man, and some are only discovered by Those that
search more nighly; and enquire more carefully, yet when such truths are
discovered, they are esteemed no less certain than the Others. For Example, Tho
it do not so easily appear, that in a Rightangled Triangle, the square of the
Base is equal to the squares of the sides, as it appears, that the Base is
subtended under its Largest Angle, yet the first Proposition is no less
certainly believed when once it is perceived, then this Last.

Thus in Reference to God; certainly, unless I am overrun with Prejudice, or
have my thoughts begirt on all sides with sensible Objects, I should
acknowledge nothing before or easier then him; For what is more self-evident
then that there is a Chief Being, or then that a God (to whose essence alone
Existence appertains) does Exist? And tho serious Consideration is required to
perceive thus much, yet Now, I am not only equally certain of it, as of what
seems most certain, but I perceive also that the Truth of other Things so
depends on it, that without it nothing can ever be perfectly known.

For tho my nature be such, that during the time of my Clear and Distinct
Perception, I cannot but believe it true; yet my Nature is such also, that I
cannot fix the Intention of my Mind upon one and the same thing always, so as
to perceive it clearly, and the Remembrance of what Judgment I have formerly
made is often stirred up, when I cease attending to those reasons for which I
passed such a Judgment, other Reasons may then be produced, which (if I did not
know God) may easily move me in my Opinion; and by this means I shall never
attain to the true and certain Knowledge of any Thing, but Wandering and
Unstable opinions. So, for example, when I consider the Nature of a Triangle,
it plainly appears to me (as understanding the Principles of Geometry) that its
three Angles are equal to two right ones; And this I must of necessity think
True as long as I attend to the Demonstration thereof; but as soon as ever I
withdraw my Mind from the Consideration of its Proof (although I remember that I
have once Clearly perceived it) yet perhaps I may doubt of Its Truth, being as
yet Ignorant of a God; For I may persuade my self, that I am so framed by
Nature, as to be deceived in those things which I imagine my self to perceive
most evidently. Especially when I recollect, that heretofore I have often
accounted many things True and Certain, which afterward upon other Reasons I
have Judged as False. But when I perceive that there is a God; because at the
same time I also Understand that all things Depend on Him, and that he is not a
Deceiver; and when from hence I Collect that all those Things which I clearly
and distinctly perceive are necessarily True; tho I have no further Respects to
those Reasons which induced me to believe it True, yet if I do but remember,
that I have once clearly and distinctly perceived it, no Argument can be
brought on the contrary, that shall make me doubt, but that I have true and
certain Knowledge thereof; and not only of that, but of all other Truths also
which I remember that I have once Demonstrated, such as are Geometrical
Propositions and the like.

What now can be Objected against me? shall I say, that I am so made by Nature,
as to be often deceived? NO; For I now Know that I cannot be deceived in those
Things, which I clearly Understand. Shall I say, that at other times I have
esteemed many Things True and Certain, which afterward I found to be
falsities? No; for I perceived none of those things clearly and distinctly, but
being Ignorant of this Rule of Truth, I took them up for Reasons, which Reasons
I afterward found to be Weak. What then can be said? Shall, I say, (as lately I
objected) that Perhaps I am asleep, and that what I now think of is no more
True, then the Dreams of People asleep? But this it self moves not my Opinion;
for certainly though I were asleep, if any thing appeared evident to my
Understanding, 'twould be True.

And Thus I Plainly see, that the Certainty and Truth of all Science Depends on
the Knowledge of the True God, so that before I had Known Him, I did Know
nothing; But now many things both of God himself, and of other Intellectual
Things, as also of Corporeal nature, which is the Object of Mathematics, may
be Plainly Known and Certain to me.

MEDITAT. VI.
Of Corporeal Beings, and Their Existence: As Also of the Real Difference,
Between Mind and Body.
IT now remains that I examine whether any Corporeal Beings do Exist; And
already I know that (as they are the Object of Pure Mathematics) they May (at
least) Exist, for I clearly and distinctly perceive them; and doubtless God is
able to make, whatever I am able to perceive, and I never Judged any thing to
be beyond his Power, but what was Repugnant to a distinct perception. Moreover,
such Material Beings seem to Exist from the faculty of Imagination, which I
find my self make use of, when I am conversant about them: for if I attentively
Consider what Imagination is, 'twill appear to be only a certain Application of
our Cognoscitive or knowing Faculty to a Body or Object that is before it; and
if it be before it, It must Exist.

But that this may be made more Plain, I must first examine the difference
between Imagination, and pure Intellection, or Understanding. So, for example,
when I Imagine a Triangle, I do not only Understand that it is a figure
comprehended by three Line^, but I also behold with the eye of my mind those
three lines as it were before Me, and this is that which I call imagination.
But if I convert my Thoughts to a Chiliogone, or Figure consisting of a
Thousand Angles, I know as well that this Is a figure comprehended by a
Thousand sides, as I know that a Triangle is a Figure Consisting of three
sides; but I do not in the same Manner Imagine, or behold as present those
thousand sides, as I do the three sides of a Triangle. And tho at the time when
I so think of a Chiliogone, I may confusedly represent to my self some Figure
(because whenever I Think of a Corporeal Object, I am used to Imagine some
Shape or other) yet it is evident that this Representation is not a Chiliogone,
because it is in nothing different from what I should Represent to my self if I
thought of a Milion-angled figure, or any other Figure of More sides; Neither
does such a Confused Representation help me in the least to know those
Properties, by which a Chiliogone differs from Other Polygones or Manyangled
Figures. But if a Question be put concerning a Pentagone, I know I may
Understand its Shape, as I Understand the Shape, of a Chiliogone, without the
help of Imagination, but I can also imagine it, by applying the Eye of my Mind
to its Fives sides, and to the Area or space contained by Them; And herein I
manifestly perceive that there is required a peculiar sort of Operation in the
Mind to imagine a Thing, which I require not to Understand a Thing; which New
Operation of the Mind plainly shows the difference between imagination and pure
Intellection.

Besides this, I Consider that this Power of Imagination which is in me (as it
differs from the Power of Understanding) does not appertian to the Essence of
Me, that is, of my mind, for tho I wanted it, yet certainly I should be the
same He, that now I am: from whence it seems to follow, that it depends on
something different from my self; and I easily perceive that if any Body
whatever did Exist* to which my Mind were so conjoined, that it may Apply it
self when it pleased to Consider, or (as it were) Look into this Body; From
hence, I say, I perceive It may so be, that by this very Body I may Imagine
Corporeal Beings: So that this Manner of Thinking differs from pure
Intellection only in this, that the Mind, when it Understands, does as it were
turn it self, to it self, or Reflect on it self, and be^^o'ds some or other of
those Ideas which are in it self; But when it Imagines, it Converts it self
upon Body, and therein beholds something Conformable to that Idea, which it
has understood, or perceived by Sense.

But it is to remembered, that I said, I easily conceive Imagination May be so
performed, supposing Body to Exist. And because no so convenient manner of
Explaining it offers it self, from thence I probably guess, that Body does
Exist. But this I only say probably, for tho I should accurately search into
all the Argument^ drawn from the distinct Idea of Body, which I find in my
Imagination, yet I find none of them, from whence I may necessarily conclude,
that Body does Exist.

But I have been accustomed to Imagine many other things besides that Corporeal
Nature which is the Object of pure Mathematics; such as are, Colors, Sounds,
Tastes, Pain, etc. but none of these so distinctly. And because I perceive these
better by Sense, from Which by the Help of the Memory they come to the
Imagination, that I may with the Greater advantage treat of them, I ought at
the same time to Consider Sense, and to try whether from what I perceive by
that way of Thought, which I call Sense, I can deduce any certain Argument for
the Existence of Corporeal Beings.

And first I will here reflect with my self, what those things were, which
being perceived by Sense I have heretofore thought True, and the Reasons why I
so thought: I will, then enquire into the Reasons for which I afterward
doubted those things. And last of all I will consider what I ought to think of
those Things at Present.

First therefore I have always thought that I have had an Head, H^nds, Feet,
The Reasons why I Trusted my Senses.
and other Members, of which This Body (which I have looked upon as a Part of
Me, or Perhaps as my Whole self) Consists; And I have also thought that this
Body of Mine is Conversant or engaged among many Other Bodies, by which it is
Liable to be affected with what is advantageous or hurtful; What was
Advantageous I judged by a certain sense of Pleasure, what was Hurtful by a
sense of Pain. Furthermore, besides Pleasure and Pain, I perceived in my self
Hunger, Thirst, and other such like Appetites, as also certain Corporeal
Propensions to Mirth, Sadness, Anger, and other like Passions.

As to What happened to me from Bodies without, Besides the Extension, Figure,
and Motion of those Bodies, I also perceived in them Hardness, Heat, and other
tactile Qualities, as also Light, Colors, Smells, Tastes, Sounds, etc. and by
the Variation of these I distinguished the Heaven, Earth, and Seas, and all
other Bodies from each other.

Neither was it wholly without Reason (upon the account of these Ideas of
Qualities, which offered themselves to my Thoughts, and which alone I properly
and Immediately perceived) that I thought my self to Perceive some Things
Different from my Thought, viz. The Bodies or Objects fro whence these Ideas
might Proceed; for I often found these Ideas come upon me without my Consent or
Will; so that I can neither perceive an Object (the I had a mind to it) unless
it were before the Organs of my Sense; Neither can I Hinder my self from
perceiving it, when it is Present.

And seeing that those Ideas which I take in by sense are much more Lively,
Apparent and in their kind more distinct, than any of those which I knowingly
and Willingly frame by Meditation, or stir up in my Memory; it seems to me that
they cannot proceed from my self. There remains therefore no other way for them
to come upon me, but from some other Things Without Me. Of Which Things seeing
I have no other Knowledge but from these Ideas, I cannot Think but that these
Ideas are like the Things.

Moreover, Because I remember that I first made use of my senses before my
Reason; and because I did perceive that those Ideas which I my self did frame
were not so Manifest as those which I received by my senses, but very often
made up of their parts, I was easily persuaded to think that I had no Idea in
my Understanding, which I had not First in my sense.

Neither was it without Reason that I Judged, That Body (which by a peculiar
right I call my Own) to be more nighly appertaining to Me then any other Body.
For from It, as from other Bodies, I can never be separated, I was sensible of
all Appetites and Affections in It and for I^, and lastly I perceived pleasure
and Pain in its Parts, and not in any other Without it. But why from the sense
of Pain a certain Grief, and from the sense of plea^ure a certain Joy of the
Mind should arise, or Why that Gnawing of the stomach, Which I call Hunger,
should put me in mind of Eating, or the dryness of my Throat of Drinking, I can
give no other Reason but that I am taught so by Nature. For to my thinking
there is no A^^inity or ^ikeness between that Gnawing of the Stomach, and the
desire of Ea^ing, or between the sense of Pain, and the sorrowful thought from
thence arising. But in this as in all other judgments that I made of sensible
objects, I seemed to be taught by Nature, for I first persuaded my self that
things were so or so, before ever I enquired into a Reason that may prove it.

But afterward I discovered many experiments, The Reasons why I doubt my
senses.
wherein my senses so grossly deceived me, that I would never trust them again;
for Towers which seemed Round a far off, nigh at hand appeared square, and
large Statue^ on their tops seemed small to those that stood on the ground; and
in numberless other things, I perceived the judgments of my outward senses
were deceived: and not of my outward only, but of my inward senses also; for
what is more intimate or inward than Pain? And yet I have heard from those,
whose Arm or Leg was cut off, that they have felt pain in that part which they
wanted, and therefore I am not absolutely certain that any part of me is
affected with pain, tho I feel pain therein. To these I have lately added two
very general Reasons of doubt; Medit. 1.
The first was, that while I was awake, I could not believe my self to perceive
any thing, which I could not think my self sometimes to perceive, tho I were a
sleep; And seeing I cannot believe, that what I seem to perceive in my sleep
proceeds from outward Objects, what greater Reason have I to think so of what I
perceive whilst I am awake? The other Cause of Doubt was, that seeing I know
not the Author of my Being (or at least I then supposed my self not to know
him) what reason is there but that I may be so ordered by Nature as to be
deceived even in those things which appeared to me most true. And as to the
Reasons, which induced me to give credit to sensible Things, 'twas easy to
return an answer thereto, for finding by experience, that I was impelled by
Nature to many Things, which Reason dissuaded me from, I thought I should not
far trust what I was taught by Nature. And tho the perceptions of my senses
depended not on my Will, I thought I should not therefore conclude, that they
proceeded from Objects different from my self; for perhaps there may be some
other Faculty in me (tho as yet unknown to me) which might frame those
perceptions.

But now that I begin better to know my self and the Author of my Original, How
far the senses are now to be trusted.
I do not think, that all things, which I seem to have from my senses are
rashly to be admitted, neither are all things so had, to be doubted. And first
because I know that whatever I clearly and distinctly perceive, may be so made
by God as I perceive them; the Power of understanding clearly and distinctly
one Thing without the other is sufficient to make Me certain that One Thing is
different from the Other; because it may at least be placed apart by God, and
that it may be esteemed different, it matters not by what Power it may be so
severed. And therefore from the knowledge I have, that I my self exist, and
because at the same time I understand that nothing else appertains to my Nature
or Essence, but that I am a thinking Being, I rightly conclude, that my Essence
consists in this alone, that I am a thinking Thing. And tho perhaps (or, as I
shall show presently, it is certain) I have a Body which is very nighly
conjoined to me, yet because on this side I have a clear and distinct Idea of
my self, as I am only a thinking Thing, not extended; and on the other side
because I have a distinct Idea of my Body, as it is only an extended thing,
not thinking, it is from hence certain, that I am really distinct from my Body,
and that I can exist without it.

Moreover I find in my self some Facult^es endowed with certain peculiar ways
of thinking, such as the Faculty of Imagination, the Faculty of Perception or
sense; without which I can conceive my whole self clearly and distinctly, but
(changing the phrase) I cannot conceive those Faculties without conceiving My
self, that is, an understanding substance in which they are; for none of them
in their formal Conception includes understanding; from whence I perceive they
are as different from me, as the modus or manner of a Thing is different from
the Thing it self.

I acknowledge also, that I have several other Faculties, such as changing of
place, putting on various shapes, etc. Which can no more be understood without
a substance in which they are, then the forementioned Faculties, and
consequently they can no more be understood to Exist without that substance:
But yet it is Manifest, that this sort of Faculties, to the End they may exist,
ought to be in a Corporeal, Extended, and not in a Understanding substance,
because Extension, and not Intellection or Understanding is included in the
Clear and Distinct conception of them.

But there is also in me a certain Passive Faculty of sense, or of Receiving
and Knowing the Ideas of sensible Things; of which Faculty I can make no use,
unless there were in my self, or in something else, a certain Active Faculty of
Producing and Effecting those Ideas. But this cannot be in my self, for it
Pre-supposes no Understanding, and those Ideas are Produced in me, tho I help
not, and often against my Will. There remains therefore no Place for this
Active Faculty, but that it should be in some substance different from me. In
which because all the Reallity, which is contained Objectively in the Ideas
Produced by that Faculty, ought to be contained Formally or Eminently (as I
have Formerly taken notice) this substance must be either a Body (in which what
is in the Ideas Objectively is contained Formally) or it Must Be God, or some
Creature more excellent then a Body (In which what is in the Ideas Objectively
is contained Eminently) But seeing that God is not a Deceivour, it is altogether
Manifest, that he does not Place these Ideas in me either Immediately from
himself, or Mediately from any other Creature, wherein their Objective Reallity
is not * contained Formally, but only Eminently. And seeing God has given me no
Faculty to discern Whether these Ideas proceed from Corporeal or Incorporeal
Beings, but rather a strong Inclination to believe that they are sent from
Corporeal Beings, there is no Reason Why God should not be counted a Deceiver,
if these Ideas came from any Where, but from Corporeal Things. Therefore we
must conclude that there are Corporeal Beings. Which perhaps are not all the
same as I comprehend them by my sense (for Perception by sense is in many
Things very Obscure and Confused) but those things at least, which I clearly
and distinctly Understand, that is to say, all those things which are
comprehended under the Object of Pure Mathematics; those things I say at least
are True.

As to What Remains, They are either some Particulars, as that the Sun is of
such a Bigness or Shape, etc. or they are Things less Clearly Understood, as
Light, Sound, Pain, etc. And tho these and such like Things may be very
Doubtful and Uncertain, yet because God is not a Deceiver, and because that
(Therefore) none of my Opinions can be false unless God has Given me some
Faculty or other to Correct my Error, hence it is* that I am encouraged with the
Hopes of attaining Truth even in these very Things.

And certainly it cannot be doubted but whatever I am taught by Nature has
something therein of Truth By Nature in General I understand either God
himself, or the Coordination of Creatures Made by God, By my Own Nature in
Particular I understand the Complexion or Association of all those things which
are given me by God.

Now there is nothing that this my Nature teaches me more expressly then that I
have a Body, Which is not Well when I feel Pain, that this Body wants Meat or
Drink When I am Hungry or Dry, etc. And therefore I ought not to Doubt but that
these things are True. And by this sense of Pain, Hunger, Thirst, etc. My
Nature tells me that I am not in my Body, as a Mariner is in his Ship, but that
I am most nighly conjoined thereto, and as it were Blended therewith; so that I
with It make up one thing; For Otherwise, when the Body were hurt, I, who am
only a Thinking Thing, should not therefore feel Pain, but should only perceive
the Hurt with the Eye of my Understanding (as a Mariner perceives by his sight
whatever is broken in his Ship) and when the Body wants either Meat or Drink, I
should only Understand this want, but should not have the Confused sense of
Hunger or Thirst; I call them Confused, for certainly the Sense of Thirst,
Hunger, Pain, etc. are only Confused Modes or Manners of Thought arising from
the Union and (as it were) mixture of the Mind and Body.

I am taught also by Nature, that there are many other Bodies Without and About
my Body, some whereof are to be desired, others are to be Avoided. And because
that I Perceive very Different Colors, Sounds, Smells, Tastes, Heat, Hardness,
and the Like, from thence I Rightly conclude that there are Correspondent
Differences in Bodies, from which these different perceptions of sense proceed,
tho perhaps not Alike. And because that some of these perceptions are Pleasant,
others Unpleasant, it is evidently certain, that my Body, or rather my Whole
self as ( I am compounded of a Mind and Body) am liable to be Affected by these
Bodies which encompass me about.

There are many Other Things Also which Nature seems to teach Me, but Really I
am not taught by It, but have gotten them by an ill use of Passing my Judgment
Inconsiderately, and from hence it is that these things happen often to be
false; as that all space is Empty, in which I find nothing that works upon my
Senses; That in a hot Body there is something like the Idea of Heat which is in
me; That in a White or Green Body there is the same Whiteness or Greenness
which I perceive; And the same Taste in a bitter or sweet Thing, etc. That
Stars, Castles, and Other Remote Bodies are of the same Bigness and Shape, as
they are Represented to my senses: and such like. But that I may not admit of
any Thing in this very matter, which I cannot Distinctly perceive, it behooves
me here to determine more Accurately What I mean when I say, That I am taught a
Thing by Nature.

Here I take Nature more strictly, then for the Complication of all those
Things which are Given me by God; For in this Complication there are many
things contained which relate to the Mind alone, as, That I perceive What is
done cannot be not Done, and all Other things which are known by the Light of
Nature, but of these I speak not at present. There are also many Other Things
which belong only to the Body, as, That it tends Downwards and such like, of
these also I treat not at Present. But I speak of those Things only which God
has bestowed upon me as I am Compounded of a Mind and Body together, and not
differently Considered. It Is Nature therefore thus taken that teaches me to
avoid troublesome Objects, and seek after pleasing Ones; but it appears not
that this Nature teaches us to conclude any thing of these Perceptions of our
senses, before that we make by our Understanding a diligent examination of
outward Objects; for to Enquire into the Truth of Things belongs not to the
Whole Compositum of a Man as he Consists of Mind and Body, but to the Mind
alone.

So that tho a star affect my eye no more then a small spark of Fire, yet there
is in my Eye no Real or Positive Inclination to believe One no bigger then the
Other, but thus I have been used to Judge from my Childhood without any Reason:
and tho coming nigh the Fire I feel Heat, and Coming too nigh I feel Pain, yet
there is no Reason to persuade me, That in the Fire there is any thing like
either that Heat or that Pain, but only that there is something therein,
Whatever it be, that excites in us those sensations of Heat or Pain: and so tho
in some space there may be nothing that Works on my senses, it does not from
thence follow, that there is no Body there; for I see that in these and many
other things I am used to overturn the Order of Nature, because I use these
perceptions of sense (which properly are given me by Nature to make known to
the mind what is advantageous or hurtful to the Compositum, whereof the mind is
part, and so far only they are Clear and Distinct enough) as certain Rules
immediately to discover the Essence of External Bodies, of Which they make
known nothing but very Obscurely and Confusedly.

I have Medit. 4.
formerly shown how my Judgment happens to be false notwithstanding Gods
Goodness. But now there arises a new Difficulty concerning those very things
which Nature tells me I am to prosecute or avoid, and conc^^ning my Internal
senses, Wherein I find many Errors, as when a Man being deceived by the
Pleasant Taste of some sort of Meat, devours therein some hidden Poison. But in
this very Instance it cannot be said, that the Man is impelled by Nature to
desire the Poison, for of that he is wholly Ignorant; but he is said to Desire
the Meat only as being of a grateful Taste; and from hence nothing can be
concluded but, That Mans-Nature is not All-knowing; which is no Wonder seeing
Man is a Finite Being, and therefore nothing but Finite Perfections belong to
him.

But We often err even in those things to Which we are* Impelled by Nature, as
when sick men desire that Meat or Drink, which will certainly prove Hurtful to
them. To this it may perhaps be replied, That they Err in this because their
Nature is Corrupt. But this Answers not the Difficulty, For a sick man is no
less Gods Creature then a Man in Health, and therefore it is as Absurd to
Imagine a Deceitful Nature imposed by God on the One as on the Other; And as a
Clock that is made up of Wheels and Weights does no less strictly observe the
Laws of its Nature, when it is ill contrived, and tells the hours falsely, (...)
when it answers the Desire of the Artificer in all performances; so if I
consider the body of a Man as a mere Machine or Movement, made up and
compounded of Bones, Nerves, Muscles, Veins, Blood, and Skin; so that, tho
there were no mind in It, yet It would perform all those Motions which now are
in it (those only excepted which Proceed from the Will, and consequently from
the Mind) I do easily acknowledge, that it would be as natural for him (if for
example sake he were sick of a Dropsy) to suffer that Dryness of his Throat
which uses to bring into his mind the sense of Thirst, and that thereby his
Nerves and other Parts would be so disposed as to take Drink, by Which his
disease would be increased; As (supposing him to be troubled with no such
Distemper) by the like Dryness of Throat he would be disposed to Drink, when
it is Requisite. And tho, if I respect the Intended use of a Clock I may say
that it Errs from its Nature, when it tells the Hours wrong, and so considering
the Movement of a Man's Body as contrived for such Motions as are used to be
performed thereby, I may think That also to Err from its Nature, if its Throat
is Dry, when it has no want of Drink for its Preservation. Yet I Plainly
discover, that this last Acceptance of Nature differs much from that whereof
we have been speaking all this While, for this is only a Denomination
extrinsick to the Things whereof it is spoken, and depending on my Thought,
while it Compares a sick man, and a disorderly Clock with the Idea of an
healthy man and a Rectified Clock. But by Nature in its former Acceptance I
Understand something that is Really in the Things themselves, which therefore
has something of Truth in it.

But tho Respecting only a Body sick of a Dropsy it be an Extrinsick
Denomination to say, that its Nature is Corrupt, because it has a Dry Throat,
and stands in no need of Drink; yet respecting the Whole Compound or Mind
joined to such a Body, it is not a mere Denomination, but a real Error or Nature
for it to thirst when drink is hurtful to it. It remains therefore here to be
inquired, how the Goodness of God suffers Nature so taken to be deceivable.

First* therefore I understand that a chief difference between my Mind and Body
consists in this, That my Body is of its Nature divisible, but my Mind
indivisible; for while I consider my Mind or my self, as I am only a thinking
Thing, I can distinguish no parts in Me, but I perceive my self to be but one
entire Thing; and tho the whole Mind seems to be united to the whole Body, yet
a Foot, an Arm, or any other part of the Body being cut off, I do not therefore
conceive any part of my Mind taken away; Neither can its Faculties of desiring,
perceiving, understanding, etc. be called its Parts, for it is one and the same,
mind, that desires, that perceives, that understands; Contrarily, I cannot
think of any Corporeal or extended Being, which I cannot easily divide into
Parts by my thought, and by this I understand it to be divisible. And this
alone (if I had known it from no other Argument) is sufficient to inform form
me, that my mind is really distinct from my Body.

Nextly I find, that my mind is not immediately affected by all parts of my
body, but only by the Brain, and perhaps only by one small part of it, That, to
wit, wherein the common sense is said to reside; Which part, as often as it is
disposed in the same manner, will represent to the mind the same thing, tho at
the same time the other parts of the body may be differently ordered. And this
is proved by numberless Experiments, which need not here be related.

Moreover I discover that the nature of my body is such, that no part of it can
be moved by an other remote part thereof, but it may also be moved in the same
manner by some of the interjacent parts, tho the more remote part lay still and
acted not; As for example in the rope,

A -- B -- C -- D

if its end D. were drawn, the end A. would be moved no otherwise, than if one
of the intermediate parts B. or C. were drawn, and the end D. rest quiet. So
when I feel pain in my Foot, the consideration of Physics instructs me, that
this is performed by the help of Nerves dispersed through the Foot, which from
thence being continued like Ropes to the very Brain, whilst they are drawn in
the Foot, they also draw the inward parts of the Brain to which they reach, and
therein excite a certain motion, which is ordained by Nature to affect the mind
with a sense of Pain, as being in the Foot. But because these Nerves must pass
through the Shin, the Thighs, the Loins, the Back, the Neck, before they can
reach the Brain from the Foot, it may so happen, that tho that part of them,
which is in the Foot were not touched, but only some of their intermediate
parts, yet the same motion, would be caused in the Brain, as when the Foot it
self is ill affected, from whence 'twil necessarily follow, that the mind
should perceive the same Pain. And thus may we think of any other Sense.

I understand lastly, that seeing each single motion performed in that part of
the Brain, which immediately affects the mind, excites therein only one sort of
sense* nothing could be contrived more conveniently in this case, than that, of
all those Senses which it can cause, it should cause that which chiefly, and
most frequently conduces to the conservation of an healthful Man; And
experience witnesses, that to this very end all our senses are given us by
Nature; and therefore nothing can be found therein, which does not abundantly
testify the Power and Goodness of God. Thus for Example, when the Nerves of
the Feet are violently and more than ordinarily moved, that motion of them
being propagated through the Medulla Spinalis of the Back to the inward parts
of the Brain, there it signifies to the mind, that something or other is to be
felt, and what is this but Pain, as if it were in the Foot, by which the Mind
is excited to use its endeavors for removing the Cause, as being hurtful to
the Foot. But the Nature of Man might have been so ordered by God, that That
same motion in the Brain should represent to the mind any other thing, viz.
either it self as it is in the Brain, or it self as it is in the Foot, or in any
of the other forementioned intermediate parts, or lastly any other thing
whatsoever; but none of these would have so much conduced to the Conservation
of the Body. In the like manner when we want drink, from thence arises a
certain dryness in the Throat, which moves the Nerves thereof, and by their
means the inward parts of the Brain, and this motion affects the mind with the
sense of thirst; because that in this case nothing is more requisite for us to
know, then that we want drink for the Preservation of our Health. So of the
Rest.

From all which it is manifest, that (notwithstanding the infinite Goodness of
God) it is impossible but the Nature of Man as he consists of a mind and body
should be deceivable. For if any cause should excite (not in the Foot but) in
the Brain it self, or in any other part through which the Nerves are continued
from the Foot to the Brain, that self same motion, which uses to arise from the
Foot being troubled, the Pain would be felt as in the Foot, and the sense would
be naturally deceived; for it is consonant to Reason (seeing that That same
motion of the Brain always represents to the mind that same sense, and it
oftener proceeds from a cause hurtful to the Foot, than from any other) I say
it is reasonable, that it should make known to the mind the Pain of the Foot,
rather than of any other part. And so if a dryness of Throat arises (not as
it is used from the necessity of drink for the conservation of the Body, but)
from an unusual Cause, as it happens in a Dropsy, it is far better that it
should then deceive us; then that it should always deceive us when the Body is
in Health, and so of the Rest.

And this consideration helps me very much, not only to understand the Errors
to which my Nature is subject, but also to correct and avoid them. For seeing I
know that all my Senses do oftener inform me falsely than truly in those things
which conduce to the Bodies advantage; and seeing I can use (almost always)
more of them than one to Examine the same thing, as also I can use memory,
which joins present and past things together, and my understanding also, which
has already discovered to me all the causes of my Errors, I ought no longer to
fear, that what my Senses daily represent to me should be false. But especially
those ^xtravagant Doubts of my First Meditation are to be turned off as
ridiculous; and perticularly the chief of them, viz. That * of not
distingui^hing Sleep from Waking, for now I plainly discover a great
difference, between them, for my Dreams are never conjoined by my memory with
the other actions of my life, as whatever happens to me awake is; and certainly
if (while I were awake) any person should suddenly appear to me, and presently
disappear (as in Dreams) so that I could not tell from whence he came or where
he went, I should rather esteem it a Sp^ctre or Apparition feigned in my Brain,
then a true Man; but when such things occur, as I distinctly know from whence,
where, and when they come, and I conjoyn the perception of them by my memory
with the other Accidents of my life, I am certain they are represented to me
waking and not asleep, neither ought I in the least to doubt of their Truth, if
after I have called up all my senses, memory, and understanding to their
Examination I find nothing in any of them, that clashes with other truths; For
God not being a Deceiver, it follows, that In such things I am not deceived.
But because the urgency of Action in the common occurrences of Affairs will not
always allow time for such an accurate examination, I must confess that Man's
life is subject to many Errors about perticulars, so that the infirmity of our
Nature must be acknowledged by Us.

FINIS.
ADVRTISEMENET CONCERNING THE OBJECTIONS.
AMong seven Parcels of Objections made by Diverse Learned Persons against these
Meditations, I have made choice of the Third in the Latin Copy, as being
Penned by Thomas Hobbs of Malmesbury, a Man famously known to the World abroad*
but especially to his own the English Nation; and therefore it is likely that
what comes from Him may be more acceptable to his Countrymen, then what
proceeds from a Stranger; and as the strength of a Fortification is never
better known then by a Forcible Resistance, so fares it with these Meditations
which stand unshaken by the Violen^ Opposition of so Potent an Enemy. And yet
it must be Confessed that the Force of these Objections and Cogency of the
Arguments cannot be well apprehend^d by those, who are not versed in other
Pieces of Mr. Hobbs's Philosophy, especially His Book De Corpore and De Homine,
The former whereof I am sure is Translated into English, and therefore not
Impertinently referred to Here in a Disc^urse to English Readers. And this is
the Reason that makes the Great Descartes pass over many of these Objections
so slightly, Who certainly would have Undermined the whole Fabric of the
Hobbian Philosophy had he but known upon What Foundations it was Built.

OBJECTIONS Made against the Foregoing MEDITATIONS, BY THE FAMOUS THOMAS HOBBS
Of MALMESBURY* WITH DES-CARTES'S ANSWERS.
OBJECT. I.
Against the First Meditation: Of things Doubtful.
IT IS evident enough from What has been said in this Meditation, that there is
no sign by Which we may Distinguish our Dreams from True (...) Phantasmes which
we have waking and from our Senses are not accidents inhering in Outward*
Objects, neither do they Prove that such outward Objects do Exist; and
therefore if we trust our Senses without any other Ground, we may well doubt
whether any Thing Be or Not, We therefore acknowledge the Truth of this
Meditation. But Because Plato and other Ancient Philosophers argued for the
same incertainty in sensible Things, and because it is commonly Observed by the
Vulgar that it is hard to Distinguish Sleep from Waking, I would not have the
most excellent Author of such new Thoughts put forth so antique Notions.

ANSWER.
Those Reasons of Doubt which by this Philosopher are admitted as true, were
proposed by Me only as Probable, and I made use of them not that I may vend
them as new, but partly that I may prepare the Minds of my Readers for the
Consideration of Intellectual Things, wherein they seemed to me very necessa^y;
And partly that thereby I may show how firm those Truths are, which hereafter I
lay down, seeing they cannot be Weakened by these Metaphysical Doubts; So that
I never designed to gain any Honor by repeating them, but I think I could no
more omit them, then a Writer in Physic can pass over the Description of a
Disease, Whose Cure he intends to Teach.

OBJECT. II.
Against the Second Meditation: Of the Nature of Man's Mind.
I Am a Thinking Thing. It Is True; for because I think or have a Phantasme
(whether I am awake or asleep) it follows that I am Thinking, for I Think and I
am Thinking signify the same Thing. because I Think, it follows That I am, for
whatever Thinks cannot be Nothing. But when he Adds, That is, a Mind, a Soul,
an Understanding, Reason, I question his Argumentation; for it does not seem a
Right Consequence to say, I am a Thinking Thing, therefore I am a Thought,
neither, I am an Understanding Thing, therefore I am the Understanding. For in
the same manner I may Conclude, I am a Walking Thing, therefore I am the
Walking it self.

Wherefore D. Carts Concludes that an Understanding Thing and Intellection
(which is the Act of an Understanding Thing) are the same; or at least that an
Understanding Thing and the Intellect (which is the Power of an Understanding
Thing) are the same; And yet all Philosophers dis^i^guish the subject from its
Faculties and Acts, that is, from its Properties and Essence, for the Thing it
self is one thing, and its Essence is an other. It may be therefore that a
Thinking Thing is the Subject of a Mind, Reason, or Understanding, and
therefore it may be a Corporeal Thing, the Contrary Whereof is here Assumed and
not Proved; and yet this Inference is the Foundation of that Conclusion which
D. Carts would Establish.

In the same Meditation, Places noted with this ^sterick are the Passages of
the foregoing Meditations here Objected against.
I know that I am, I ask What I am Whom I Thus know, Certainly the Knowledge of
Me precisely sotaken depends not on those Things of whose Existence I am yet
Ignorant. It Is Certain the Knowledge of this Proposition I am, depends on this,
I think* as he has rightly informed us; but from wh^nce have we the knowledge
of this Proposition, I think? certainly from hence only, that we cannot
conceive any Act without its subject, as dancing without a Dancer, knowledge,
without a Knower, thought without a thinker.

And from hence it seems to follow, that a thinking Thing is a Corporeal Thing;
for the Subjects of all Acts are understood only in a Corporeal way, or after
the manner of matter, as he himself shows hereafter by the example of a piece
of Wax, which changing its color, consistence, shape, and other Acts is yet
known to continue the same thing, that is, the same matter subject to so many
changes. But I cannot conclude from another thought that I now think; for tho a
Man may think that he has thought (which consists only in memory) yet it is
altogether impossible for him to think that he now thinks, or to know, that he
k^ows, for the question may be put infinitely, how do you know that you know,
that you know, that you know? etc.

Wherefore seeing the Knowledge of this Proposition I am, depends on the
knowledge of this I think, and the knowledge of this is from hence only, that
we cannot separate thought from thinking matter, it seems rather to follow,
that a thinking thing is material, than that it is immaterial.

ANSWER.
When I said, That is a Mind, a Soul, an Understanding, Reason, etc. I did not
mean by these names the Faculties only, but the things endowed with those
Faculties; and so it is always understood by the two first names ( mind and
soul) and v^ry often so understood by the two last Names ( understanding and
Reason) and this I have explained so often, and in so many places of these
Meditations, that there is not the least occasion of questioning my meaning.

Neither is there any parity between Walking and Thought, for walking is used
only for the Act it self, but thought is sometimes used for the Act, sometimes
for the Faculty, and sometimes for the thing it self, wherein the Faculty
resides.

Neither do I say, that the understanding thing and intellection are the same,
or that the understanding thing and the intellect are the same, if the
intellect be taken for the Faculty, but only when it is taken for the thing it
self that understands. Yet I willingly confess, that I have (as much as in me
lay) made use of abstracted words to signify that thing or substance, which I
would have divested of all those things that belong not to it. Whereas
contrarily this Philosopher uses the most concrete Words to ^ignifie this
thinking thing, such as subject, matter, Body, etc. that he may not suffer it
to be separated from Body.

Neither am I concerned that His manner of joining many things together may
seem to some fitter for the discovery of Truth, than mine, wherein I separate
as much as possibly each particular. But let us omit words and speak of things.

It may be (says he) that a Thinking thing is a corporeal thing, the contrary
whereof is here assumed and not proved. But herein he is mistaken, for I never
assumed the contrary, neither have I used it as a Foundation, for the rest of
my Superstructure, but left it wholly undetermined till the sixth Meditation,
and in that it is proved.

Then he tells us rightly, that we cannot conceive any Act without its subject,
as thought without a thinking thing, for what thinks cannot be nothing; but
then he subjoyns without any Reason, and against the usual manner of speaking,
and contrary to all Logic, that hence i^ seem to follow, that a thinking thing
is a corporeal Being. Truly the subjects of all Acts are understood under the
notion of substance, or if you please under the notion of matter (that is to
say of metaphysical matter) but not therefore under the notion of Bodies.

But Logicians and Commonly all Men are used to say, that there are some
Spiritual, some Corporeal substances. And by the Instance of Wax I only proved
that Color, Consistence, Shape, etc. appertain not to the Ratio For^alis of
the Wax; For in that Place I (...) neither of the Ratio Formalis of the Mind,
neither of Body.

Neither is it pertinent to the business, that the Philosopher asserts, That
one Thought cannot be the subject of an other thought, for Who besides Himself
ever Imagined This? But that I may explain the matter in a few words, It Is
certain that Tho^ght cannot be without a Thinking Thing, neither any Act or any
Accident without a substance wherein it resides. But seeing that we know not a
substance immediately by it self, but by this alone, that it is the subject of
several Acts, it is very consonant to the commands of Reason and Custom, that
we should call by different names those substances, which we perceive are the
subjects of very different Acts or Accidents, and that afterward we should
examine, whether those different names signify different or one and the same
thing. Now there are some Acts which we call corporeal, as magnitude, figure,
motion, and what ever else cannot be thought on without local extension, and
the substance wherein these reside we call Body; neither can it be imagined
that it is one substance which is the subject of Figure, and another substance
which is the subject of local motion, etc. Because all these Acts agree under
one common notion of Extension. Besides there are other Acts, which we call
cogitative or thinking, as understanding, will, imagination, sense, etc. All
which agree under the common notion of thought, perception, or Conscience; And
the substance wherein they are, we ^ay, is a thinking thing, or mind, or call
it by whatever other name we please, so we do not confound it with corporeal
substance, because cogitative Acts no have affinity with corporeal Acts, and
thought, which is the common Ratio of those is wholly diffrrent from Extension,
which is the common Ratio of These. But after we have formed two distinct
conceptions of these two substances, from what is said in the sixth Meditation,
it is easy to know, whether they be one and the same or different.

OBJECT. III.
* WHich of them is it, that is distinct from my thought? which of them is it
that can be separated from me?

Some perhaps will answer this Question thus, I my self, who think am distinct
from my thought, and my thought is different from me (tho^not separated) as
dancing is distinguished from the Dancer (as before is noted.) But if Des
Carts will prove, that he who understands is the same with his understanding,
we shall fall into the Scholastic expressions, the understanding understands,
the sight (...), the Will wills, and then by an exact an^logy, the Walking (or
at least the Faculty of walking) shall walk. All which are obscure, improper,
and unworthy that perspicuity which is usual with the noble Des Carts.

ANSWER.
I do not deny, that I who think am distinct from my thought, as a thing is
distinguished from its modus or manner; But when I ask, which of them is it
that is distinct from my thought? this I understand of those various modes of
thought there mentioned, and not of my substance; and when I subjoyn, which of
them is it that can be separated from me? I only signify that all those modes
or manners of thinking reside in me, neither do I herein per^eive what occasion
of doubt or obscurity can be imagined.

OBJECT. IV.
* IT remains therefore for me to Confess that I cannot Imagine what this Wax
is, but that I conceive in my mind What it is.

There is a great Difference between Imagination (that is) having an Idea of a
Thing, and the Conception of the Mind (that is) a Concluding from Reasoning
that a thing Is or Exists. But Descartes has not Declared to us in what they
Differ* Besides, the Ancient Aristotelians have clearly delivered as a
Doctrine, that substance is not perceived by sense, but is Collected by
Ratiocination.

But what shall we now say, if perhaps Ratiocination be nothing Else but a
Copulation or Concatenation of Names or Appellations by this Word Is? From
whence 'twill follow that we Collect by R^asoning nothing of or concerning the
Nature of Things, but of the names of Things, that is to say, we only discover
whether or no we join the Names of Things according to the Agreements which at
Pleasure we have made concerning their significations; if it be so (as so it
may be) Ratiocination will depend on Words, Words on Imagination, and perhaps
Imagination as also Sense on the Motion of Corporeal Parts; and so the Mind
shall be nothing but Motions in some Parts of an Organical Body.

ANSWER.
I have here Explained the Difference between Imagination, and the Mere
Conception of the Mind, by reckoning up in my Example of the Wax, what it is
therein which we Imagine, and what it is that we conceive in our Mind only: but
besides this, I have explained in an other Place How we understand one way, and
Imagine an other way One and the same Thing, suppose a Pentagone or Five sided
Figure.

There is in Ratiocination a Conjunction not of Words, but of Things signified
by Words; And I much admire that the Contrary could Possibly enter any Man's
Thoughts; For Who ever doubted but that a Frenchman and a German may argue
about the same Things, tho they use very Differing Words? and does not the
Philosopher Disprove himself when he speaks of the Agreements which at pleasure
we have made about the significations of Words? for if he grants that something
is Signified by Words, Why will he not admit that our Ratiocinations are rather
about this something, then about Words only? and by the same Right that he
concludes the Mind to be a Motion, he may Conclude Also that the Earth is
Heaven, or What else he Pleases.

OBJECT. V.
Against the Third Meditation of God.
* SOme of These (viz. Humane Thoughts) are as it were the Images of Things,
and to these alone belongs properly the Name of an Idea, as when I Think on a
Man, a Chimera, Heaven, an Angel* or God.

When I Think on a Man, I perceive an Idea made up of Figure and Color,
whereof I may doubt whether it be the Likeness of a Man or not; and so when I
think on Heaven. But when I think on a Chimera, I perceive an Image or Idea, of
which I may doubt whether it be the Likeness of any Animal not only at present
Existing, but possible to Exist, or that ever will Exist hereafter or not.

But thinking on an Angel, there is offered to my Mind sometimes the Image of a
Flame, sometimes the Image of a Pretty Little Boy with Wings, which I am
certain has no Likeness to an Angel, and therefore that it is not the Idea of
an Angel; But beleiving that there are some Creatures, Who do (as it were) wait
upon God, and are Invisible, and Immaterial, upon the Thing Believed or
supposed we Impose the Name of Angel; Whereas the Idea, under which I Imagine
an Angel, is compounded of the Ideas of sensible Things.

In the like manner at the Venerable Name of God, we have no Image or Idea of
God, and therefore we are forbidden to Worship God under any Image, least we
should seem to Conceive Him that is inconceivable.

Whereby it appears that we have no Idea of God; but like one born blind, who
being brought to the Fire, and perceiving himself to be Warmed, knows there is
something by which he is warmed and Hearing it called Fire, he Concludes that
Fire Exists, but yet knows not of what shape or Color the Fire is, neither has
he any Image or Idea thereof in his Mind.

So Man knowing that there must be some Cause of his Imaginations or Ideas, as
also an other cause before That, and so onwards, he is brought at last to an
End, or to a supposal of some Eternal Cause, Which because it never began to Be
cannot have any other Cause before it, and thence he Concludes that it is
necessary that some Eternal Thing Exist: and yet he has no Idea which He can
call the Idea of this Eternal Thing, but he names this Thing, which he believes
and acknowledges by the Name God.

But now Descartes proceeds from this Position, That we have an Idea of God in
our Mind, to prove this Theoreme, That God (that is an Almighty, Wise, Creator
of the World) Exists, whereas he ought to have explained this Idea of God
better, and he should have thence deduced not only his Existence, but also the
Creation of the World.

ANSWER.
Here the Philosopher will have the Word Idea be only Understood for the Images
of Material Things represented in a Corporeal Fantasy, by which Position he
may Easily Prove, that there can be no Proper Idea of an Angel or God, whereas
I declare every Where, but especially in this Place, that I take the Name Idea
for whatever is immediately perceived by the Mind, so that when I Will, or
Fear, because at the same time I perceive that I Will or Fear, this very Will
or Fear are reckoned by me among the number of Ideas; And I have purposely made
use of that Word, because It was usual with the Ancient Philosophers to
signify the Manner of Perceptions in the Divine Mind, although neither we nor
they acknowledge a Fantasy in God; and besides I had no fitter Word to
express it by.

And I think I have sufficiently explained the Idea of God for those that will
attend my meaning, but I can never do it fully enough for those that will
Understand my Words otherwise then I intend them.

Lastly, what is here added concerning the Creation of the World is wholly
beside the Question in hand.

OBJECT. VI.
* But (...) ar^ Other ( Thoughts) That have Superadded Forms to them, as when
I Will, when I Fear, when I Affirm, when I Deny; I know I have always
(whenever I think) some certain thing as the Subject or Object of my Thought,
but in this last sort of Thoughts there is something More which I think upon
then Barely the Likeness of the Thing; and of these Thoughts some are called
Wills and Affections, and others of them Judgments.

When any one Fears or Wills, he has certainly the Image of the Thing Feared,
or Action Willed, but what more a Willing or Fearing Man has in his Thoughts is
not explained; and tho Fear be a Thought, yet I see not how it can be any other
then the Thought of the Thing Feared; For what is the Fear of a Lion rushing on
me, but the Idea of a Lion Rushing on me, and the Effect (which that Idea
produces in the Heart) whereby the Man Fearing is excited to that Animal Motion
which* is called Flight? but now this Motion of Flying is not Thought, it
remains therefore that in Fear there is no other Thought, but that which
consists in the likeness of the thing. And the same may be said of Will.

Moreover Affirmation and Negation are not without a voice and words, and hence
it is that Brutes can neither affirm or deny not so much as in their Thought,
and consequently neither can they judge. But yet the same thought may be in a
beast as in a Man; for when we affirm that a Man runs, we have not a thought
different from what a Dog has when he sees his Master running; Affirmation
therefore or Negation superadds nothing to mere thoughts, unless perhaps it
adds this thought, that the names of which an Affirmation consists are (to the
Person affirming) the Names of the same thing; and this is not to comprehend in
the thought more then the likeness of the thing, but it is only comprehending
the same likeness twice.

ANSWER.
It Is self evident, That it is one thing to see a Lion and at the same time to
fear him, and an other thing only to see him. So it is one thing to see a Man
Running, and an other thing to Affirm within my self (which may be done
without a voice) That I see him.

But in all this objection I find nothing that requires an Answer.

OBJECT. VII.
* NOw it remains for me to examine, how I have received this Idea of God, for
I have neither received it by means of my senses, neither comes it to me
without my forethought, as the Ideas of sensible things use to do, when those
things work on the Organs of my sense, or at least seem so to work; Neither is
this Idea framed by my self, for I can neither add to, nor detract from it.
Wherefore I have only to conclude, that it is innate, even as the Idea of me my
self is Natural to my self.

If there be no Idea of God, as it seems there is not (and here it is not proved
that there is) this whole discourse falls to the ground. And as to the Idea of
my self (if I respect the Body) it proceeds from Sight, but (if the Soul) there
is no Idea of a Soul, but we collect by Ratiocination, that there is some
inward thing in a Man's Body, that imparts to it Animal Motion, by which it
perceives and moves, and this (whatever it be) without any Idea we call a Soul.

ANSWER.
If there be an Idea of God (as it is manifest that there is) this whole
Objection falls to the ground; and then he subjoyns, That we have no Idea of
the Soul, but collect it by Ratiocination, It Is the same as if he should say,
that there is no Image thereof represented in the Fantasy, but yet, that
there is such a Thing, as I call an Idea.

OBJECT. VIII.
* AN other Idea of the Sun as taken from the Arguments of Astronomors, that is
consequentially collected by me from certain natural notions.

At the same time we can certainly have but one Idea of the Sun, whether it
belook'd at by our eyes, or collected by Ratiocination to be much bigger than
it seems; for this last is not an Idea of the Sun, but a proof by Arguments,
that the Idea of the Sun would be much larger, if it were looked at nigher. But
at different or several times the Ideas of the Sun may be diverse, as if at one
time we look at it with our bare eye, at an other time through a Teloscope; but
Astronomical arguments do not make the Idea of the Sun greater or less, but
they rather tell us that the sensible Idea thereof is false.

ANSWER.
Here also (as before) what he says is not the Idea of the Sun, and yet is
described, is that very thing which I call the Idea.

OBJECT. IX.
* FOr without doubt those Ideas which Represent substances are something more,
or (as I may say) have more of objective Reality in them, then those that
represent only accidents or modes; and again, that by which I understand a
mighty God, Eternal, Infinite, Omniscient, Omnipotent, Creator of all things
besides himself, has certainly in it more objective reality, then those by
which Finite substances are exhibited.

I have before often noted that there can be no Idea of God or the Mind: I will
now superadd, That neither can there be an Idea of Substance. For Substance
(Which is only Matter Subject to Accidents and Changes) is Collected only by
Reasoning, but it is not at all Conceived, neither does it represent to us any
Idea. And if this be true, How can it be said, That those Ideas which represent
to us Substances have in them something More, or More Objective Reality, then
those which represents to us Accidents? Besides, Let Descartes again Consider
what he means by More Reality? Can Reality be increased or diminished? Or does
he think that One Thing can be More A Thing then an other Thing? let him
Consider how this can be Explained to our Understandings with that Perspicuity
or Clearness which is requisite in all Demonstrations, and Which He Himself is
used to present us with upon other Occasions.

ANSWER.
I have often noted before, That that very Thing which is evidenced by Reason,
as also whatever else is perceived by any other Means, is Called by Me an Idea.
And I have sufficiently explained How Reality may be Increased or Diminished,
in the same manner (to wit) as Substance is More a Thing, then A Mode; and if
there be any such things as Real Qualities, or Incomplete Substances, these are
More Things then Modes, and Less Things then Complete Substances: and Lastly if
there be an Infinite Independent Substance this is More a Thing, then a Finite,
Dependent Substance. And all this is self-evident.

OBJECT. X.
* WHerefore There only Remains the Idea of God; Wherein I must consider
whether there be not something Included, which cannot P^ssibly have its
Original from me. By the Word, God, I mean a certain Infinite Substance,
Independent, Omniscient, Almighty, by whom both I my self and every thing Else
That Is (if any thing do actually exist) was Created; All which attributes are
of such an High Nature That the more attentively I consider them, the Less I
Conceive my self alone possible to be the Author of these notions; from what
therefore has been said I must Conclude there is a God.

Considering the Attributes of God, that from thence we may gather an Idea of
God, and that we may enquire whether there be not something in that Idea which
cannot Possibly Proceed from our selves, I discover (if I am not Deceived) that
what we think off at the Venerable name of God proceeds neither from our
selves, neither is it Necessary that they should have any other Orignal then
from Outward Objects. For by the Name of God I understand a Substance, that is,
I understand that God Exists (not by an Idea, but by Reasoning) In^^nite (that
is, I cannot conceive or Imagine Terms or Parts in him so Extreme, but I can
Imagine others Farther) from whence it follows, that not an Idea of Gods
Infinity but of my Own bounds and Limits presents it self at the Word Infinite.
Independent, That is, I do not conceive any Cause from which God may proceed;
from whence it is evident that I have no other Idea at the word Independent, but
the memory of my own Ideas which at Different. Times have Different Beginnings,
and Consequently they must be Dependent.

Wherefore, to say that God is Independent, is only to say That God is in the
Number of those things, the Original whereof I do not Imagine: and so to say
that God is Infinite, is the same as if we say That He is in the Number of
Those Things whose Bounds we do not Conceive: And thus any Idea of God is
Exploded, for What Idea can we have without Beginning or Ending?

Omniscient or Understanding all things, Here I desire to know, by what Idea,
Descartes understands Gods Understanding? Almighty I desire also to know by
What Idea Gods Power is understood? For Power is in Respect of Future Things,
that is, Things not Existing. For my part, I understand Power from the Image or
Memory of past Actions, arguing with my self thus, He did so, therefore he was
able (or had Power) to do so, therefore (continuing the same) he will again
have Power to do so. But now all these are Ideas that may arise from external
Objects.

Creator of all things, I can frame an Image of Creation from what I see every
day, as a Man Born, or growing from a Punctum to that shape and size he now
bears; an other Idea then this no man can have at the word Creator; But the
Possibility of Imagining a Creation is not sufficient to prove that the world
was Created. And therefore tho it were Demonstrated that some Infinite
Independent Almighty Being did exist, yet it will not from thence follow that a
Creator exists; unless one can think this to be a right inference, we believe
that there exists something that has created all other things, therefore the
world was created thereby.

Moreover when he says, that the Idea of God, and of our Soul is Innate or born
in us, I would fain know, whether the Souls of those that sleep soundly do
think unless they dream; If not, then at that time they have no Ideas, and
consequently no Idea is Innate, for what is Innate to us is never Absent from
us.

ANSWER.
None of Gods Attributes can proceed from outward objects as from a Pattern,
because there is nothing found in God like what is found in External, that is,
Corporeal things; Now it is manifest that whatever we think of in him differing
or unlike what we find in them proceeds not from them, but f^^m a cause of that
very diversity in our Thought.

And here I desire to know, how this Philosoper deduces Gods Understanding from
outward Things, and yet I can easily explain wha^ Idea I have thereof, by
saying, that by the Idea of Gods Understanding I conceive whatever is the Form
of any Perception; For who is there that does not perceive that he understands
something or other, and consequently he must thereby have an Idea of
understanding, and by enlarging i^ Indefinitely he forms the Idea of Gods
Understanding. And so of his other Attributes.

And seeing we have made use of that Idea of God which is in us to demonstrate
his existence, and seeing there is contained in this Idea such an Immense
Power, that we conceive it a contradiction for God to Exist, and yet that any
thing should Be besides Him, which was not Created by Him, it plainly follows
that demonstrating His existence we demonstrate also that the whole world, or
all things different from God, were Created by God.

Lastly when we assert, that some Ideas are Innate or natural to us, we do not
mean that they are always present with us (for so no Idea would be Innate) but
only that we have in our selves a Faculty of producing them.

OBJECT.
* THe whole stress of which Argument lies thus; because I know it impossible
for me to be of the same nature I am, viz, having the Idea of a God in me,
unless really there were a God, A God (I say) that very same God, whose Idea I
have in my mind.

Wherefore seeing it is not demonstrated that we have an Idea of God, and the
Christian Religion commands us to believe that God is Inconceivable, that is,
as I suppose, that we cannot have an Idea of Him, it follows, that the
Existence of God is not demonstrated, much less the Creation.

ANSWER.
When God is said to be Inconceiveable it is understood of an Adequate full
conception. But I am 'een tired with often repeating, how notwithstanding we
may have an Idea of God. So that here is nothing brought that makes any thing
against my demonstration.

OBJECT. XII.
Against the Fourth Meditation, Of Truth and Falsehood.

* BY Which I understand that Error (as it is Error is not a Real Being
Dependent on God, but is only a Defect; and that therefore to make me Err there
is not requisite a Faculty of Erring Given me by God.

It Is Certain that Ignorance is only a Defect, and that there is no Occasion of
any Positive Faculty to make us Ignorant. But this position is not so clear in
Relation to Error, for Stones and Inanimate Creatures cannot Err, for this
Reason only, because they have not the Faculties of Reasoning or Imagination;
from whence it is Natural for us to Conclude, That to Err there is requisite a
Faculty of Judging, or at least of Imagining, both which Faculties are
Positive, and given to all Creatures subject to Error, and to Them only.

Moreover Descartes says thus, I find (my Errors) to Depend on two concurring
Causes, viz. on my Faculty of Knowing, and on my Faculty of Choosing, or
Freedom of my Will. Which seems Contradictious to what he said before; And here
also we may note, that Freedom of Will is assumed without any Proof contrary to
the Opinion of the Calvinists.

ANSWER.
Tho to make us Err there is requisite a Faculty of Reasoning (or rather of
Judging, that is, of Affirming and Denying) because Error is the Defect
thereof, yet it doesnot follow from thence that this Defect is any thing Real,
for neither is Blindness a Real Thing, tho stones cannot be said to be Blind,
for this Reason only, That they are incapable of sight. And I much wonder that
in all these Objections I have not found one Right Inference.

I have not here assumed any thing concerning the Freedom of Man's Will, unless
what all Men do Experience in themselves, and is most evident by the Light of
Nature. Neither see I any Reason, Why he should say that this is Contradictious
to any former Position.

Perhaps there may be Many, who respecting Gods predisposal of Things cannot
Comprehend, How their Freedom of Will Consists therewith, but yet there is no
Man who, respecting himself only, does not find by Experience, That it is one
and the same Thing to be Willing, and to be Free. But it is no Place to Enquire
what the Opinion of others may be in this Matter.

OBJECT. XIII.
* AS for Example, When lately I set my self to examine Whether any Thing Do
Exist, and found, that from my setting my self to examine such a Thing, it
evidently follows, That I my self Exist, I could not but Judge, what I so
clearly understood, to be true, not that I was forced thereto by any outward
Impulse, but because a strong Propension in my Will did follow this Great Light
in my Understanding, so that I believed it so much the more Freely and
Willingly, by how much the Less indifferent I was thereunto.

This expression, Great Light in the Understanding, is Metaphorical, and
therefore not to be used in Argumentation; And every one, that Doubts not of
his Opinion, Pretends such a Light, and has no less a Propension in his Will to
Affirm what he doubts not, than He that really and truly knows a Thing.
Wherefore this Light may be the cause of Defending and Holding an Opinion
Obstinately, but never of knowing an Opinion Truly.

Moreover not only the Knowledge of Truth, but Blief or Giving Assent, are not
the Acts of the Will; for Whatever is proved by strong Arguments, or Credibly
told, we Believe whether we will or no.

It Is True, To Affirm or Deny Propositions, to Defend or Oppose Propositions,
are the Acts of the Will; but it does not from thence Follow that the Internal
Assent depends on the Will. Wherefore the following Conclusion ( so that in the
abuse of our Freedom of Will that Privation consists which Constitutes Error)
is not fully Demonstrated.

ANSWER.
It Is not much matter, Whether this expression, Great Light, be Argumentative
or not, so it be explicative, as really it is, For all men know, that by light
in the understanding is meant clearness of knowledge, which every one has not,
that thinks he has; and this hinders not but this light in the Understanding
may be very different from an obstinate Opinion taken up without clear
perception.

But when it is here said, That we asse^t to things clearly perceived whether we
will of no, it is the same, as if it were said, that willing or nilling; we
desire Good clearly known; whereas the word Nilling, finds no room in such
Expressions, for it implies, that we will and nill the same thing.

OBJECT. XIV.
Against the Fifth Meditation. Of the Essence of material things.
* AS when for Example, I imagine a Triangle, thy perhaps (...) a Figure exists
no where (...) of my thoughts, nor ever will exist, (...) Nature thereof is
determinate, and its Essence or (...) is (...) immutable and eternal, which is
(...) made by (...) no^ depends o^ my mind, as appears from this, that (...) be
demonstrated of this Triangle.

If a Triangle be (...) where, I understand not how it can (...) any Nature,
for what is no where, is (...), and therefore has not a Being (...) any Nature.

A Triangle on the Mind (...) from ^ Triangle seen, o^ from one made up of what
has been seen; but when once we have given the name of a Triangle to a thing
(from which we think the Idea of a Triangle arises) tho the Triangle it self
perish, yet the name continues; In the like manner, when we have once conceived
in our thought, That all the Angles of a Triangle are equal to two right ones,
and when we have given this other name (viz. Having its three Angles equal to
two right ones) to a Triangle, tho afterward there were no such thing in the
World, yet the Name would still continue, and this Proposition. A Triangle is a
Figure having three Angles equal to two right Ones, would be eternally true.
But the Nature of a Triangle will not be eternal if all Triangles were
destroyed.

This Proposition likewise, A Man is an Animal, will be true to Eternity,
because the Word Animal will eternally signify what the Word Man signifies;
but certainly if Mankind perish, Humane Nature will be no longer.

From whence it is Manifest. That Essence as it is distinguished from Existence
is nothing more than the (...) of Names by this word I^, and therefore Essence
without Existence is merely a Fiction of our own; and as the Image of a Man in
the Mind is to a Man, so it seems ^ssence is to Existence. Or as this
Proposition, Socrates is a Man, is to this, Socrates Is (...) Exists, so is the
Essence of Socrates to his Existence. Now this Proposition Socrates is a Man,
when Socrates does not exist, signifies only the Connection of the Names, and
the word Is carries under it the Image of the unity of the thing, which is
called by these Two Names.

ANSWER.
The Difference between Essence and Existence is known to all Men. And what is
here said of Eternal Names instead of Eternal Truth, has been long ago
sufficiently rejected.

OBJECT. XV.
Against the Sixth Meditation. Of the Existence of Material Beings.
* ANd seeing God has given me no Faculty to know whether these Ideas proceed
from Bodies or not, but rather a strong inclination to believe, that these
Ideas are sent from Bodies, I see no reason, why God should not be counted a
Deceiver, if these Ideas came from any where, but from Corporeal Beings, and
therefore we must conclude that Corporeal Beings exist.

It Is a received opinion, that Physicians who deceive their Patients for their
Healths sake, and Fathers, who deceive their Children for their Good, are
guilty thereby of no Crimes, for the fault or Deceit does not consist in the
falsity of Words, but in the Injury done to the Person deceived.

Let D. Cantes therefore consider whether this Proposition, God can upon no
acc^urt deceive us. Universally taken be true; For if it be not true so
universally taken, that Conclusion, Therefore Corporeal Beings exist, will not
follow.

ANSWER.
It Is not requisite for the establishment of my Conclusion, That we cannot be
deceived on any account (for I willingly granted, that we may be often
deceived) but that we cannot be deceived, when that our Error argues that in
God there is such a Will to Cheat us as would be contradictious to his Nature.
And here again we have a wrong inference in this Objection.

The Last Objection.
* FOr now I plainly discover a great difference between them ( that is sleep
and waking) for my Dreams are never conjoined by my Memory, with the other
Actions of my Life.

I desire to Know, whether it be certain, that a Man dreaming, that the doubts
whether he dream or not, may not Dream, that he joins his Dream to the Ideas of
things past long since; if he may, than those Actions of his past life, may be
thought as true as if he were awake.

Moreover because (as D. Carts affirms) the Certainty and truth of all
knowledge depends only on the knowledge of the True God, either an Atheist
cannot from the Memory of his past life conclude that he is awake, or else it is
possible for a man to know that he is awake without the Knowledge of the True
God.

ANSWER.
A Man that dreams cannot really connect his dreams with the Ideas of past
things, tho, I confess, he may dream that he so connects them; for whoever
deny^d, That a man when he is a sleep may be Deceived? But when he awakens he
may easily discover his Error.

An Atheist from the memory of his past life may collect that he is awake, but
he cannot know, that this Sign is sufficient to make him certain, that he is
not deceived, unless he know that he is created by a God that will not deceive
him.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books sold by Benjamin Took a the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
HEredoti (...) Historiarum libri (...) ejusdem narra^io (...) vita ho^^ri, Gr.
Lat. and H. Step^ Apologis (...) H^rod^^^ accesse^^^ (...) Edition Ch^^^logia
Historia, and (...) Geographi^^ Herodot^^^, (...) Lectiones and note ex
pluribus M. S. S. ^od. and Antiquis script^ribus collect^, fol. Francisci
Suarez. Doct. Theol. Gra^. Trad^tus de Legibus an Deo. Legislature in dece^^
libros distrib^tus. fol. Thorndicius de Ratione ac I^re (...) Eccles^^. fol.
The Holy Court in five Tomes, written in French by N. Causin, translated by Sir
T. H. the fourth (...). fol. The Works of the most Reverend John Bramhal, D. D.
late L. Archbishop of Armagh, some of which never before printed, with the life
of the Author, etc. fol. The History and Vindication of the Irish Remonstrance
against all Calumnies and Censures in several Treatises. falio. A Collection of
all the Statutes now in use in the Kingdom of Ireland, with Notes in the
Margin: And likewise the Acts of Settlement and Explanation, with the rest of
the Acts, made in the Reign of his Majesty that now is, to the ^diss^ution of
the Parliament, Aug. 16^6. Several ^hyrurgical Treatises (...). Wiseman,
Sergeant Chyrurgion folio. The Primitive Origination of Mankind considered and
examined, according to the light of Nature, written by Sir M. Hale, Knight. late
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. folio. Sir Ri^hs* Baker's Chronicle of
the Kings of England from the Romans Government to this time. Thirty five
Sermons by the Right Revere^^ R. Sanderson late Lord Bishop of Lincoln* Le Beau
^ledeur, (...) Book of Entries containing Declarations, Informations, and other
select and approved Pleadings; with special Verdicts and Dumurrers in most
actions real* personal, and mixed, which have been arg^ed and adjudged in the
Courts of Westminster, (...) faithful references to the most authentic Law
Books, by Sir Humphry Winch, Knight. sometimes one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas, fol. Etymologicon Linguae Anglicanae; seu explicatio vocum
Anglicarum Etymologica ex propriis fontibus. Omnia Alphabetico ordine in
quinque distinctas Classes digesta. Authore Step. Skinner, M. D. folio. A large
Dictionary in three Parts by Tho. Holyoake D. D. folio. Horae Hebraicae and
Talmudicae impensae in Evangelium S. Iohannis. p. I. Lightfoot. quarto. Doctor
Browns Travels in Hungaria, Servia, Bulgaria, Macedonia, etc. As also through a
great part of Germany, with Observations on the Mines, Baths, and mineral
Waters in those Parts, illustrated with the Figures of some habits and
remarkable places. quarto. A Representation of the State of Christianity in
England, and of its Decay and Danger from Sectaries as well as Papists. The
Controversial Letters, or the grand Controversy, concerning the pretened
authority of Popes and true Sovereign of Kings, in 16 Letters. quarto. A True
Widow, a Comedy written by T. Shadwel. quarto. A Vindication of the sincerity
of the Protestant Religion in the point of Obedience to Sovereigns, opposed to
the Doctrine of Rebellion authorized and practiced by the Pope and the
Jesuits, by Peter Du Moulin* quarto. Phocaena, or the Anatomy of a Porpess
dissected at Gresham College, with a Preliminary discourse concerning Anatomy,
and a Natural History of Animals. quar. Dodwells separation of Churches from
Episcopal Government, as practiced by the present Nonconformists proved
Schismatical from such principles as are least controverted, and do withal most
popularly explain the sinfulness and mischief of Schism. quarto. -- Two Letters
of Advice. 1. For the susception of Holy Orders. 2. For Studies Theological,
especially such as are rational; at the end of the former is inserted a
Catalogue of the Christian Writers, and genuine works of the first three
Centuries. octavo. -- Some Considerations of present Concernment; how far
Romanists may be trusted by Princes of another Persuasion. octavo. -- Two short
Discourses against the Romanists 1. An Account of the fundamental Principle of
Popery. 2. An Answer to six Queries. twelves. Navigation and Commerce their
Original and Progress, containing a succinct account of Traffic in general, by
John Evelin, Esquire octavo. Of Gifts and Offices in the public Worship of God, in
three parts, endeavoring an impartial account, what was in the inspired Age of
the Church, what succeeded in the more ordinary State* what reasonably may be
allowed in Prayer, singing, and Preaching, by Edw. Wetenhal, D. D, octavo. The
Catechism of the Church of England with marginal Notes, very plainly setting
forth its meaning, and proving the same out of the Scriptures, for the use of
Schools by Edw. Wetenhal, D. D. Poems and Songs by Tho. Flatman. octa. Poems by
N. Tat^. octavo. The Degrees of Consanguinity affinity described and
delineated, by Robert Dixon. D. D. in octavo. The French Oardiner (...)
cultivate all sorts of Fruit Trees and (...) for the Garden, together with
instructions to dry and conserve them, in written in French, and Englished by
Io. Evelin, Esquire in octavo. (...) Obstaculum; being an Answer to several Queries
dispersed in several parts of Glocestershire in octavo. S. Gardinerus S. T. P.
de Trinitate contra Sandium, in octavo, Deus Nobiscum. A Narrative of a great
Deliverance at Sea, by W. Johnson, D. D. Phaedri Augusti Caesaris Liberti
Fabularum Esopiarum Libri V. in usum scholarum Angilae. octavo. A Short Veiw of
the chief points in Controversy between the Reformed Churches, and the Church
of Rome, by Dr. Peter Da Moulin, in octavo. The Country Parsons advice to this
Parishioners in two Parts. 1. Containing a plain and serious Exhortation to a
Religious Life. 2. General Directions how to live accordingly. in octavo.
FINIS.

