DAGON'S FALL, OR THE CHARM BROKE
SO now things begin to come to some consistence, a man may without the help of
Spectacles, see clearly who and who is together; Matters resolve by degrees into
their own proper Principles: There was such a mad medley, such a monstrous
confusion and jumble of things and names, hodge-podge together not long since,
that 'twas impossible to know what was what. For a certain kind of odd Gargon
Language was invented by a sort of Cunning Fellows (that studied the Black Art)
half a dozen words whereof were of strange mystic signification, and would
express as much in short as any thousand could in the Oriental Tongues. There
was Liberty, Property, Protestant Religion, Popery, Arbitrary Power, Fears,
Jealousies, Grievances, and some few words more, that answered all Questions
that could possibly be propounded, resolved all doubts and difficulties, solved
all Arguments and Objections in a trice: In a word, they proved any thing and
signified every thing, and all things together; and yet at the very self-same
time (mirandum dictu) they meant just nothing. As for example to the Question,
Whether it be not the duty and interest of the Subject, to supply the King for
the Safety and Honor of the Nation? The Answer was, Grievances. Again, Whether
the King and Council's Wisdom, and the Law of the Land, be not more valuable
than Vox Populi? The Answer was, Fears and Jealousies. And so, Whether it be
prudently done to run headlong into present mischiefs for fear of suture
possibilities? The Answer is, Popery, Slavery. Whether 12 or more godly men may
not unanimously agree upon the grand point of Perjury salva fide? The Answer
is, the Protestant Religion. And a thousand such Questions as these are equally
answered, without the trouble of affirmatives or negatives, by one or two of
the former Crambo-words; as also all sorts of difficulties are sully resolved
(and as unappeasably) as by (...). But that which is the miraculous mystical
Excellency of these Hieroglyphick words, they do not only severally answer
several Questions, but any one of them answers all questions, doubts and
scruples whatever; so that the first you hit upon is as good as any one, or all
of them together. As thus, suppose it be asked, Whether it be not as free and
lawful for a King to borrow money, if he can, as for any one of his meanest
Subjects? Now, though indeed the usual answer to this is Arbitrary Power, yet
you may go handy dandy, and take any one of the rest that comes first, and
all is one. But farther, the force of these words is so great, that not only all
Questions and Proposals are by virtue of them extricated and resolved, but all
the several actions and passions, humors, interests, intrigues and designs of
the Artists themselves, that use them, though otherwise they may seem never so
odd and unaccountable, yet by the help of one of these magic terms are
acquitted and cleared immediately of all guilt and imputation; and the most
unjust and unreasonable Proceedings imaginable, being but lightly touched with
one of these words, shall receive such a fair and favorable gloss and
tincture, as to be metamorphosed into the quite contrary, to what it really is.
And thus it is easily made out, That the late King cut off his own Head; That
imprisoning, killing and plundering, was to maintain the Right and Freedom of
the People: That to borrow vast Sums, and repay them with Public Faith ad
Graecas Calendas, was strict Equity: That to rob and starve Widows and Orphans,
was to do Justice and Judgment: That to commit Sacrilege, and demolish
Churches, was for the Honor of God; and to ravage the whole Nation with Fire
and Sword, was for the Safety, Peace and Settlement of the Kingdom. Nor do
these words like those of other Languages grow old or obsolet; for they are as
much now in fashion, as they were forty or fifty years agon; And even still by
a certain charm that is in them, Quidlibet fit ex quolibet. Thus to give the
King no Money, is the Honor and Safety of Himself and the Nation. And to let
these Kingdoms lie in a naked and helpless Condition, without any other
Strength or Defense, than that of the four Seas, is the best way to prevent
French Monarchy and Incroachment: That to bind the Subjects in a stricter Tie
of Allegiance, Duty and Affection to their Prince, is to persuade them that the
King is not to be trusted: That to take away His Majesty's Guards at a time
when there is a horrid Plot against His Life, is for the Preservation of His
Majesty's Person; That to do every thing with studied Industry against His
Majesty's Will and Pleasure, is an undeniable Testimony of Loyalty and
Obedience: That like malicious merciless Jews, to clear and release Barabbas by
Ignoramus, and by saving him to hazard and expose the Life of their King, is to
do like a true Loyal Protestant godly Tender Conscienc'd Jury. Nor are
Propositions, Actions and Things only transelementated by these Enchanting
words, but the very Persons and. Properties of men, shall in very few days
space receive a monstrous Metamorphosis; insomuch that a Rogue and Villain upon
Record, shall forthwith become an honest man, and credible to so great a
degree, as to let great and good men's lives lie at the mercy of his naked Oath
and Deposition: And on the contrary, men of confessed Truth and Honesty shall, by
having one or two of the forementioned words cast into the Scale with him, sink
the Balance to the lowest and vilest degrees of Subarnation, Perjury and
Villainy. But what is still more prodigious of such powerful force, is the
magic Virtue of these words, that appearing lately up and down the City and
Country in Printed Characters; and many harmiess well-meaning People poring too
long and often upon them, they became (as some of Ulysses men by Circe's Cups)
all of a sudden strangely metamorphosed into Asses, Wolves, Tigers, Foxes, and
such like Beasts; so that, had not the King by his own hand lately removed the
Evil of the Charm, by certain Printed Characters called a Declaration; or
Counter charm, they had in all likelihood continued so to this very moment.

Nay farther yet the very seasons of the Year loie their respective natural
qualities by the magical force of these words, and transmute into each other,
for (by virtue of them) the Dog days happened last year to be in November and
December. and the season then was accordingly hot and fiery in most parts of the
Nation; but more especially in the City of London and Westminster, the heats
were intolerable, insomuch, that the King was forced about the latter end of
December to send above five or six hundred Persons of note from their abode at
Westminster, into the Country, least such a warm concourse should have bred
some pestilential infection: and all this violent heat (they say) was
occasioned only by muttering according to art two or three of the forementioned
words, such as Popery, Arbitrary Power and the like. But there is one
extraordinary advantage which these words have, viz. That any one of them is of
itself alone, not only a whole sentence, but a whole science also, so that an
ordinary Tailor, or Tinker, though otherwise never so rude, ignorant, and
unlearned, if he get but these words readily by rot, he becomes Master
immediately of the chief liberal sciences, and has Grammar, Logic and
Rhetoric enough to dispute a point of Divinity, State or Law, with the
greatest Professors and Practitioners in the Nation; Ay, and confute them too;
urg ehim never so hard, with a strong Argument for Prelatical Government in the
Church, you are answered and confounded presently by the strength of one
almighty word Popery, it is but pronouncing it secundum artem, and your business
is done So in State Affairs, and point of Government, argue never so
convincingly in the defense of Monarchy, and the divine and natural right of
Kings, your confutation consists but in two words only, viz. Arbitrary Power.
After which, you must e'ne desist with patience, and silence; for with these
Persons, and in all disputes and contests of the like nature, any thing offered
by way of rejoinder, is hist off the stage presently; or if you prove obstinate
in your reasons, and arguments, it is ten to one if you do not dispute your self
into the Clutches of one of their Officers, and so find your self at midnight
in an enchanted Castle. In fine, this has been the odd posture of our Affairs
for some time past, and most strange freaks, and pranks have been played by the
help of these few words, such monstrous confusion, and transfigurations have
followed the force of these spells, that nothing hardly appeared in its true
shape, or could be known distinctly; truth became falsehood, and that again was
made truth, honest men turned mere Rogues, and Villains true men all of a
sudden, Heresy, Schism, and Treason, was evangelical Truth and Obedience, and
loyalty, and so Vice Versa. Now the Master Magicians and inventers of these
spells, (tho 'twas well enough known that they had made a contract with the
Devil, and had neither Piety, Truth nor Loyalty at all in them, yet) they had
so daubed and painted themselves all over with the glossy colors of Protestant
Religion, here and there intermixed with Magical Characters of liberty, property
and the like, that to such as were not very well acquainted with the imposure
and Legerdemain of such kind of limning they were thought to be really what
they appeared, and accordingly were admired, as Master pieces, and regular
draughts of extraordinary nature; but to the more curious, and inquisitive, and
to such as came a little nearer, and breathed upon them, all the fair Varnish
which appeared at a distance so very charming, quite vanished, and instead of a
true and regular picture (of Religion, or Loyalty) it all dwindled into mere
rude rough Landscape: where the chief things that presented themselves to view
were the old tuine of Kings Court, and great men's houses, with devastations of
Churches and Towns, and the old carcasses of withered Trees (somewhat
resembling that near Paddington) with a few portraits of Owls, Buzzards,
Vultures, Wolves, Dogs, and such like In fine the chief Strength of these
charms is broke, the magical words are become of little or no force, all the
Brazen heads that of late muttered dreadful necromantick sounds are silenced,
or else (like that of Friar Bacon) fellen down and broken to pieces, We hear no
more frightful noises now from the enchanted Castle and Elephant, nor from the
burning Headpiece near Temple Bar. Besides, one of the chief Magicians has
been a long time enclosed in an enchanted Castle, and neither by his own art,
nor that of his Brethren, can he yet break the strong spell that confines him;
for it is said that one condition of the Enchantment is, that he shall not be
enlarged till such time as five hundred flaming Circles appear in his defense.
But yet since these Master-magicians have been quelled, some little pedling
retailers, have gathered together scraps and pieces of broken charms, and are
still tampering to uphold the Mystery and Trade: But every body now is so well
acquainted with such tricks, and so armed with forcible Countercharms, that all
the weak efforts of their Magical murmurs sound more like the faint echo of a
dying voice, than strong powerful spells: And it is thought that ere long, when
these weak remains, and faint efforts of this black-art are completely laid,
the Magicians lives (like those in Romance) will be of a date not much longer
than their Enchantments.

Printed for John Smith in Great Queen Street, Bookseller, 1681.


