A Description of the PAINTING of the THEATER IN OXFORD.
IN Imitation of the Ancient Theaters of the Greeks and Romans, which were too
large to be covered with Lead or Tyle, this is supposed to be open: and as they
stretched a Cordage from Pilaster to Pilaster, upon which they strained a
covering of Cloth, to protect the people from the injuries of the weather; so
here is a Cord-Moulding gilded, that reaches cross and cross the House both in
length and breadth, which supporteth a great Red Drapery, supposed to have
covered the Roof, but now furled up by the Genii ronnd about the House toward
the Walls, which discovers the open air, and makes way for the descent of
the Arts and Sciences, that are congregated together in a Circle of Clouds, to
whose Assembly Truth descends as being solicited and implored by the most of
them. For joy of which Festival the other Genii sport about the clouds, with
their Festoons of Flowers and Laurels, and perpare their Garlands of Laurels
and Roses, viz. Honor and Pleasure, for the great Lovers and Studiers of those
Arts. And that the Assembly may be perfectly happy, their great Enemies and
Disturbers, Envy, Rapine, and Brutality, are by the Genii of their opposite
Virtues, viz. Prudence, Fortitude, and Eloquence driven from the Society, and
tumbled down head long from the clouds.

The report of the Assembly of the one, and the Expulsion of the other, is
proclaimd through the open and serene Air by some other of the Genii, that
blowing their Antic Trumpets, divide themselves into the several Quarters of
the world.

This in Gross.
But the Circle of Figures consists principally of Theology, with her Book of
seven Seals, imploring the assistance of Truth for the unfolding of it.

On her left side is the Mosaical Law, veiled with the Tables of Stone, to
which she points with her Iron Rod.

On her right hand is the Gospel, with the Cross and Chalice.

In the same Division, over the Mosaical Law, is History holding up her Pen, as
dedicating it to Truth, and an attending Genius with several Fragments of Old
writing, from which she collected her History into her Book.

On the other side of the Gospel, is Divine Poesy, with her Harp of David's
fashion.

On the same side of the Circle, opposite to Theology, are Mathematick Sciences
in several squares (depending on demonstration as the other on Faith) As
Astronomy with the Celestial Globe, Geography with the Terrestrial, Geometry
with her Square and Plumb-line, Optic with her Perspective-glass; Also
Arithmetic, Architecture, Perspective, etc.

In another square, on the West side of the Circle, is Law, with her Ruling
Scepter, accompanied with Records on the one side, on the other with Rhetoric,
by which is an attending Genius, with the Scales of Justice, and a Figure with
a Palm-branch, the Emblem of Reward for virtuous Actions, And the Roman Fasces,
the Marks of Power and Punishment.

On that side the Circle, opposite to Law, is Physic, with the Knotty Staff of
Esculapius, with a Serpent winding about it. The Herbalist imploring the
assistance of Truth for the right understanding of her Plants. The Chemist with
a Bolt-head in his hand. The Chyrurgeon as preparing her self to finish the
dissecting of an head, which has the Brain already opened, and is held before
her by one of the Genii. In other places, where room can best be had to make
the composition graceful, is Logic in a posture of arguing. In the Triangle on
the left hand of the Law, is Music, with her paper of Musick-notes on her
Knee, with a Genius by her playing on a Flute, being the Emblem of the most
ancient Music.

Dramatick Poetry with a Vizor, representing Comedy, a bloody Dagger for
Tragedy, the Red Pipe for Pastoral.

Printing with a Box of Letters by on hand, and a (...) ready set in the other
and by her several Sheets hanging as a drying.

These and several other Sheets compass the Circle.

In the midst of which, as descending from above, is the figure of Truth
sitting on a Cloud; in one hand a Palm-branch, the Emblem of Victory, in the
other the Sun, whose Brightness enlightens all the Circle with Figures, and is
so bright, that it something hides the face of her self to us that are below.

Over the Entrance of the Front of the Theater are Three Figures tumbling down;
as Envy with her Snaky hairs, Squint eyes, Haggs breast, Pale venomous
Complexion, Strong, but ugly Limbs, and Riveling skin, frighted from above by
the sight of Pallas her Shield with the Gorgon's head in it, against which she
would oppose the biggest of her Snakes, but her fall is so precipitous that she
has no command of her Arms.

Then Rapine with her Fiery eyes, Grinning teeth, sharp twangs, her hands
imbrued in blood, holding a bloody Dagger in one hand, in the other a burning
Flambo; with which Instruments she would seize on, or destroy, not only
Learning, but her Habitations, but is prevented and overcome by an Herculian
Genius, or Power.

Next that, brutish scoffing Ignorance, that endeavors to vilify and contemn
what it understands not, represented by a Satyr, which is charmed by a
Mercurial Genius with her Caduceus.

OXFORD.

Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD, Printer to the Univesity, Anno Domini 1673.

published at the Act time.

At ye same time also in 1674


