HYDROLOGIA PHILOSOPHICA OR, An ACCOUNT of ILMINGTON WATERS In Warwickshire;
With Directions for the Drinking of the same.

Together with some Experimental Observations touching the Original of Compound
Bodies.

By SAM. DERHAM Bachelour in Physic lately of Magd. Hall. OXON.

OXFORD, Printed by Leon. Lichfield, Printer to the University, for John Howell
Bookseller. 1685.

TO HIS Honored Friend WI^^IAM LENTHALL Esquire of Haseley.
S^^
I^ was not my Ambitious Design but the importunity, or rather Command, of
several Gentlemen to commit to the Press these Experiments I had made on
Ilmington Waters, that makes me thus appear; however was resolved it should
pass as from an unknown Pen, until I found Concealment was impossible; and by
absconding should seem to impose falsities on the World; which are the only
Reasons of my Name in Print. And seeing that hereby I do expose my self to the
Censure of all men, although it is but a mean Return for your Kindness and
Civilities to me to entrench farther upon your good Nature; yet I hope you will
allow this following Treatise a propitious Acceptance, whose Prudence and
Learning is able to withdraw me from the Calumny of mine Enemies. Although the
greatest Patron that ever lived was never able to protect Books from Censure,
(neither is it reasonable to impose Opinions in Philosophy as Truths
necessarily to be believed against the Argu^ngs of more solid judgment) yet as
just Umpire may advance Truth against the malicious Cavils of them, that
neither consider the Sureness of the Experiments, nor whether the Deductions be
a forced Consequence or the Sense of Authors perverted, but through Envy
quarrel at the Treatise because Delivered by such an Author. Flattery for
Patronage I shall avoid, true praise being not more pleasing to You, than
Counterfeit is ungrateful, but shall presume the more because of your imbred
proneness to the Advancement of Scholastic Undertakings. Neither shall I
endeavor an Encomium of Him, whose Merits and Excellent Endowments have
already become their own Herald, beyond the Praise of

Your truly Affectionate and Humble Servant SAMUEL DERHAM.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
PErhaps it may seem strange that I should thus undertake an Hydrological
Essay, seeing that many Eminent Writers have given their judgment of the Cause
and Virtues of Mineral Waters, such as Georgius Agricola, Libavius, Solinander,
Andr. Baccius, Fallopius; and of our own Countrymen Dr. Jorden, Simpson, Turner
and many others both Ancient and Modern Authors. Yet there were several Reasons
inducing me to publish this my Scrutiny into the Nature and Operation of this
Newfound Spring, by some called Balmoore Waters naming the Spring from the
Place, which is near Ilmington a Town in Warwickshire. This may also deserve
the Name of Ilmington-Spaw from its brackishness, according to Van Helmonts's
Appellation Parad. 3 and 4 of Fontes aciduli, Spadanae or Spaw-Waters. Which
name I shall retain in my following Treatise.

My chief Inducements hereto, were

First, The Common Good; seeing Multitudes daily flocked to this Fountain, of
whom many were poor illiterate Countrymen, that inconsiderately (without
preparing their Bodies or Physicians advise) repairing hitherto might as well
have hastened to their ruin, as to recover their impared Health. For,

The most ingenious Dr. Cole who first tried and applauded these Waters by his
recommending a Person of Quality to the Drinking of them, did so alarm the
Ordinary sort of People and the rude Mobile, as if Waters had been found with
some Supernatural Virtue like the Pool of Bethesda, or the Waters of Jorden
when they cured Leprous Naaman the Syrian.

Secondly, The Doctor being called away by his Employment, I was desired by
several Gentlemen to commit the Trials I had made on those Waters to the Press;
on no other design then to give Caution to the incautelous Multitude, among
which many are (as an Auth. of the Query about Dri^king the Bath-water prefixed
to Dr. Jord^n o^ the Bath.
Author observed) like so many Animals that follow one another and are apt to
go the broader way, though it lead to ruin.

Thirdly, Ancient Authors did usually take a general Survey of Mineral Waters,
not descending to a strict Scrutiny by Experiments into Particular Springs.
Upon which account many things have been left false and imperfect, which an
Examination of Particulars may descry; and perhaps afford more of knowledge to
Posterity though in a few Experiments, than in great Volumes of Conjectural
Philosophy. As Dr. Tyson in his Phocaena Page* 9. rightly says, Malpighius in
his Silkworm has done more then Jonston in his whole Book of Insects; and He
and the ingenious Dr. Crew have taught us more of Plants, than either Gerard or
Parkinson.

Yet I desire not to contemn, but to speak with due honor and reverence of the
writings of the Ancients to whom we owe great part of our knowledge, but withal
hoping that I may have as much freedom to communicate my Sentiments, as others
have done theirs before me.

As for the Calumny and Reproach which I shall occur from mine Enemies, and
especially those that out of a Disgust to the Author verify the Proverb Try the
Man and not the Cause, I shall pass by remembering the Saying -- Habent sua fata
libelli

But least that by making use of some words mentioned by Helmont and other
Chemists, such as Archeus, Leffas terrae, Acid and Alkali etc. I should seem
far short of answering my Design, I shall by the way hint out the Sense of
them, least that by obscure Terms I should seem to darken the Matter and amuse
the Reader, that is unacquainted with Chemistry.

Helmont De Form. Ortu Sect. 61. thus explaineth himself Repetam seminum massam
recipere in se corporalem Auram, vulcanum, Quem Archeum nomino. Now the Aura
Vitalis by him termed Archeus, is but that Stamp or Divine Impress made at
first by God Almighty, to direct blind Matter in the Composition of an Object.
For we cannot suppose that an Embryo is formed by a fortuitous concourse of
Atoms, and that Animals do propagate after their kind by an accidental
Conjunction of Matter; but the Divine Fiat in the Creation made an overruling
Power to the work of Generation and Specification of the Individual: whether it
be called Archeus, vis (...), Forma etc. Which was at first made by God the
Creator, and as Helmont elsewhere tells us is as a Faber or Workman to the
shaping of a Concrete in its Generation.

Leffas terrae is that Succus terrae fracidus unde surgit omne plantarum genus
visibili carens semine, sataque semina promoventur in Destinationes. Helm.
Imag. Ferm. Parag. 31. viz, That fracid juice of the Earth, that is the
Nutritive Juice to Vegetables. For Water on the Earth exposed to heat and air
will be soon endowed with a putrid Ferment, which is a Leffas convertible by
the Archeus into Vegetables.

Salts are either Acid or Alkalizate, upon the mixture of which contrary Salts
an Effervescence will follow. So that an Alkali may be thus described. It is a
fixed Salt which will make an Ebullition with an Acid, and by taking off the
Edges of its Particles will sweeten an Acid Liquor.

As for Mineral Waters, Libavius gives us this Notion Quae a simplici vulgari
and mera discedentes, cum aliquo subterraneorum conspirant, and aut
spiritaliter sunt tinctae aut mistae corporaliter. Judicio Aquar. Lib. 1. Cap.
1. viz. Waters that besides their own Nature, have imbibed something of the
quality or substance of some Subterranean Mine. What are the Subterranea he
afterward tells us Lib. 1; but Gab. Fallopius De Therm. Aq. Cap. 8. ranketh
them under Five Heads. viz. Vapors, Juices, Metals, Stones, and Earth.

As for Vapors impregnating Waters in their Current, I see no reason to make
them a distinct Ingredient from the others, Fallopius allows only Vapors to
be found in Waters that are Poisonous, Bituminous, and Sulphurous, yet of what
kind soever, they seem not to differ from the Evaporating Object: as the Vapor
of Water, is but Water rarisied, whose Particles recollected in a Receiver may
appear again under the form of Water. As Helmont Parad. 2. has observed, Vapor
reipsa nil aliud est Materialiter and formaliter, quam Atomorum Aquae in altum
sublata Congeries. To the same effect speaks Libavius de Jud. Aq. Lib. 1.
Cap. 6.

Dr. Jorden On Nature. Bath. and Min. Wat. Cap. 4. not content with what
Fallopius has done, especially because New Minerals have lately been
discovered (as Calaem in the East Indies, Rhusma and Terra Ghetta in Turkey
etc.) and perhaps future Ages may discover many more) has comprehended them
under Seven Heads; taking a Mineral for An inanimate Perfect Body bred in a
Mine, in the Bowels of the Earth. His Genera are 1 Earth, 2 Stone, 3 Bitumen, 4
Salts or Concrete Juices, 5 Spirits, 6 Mean or half Metals, 7 Metals. Of all
which in as much as they cause Alterations in Waters, I shall take a short
Survey; Brevity here beeng intended.

First, Earth is a cold dry sluggish Body altogether effete in its virtue,
except when it contains some active Principle; such as a Nitrous Salt by
which Fullers-Earth does scour Cloth, and Marle laid on Land does cause
Fertility; or an Aluminous Salt, such as is found near Scarbrough Spaw etc.
Upon which account the Chemists rightly call Simple Earth Caput Mortuum or
Terra damnata. Water hereby may become turbid and muddy, but not impregnate
with any Virtue.

Secondly, Stones by their Qualities of Cold, Dryness, and Stipticity come near
that of Earth. Yea as Dr. Jorden Cap. 4. has hinted to us, Stones in their
simple Nature distinct from any other Ingredient, are but as a Caput Mortuum
and untamable by ^ire or Water. It Is true some Stones will melt, others by
Calcination turn as it were to Ashes; but that is from a Heterogeneous Mixture
of some Salt, Metal, etc. And this may be concluded hence, The more pure and
free from Mixture Stones are, by so much the more indissolvable by Water or the
devouring flames of Fire; as Diamonds, Amiantus or Alumen plumosum, Glymmer,
Saxum Arenarium etc; all which stony Concretions will endure the Fire: yea I
suppose had we but a pure stony Body it would endure the washings of Water, and
the utmost degree of Fire. Pliny Nature. Hist. Lib. 36. Cap. 19. says Amiantus
lapis nihil igni deperdit. Not only the Terra Damnata left after the Active
Principles are drawn off in Distillation will endure the Fire; but the Asbestum
which is an Efflorescence of the Amiantus, and many such like Stony Concretions
(I doubt not) were they free from Heterogeneous Mixtures.

Stones then in their simple Nature yield no Virtue to Springs, except whilst
in their Primitive juices or Solutis principiis; for then they may cause an
Alteration, as we may perceive by many cold petrifying Springs; of which almost
infinite Examples might be produced here in our own Country. But when there is
a mixture with a Minera, then Stones by Fire or Water may soon suffer a
Dissolution: as Marcasites of Iron, Copper, Alum, etc. not only by fire may
undergo a Change, but also may communicate their Virtue to Waters having a
proper Menstruum.

Thirdly, Bitumina are either hard as Amber, Carbofossilis; or Liquid as
Petroleum and Naphtha. We find by daily Experience that unctuous Matter or Oils
will not undergo a perfect mixture with Water: yet by some Mineral juice may
have its body so opened as to come floating with the Spring Water though in a
confused Posture. Yea says Fallopius de Aq. Therm. Cap. 8. It is sometimes so
confused, that a Separation from the Water is very difficult. Instances of
Bituminous Waters he gives us; as the River Lipparis in Cilicia, which by its
plenty will as it were anoint the Bodies of them that swim in it; the Fountains
of Mount Gibbus near Modena in Italy; many Fountains likewise near Baia in
Campania; so also Springs at the foot of Vesuvius; many also we read of in
Saxony, Swedland, and at Avergne in France; and of one famous in our own
Country at Pitchford in Shropshire; and that Bitumen is the predominant
Principle in our Springs at Bath, Dr. Jorden has proved De Not. Bath and Min.
Wat. Cap. 6*

Fourthly, Concrete Juices called Salts which are not only found in Waters but
being dissolved make the Current Springs as so many Menstruums to unlock the
Bodies of other Minerals. The Species are usually reckoned Four viz. Alum,
Vitriol, Nitre and Common Salt (but as for the Number I shall not here dispute)
It Is true different Salts will shoot by Chrystallization into several Forms, as
Vitriol and Alum into Glebas (although these of Alum differ something from them
of Vitriol) Nitre into Stirias and Salt into Tesseras; so likewise will other
Species of Salt comprehended under these, by reason of their Glebes and
difference of Particles. As for the Virtues of such Springs we must look to the
Nature of the Ingredients; and whether the Waters are not impregnated with
several Mineras; from whence there must needs follow great Variety in Mineral
Waters. That Salt, Nitre, Alum, and Vitriol are Ingredients of Mineral Waters,
we have the Testimony of several Authors, too many here to relate. As
Salt-Springs at Saltzburgh and Halstat, and many other places in Germany; the
Salt-Springs in Tuscany, and as our Springs at Droit-Wich and at Nant-Wich will
testify. Nitrous Springs we read of at Calestria in Macedonia; in many places
of Egypt; in many places in France mentioned by Du Clos Class Second and
Third; and Nitrous Springs by Baccius De Therm. Lib. 5. Cap. 6. Alum Springs
are frequent in Tuscany and many other Places of Italy; and also in Germany,
and in Spain; with us at Okenyate in Shrop-shire, and that famous Spaw at
Scarbrough in Yorkshire. Vitrioline Waters are also found (although the truth
thereof is questioned by Dr. Lister De Font. Med. Angl. Cap. 7.) Instances of
which Dr. Jorden de Not. Ba. Cap. 7. gives us; as that at Cyprus described by
Galen where the Water is Green, at Smolnicium in Hungary, in Transylvania etc,
in which (says he) the very Body of Vitriol is found. Besides the Testimony of
Helmont Paradox. 4. of Pauhont and Savenir two German Spaws, and the
Experiments of Dr. Simpson on our Scarbrough Spaw; and as I shall prove of
Ilmington Spaw. As for the distinction of being vertually or by its quality
contained I cannot allow of, not finding any solid Reason how an Accident can
be separated from his Substance, and remain Existent in another: for I look
upon that Rule as true Accidens non migrat a Subjecto in Subjectum.

Fifthly, Spirits (so called from their Volatility by fire) that enter the
Composition of Metals will not endure fusion by fire but easily fly off; such
as Quicksilver, Auripigmentum, Sandaraca, Chrisocolla, Cadmia etc; which by
some Authors are reckoned for Concrete Juices, but by others for Spirits from
their Volatility: and Waters endowed with these kind of Ingredients are
generally poisonous. Agricola Lib. 1. and 2. tells us of waters betwixt
Seburgh and Strapela that by their Malignancy will kill Fishes, and other
Animals that drink thereof. Arsenical Waters we read of, as at Circum in
Thracia, at Perant near Mompelier; of many such waters Fallopius de Therm. Aq.
gives us an account. Now Dr. Jorden reckons some Waters that contain
Quicksilver for wholesome waters, as that at Serra Morena and La Nava in Spain,
Almagra and Toletum. But if we consider how that Mercury is an Enemy to the
Nervous Parts, especially when unprepared; how it abounds with Arsenical
Particles before it is purisied, we may much doubt of the wholesomeness of
them, yet I shall not dispute against the Possibility of the Thing. So also are
these from Sulphur very dangerous, because they often partake of a Poisonous
Minera.

These that partake of Cadmia are to be avoided, because the Natural Cadmia is
Poisonous and a strong Caustic. Cadmia foffili Aquae infectae acres esse
consueverunt, Agricol. de Nature. Eor. Efflu. ex Terra. Lib. 1.

Sixthly, Mean or half Metals, so called because they are fusible but not
malleable like Metals, as Antimony, Bismuthum or Tin-Glass found in England and
Germany. These may be Ingredients to Mineral waters, and for the Virtues of
such we must look to the impregnating Object.

Seventhly, Metals as Lead, Tin, Iron Gold, Copper, and Silver: for Mercury
from its Volatility by fire is reckoned by Dr. Jorden among Mineral Spirits.
These says Fallopius de Therm. Aq. Cap. 8. May be Ingredients in Mineral
waters, but tells us, that he never knew any Particular Spring in which
Metals had their share.

But we have sufficient Testimony of Particular Springs that are impregnated
with Metals. Baccius De Therm. Lib. 6. Cap. 3. gives us an account of several
waters that have preyed on Iron, and several whose Virtue is from the Magnet
(which indeed is a better sort of Iron-stone) Solinander De Font. Temperat.
Cap. 6. Instanceth diverse Springs containing Metalline Ingredients, as that
impregnated with Copper at Baia in Campania, and that at Luca called St. John's
Bath; with Lead, as the Lead-Waters in Lotharingia; with Iron, as at Siena,
Verona, and Luca. To which I might add our Chalybeat waters at Tunbridge,
Astrap, and Scarbrough, with our late found Spring at Ilmington. The same
Author tells us that waters are found impregnated with Gold, Silver, Lead,
and Precious Stones although very rarely, because of their Scarcity, and the
compact Substances of Pearls.

Multitude of Examples of Mineral waters we have cited by Dr. Jorden On Min.
Wat. and Not. Bat. Cap. 10. to whom I may refer the Reader.

But it may be questioned; how can Earth be reckoned as a Mineral and one of
the foregoing seven Genera, taking a Mineral for an Inanimate perfect Body bred
in the Bowels of the Earth? Answ. Minerals are here taken in a large sense,
under which Earth is comprehended in as much as it is the Receptacle and Matrix
of Subterraneous Conceretes, whose Particles may also be communicated to water
in its Current; Stones also in this respect may be taken for Minerals.

Concrete Juices or Salts are reckoned as a Distinct Genus (although as I shall
hereafter prove, that all Compound Bodies in the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral
Kingdom are made out of a Succus as their more immediate Matter) from their
Properties resulting from their peculiar texture of Parts. Thus Salts are
reckoned from their easy Dissolution in water, and their reconcretion. Bitumina
from their burning and wasting by fire, although they enter not the Composition
of a Metal. Sulphur will burn and wast by fire, and is also often a Metalline
Ingredient; and is reckoned with Mercury etc. among Mineral Spirits, which are
so called from their Volatility by fire although they enter the Composition of
Metals. Antimony and Tin Glass are accounted as half Metals, because they are
fusible, but not malleable like Metals; which are both Fusible and Malleable
Mineral Substances.

I need not Apologize for the Usefulness of Mineral Waters, seeing they have
been for several Hundreds of years in great Estimation. The Romans we are
informed by Baccius De Therm. had their Baths in great request, and for the
greater splendour had many Magnificent Buildings erected at Rome. And of the
frequent Bathings of the Turks, although only with pure Water Alpinus De Medic.
Egypt. Lib. 3. Cap. 17. gives us an Account.

I need not likewise relate the Superstition of the Ancients; who, when a
Mineral Spring was found, from the strangeness of its Effects soon dedicated it
to some Saint or Deity, because they made little Scrutiny into the Nature of
Mineral Waters. And since that Experimental Philosophy has found favor in the
world, knowledge herein has daily increased; and for the Promotion hereof, let
us make enquiry into each Particular, that at length we may arrive to Universal
Conclusions.

In the Prosecution of my Design I shall observe this method, and accordingly
divide the following Treatise.

First, To enquire into the Nature of Compound Bodies either in the Animal,
Vegetable or Mineral Kingdom; under Minerals will fall in a Consideration of
the Original and Difference of Glebes, that chiefly give Essence to
Mineral-Waters.

Secondly, To make Experimental Essays into the Nature of Ilmington-Spring.

Thirdly, After taking a short Survey of most Diseases incident to the Body of
man, as to their Causes or Original; to enquire how far Ilmington-Spaw may
conduce to their Cure, and to preserve Health whilst entire.

But by the way take notice, That whereas I made the Experiments on
Ilmington-Spaw in a dry Season, and was very careful and exact in the weight of
the water which I have given Page 48; it may admit of a Variation not only in
weight, but be weakened in its Virtue in a wet Season when the Springs are rank
by a mixture of Rainwater; and also by the breaking in of any fresh Spring.

Hydrologia Philosophica OR An Account of ILMINGTON WATERS, etc.
HAVING Observed with Probatio ea nauci and nihil^ est, qna per alios nimirum
Galenum, Avice^^am, Rbasin etc. nostra tuemur and velamus Paracel. L. 4. de
Orig. Morb. Matricis.
Paracelsus that proof by Authority, where Reason and Experience are deficient,
is altogether uncertain; and that Philosophy is not to be founded on Phansy,
but on Experience and plain Natural Diductions therefrom: I shall in this
following Treatise lay down only such Positions, that I find built on
Experience. For if bare Authority might pass for Proof, I might cite Anaxagoras
to prove the Snow black, and such like strange speculations, which to the
judicious will seem only as such. Yet I shall not contemn Authority, but yield
due honor and Reverence to our Ancestors, whose Works still are for our
Instruction; but shall chiefly insist in the footsteps of them, that have made
Experimental Essays for their guide.

In the prosecution of my design, I shall speak somewhat as to the Principles
of Concretes, which will lead me on to a consideration of Mineral Glebes, that
principally give Essence to Spaw-waters.

Diverse have been the opinions of Philosophers about the Elements of Compound
bodies; not to mention the Opinion of Heraclitus, who observing Fire to be an
active simple tenuious body, made it the first Principle of all things; nor the
opinion of Hesiod, assigning Earth for the Original of Compounds, there are
other more famous, which Sects of Philosophers do still maintain. Such as that
1st, of the Aristotelians; 2ly, of the Chemists; 3ly, of Thales Milesius,
Helmont and others; 4ly of Epicurus and Democritus.

1. The Aristotelians place the foundation of Bodies in the four ^lements (
viz) Fire, Air, Water, and Earth. Which I wonder at, seeing Aristotle lib. 2.
de gener. cap 8. allows of, and urges that Argument. Bodies consist of such
Principles into which they are ultimately reducible. But by all the Analysis
that either Art or Nature could make, did never find Fire an ingredient. To
talk of an Element of Fire sub Concavo Lunae, is but a supposition without a
Demonstration. The Air we know is necessary, and that in several respects, to
the Continuance, and Preservation of our lives, but no Demonstration of its
first being an Element. The Quaternary of Elements is so far from solving the
Phenomena, of the more abstruse Recesses of Nature; that it is all one as Dr.
Willis de Ferm. c. 1. p. 3. has rightly observed, to say a House is made of
wood and stones, as to say a Body is made of the Four Elements. For it is hard
to imagine such Things to be Principles, which neither answer the Phenomenon of
Nature, nor the Reduction of Concretes, and truly the supposing Such for
Elements, will be but an Imaginary Philosophy.

2ly. The Chemical Principles are, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, because in an
Analysis of Bodies by Fire, these Three appear; whether the Concrete belong to
the Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral kingdom. By Reduction of a Metal or Mineral
(as the Chemists thought) into its first Elements, they extract a Sulphur or
Oil, a Fluid which in Minerals is a plain Mercury or Quicksilver, and a Salt.
Out of Vegetables and Animals, they extract an Oil or Sulphurous Spirit, which
is but an Essential Oil gotten by Fermentation, a Salt, and Mercury; which last
is but the Phlegm or Water, whose Particles are driven off by the stress of
Fire, and recollected in a Receiver.

But the ingenious Dr Willis de Fermen. c. 2. observing a faeces left after
Distillation, and when the other Principles are drawn off to be quite useless,
yea void of Mutation and Exaltation, and therefore properly called Caput
Mortuum, or Terra Damnata. Besides, he considering that there must be some
subtle spirituous Agent, to bring Things to maturity and perfection, as in the
growth and fermentation of Vegetables and their fruit; that by the Depression
of this Active Principle, Things are crude and immature, and by the decay
thereof decline and die. That Heat, Consistence, variety of Colors, and Tastes;
yea the amiable texture of Parts do chiefly depend on a Sulphur. That the
Weight, Solidity, and Duration of Bodies without Putrefaction do depend on a
Salt, which detaineth and fixes the Volatile Parts and Sulphur. That Water is
a convenient Vehicle for the most active Principles, and to associate them to
the Salt. Upon such like considerations has multiplied the Chemical Principles
into Five, Spiritus, Sal, Sulphur, Aqua and Terra.

Against which multiplication I shall propose these Experimental Observations,
proving Spiritus to be no distinct Principle from the three former, viz. Salt,
Sulphur and Mercury: besides what may be said to his fifth Principle Earth.

All sorts of Chemical Spirits are reduceable to two kinds, Sulphurous and
Saline; of Saline Spirits there are two sorts, Volatile Alkalizate and Acid.

Sulphurous Spirits, such as Spirits of Wine, Rosemary, Juniper; and all
Sulphurous Spirits got by fermentation out of Vegetables, are nothing but an
essential Oil or Sulphur exalted with a little Phlegm and Salt. This is evident
from its Inflammability, which is allowed on all sides to depend chiefly on the
Sulphur.

Take Spirit of Wine or Brandy a Spoonful, it will take flame by a burning
Paper or Candle, which will continue until all is consumed, except an insipid
Water or Phlegm: and the best way of trying the goodness of Vinous Spirits, is
by inflammability; which prove better or worse, according as they burn away
more or less. Some Chemists assert, they have had such highly rectified Spirits
of Wine, that by burning would totally consume away, that the flame would like
the containing Vessel dry, leaving neither Faeces nor Phlegm. What difference
is there betwixt Sulphur, and Sulphurous Spirits; excepting Fermentation and
Distillation, by which the subtle parts are separated from the more feculent,
but not in an ordinary Sulphurous Body, seeing both take flame and burn alike?
It Is true, by Distillation the more refine parts are separated, and the
Sulphurous carry with them some Phlegm, and a little Volatile Salt: but that
destroys not the Sulphurous parts as such, which being the predominant
Principle, give denomination to the Liquor, and differ not as to the Principle
of Sulphur.

Volatile Saline Spirits, as Spirit of Hartshorn, Spirits of Sal Ammoniac; and
all Spirits drawn from Animals, as Spirit of Vipers etc. consist of a volatile
Salt dissolved in a little Phlegm, with a very small quantity of Sulphur. And
that it depends on a Volatile Salt dissolved in Phlegm, is thus Apparent.
Fill a small Vial with good Spirit of Hartshorn, Sal-Armoniac, etc. let it
stand without moving for about half a year, you will find a Phlegm instead of a
Spirit, but the Salt all shot or Chrystallized to the sides of the bottle;
which Salt being dissolved in fresh Phlegm, will become again Spirit of
Hartshorn. Besides you may make Spirit of Hartshorn thus, yea as good as the
shops will afford. Take of the Volatile Salt shot in the Neck, or to the sides
of the Receiver in the Distillation of Hartshorn; mix it with so much Phlegm
drawn off, as suffices for its dissolution; you will have an excellent Spirit,
which according to the Quantity of Salt dissolved will be stronger or weaker.
So that the Phlegm rising with volatile Salt in Distillation, or afterward
mixed with it; liquisieth and turns it into a Spirit. The same may be said of
the Spirits of all Animals, and is manifestly apparent by the Distillation of
Vipers, whose Salt sticks for the greatest part to the sides of the Receiver,
or head of the Limbeck, but mixed with the Phlegm does become a Spirit of
Excellent Use.

This Salt in Distillation carries with it a little yellowish Oil, but by
instillation of Sp. Vini Tartarizatus is preserved, except the Spirit of Wine
contains a considerable quantity of Phlegm, which will soon dissolve the
Volatile Salt of Vipers.

Acid Spirits, as of Vitriol, Vinegar, Sulphur etc. is but an Essential acid
Salt liquified by Phlegm, or by Violence of Fire. Spirit of Vitriol is Salt
Liquified by force of Fire, which has freed the Saline from the terrestrious
parts; this we may conclude from the Caustic quality both of the Spirit and
Oil; which only differ, in as much as the Oil is the more Acid part of Vitriol
with a little Phlegm and Sulphur and improperly called Oil, but the Spirit with
more Phlegm and less of the Acid Part. And that Spirit of Vitriol chiefly
consists of a Salt in fluore, is more fully manifest by instillation of an
Alkali, for Example; pour Olcum Tartari per Deliquium, upon Spirit of Vitriol,
as in the making of Tartarum Vitriolatum, the Acid of Vitriol and Alkali of
Tartar combine together into a Neutral Salt, but the Phlegmatic part is
evaporated as an insipid Water. So may any Acid Salts in fluore, being mixed
with Alkalis be revived again into dry Salts, by Evaporation, Precipitation,
Chrystallization etc. so that Saline Spirits either Acid or Alkalizate, in as
much as they contain a Salt highly exalted or volatilised, are called Spirits,
Sal quatenus volatile Spiritus dici potest. Helm. Paradox. 4.

Against this Opinion Thales Milesius, Helmont and others oppose themselves.
Thales observing Vegetables to grow and flourish by Moisture, that Plants fade
by drougth and Trees cast their leaves, but after showrs of Rain revive, look
fresh and green; that Moisture is requisite to Nutrition of Animals, that
Minerals take their Original and increase from a concretion of their proper
Succus, that Stones take their Rise from a petrifying juice: upon such like
Considerations has assigned Water for the Original of Concretes. To which
Principle Van. Helmont has added Semen; making the Chemical Principles Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, but posterior products of Water and Seed. He tells us
indeed, Primordialiter duo tantum in Vniverso esse Elementa aerem videlicet and
aquam, a Textu sacro satis insinuata, per spiritum in mundi incunabulis aquarum
abysso supernatantem Paxad. ^. But then speaking of the Elements as the first
matter of Compounds, tells us by his own experience, he could convert all
Concrete bodies into Water, as into the only and first Principle. And if so,
what becomes of Earth the Fourth Aristotelian Principle, and the Fifth
Chemical, according to Dr Willis? Nostra Mechanica mihi patefecit, arenam,
marcasitam, argillam, terram, lapides coctos; vitrum, calcem, sulphur, etc.
transmutari in salem actualem aequiponderantem suo corpori, unde sactus est;
and quod iste sal aliquoties cohobatus cum sale Circulato Paracelsi, suam
omnino fixitatem amittat, tandem transmutetur in liquorem, qui etiam tandem
transit in Aquam insipidam and quod Aqua ista aequiponderet sali suo unde
manavit. Plantam vero, carnes, ossa, pisces, and quicquid similium est, novi
redigere in mera sua Tria, unde ^ostmodum aquam insipidam confeci. Helm. in
Elementa. So that by his Alkahest, at least assisted with Paracelsus's Sal
circulatam he could reduce all Concrets into Water, yea the Tria Chymicorum
Principia, whence we may suppose them but secundary things made out of Water,
by the efficacy of Seminal Principles planted ab origin. Lantent in Elemen.
torum condo an ditissimo promptuario, hospita^^ ab initio rations in aevum
durabiles, scientia rerum sibi in tempore futurarum instructae, etc. Haelmont
Parad. 1. So that he grants but Two first Principles ( viz.) Water for the
subject matter, and Semen for the efficient and plastic cause. From this
experiment we must necessarily conclude allowing the truth thereof) That the
Quaternary of the Aristotelian principles, and also the ^ria (for Spirits and
Earth are but products of the other) of the Chemists must fall, excepting that
of Water with the Seminal Principles, for we must allow that argument of the
Aristotelians; into which bodies are ultimately resolved, of such they do
consist; but into the Principle Water bodies are ultimately resolved, Ergo,
They consist of the Principle of Water. For the truth of which Analysis, we
have the experience of that profound and learned Helmont, who with his ^^kahest
could reduce Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals into a pure water: only tells
us, that the greatest difficulty was in the Reduction of the Sabulum bulliens
or Quellem, yet by industry the thing was fecible. Paracelsus his Predecessor
did arrive almost to that height, who could with his Circulatum majus resolve
Metals into an Oil, which Helmont by the addition of an Alkali did change into
water. Besides the testimony of Helmont, led (as he tells us) by thirty years
experience, and not trusting to probable conjectures, Lullius and others have
contended for the same thing, and pretended to have been experienced in the
same grand and noble Menstruum. But to lay aside Authority, Reason built upon
Experience seems to conclude that Water is the main (and perhaps I might
truly say the only subject matter of Concretes. Which by the Seminal Principles
and ferments thereof is transmuted into this or that Body, according to the
nature or species of the Semen or Idea of the Archeus. It may perhaps seem a
strange Paradox, and a renovation of an old Philosophical Hypothesis exploded by
most of the Ancient and Modern Naturalists; But were it not beyond my intended
subject, I might prosecute the assertion and prove, That all bodies in the
Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral kingdom do take their material Principle from
Water. I mean not that all sublunary bodies do immediately owe their Original
to a pure elementary Water; but either to simple Water, or else to a Succus sui
generis nutritious, which is matter run through some alterations from that first
pure Element of Water. And in this sense are the Assertions of the
Hydroplasticks, comprehending Succus under the notion of Water. I might only
propose, Let any man show me an Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral that I cannot
prove to owe its Original immediately to Water, or to a Succus transformed by
the Seminal principle into the proposed Object. But shall only instance some
particulars, leaving a further prosecution to another's enquiry.

Dr. Sharrock gives us a Catalogue of Plants that would grow and increase by
simple water in a Glass-bottle; as Mints, Sedum multifidum, Pennyroyal, Bugle,
Prunella, Water-cresse, Scordium, Marshmallows, Nummularia, etc. Sedum
multifidum in a month increased in weight half a Scruple, Scordium as much in a
fortnight, Dorias his Woundwort in six weeks gr. 13. Bugula in less time gr.
15. Water-cress in a month gr. 25. Ranunculus in 6 weeks half a Scruple,
Periwincle as much, Prunella, Brooklime and most of the sorts of Mint got
weight proportionably. Shar. Veget p. 102.

For experiment sake I took several small young slips of Mint diligently
weighed, which I kept in Glasse-bottles of fair water the space of Twelve
weeks, as the water wasted I poured on fresh, at the end of which time I
weighed each Plant for every Slip was now become a Plant with large roots and
branches) and found the former weight of several of them to be tripled, but the
least of them doubled.

Famous are the Experiments of Mr. Boil. I caused (said he) my Gardener to dig
out a convenient quantity of good Earth and dry it well in an Oven, to weigh
it, to put it in an Earthen Pot almost level with the surface of the ground,
and to set in it a selected seed, he had from me of Squash, which is an Indian
kind of Pompion, which grows apace; this Seed I ordered him to water only with
Rain or Spring water etc. and a little after gives us the account of it from
his Gardener. I have weighed the Pompion with the Stalk and Leaves, all which
weighed Three Pound wanting a quarter; then I took the Earth, baked it as
formerly and found it just as much as I did as first, which made me think I had
not dried it sufficiently, then I put it into the Oven twice more, after the
Bread was drawn, and weighed it the second time, but sound it shrink little or
nothing. Boil Scep. Chy.

He gives us also another Experiment from the same Gardener in these words. To
give you an account of your Cucumbers, I have gained two indifferent fair ones,
the weight of them is Ten pounds and a half, the branches and the roots weighed
Four pounds wanting two Ounces; and when I had weighed them I took the Earth
and baked it in several small earthen Dishes in an Oven: and when I had so
done* I found the Earth wanted a pound and half of what it was formerly, yet I
was not satisfied, doubting the earth was not dry: I put it into an Oven the
second time (after the Bread was drawn) after I had taken it out and weighed
it, I found it to be the same weight. So I suppose there was no moisture left
in the earth. Neither do I think that the Pound and half that was wanting was
drawn away by the Cucumber, but a great part of it in the ordering was in dust
(and the like) wasted.

Famous is also that Experiment of Helmont: Who took of earth dried in an Oven
200 pound, put it in an earthen vessel, and moistened it with rainwater, and
planted in it a Willow tree of Five pounds weight; this he kept and watered
with rain, or distilled water, to prevent an addition of fresh earth, he
covered the vessel with a plate of Tin full of holes At the end of Five years
he dug up and weighed the Tree, and found the Tree, computed with the leaves
fallen off in four Autumns, to weigh 169 Pounds, and about three Ounces, and
the Earth in which it was set to want only about two Ounces, so that 164 pounds
and upwards was the increase by Water.

Had this Tree, or other Plants increased by simple water been distilled,
undoubtedly there had been found the same principles with others of the same
Species that sprung in open Gardens or Fields. Water we see by these
Experiments was disguised by the Plastic virtue of the Seeds into various
forms; as it is evident by the Experiments of Mr. Boil. One of the Vegetables
cherished only by water, having obtained a competent growth, I did for trial
sake cause to be distilled in a small Retort, and thereby obtained some Phlegm,
a little Empyreumatical Spirit, a small quantity of adust Oil, and a Caput
mortuum, which appeared to be a Coal, I concluded it to consist of Salt and
Earth. And a little after. The water I used to nourish this Plant was not
shifted or renewed, I chose Spring water rather than rainwater, because the
latter is a kind of (...), containing steams of several bodies wandering in the
Air, and a certain spirituous substance, etc. Scept* Chym. p. 112. Here are the
Chemical Principles extracted from a Subject, whose matter before transmutation
was Water.

That Water is the material Principle for the growth and increase of
Vegetables, may be collected from these observations. viz. Rainwater or Dews
refresh the fading Herbs; That flooding of grounds causes fertility, That
Grass cut down by the want of a supplemetal Succus soon withers; That
exceeding Droughts have caused Famines; and that the Corn of Egypt depends
on the overflowing of Nile. And truly whence is the luster of the Fields
bedecked with flowers, but from Water transformed into this or that Species,
according to the Idea of the semen, or Archeus; for according to the Plastic
or Formative power, Water is changed into roots, stalks, leaves, yea to make
the glorious Lilly.

As Vegetables, so Animals receive their growth and sustenance immediately from
Water, or else mediately viz. From Herbs, Flesh, etc. which is but Water
metamorphized, and run through former alterations. An Ox feeds on grass or
plants, viz. Water transformed thereto, a Man feeds on the flesh of the Ox,
whose material Principle is but Water transformed into a Plant, thence into
Flesh by diverse fermentative alterations of the Ox, and now farther according
to the ferments of Man.

But to show more particularly, how that Water or at least a succus is
necessarily requisite to the nutrition of every Animal; Aliment taken into the
stomach, before it is fit for nutrition is turned into Chyle, (which is a
Succus) from whence blood, then Chyme, to be assimilated into each part. As for
example, Bread or Flesh eaten by a man, is by concoction turned into a fluid
Chyle, by the ferment in sanguification, the Saline and Sulphurous parts work
upon each other, and turn the Chyle into Blood; out of which a succus is
separated, and by the innate ferment of each part assimilated thereto. What is
Flesh but a Leffas or watery succus first turned into Grass, Corn, etc. and at
length by succeeding alterations by ferments shaped into Flesh. And the more
probable it is, seeing that the Flesh, Blood, Urine or Milk of Animals by bare
distillation is turned for the greatest part into Phlegm. The flesh of Eeles
(as Mr. Boil has observed) by distillation does yield a great quantity of
water, and whilst distilling they seem to boil like a pot of water, seeming to
be nothing else but a congealed water.

The semen of Vegetables before roots and branches are formed do require a
moist body, which according to the Plastic power of the Archeus, does Proteus
like turn its shape, and that which was in the form of Water is turned into a
Vegetable, which by the Ferments of our body may become blood or flesh, which
at length by Putrefaction may be resolved and turned in Worms etc. But even to
the generation of Worms and Insects a putrid juice is required.

If we look to the first formation of an Animal, we shall find the Sperme to be
but a Liquor disguised by the Ferment of Seminal Vessels, which by circulation
through the parts of the body whilst blood, is impregnated with an
Efflorescence of the whole. And when it is thus prepared, before the Aura
vitalis can exert its operation, it must have a convenient Matrix as a place,
but an Addition of moisture for increase of the Animal formed.

As Vegetables and Animals have their Seeds, so likewise Minerals in the Bowels
of the Earth; and not only to the increase, but also to the first formation of
a Particular in either of these Species, we still find a Succus required. It Is
true the Mineral Seeds are inconspicuous and fall not under our sense of
Seeing. So by an exact enquiry we shall find these of Animals and Vegetables.
For the prolifick part, or Genitura is properly the Seed; but the Sperme in an
Animal, and the Grains or Corns among Vegetables, are but convenient
Receptacles to lodge the more active part, (which is indiscernable by the best
instruments in Optics) until set at work by some External cause, in its proper
place. But however we see by daily experience, that by the plastic power of
the Seeds, a juice is formed into roots and branches: so from Metaline and
Mineral Seeds placed in the body of the earth, rather in diverse parcels thereof
ab origin; whence the variety of Mineral Glebes, which turn a Succus into
their own nature. These Mineral Principles being set at work by the Celestial
influence upon appropriate matter, form to themselves a Mercurial Juice and
Sulphur, as the more immediate matter to the production of Metals or Minerals,
which by the specific Ferments of the Seeds at length are completed.

That Mineral Glebes will appropriate a juice, and therefrom perfect a Metal is
hence evident. As Earth out of which Nitre is extracted, and afterward exposed
to the open Air will center upon it the floating Saline Particles; the like
effect we shall find upon the Caput mortuum of Vitriol, so as to be again
impregnate with a fresh Vitriol or Nitre; in like manner Mineral Glebes after
the Metal is extracted, will again convert a Succus into a Metal: as the Miners
of Tin, Lead, etc. can testify, who find a fresh Ore where All was for sixty or
seventy years before extracted. Dr. Jorden has observed, that the Tinners in
Cornwall within thirty years have found Tin generated de Novo, where it has
been all dug up, and the place filled with earth. Jord. Nature. Bath. Cap.
XI. Many examples he cites, as the great Income witnessed by Fallopius, that
the Duke of Florence has by Metals and Minerals produced where all Ore was
before exhausted. So also that of the Iron Mines at Ilva an Island of the
Adriatic Sea, where the Venetians find Iron generated afresh, yea as fast as
they can work it; this is testified by Georgius Agricola. de Ortu and Cauj.
Subt. Lib. 5. p. 61. Who farther confirms the Reproduction of Metals, Putei
ex quibus materia metallo gravida est effossa, aliquot annis eadem replentur.
And a little after; In Lygiis ad Sagam oppidum eruitur e pratis ferri vena,
quae fossae decennio replentur vena renata. Agric. Lib. 5. p 64. Remarkable
also is that of Erastus. Vidi ego argentum purissimum in valle Joachimica, in
arbore sive trabe cuniculi cujusdam concretum, quae vix ante annos 25 aut 30 ad
sustinendum cuniculum ibi collocata fuerat. Erastus de Medicin. Nov. Paracels.
de Metallis p. 19. That in the Mines of S. Joachims Valley, Silver was
generated on a Prop of Wood, that had not above 25 or 30 years supported the
Mine-works.

We cannot suppose the reason of the new Eruptions of fire after hundreds of
years at Aetna and Vesuvius, and these prodigious burnings of the Mountains
Popochampeche and Popocatepec mentioned by Mr. Gage in his Survey of the West
Ind. Cap. 13. Except a production of Bituminous or Sulphurous matter generated
de Novo is the cause of perpetuating these Vulcano's. For else how could the
fire burn round these Hills, and perhaps return violently to the same place it
had burned in about a hundred years before. It must certainly find new matter,
seeing that in former Eruptions of fire Ashes have been cast forth, yea the
very stones and earth have been as it were calcined to Powder. So that we
cannot imagine Sulphurous matter to be there left, but by the Seminal
Principles and a convenient Succus to be newly begotten. But I need not proceed
to produce the testimony of more Authors, as I might out of Caesalpinus de
Metallis, and Libavius in his Alchem. de Metal. seeing most Authors as to this
particular have allowed a generation of Minerals de Novo, not approving the
Opinion of some few, supposing them to have been latent from the Creation. The
difference is whether with Erastus in defense of Aristotle we suppose the
matter (before concretion into a hard Mineral or Metalline Substance) to be a
Vapor, or with Agricola we believe Succus est ex quo formatur Metallum de Ortu
Subt. Lib. 5. p. 71. but it will not be very material. For if the Matter do
arrive to the Mineral Glebes under the form of Halitus or Vapor; What is Vapor
but a Succus or moist body, whose Particles are separated and elevated apart,
but may be collected again into a greater Bulk by a Receiver, etc. as Helmont
has sufficiently proved? In Distillation of Water the vapor that arises is
but Water rarefied, whose Particles collected in a Receiver make up again a
body of Water.

That Minerals may be made out of Water, we have that Experiment cited by Mr.
Boil out of Monsieur de Rochas. I took (says he) water which I well knew not
to be compounded nor mixed with any other thing then the Spirit of Life. By a
well proportioned artificial heat I so ordered it, that with it and
coagulations, congelation and fixation I turned it into earth, which earth
produced Animals Vegetables and Minerals. Here Water was turned into Earth
which at length was converted into either of the Three States.

Out of Mercury says the afore-cited Author, a fourth or fifth part of Water
may be obtained without any addition, which for ought he could find, could not
be reduced to Mercury; so that it appeared to be plain Water.

As for that Objection; why Metals should weigh heavier than water, or that a
Spoonful of Quicksilver is in proportion nigh fourteen to one, if Metals should
be made out of, or else Water disguised? This I say does depend on the Seminal
Principles collecting more matter in less space in some bodies then in others.
Bodies which have few Pores or Interstices of parts, but Particles of matter
closely united, so they are more heavy or light, although the same Elementary
matter compose all, but not compact in all bodies alike. And the inspection
through a Microscope on the Pores of bodies will clear up this answer to the
Objection.

The first Change of Water in order to Metals is into a Mineral Mercury, the
next change by coagulation with Sulphur is into some metal, according to the
Specification of the Seed, the repurgation from Sordes or feculent matter, and
the tincture of the Sulphur either Solar, Lunar, Saturnine, etc. so the
diversity of Metals arise.

Although the foregoing Experiments prove the more immediate matter of
Generation and Nutrition to be Water, yet they do in effect prove one material
Principle which is the ultimate Result of Water and all other Bodies; as by the
Experiment of Monsieur de Rochas, and by Conversion of water into the roots and
branches of Vegetables may be collected. For as Helmont by his alkahest could
convert Stones, Earth, Glass, yea any body into water; so water may again be
transmuted into fixed matter. As it is proved by the increase of Mints or other
Vegetables in water; by Helmont's Experiment before cited of a Willow Tree; by
Mr. Boyle's Experiment of a Squash, in which water is transformed into a body
according to the nature of the thing nourished. Yea in the Animal, Vegetable
and Mineral Kingdom, as the Aliment is converted into a Succus, or at least is
a succulent matter before Nutrition; so the Succus is again converted into
flesh, bones, roots, branches, leaves, or metalline Concrete, according to the
individual and its parts of this or the other Species. So that it may be as
well urged; That fixed matter is the first Element of all things, as well as
Water. For as all Concretes may be converted into Water, so Water may be
converted into fixed matter. As for Instance, Vegetables that from a watery
nourishment are become a gross and hard aliment taken into the stomach of an
Animal is by the ferment thereof turned into a liquid Chyle, which by the
ferment of the Heart, etc. is turned into a balsamic blood, and from thence
again into bones, flesh, or other gross and fixed Substances.

From the transmutations and reductions of Matter into its pristine form, may
be concluded the truth of the Fourth Opinion, viz. of Epicurus, and Democritus.
That Matter is the first and only Principle, out of which all concrete bodies
are made. And according to the diverse figurations, motions, and fixation of the
Atoms or minute parts of matter, so are bodies of this or that Species. I
cannot close with the opinion of some, that to matter would add Chance for a
Principle; as if the glorious bodies of the Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. were made by
Chance, or by an accidental collection of Atoms, as if a Dog or other Animal
were but as a Clock, or other mechanical Engine: but that Matter was shaped at
first by the Divine Fiat, and is now metamorphized according to the Plastic
power of the Archeus, or Seminal Principles planted ab origin by God Almighty;
which by the Celestial influences are set at work, and out of convenient matter
form to themselves a Body. We must not rely on Secondary Causes to explain all
the secrets of Nature, as Mr. Boil in his Vsefuln. of Experim. Phil. Essay 2.
has observed. That Gods power is conspicuous in all Creatures, and even in the
least of them the Wisdom of God is manifest.

Descartes tells us Materia in toto Vniverso una and eadem existit. Princ.
Not. Phil. Par. 2. parag. 23. And a little after, Omnis materiae variatio, sive
omnium ejus formarum diversitas, pendet a motu. Matter in the whole Universe is
one and the same, and that all variation or diversity of Forms which matter
has put on, does depend on Motion. Which Philosophers seemed to observe by
their Definition of Nature, Natura est Principium motus and quietis. For then
they understood (says he) Id, per quod res omnes corporeae tales evadunt,
quales ipsas esse experimur. But then if we consider, what is the First Movent
that sets Secondary Causes in action; we must with Cartesius,. 36.
acknowledge God to be the Universal and Primary Cause of motion. Ingenious is
his Phansy, That God made all the parts of matter equal in the beginning both
in magnitude and motion, which whilst moving by Attrition did break off their
angulous parts, that became a subtle matter fit to make the Sun and fixed
Stars; but these that became Spherical globuli, were for the structure of the
Heavens; but the parts of matter which by their figures were unfit for motion,
did remain gross and fit to make the Earth, Planets, and Comets.

But seeing I have disowned imaginary Philosophy, I shall enquire how far
Experience gives light to this opinion, viz. That Matter Indeterminate is the
only Elementary Principle ex Quo is made every compound Body.

If we take a survey of the whole frame of sublunary Concretes, we shall find
Matter of it self to be unconsined to any One Species: but the same Matter
according to the determination of Forms runs through any Species, and
according to the disposition of its parts does put on the forms of different
Elements; which gave occasion to Philosophers so much to dispute the number of
Ingredients in a mixed Body, which really are but Secondary things made out of
Matter, that first Principle of Concretes.

From that Experiment of Mr. Boil Scep. Chym. p. 112. before mentioned, of his
Distillation of a Vegetable nourished only by Water, out of which he procured
(according to some) the Five Chemical Principles, Spiritus, Sal, Sulphur, Aqua,
and Terra; we may conclude thus much, viz. That Matter which made up the body
of Water was converted into Salt, Sulphur, etc.

Having proved before that a Succus or Water is the immediate matter for
nutrition of Vegetables; Let us take for Example a Vine, which requires a
great deal of moisture, as may be concluded from its hasty growth, and bleeding
of broken slips. The increase of its bulk is by liquid Sap, which through
different strainers and coagulation is turned into leaves, branches, Grapes,
etc. The juice of the Grapes by fermentation will cast a Tartar to the sides of
the Vessels, which by distillation will yield a Salt and Terra damnata, the
Wine will yield a Phlegm and a Sulphurous Spirit; and yet all from the Sap as
the more immediate matter. So that here was but one thing in common, viz.
Matter indeterminate to this or that Species.

As the Leffas terrae is converted into Grass, so Grass into Chyle, Blood, and
after various Alterations into the Flesh of a Brute, whose flesh may be
converted again into Chyle, Blood and parts of a Man that did eat of that
Brute; and by the corruption of the humane Carcass is turned again into Earth,
which may by Nature be again converted into Water, as well as by Helmont's
Alkahest, and so pass over a new Stage. The parts of this Brute distilled would
yield the Chemical Principles, yea the Aristotelian so far as they are
consistent with truth; as may be easily seen by the Distillation of the Horns,
Hoofs, Flesh, and Blood of Animals. In all which changes we shall find One
ultimate result, viz. Matter indeterminate to any One particular Species.

I shall easily grant, That a Body may be made out of Spirit, Salt, Sulphur
Phlegm, and Earth; or of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, according to others; yet
these are but Elementa secundaria, seeing they admit of a farther Resolution,
as well as a Tree or any compound body admiteth a Resolution into these. That
cannot be accounted for a First Element, which deriveth its Original a Priori:
as from the configuration, disposition, motion, or quiescence of the particles
of Matter, not only mixed bodies, but others more simple assigned for
Principles by Sects of Philosophers may be derived. To instance in Particulars,
How that the parts of Matter free from cohesion and as it were in fluore with
perpetual motion make Water; that the opace gross fixed parts of Matter make
Earth, the agile Spherical Particles in a raped motion make Fire, etc. would be
beyond my intention. Only thus much we find by experience; That in generation
and corruption there is One ultimate result from all compound bodies, which
Aristotle rightly called materia prima, out of which all Natural bodies are
first made, and at last resolved into. As for example; take a Plant, such as
Mint, Pennyroyal, Bugle, Nummularia, etc. by a Chemical Analysis it may be
resolved into Spirit, Salt* Sulphur Phlegm, or Water, and Earth; or according
to some Chemists that look a little higher, or to more remote Principles, into
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury seeing that Spirit and Earth are but Products of the
other three Yet all these as Dr. Sharrock by the increase of Vegetables in pure
Water, and the foregoing Experiments have proved, are but Water transformed.
And although Water is necessary to Nutrition, and that all Aliment before
assimulation to its Substance must be converted into a Liquid, yet Water cannot
claim the Property of a First, but Secondary Element, seeing that Water it self
is convertible into the Substance of Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, as
these are by Van Helmont's Experiment into Water. So that the Ultimate result
in all Corporeal transmutations will be Matter, the only constitutive
Principle, from which according to the Plastic Power of the Semen, or that
Divine Impress stamped at first by God Almighty, that is the Formative Cause in
Concrete Bodies, is produced the difference of Species and Individuals. Which
brings me to consider, how comes the Variety of Animals, Vegetables and
Minerals; and the Difference of Waters that our Soil does afford.

PAR. I. SECT. 2.
BY the History of the Creation we find that God created the Heavens and the
Earth, but first created Matter, out of which He afterward made bodies
different according to their kind. For as Divines tell us, quoting S.
Augustine, Quod caelum and terra appellatum est, materies erat confusa quaedam
de qua mundus (qui duabus maxim partibus caelo scil. and terra constat)
digestis Elementis and accepta forma fabricaretur. Aug. lib. imperf. ad literam
de Genesi cap. 4. That which was called Heaven and Earth was a confused matter,
out of which the world (that does chiefly consist of two parts, Heaven and
Earth) by digestion of the Elements and putting on a form was made. And a
little after tells us, In principio fecit Deus coelum and terram, id est,
materiam quae caeli and terrae formam capere posset: quae materia terra
invisibilis and incompleta erat, id est, informis and luce carens profunditas:
quae tamen quoniam moventi and operanti artifici subjecta esset, propter hoc
ipsum quod cedit operanti, Aqua etiam nominata est. The making of the Heaven
with its proper form was the work of the second day, Genesis c. 1. v. 8. The
making of the Seas and the Earth with its vegetables was the work of the third
day, v. 13. So that the Heavens and Earth, mentioned v. 1. must be understood
only of the matter, or the dark abyss, on which the Spirit of God moved, in
order to posterior formation. And indeed the next following words intimate as
much to us. The Earth was without form and void.

This undigested Lump of matter the Ancients called a Chaos; as we may see by
Hesiod in his Theogonia, by Apollonius in Argonauticis, lib. 1. lin. 496. who
there speaks to the same effect that Ovid metamorph. lib. 1.

Ante mare and terras, and, quod tegit omnia, coelum,
Vnus erat. --
Which are excellently rendered by Mr. Sandys thus, The Sea, the Earth, all
covering Heaven
unfram'd
One face had Nature, which they Chaos named.
An undigested lump, a barren load,
Where jarring Seeds of things ill-joyn'd abode.


I might cite also many more Heathen Philosophers and Poets, which I shall pass
by; only taking notice of their Opinion concerning the Seminal principles of
Bodies lodged in that undigested lump of Matter. All which I suppose received
their opinions from the writings of Moses, from whom we are taught, that God
created all things, but some he made actually existent, other things he left to
be produced by the Seminal Principles, which He planted in the Chaos, or
confused Matter. As we may see by Genesis 2. v. 5, God made every plant of the
field before it was in the eartb, and every herb of the field before it grew,
viz. the semina of vegetables, which by the primitive Fiat, so soon as the
Matter was digested into form, were set on work, and brought forth according to
the formative virtue of the latent seeds. The Waters brought forth Creatures
abundantly after their kind, the winged Fowl after his kind, the Earth brought
forth the living Creature after his kind, Cattle and creeping things and Beast
after his kind; and of the dust of the ground made He Man. Upon all which we
find a Divine Impression stamped or Generative faculty, by which they might be
fruitful and multiply,

The Earth before Adam's transgression brought forth of its own accord grass
and herbs for the Use of man, which we may well believe to be from latent
Seeds, which now are more manifestly requisite to continue the species. After
Adam had drew a curse on the ground, we still find that the Earth should bring
forth, but it should be such as were more useless an unfit for meat, as thorns
and thistles: but the more useful plants it should not, unless by humane labor
and industry. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread. Genesis 3 19.

As God implanted various seeds of Herbs in the earth, which as at first sprung
therefrom, so yet from seeds continue their species, being set at work by the
Divine Fiat so soon as the celestial influences and appropriate secondary
Causes are rightly applied with convenient Matter; so in like manner has God
the Creator placed variety of Mineral seeds in diverse parcels of Earth, from
which comes a Diversity of Mineral glebes, as here Clay. Marle, there
Marcasites of Iron, Alum, etc. as Dr. Jorden Nature. Bath. and Min. Wat. c. 7.
argues, That Minerals have their Seeds to perpetuate their species.

And that there are Metallic seeds in the bowels of the Earth, may be
concluded from the Generation and Maturating of a crude Mercurial and
sulphurous juice, until a perfect Metal is formed: As has been proved p. 18.
how the caput mortuum of Vitriol, exposed to open Air, will be again
impregnated; and fresh Ore of Tin or Lead, where 60 or 70 years before a^ was
extracted, and old mines replenished with fresh Iron stones. All which
productions depend on the Seminal Principles lodged in several parcels of
Earth, which from a succulent Matter from a Body according to the Specification
of the Archeus. The succus of the Earth by the operation of the Seminal Agent,
is at first converted into a crude Mercury and embrionate Sulphur, which at
length by maturation does become a perfect Metal. So from the Esurine or common
Salt of the earth, according to the diversity of Glebes, do arise different
Mineral Salts, such as that of Vitriol, Alum, Nitre, and Sal Gemma.

These Salts being dissolved in spring water sliding through the veins of the
earth, and meeting with a Vitriolick or Aluminous glebe, etc. does become a
natural Menstruum to open the body of a Minera. These Salts, as so many Keys to
unlock the Mineral Kingdom make the current Springs impregnated with the
virtues of them; and hence is the Original of Medicinal Waters.

Against the opinion of an Universal or one Common Salt of the Earth, out of
which all Mineral Salts, according to the different Glebes, are made into
different species, Dr. Lister, de font. med. c. 6. objecteth several reasons,
and endeavors a confutation of Helmont's Assertion of an Esurine or
Universal Salt. His Reasons are reduced to four Heads.

1. The Esurine Salt, as it does participate of no Quality, to assert the
existence thereof is but a gratis dictum. 2. A Pyrites or Marcasite cannot
perfect its vitriol under water. 3. It is scarce credible that a vein of Iron
can be corroded of that Esurine Salt. 4. Vitriol is not made suddenly, or in a
moment, but by a gentle assiduous germination.

Against which reasons I shall offer these Experimental Observations, proving
that there is an Universal Salt or Common Matter to them all.

1. There is one thing in common among them, because of the Convertibility of
one Salt into another; as a Vitrioline by Alterations may be turned into an
Aluminous Salt, witness the making of Turbith Minerale thus. Add four ounces of
oil of Vitriol to one ounce of Mercury; by setting the mixture on a digestive
furnace the Phlegm will be evaporated, but there will remain in the Bolthead a
Citrine powder from the Alkalizate Mercury fixed by the acid parts of the oil
of Vitriol. From this powder edulcorated by washings of water, and distilled
with Quicklime or Potashes, may be revived a current Quicksilver, yea to its
full weight as at first. The water that by washings edulcorated this powder
boiled up, yields an aluminous Salt. Here Vitriolick salt is turned into
Alum, for the Mercury may be restored to its full weight, so that the
Vitrioline is the only salt transformed This is mentioned by Dr. Simpson,
Hydrol. Chym. p. 60. where an Experiment of his own he gives thus. Distill oil
of Vitriol and common Salt with a gentle heat in a glass body or Retort, you
will find a very volatile spirit of Salt will come over the helm, which will
fume exceedingly, the Caput mortuum or remaining Salt being dissolved gives a
Salt exactly resembling Alum. To which I may annex that Observation of Dr.
Jorden, Nature, Bath. c. 7. That in Distillation of oil of Vitriol, the Lute
wherewith the glasses are joined will yield a perfect Alum. The affinity (or
rather transmutability) of Vitriol and Alum are so great, that he tells us,
it may be doubted whether they are distinct species of Salts.

2. Set several plants in the same soil, as Scurvigrass, Wormwood, etc. These
by distillation shall yield different salts, as the greatest part of that of
Wormwood will be a fixed, but of Scurvigrass a volatile salt. Which variety of
salts must proceed from the different fermentations and alterations of the
nutritive succulent Matter. If it be objected, that each plant attracteth a
peculiar succus, whose particles are answerable to the pores of the Vegetable,
and so some Plants take in more of the volatile, and others more of the fixed
salt. Answ. The same Plants, as Wormwood, Beans, yea I had almost said All
vegetables, by distillation yield both volatile and fixed salt, although they
differ as to the quantity thereof. For the division of Salts into Fixed and
Volatile, is only from the degrees of volatization. The fixed or Alkali salt is
not easily sublimed, but will endure calcination in as much as it is deprived
of spirits, and incorporated with earth; but the volatile is endowed with
spirits, and may be easily sublimed: either of which containing all the virtue
of the Plant, may be called an Essential Salt. Yet the proximate Matter before
formation might be the Common universal Salt, determined by different Strainers
and Ferments of Vegetables.

3. The production of Sal fossilis is from the Acid of the Earth, insinuating
it self into the pores of stones that are an Alkali; it being once penetrated
is united with the stony parts into a saline Concrete, which from its
transparency is called Sal Gemma. Thus an Acid of the Earth sliding through
mountains of stone, have converted them almost all into a fossile Salt, as
Authors of credit do testify of mountains in Poland.

4. That Salts have something in common among them, may be hence concluded.
Expose the Caput mortuum of Vitriol, of Nitre, of Alum, and of Sal Gemma, to
the open air: Each will center upon it the floating saline particles of the
Air, or else imbibe a saline succus, so as to become again impregnate with a
peculiar Salt. So that the saline particles are indifferent to which kind they
are to be appropriated by the latent Seminals.

And that all Minerals, stony and saline concretions, do come from a succus,
which is afterward congealed into a hard substance, may be concluded from
Animals that are found enclosed in stones, such as a Toad in the midst of a
Stone, a petrified Fish, a Spider in Amber, so also Fljes, Worms, Ants, etc.
For Stones and Minerals, whilst in solutis principiis or in succo, may environ
an Animal as a petrifying juice does a piece of wood, which being congealed
will be as a coat of defense to preserve them from putrefaction, as Gilbertus
speaking of Amber has well described it. Mollis primum and viscosa materia
fuit, quare muscas and vermiculos, culices, formicas, in frustulis quibusdam
comprehensos and tumulatos, aeternis sepulchris relucentes continet. Qui omnes
in liquidum cum primum efflueret involarunt, vel irrepserunt, vel inciderunt
Gilb. de magnete, lib. 2. cap. 2.

Upon such like considerations Helmont might well conclude one Common Salt,
indifferent to which species it should be determined (but not void of
Qualities, as Dr. Lister urges) who assigns an Acid liquor sliding through
the veins of the earth for the Original of all Salts. Quocirca notandum est.
Sal quoddam existere hermaphroditicum metallorum, quod defectu nominis Esurinum
sive Acetosum re and nomine vocari coepit. Generale equidem and ad omnia
metalla accommodabile, adeoque si non primam velut and remotissimam eorundem
materiam putare placeat, saltem est metallorum scundina, quibuslibet metallis
congenialis. Helm. parad. 3.

The second argument against one chief Salt, out of which others are formed, is
taken from the Pyrites, which (says Dr. Lister) cannot perfect its Vitriol
under water. But the making of vitriolum Martis or Veneris does evince the
contrary. For Vitriol being but a Mineral Salt, that has preyed on, and
combined with a Metal, as with Iron or Copper, the Menstruum may be aqueous, if
there be a convenient quantity of Salt therein, to incorporate with the
dissolved part of metal. In making vitriolum Martis, water added to oil of
Vitriol does only weaken the Menstruum, that the more soluble parts of Iron may
be dissolved and incorporated with the saline parts of the liquor: for were the
Menstruum too corrosive, it would insinuate into the body of Mars, and make an
impure Salt or Vitriol of Iron.

His arguments against the possibility of the Esurine salt dissolving a vein of
Iron, suppose no distinction betwixt the crudity and maturity of the minera.
Although Aqua fortis or spirit of Nitre will not dissolve Ocre nor the
Haematites, yet either will strongly ferment with filings of Iron, or the more
maturate parts of Mars. Although the Haematites be a sort of Iron-stone, and
Ocre be the Terra metallica, yet thence it will not follow, that the Menstruum
for Iron are the Menstruums for the Haematites, which many times is soft and
like clay, and the Ocre a mere metalline earth.

For Bodies must have their proper Dissolvents, which may undo the fast and
hard contexture of some Bodies, but leave untouched the softer compages of
others: Witness, an Aluminous liquor will corrode a bar of Iron, but leave safe
and sound a piece of cloth, as Dyers daily find by experience. So also by the
testimony of them, at the Alum-works, a Lee made by the decoction of the
calcined minera of Alum, is boiled in a leaden Cistern which it leaves
uncorroded; but a furnace of Iron, or a plate thereof put into the boiling
liquor is soon torn to pieces. So likewise Aqua fortis will corrode a bar of
Iron, but leave entire a ball of soft Clay. As this Esurine Acid does prey upon
a vein of Iron, it does incorporate with the more pure metalline parts, and
make a Neutral Salt. To the effecting of which a long tedious delay is not
requisite, for we find by the making of vitriolum Martis, the saline parts of
the Menstruum do soon insinuate themselves into the pores of the metal. Whence
Helmont: Constat martis vitriolum sale Esurino embryonati sulphuris and vena
(non ferro) ferri, quam sal esurinum adhuc volatile lambendo corrosit, in quo
corrosionis actu fit aliqualis dissolutio ipsius venae, and coagulatio sive
fixatio salis volatilis. Helm. Parad. 4.

To the difference of Salts then in the bowels of the earth, these three things
do concur. 1. An Esurine Acid, 2. Water to convey this Acid to an appropriate
Glebe, 3. a Mineral Glebe.

As Water impregnate with this Acid runs through the subterrestrial
Channels, and meets with a glebe of Alum, Nitre, Marcasites of Iron or of
Copper, etc. so it is determined to this or that specific Salt, whether Alum,
Nitre, Sal Gemma, Vitriol of Iron or Copper.

The Esurine Acid thus coagulated into Salt, may by the subsequent streams of
water, or by a free Current of the same, bring along with it some particles of
the mineral salt, either floating or dissolved in it; the more indeed in case
the Minerals are in solutis principiis or their Succulencies. If water flows
from a Nitrous glebe, it gives a cold spring, as many there are in England: if
from an Aluminous glebe, and brings some of the salt thereof, and thereby is
the more able to prey on an occurrent minera of Iron, it yields fontes
^eidulos or Spaw-waters; such as Scarbrough Spaw, Barnet, and Epsom waters,
etc. all which Aluminous waters though Chalybeat work by Siedge. If the Esurine
Acid prey chiefly on a minera of Iron, the water will be most what Diuretic,
and color the excrements black, such as Tunbridg, Astrap, and Stallbridg
Waters, among which that near Ilmington in Warwickshire may be accounted the
principal, no water in England being a stronger Chalybeat, as I shall hereafter
prove. If water wherein is this Esurine Acid meet with no Mineral glebe, as of
Iron, Copper, etc. it remains only a sower brackish water, which with Galls
will strike no Purple. Of this sort there is one famous near Chesterfield in
the County of Derby: the salt of which by Chrystallization and Evapo^ation is
of an irregular figure, and not a Calcarious Nitre or common Salt, as Dr.
Lister would have most of our medicinal Fountains to consist of.

But against what has been said concerning the Esurine Acid meeting with
Marcasites of Iron or Copper, and being by them converted into a Vitrioline
salt, which may give essence to some Springs, Dr. Lister, de font. med. Ang. c.
7. opposes himself; telling us, that mature Vitriol is not to be found in any
of our medicinal Waters, and that he cannot credit Helmont, who says, that by
distillation he found Pauhont and Savenir, two German Spaws, to contain a
Vitriol of Iron. His Reasons are intimated to us, Pyrites qui in aere in merum
vitriolum, etc. The Pyrites or Marcafite in open air is turned by its proper
germination into a mere vitriol, but under water does as it were dissolve into
a spirit, sulphurous halitus or Ocre. And afterward says, Vitriol is
resolvable into three Principles, Salt, Sulphur, and Ocre; but the Saline
principle is only owing to the Germination in Air.

But had the Docter considered, how that Vitriol is found under ground, where
we cannot suppose a free access of air, (if any at all,) he would not have been
so positive in his assertion. For the Hungarian and Cyprian blew Vitriol is
dug up near the Copper-mines; the English, Roman, and German Vitriol, (which
last partaketh of a little Copper) lie near to Iron stones. All which without
exposing to the air will from their Marcasites yield their distinct sorts of
vitriol. And what should hinder the germination of vitriol under ground, seeing
that vitriol is but a Compound body, of an acid Salt and sulphurous Earth? The
sulphurous Earth is but the Ocre or Terra metallica, that Matter ferri vel
Veneris, which receives the Acid, and determines the same according to the
Power of the Semen latent in the Earth, which may as well convert the Acid of
the Earth, as the Saline particles floating to and fro in the air. As for the
dissolution of the Pyrites in water, I shall easily grant that much of its
saline part may be thus resolved, especially whilst it is near its first
succulency; but thence see no reason to lay its Original upon the Air: neither
could ever find any of these spirits flying off from mineral waters, which the
Doctor calls ipsum metallum vegetans; for if so, then certainly there might
be, by the help of an Alembick and Receiver, such a spirituous substance
preserved from fresh Spring Water, which none that ever I heard of could
obtain. It Is true, some steams will fly off from mineral water, as by our sense
of smelling may be perceived, but these Aporrhea are but some particles winding
off, and are the effect of fermentation or heat, yet cannot be collected
retaining the full nature of the mineral ingredient. All mixed bodies are
subject to change; by internal or external ferments, and by the active agile
parts and motion, many vapors, as in insensible transpiration, may fly off,
and enter the pores of other bodies, or perhaps put on a new form, but never
could be found an essential spirit of Mineral water*

But by spirit perhaps the Doctor might mean Ocre, for he tells us c. 7. that
Ocre does evaporate from our Baths, and that spirit which flies off is a
Metal; and elsewhere will not allow Ocre to be a sulphurous Earth, but a mere
Metal, merum ferri metallum est. L^st de font. med. c. 2. because after burning
in the fire it may be drawn by the Loadstone. But Gilbertus has proved, that
not only Iron, but many other things will answer the operation of the Magnet.
Non ferrum tantum and magnes a magnete attrahitur and volvitur magnetice, sed
ferreae venae omnes, lapides etiam alii ut fissiles Rhenani and Andegavenses
nigri, quibus pro tegulis utuntur, aliorumque colorum and substantiarum plurimi
si praeparati fuerint: tum omnis argilla, glis, saxaque nonnulla, atque ut
planius dicam omnis terra firmior, modo pinguioribus and humidis corruptelis
defoedata non fuerit, ut lutum and coenum. And a little after, Omnia magnete
attrahuntur solis ignibus praeparata, and a recrementitio humore liberata.
Gilb. de mag. lib. c. 17. Not only Iron and a Magnet (which is but a more pure
minera of Iron, or finer Iron-stone) may be drawn by a Magnet; but Stones,
white Earth, Potters clay, yea all firm Earth, in case the Excrements and
putrid moisture are purged off by fire. It Is true the Operation betwixt the
Magnet and Iron is great, and consequently by how much the more of metalline
parts of Iron there are in a mineral Earth, by so much the more conspicuous is
the Magnetism; yet simple Earth after Calcination will (though in an inferior
degree) show the like effect. But this leading me to the enquiry of a new
subject I shall return to my proposed matter in hand.

Du Glos observe. on the Min. wat. of Fran. p. 8. rightly tells us, That the
first Beings or Embryo's of Mineral Salts are nothing else but vapors or
juices unconcrete, wholly vapourable, And page 9. The Embryonate Salt in the
Chalk-stones is a stony juice, which mixeth it self with waters that pass
between the beds and interstices of the stones in the rocks, but is not easily
discerned in the waters impregnated therewith. The Seminary of Alum and Vitriol
is also necessary in the substances whence these sorts of Salts are drawn.
Waters current in their chan^els meeting with and dissolving them, become a
proper menstruum to unlock the Mineral Kingdom; and according to the dissolved
minera, so Waters differ in their qualities.

Upon the variety of Salts and Mineral Earths depends variety of Springs. For
there are four sorts of Salt commonly known to us, according to Dr. Jorden and
others, viz. Alum, Vitriol, Nitre, and common Salt; which others, and perhaps
with as great reason, reduce to three, Alum, Vitriol and common Salt, which
last may be again divided into Sal gemma or fossilis, Fountain-salt, and Sal
Marine, because these three sorts partake near of the same nature, and work
almost the like effects. Only the Sea Salt being dissolved in water has lost
many of its sharp points, and consequently is not so penetrating as Sal
fossilis, from mountains and rocks of which, according to most of our modern
Authors, the saltness of the Sea does take its original. An affinity betwixt
these Salts Monsieur Lemery has observed, who also in his Cour. Chym. Remar.
on Saltpeter, gives us this Experiment. When Saltpeter is boiled a long time
in water, and over a great fire, some part of the spirits fly away, and there
at last remains nothing but a Salt like unto Sea Salt or Sal Gemma, which
serves to prove that Saltpeter is only a Sal gemma, fuller of spirits than the
other: And if so, then Saltpeter may be ranked under the other, and make no
different species of Salt.

From these Salts with which waters may singly or jointly be impregnated, (to
which for ought we can tell species of Salt as yet unknown to us may be added)
preying upon diverse Minerals, must needs depend great variety of Mineral
waters. As for the Calcarious salt asserted by Dr. Lister, I suppose it to be
but a kind of Nitre, which is centered upon the Lapis Calcarius mentioned by
Falopius de Therm. Aq. c. 8. and by the seminary principle thereof does become
a stony salt, discernable enough by some clear but cold petrifying Springs.

The variety also of Earths, as white, red, or yellow Marle, Clay, Chalk, or
other mineral Earths, may cause great variety, as to the weight, color,
sediment, smell etc. more especially when there is a complication of many in
the same water.

PART II.
NOw I shall proceed to Enquire, what are the Ingredients of Ilmington-Spaw,
first taking notice of its Color, which is far more pale then Rock-spring
water. With Syrup of Violets it would turn green, like Alkalizate Liquors with
that syrup: with Galls, to a Purple; like Martial Vitrioline Waters: for
Cuprous Vitrioline with Galls turn muddy with a very little Purple or Black;
but of this more afterward. Its body being of a thick muddy consistence, I
weighed (in a very dry Season) a Pint of this Spaw-water against a Pint of
ordinary Water, but the Spaw exceeded near half a Dram. Another time after a
wet Season and when the Ocre was fallen an old Pint pot of common Pump-water
weighing 18 Ounces did equalize (and if either, did turn the Scales) the same
quantity of the Spaw-water: which may caution us from prefixing a determinate
Weight to any Spring Water. Variety in the Weight of Waters may appear by
comparing That Salt spring water of Droit-wich with sweet springs, yea to him
that compares the Waters of several sweet springs together, For the Esurine
salt many times being carried along with the water sliding through its secret
Meanders or veins of the Earth; of which part insinuates it self into, and
part corroding occurrent bodies; it fretteth off fragments, such as fragmenta
ferrea from Iron-stones, and particles from ordinary stones, which are carried
along with the water, and lie latent to the naked eye in its pores, but by
Distillation, Evaporation etc. will appear, Whence of necessity follows a
great variety in weight, according to the greater or less quantity of sabulum
or fragments therein contained.

Then I proceeded to enquire after the Mineral, with which this Spring was
impregnated. And first I took about half a pint of new milk, upon which in a
Porringer I poured this water fresh from the Springhead, but could not discern
any coagulation; yea, for any thing did appear, this mixture differed not from
a mixture of milk and ordinary spring water. After four miles carriage of the
water, when the reddish Ocre began to subside, I poured upon warm milk from the
cow a pretty quantity of this water, and let it stand at least twelve hours;
but neither in this mixture, nor in milk and this Spaw-water boiled together,
did any Coagulum appear. Hence I began to suspect, that its brackish taste was
not from an acid Salt; therefore on this spring water I instilled some oil of
Tartar, but upon the instillation, and the standing of the water all night, a
very small curdling did ensue; only the mixture looked more white than the
Spaw-water it self, which alteration of color proceeded from the oil of
Tartar. Whereupon I concluded, that no Acid salt was here predominant, yea
rather as such, scarce discernable in this Spring; it being, as I shall
hereafter prove, far nearer to an Alkali than to an Acid salt.

Upon an Oaken leaf bruised I poured a pintglass full of this Spring Water, and
immediately it inclined to a Purple color: I then tried it with Galls, and it
turned first to a Purple, but with an addition of more Galls to a black. But
desiring more exactness, I caused one single grain of Galls finely powdered to
be divided into twenty parts, another grain into nineteen, another into
eighteen equal portions, etc. Upon trial I found, that the eighteenth part of a
grain did something incline a pint of this water to a Purple color, as might
be perceived in a crystal glass set in a clear light; but the sixteenth part
of a grain put into a pint of water, did presently cause a tincture plainly
discernable and inclining to a purple; but the eighth part of a grain fully
turned a pint to a Purple, much resembling in color Syrup of Damask Roses
mixed with ordinary Spring Water. Afterward the more Galls were added, by so
much the more it altered toward a black, until it turned into a muddy inky
Liquor. Which Liquor by the instillation of spirit of Vitriol was cleared, but
by oil of Tartar or spirit of Hartshorn was again muddied; with spirit of
Nitre, oil of Vitriol, or Aqua fortis, etc. became clear again: for what an
Alkali muddieth, an Acid again clears.

Now considering the small quantity of Galls, with which a Pint of water was
thus tinged, I believe we may compare our new found Spaw (in this particular)
with any of the English Medicinal waters, yea with the German Spaws so much in
request.

But it being sufficiently proved by the Learned Dr. Simpson in his Hydrologia
Chymica, that a solution of the Calx of Alum, or of Alum-stones with the
addition of Galls, will turn to a deep Purple, and from thence with more
solution of Galls added becomes blackish and opacous almost like Ink. Upon
which spirit of Vitriol being poured, it becomes clear again; with oil of
Tartar again muddied, and with spirit of Vitriol, of Nitre, Aqua fortis, etc.
reduced to its pristine clarity. He also in his Hydrological Essays writeeth
thus. Not only Galls will strike a purple tincture with the Alum-salt (got
before the addition of Kelp and Urine) dissolved in distilled or fresh
spring water, but also the same may be done by other bodies, whose texture of
parts are congeneal; as for example, the inner part of the Oak, the roots of
Tormentile, Avens, Bistort, Clove-gillyflowers, and the flowers called
Balaustia. All which like Galls will strike a purple with water wherein the
Alum salt is dissolved, yea and will also become clear again by the instilling
a few drops of oil of vitriol, and with the oil of Tartar will become turbid
and muddy, etc, Hydr. Ess. p. 132.

I began to enquire farther into this Spaw, upon consideration that a Purple
color, and from thence a dark muddy liquor like Ink, might be made with Galls
from another Liquor than from a Vitriolick water or Solution. And that Vitriol
dissolved, by an addition of Galls will strike a good black, is evident from
the ordinary way of making black writing Ink, Whereupon I compared Aluminous
waters and this Spring.

I made a Solution of Mineral Alum with fair w^ter, which presently upon the
instillation did curdle Milk; but upon the mixture of Milk and this Spring
water no Coagulation did ensue. And that Alum consists chiefly of an Acid
salt all-sufficient to coagulate milk, is apparent by the mixture of a Solution
of simple Alum salt, with a Solution of salt of Tartar, Wormwood, or any
Vegetable fixed Salt; from whence will arise a turbid liquor with Coagulations
in it, which Coagula are caused by the mutual conflict of different Salts,
destroying each other until a Third and Neutral Salt result therefrom.

Besides, Aluminous Springs are purgative, witness the Scarbrough Spaw, Epsom
and Barnet Waters, etc. but this near Ilmington works most what by Urine. Yea
perhaps (and truly) I might conclude, That this Spaw in respect of its mineral
ingredients works not by Siedge. I know it may be objected, That some persons
drinking of this water do thereupon find a looseness, perhaps to the number of
four or five stools or more, To which I might answer,

1. That any simple Spring Water drank in a large quantity, will purge by its
own weight: for as it lies heavy upon the stomach and intestines it oppresses
Nature, whence the Peristaltick motion is excited to expel that which infests
and is burdensome; and if the water does much oppress the stomach before it
pass through the Pylorus, vomiting is the effect according to Dr. Willis. In
vomitu fibrarum motricium spasmus ab alteris earum finibus, viz. sinistris
incipiens and statim violentus and impetuosior factus, totam stomachi ^avitatem
simul collectam and valde coarctatam, versus sinistrum orificium corripi and
illac evacuari cogit. Cujus ratio est, quoniam si quid valde incongruum ac
naturae infestum stomacho insederit, illud non ordinaria via per intestina, ut
per anum expellatur, circumferri, verum exitu propiori excerni debet. Willis
Pharm. ration. sec. 2. cap. 1. de vomitione. parag. 5. The same reason he
gives for purging by Stool, only by a contrary motion of the Stomachical and
intestinal fibers from a less irritation, which motion is continued usque ad
anum. We cannot say then, that this Water is purgative by its Minerals, as I
shall more evince when I speak of its Essential parts. For

2. If this Spaw water as such, were Cathartick, then it must have the same
effects on all persons, allowing a proportionate quantity according to the
Constitution of the Party: but that it is not, Experience testifies. For many
find great Costiveness hereby, but a great Secretion by Urine. Yea I have known
some persons that have ventured upon five Pints for the first Dose to begin
their Watercourse; yet instead of a Purge, found their Excrements to come off
in blackish hard Scybala.

3. To whom this Water becomes a Cathartick, they must be either of a weak
constitution, soon oppressed by a large quantity of water, or else whose bodies
abound with sharp humors (as Scorbutic persons, etc.) all-sufficient to
produce a Diarrhoea or looseness by a long irritation of the fibers: whence the
Peristaltick motion being once excited, Nature as through its common Sink
expels its peccant matter. For if according to Dr. Willis, not only the
succus Pancreaticus and Bilis, but the serous humors also in their natural
Crasis, by Contraction of the tunicles squeezed out of the intestinal Glandules
to make the common Ductus slippery, and irritating the fibers, do promote
Purgation; much more then according to Sylvius, when the Saline Principle
becomes too much exalted.

To which I might add a fourth Cause, why this Spaw should become to some
persons, and at some times, a Cathartick, viz. an Inclination to a Lask,
whether it be from a Pravity of Humors, Obstructions of the Vessels, Viscera,
etc.

Besides that, Alum is an Acid, as I have already proved, and also is a
Cathartick; both which properties are not to be found in this Spaw,
comparatively more than in ordinary Spring Water. I observed also, that the
Excrements of those that drank this water were turned blackish, which is a
consequent to the taking of Chalibeat Medicines, but not to the drinking of
Aluminous waters.

For farther trial I took about two Quarts of this water, and after Evaporation
set it to Chrystallize, but could not find any Salts shot to the sides or
bottom of the vessel. I therefore evaporated it ad siccitatem, and found left a
reddish white powder, upon which I dropped spirit of Hartshorn; but it made no
ebullition or effervescence, but with an Acid did make a great ebullition with
fumes: quite contrary to Alum, which makes a plain effervescence with spirit
of Hartshorn, but with an Acid stirs not: which proves, that an Aluminous
Salt is not found in this Spaw.

Because oil of Vitriol and spirit of Nitre mixed together cause a great
effervescence, and from thence spirit of Nitre is concluded upon by Dr, Grew in
his Tractate of Experiments to be a Subalkalizate Acid, because also that
spirit of Nitre and Mercury presently boil up; it put me upon Enquiry, Whether
a Nitrous liquor was the Menstruum to the Mineral of this Spaw-water.

But by the way I shall propose one Paradox, taken notice of by Dr. Simpson,
Hydrol. Essay p. 142. quite contrary to the received opinion of vulgar
Chemists, viz. That Nitre, as Nitre, or before it has suffered the force of
fire, is not an Acid. For if Nitre were an Acid, then it being put into boiling
milk would curdle it; that it will not, Experience teaches, yea no more than
Sal Gemma, neither of which do become acid until they have undergone a fiery
Trial, whose spirits drawn off will soon curdle milk. Which seems to confirm
that opinion of Monsieur Lemery before mentioned, viz. That Nitre is only a Sal
Gemma, fuller of spirits than the ordinary fossile Salt, because when the
spirits of Saltpeter by boiling over a strong fire are fled away, there
remains only a Salt resembling Sea-sa;lt.

That Nitre, before its particles are acuated by the stress of fire, is not
acid, may hence appear: because it will make no Ebullition with a Lixivium of
Salt of Tartar, nor any other Alkali, which any Acid will do. And the ordinary
way of making Fixatio Nitri, by putting a burning coal into the Crucible or
Mortar wherein is Nitre, proves; That when the volatile parts are fled off,
(as may be perceived by the great detonation) Saltpeter is become a plain
Alkali salt.

Neither for my part can I approve of Schroder's Definition of Saltpeter. Sal
Nitrum est sal sulphureum seu (...), salso amarum ex terra pingui excoctum. I
know it may be urged, that Saltpeter yeildeth Red fumes or vapors, when its
spirits are drawn over the Helm, which seem inflammable and sulphurous; and
that Nitre flung upon burning coals will burn most vehemently, and with great
noise; and that the strength of Gunpowder proceeds from the Elastick force
of Nitre, its spirits taking their Explosion from the inflammation. To which
may be answered, That Sulphur is the chief Principle of ^nflammability, but
This I deny to be in simp^e Nitre. For about Nitre in a Crucible or earthen pot
make Ignis Rotae, or the most vehement fire that can be; yet the Nitre without
an addition of Sulphur shall not take flame and burn, which must have been a
necessary Consequent were Inflammability appropriate thereto. Let but a small
quantity of Sulphur be added as that of a burning coal, etc. with great
impetuosity the volatile parts fly off; even as a great wind that increases
the flame of combustible matter, but of it self is not capable of accension, so
Nitre by its volatile parts like bellows does blow up the sulphurous parts of
a Coal that are the principle matter of Flame. Were these Volatile parts
inflammable, then once accended, like other combustible matter in a sufficient
quantity, they would totally waste. But in fixing of Nitre it is observed, that
as the burning coals waste, so the flame decays; but by putting on fresh coals
the flame is renewed, and so until all the volatile parts of Nitre are gone: as
Monsieur Lemery well observed, App. Cour. Chym Remar. on. fix. Nitr. p. 83. As
for the Red vapors yielded in Distillation, they are not without Sulphur
capable of flame, and the sudden Explosion thereof in Gunpowder is from the
quick accension of Charcoal and Brimstone, to which does concur the flatulent
Explosion of the volatile parts of Saltpeter in a rapid motion. Arguments
against any sulphurous principle of Saltpeter might also be taken from the
Whiteness of the flame when mixed with Sulphur, and from its cooling Quality,
which is contrary to the effect of a sulphurous body.

Upon farther Trial I could not find Nitre to be any Ingredient in this Spaw.
For in the whole Anatomy of this Water by Evaporation, Distillation,
Crystallization, etc. I could not find the least footsteps of Nitre, much less
any of its Salts shot into its usual Styria's. Besides, the Powder left after
Evaporation shows its self to be far different from a Nitrous salt, as I
shall hereafter prove.

But observing this Water after its being exposed to the open air for some
time, either stagnating at the Springhead, or else as it is set in open
vessels has a bluish Cremor swimming on the top or surface of the Water, much
resembling waters that stand long upon sulphurous bogs; I began to enquire,
whether this might not be a Sulphurous Spring, like that at Knarsbrough, etc.

By an Analysis of this Water into its Principles, not one grain of combustible
Sulphur is to be found. In its Distillation in close stopped vessels, the Water
that first comes over is insipid, it will not strike a Purple by an addition of
Galls, so neither will the Spring Water when its Ocre is precipitated by being
long exposed to the open air, neither will any Sulphurous Smell of the
distilled Water strike the Nostrils. What remains in the bottom after
Distillation, and also the Sediment precipitated after long stagnation, I tried
with burning Coals and a red hot Iron, but could not perceive the least
flagration. Now were there any Sulphur, (I mean as to the body thereof) it
would show its self a combustible matter on the Top after stagnation, like the
mare Asphalticum, and in Italy the Springs at Maiamum, Sassalo, and at the foot
of Vesuvius, with many more mentioned by Dr. Jorden, not. Bat. c. 6. to which I
may add that famous Rivulet spoken of by Agricola, Sulphurea Nar albus aqua, --

Nar is white with its sulphurous Cream, Agr. de nature. cor. Effl. ex ter. l.
2 Or else the Sulphur must subside with the Vitrioline Ocre of this Spring; for
as the Water lets fall its vitrioline Ocre, so it becomes effete in its
virtues. But as no Oil nor Bitumen, so neither Sulphur will mix per minima with
Water; its parts being heterogeneal to these of Oil or Sulphur: whence there
can be no mixture unless by a ferment. The Compages of the Water then being
dissolved, and by letting fall its vitrioline Ocre becoming effete and insipid,
the Sulphur must have shew^d it self by a combustible Cream, or Sediment, had
any been there as to its body.

It may be then Queried, What makes this Cream on the top after stagnation,
and what is it that gives a strong Odor to this standing Water?

Answ. A bluish skin or Cremor is common to all Vitrioline or other Mineral
waters, and to all waters that stand long upon a Bog: which skin taken off, and
put upon burning coals, gives a fetid smell. But as I have said before,
Mineral Sulphur as to its body is not here, How comes then this fetid smell?
Waters may yield a sulphurous Cream and smell two ways, First, when a
bituminous matter issues forth with the Spring Water, as in the Springs about
the Mare Asphalticum, at Averne in France, at Pitchford in Shropshire, and at
many places as we are informed by Agricola, de not. eor. Eff, ex ter. lib. 1.
and 2. For the Watery and Oily parts being heterogeneal, there can be no
perfect Union; whence the Oil must either subside, or else turn to a Cream at
the top. Or secondly, Waters may get a sulphurous Cream and Smell by
putrefaction. For Waters, but more especially Mineral, by standing in the air
let fall their ingredients, and cast up sulphurous particles to the top.
Because the Air by its ferment dissolving the Compages of Water, does generate
a Sulphur de novo, as in long standing Ditch-water; or else does cause the
particles of Embryonative Sulphur, or Sulphur in fieri, to swim at the top,
(for combustible or Mineral Sulphur I cannot find in this Spaw) as of water
standing on Bogs, or black moorish ground. So that this Water exposed to the
air, may by a putrefactive ferment generate a sulphurous Cream de novo, or
else cast up its Embryonative Sulphur, (all-sufficient to cause the Cream and
Smell) which it has got from the Marcasites of Iron or Vitriol, that are the
main Ingredient in this Spaw, as I shall anon prove. And that Marcasites of
Vitriol do contain an Embryonative Sulphur, take that Conclusion deduced from
Experiments by Dr. Simpson, That the Marcasites of Vitriol and Alum have an
Embryonative Sulphur connatural with them, produced out of the same Mineral
Seed; for instance, the Sulphur crust, separated by calcination of the
Alum-stone; and in the Vitriol Marcasites I find, that putting them into the
fire, they burn of a blew flame, and have a sulphurous smell; in both these
the Sulphur is really answerable to the common Sulphur or Brimstone. Hydrol.
Ess. p. 61.

But by way of Objection, there is an usual Observation, that may seem to prove
the common Mineral Sulphur, and not an Embryonate, to be in this Spring, in
case Marcasites of Iron do concur to the making up of this Spaw, viz. many
Iron-stones contain a plain Brimstone, as may clearly be discerned by the naked
eye, by the fetid smell and blew flame in burning them at the Forge or Iron
Mills.

Answ. Although there is found many times among Iron-stones a plain Brimstone,
yet we have no Demonstrations to conclude that it is here. But suppose that it
should be among the Marcasites, that are chiefly concerned to the effecting
this Mineral Spring; yet Sulphur whether in its own proper Earth, or Mineral
veins, must have its proper Menstruum in order to its Dissolution. Now an
Alkalizate Salt (and not an Acid) is the proper Menstruum to open the body of
Sulphur, that it may show it self a part: but a Lixiviate Salt I cannot
perceive to be the Menstruum to unlock the Minera of this Spring, for then must
the Sulphurous part have plainly manifested it self by tinging of Silver and
combustible Cream, neither of which are here apparent. And besides, Lixiviate
liquors are un^capable of dissolving Iron, for Mars partaketh most what of an
Alkali Salt: upon which account Chalybeat Preparations (wherein the Body of
Iron is to be opened) do require an Acid Menstruum; as the Crocus or Saffrons
of Mars with many more might testify. For let the Preparation of Crocus be
performed by exposing the Iron for some time to the Dew or Rain, or by spirit
of Nitre, Sulphur, etc. yet still by examination we shall find an Acidity in
the Dissolvent, by which it is able to corrode Mars. The Odor then and Cream
of this stagnating Water must be by its small quantity of Embryonate Sulphur
brought along with the Mineral, and manifested by a putrefa^tive ferment. For a
Minera in its crude parts, or in succo primitivo, will sooner show it self,
than in its fast compact substance, that requires a stronger or more peculiar
Menstruum.

It being a consequent to vitrioline Solutions to turn to a Purple by addition
of Galls, by addition of more Galls to turn dark, and from thence to a thick
muddy inky Liquor; I began to Query, Whether this Spring was vitrioline.

As for Vitriol or Copperas I find it agreed upon by the most eminent Authors,
to be made of an Acid Salt preying upon a Mineral, whose Particles it combineth
with into a close texture. So that a Mineral containing sulphurous Earth, the
Parts of Natural vitriol may be concluded, An Esurine or Acid Salt, Metalline
Particles, and a Sulphurous Earth. According to the Diversity of Minerals, on
which the Acid preyeth and combineth with, so different Vitriols do arise. All
which (as yet known) may be reduced to two Heads, viz, Vitriol of Iron, and
Vitriol of Copper. Vitriolum album has but little of the Metalline part, and
therefore by some is reckoned for a distinct species. Because of its Mildness,
it may with a little Preparation not only become an Internal Remedy, witness
the Sal Vitrioli vomitivus, but also may be applied to tender Parts, as it is
usual in Eye-waters.

Vitriol of Copper, called by some vitriolum caeruleum from its bluish color,
by so much the more it partaketh of Copper the more blew it is, such as the
Hungarian and Cyprian Vitriol. Among the Particular sorts of Vitriol of Copper
there is difference, according to the quantity of the Acid or Esurine Salt, and
as it partaketh more or less of the Copper.

Vitriol of Iron is commonly Greenish, as the Goslarick, Swedish, English, and
Roman Vitriols. These partake most of Mars, and consequently are not so
Caustic as them of Copper, for the more Copper the more Caustic are the
Vitriols, and by so much the more fit for composition of Corrosive Menstruums.
As for instance, the German greenish Vitriol, containing more of Iron than of
Copper, is reckoned among the vitriols of Iron; but by reason of a small
quantity of Copper therein comprehended, is found to be more Corrosive than the
ordinary green Vitriols; although far short of the Blew, whose Metalline parts
are Copper; yet I deny not, that there may be a complication of Iron with
Copper in the same Marcasite.

As for the Red Vitriol our Druggists have lately obtained from Germany, and by
some esteemed as a distinct species of Vitriol, it seems to be nothing but a
Terra Vitriolica, from which the Mineral Salt is separated by preterlabent
Springs, or else is not as yet endowed with an Esurine Acid, but remains as a
Matter Vitrioli or proper Bed for its generation. By its aspect it resembles
the Cholcothar of vitriol of Iron which is redish, but that of Copper like a
yellow Oker,

Besides these Natural vitriols already mentioned, there are many Artificial;
such as vitriols adulterated (by way of cheat) in imitation of the Natural, as
much is to counterfeit the Roman Vitriol. By Solution, Evaporation,
Crystallization, etc. we may find a great deal that passes for true Natural
Vitriols to be but Factitious adulterated Compositions by addition of Salts
made shoot into strange Crystals with variety of colors.

Notwithstanding that all the sorts of Natural Vitriol will strike a Purple,
and from thence a muddy Inky liquor by a mixture of Galls; yet I conclude the
white Vitriol and Vitriol of Copper not to have existence in this Spring, for
these Reasons.

1. White vitriol is vomitive, witness the Gilla vitrioli, so also is the
vitriol of Copper, yea excepting some Preparations of Mercury the greatest
Emetick of Metals: And besides, vitriol of Copper is a violent Caustic as
Chirurgical practice assures us; neither of which Properties do agree to this
Spring.

Secondly, the red Oker that subsides out of this stagnating water, and is to
be found among the stones at the Springhead in a considerable quantity, does
exactly resemble the mineral Earth of Iron, and not of Copper; which is carried
along with the Metalline parts dissolved by the Esurine Acid; which Earth as
the matter ferri because of the body of Mars in it, being preyed upon, does
become as a Crocus Martis or Rustings of Iron.

If it be Queried, Whether the Mineral of this Water may not be Copper, but in
so small a quantity, as not to have so powerful an Operation as is required to
an Emetick; like spirit of vitriol although a Caustic, yet a few drops may be
safely taken inwardly, when there is a large Latex, as it is frequently and
with good success in cooling Juleps.

Answ. This Spring is very strong of the Mineral, witness the Tincture with so
small a quantity of Galls, (as before I have mentioned) any herein not any
water in England does exceed; so that were it from an Emetick or Purgative
Mineral, as from Alum or Copper, This must have been a Cathartick, but we have
no such assurance from Experience. Besides, were it from Copper a great
vomitive, then the Mineral being mixed in a less quantity must purge by Stool;
for as Dr. Willis, Pharm. ration. sect. 2. c. 1. de vomitione. has proved,
When the irritation of the intestinal fibers is less than is required to cause
a Vomit, it works by Siedge. In vomiting the Spasms of the Fibers being
violent, Nature is necessitated to evacuate the next way, but less violent by
the irritation of a Cathartick, which is not of so quick an Operation, nor to
nauseous and offensive to the Stomach as an Emetick; wherefore the Natural
motion of the fibers is not inverted, but continued usque ad Anum to work by
Stool. Now had here been so much Copper as clearly to have manifested it self;
this Spaw, if not an Emetick, must have been a Cathartick, at least in an
inferior degree.

Upon consideration that a Solution of vitriol of Iron with Galls would strike
a Purple, and from thence a black by addition of more Galls; I began a
comparison betwixt this Spring Water and vitriol of Iron, otherwise called Sal
Chalybis, made out of filings of Steel and oil of Vitriol.

I took a Pint of fair Spring Water, in which I dissolved a quarter of a Grain
of Sal Chalybis, then I took a Pint of Spaw-water; into each of them severally
put a quarter of a grain of Galls finely powdered, and upon the mixture both
became Purple. The mixture with the Sal Chalybis turned more to a bluish, but
that of the Spaw more to a redish Purple, much resembling fair water mixed with
a little Syrup of Damask Roses. The dissolution of the Sal Chalybis in fair
water and the Spaw-water had the same taste, as near as Art could imitate
Nature. A small variation in Color, and as little as may be, in taste may well
be allowed, by reason of the redish Oker contained in the Spaw, that upon
stagnation of the Water will subside, which must needs cause it to incline
something more to a right Purple, and to be something more styptick than the
solution of vitriolum Martis, containing none of this red Oker* Neither can it
be expected, that the Spaw-water, after its Oker is fallen, should be of the
same color with a solution of Sal Chalybis. For the Oker that falls is not a
simple Earth, but carries with it a great deal of the Mineral and Saline
parts; for in so much as the Oker falls, the Water loses its Tinging
property, yea degenerates from a Mineral water, and at length becomes effete
in its virtue.

By addition of more Galls to the Solution of Sal Chalybis and to the
Spaw-water, both began to turn to a dark, and at last to a black inky Liquor.
Then I poured into each a few drops of spirit of Vitriol, and both returned to
their pristine clarity; then I instilled upon each a few drops of oil of Tartar
per Deliquium, and again they became muddied, but with spirit of Nitre both
became clear again. From whence I infer a Similitude betwixt this Spaw-water
and a Solution of Sal Chalybis or Vitriol of Iron, being alike in their
va^riation of Colors, Precipitation, and reduction to Clarity again.

But before I shall proceed to more Experiments, to prove a farther Similitude
betwixt this Spaw-water and vitriol of Iron, I shall speak something as a
Rationale, Why these have alike Precipitation, Variation, and Reduction, which
may farther illustrate an Affinity betwixt them from the forementioned
Experiments.

Why there is some difference in color betwixt a Solution of sal Chalybis in
fair water which inclines to a Blew, and this Spaw-water (I mean when Galls
are added to both) which inclines more to a Purple, as I said before is from
the red Ocre in the Spaw-water. For all Natural vitriol contains in it a
terra Metallica, whose Color may be changed into a brown, black, etc.
according to the different Analysis of Vitriol by fire. But before any Chemical
Preparation of this Spaw-water its Oker is red, as may appear by the Stagnation
of the water, to them that make Inspection at the Springhead,

Now if we look into the Nature of the thing, we shall scarce find any or no
difference betwixt the Spaw-water and a Solution of vitriol of Iron. For Blew
and Purple are but a Black in a remiss degree; for proof hereof I could cite
the Trials of experienced Authors, all-sufficient to confirm the Assertion. But
instead thereof take one or two Observations.

First, that Blew and Purple do only differ by addition of a little Red, Take a
Blew, as Indy-blew, etc. ground into a fine powder; which being divided into
two parts, add to one part a little Vermilion finely powdered, and it gives a
Purple, by reason that the Blew and the Red particles do refract their rays
intermixtim, which cannot be distinguished but by good Microscopes. If this be
the result from dry Powders, much more then and farther from distinction when
Bodies are in fluore, and the Particles of one implexed and insinuated into the
Pores and interstices of the other.

Secondly, That Blew and Purple are but a remiss degree of Black, take this
Observation to the present business. By an addition of a small quantity of
Galls to the Spaw-water, and also to a Solution of vitriol of Iron does arise a
Purple, and a Blew inclinable to a Purple, even so it does in making of
Ordinary ink, when to a solution of Vitriol there is made an addition of a
small quantity of Galls, a Purple is the Result, but by addition of more and
more Galls it turns to a Black or inky Liquor. So that Blew or Purple is but
a medium to a Black, for the same thing by variation in its quantity makes
both.

But let us suppose a difference in color betwixt the Spaw-water and a
Solution of sal Chalybis; yet that will rather prove a different Position of
the Parts of Matter, causing a different refraction of Light, than a Difference
in the Nature of the Subjects. For the same Thing by altering the modification
of its Particles, may alter its Color. So Syrup of Violets, by instillation of
a little Oleum Tartari per Deliquium, changes from a Blew to a famous Green, A
few drops of spirit of Nitre instilled on a considerable quantity of this
mixture, or on fresh Syrup, will change it into a Carnation Red. But neither of
these Liquors had any resemblance of Red, or Green, before the Mixture, Diverse
changes in color I could instance, made by instillation of clear Liquors upon
a Decoction of Logwood, etc. and by mixture of Tinctures. By the frequent
practice of Dyers we are informed, that the same thing viz* a Decoction of
Glastum will produce a Green from a Yellow, and a Russet from a Red, only by a
previous preparation with Alum: Yea I could produce a Liquor I have got from a
vegetable, (which Experiment I lighted upon by accident, whilst making some
scrutiny into Colors) that by instillation of another Liquor as clear as
rock-water, will strike an excellent Scarlet; which color seems not to have
the least footsteps in the ingredients before they are mixed. Many such like
Observations, I question not, may be found by Trial on mixtures, yea for ought
I know to compare with our Bow-dye, without the least recourse to Chochineel.
But this being to dive unto the Dyer's Trade, I shall only take notice from
such Experiments, That Color depends more on the Texture of Parts
differently reflecting the Light, than from a difference in Matter. So that a
Blew or Purple will be no Material difference betwixt a Solution of Salt of
Mars and this Spaw-water, with Galls added to both* And that this Oker is the
main occasion thereof, may be hence concluded. I made a Solution of English
vitriol in fair water, which with a small quantity of Galls did strike a Purple
very near as deep as this Spaw-water: but let vitriol be distilled, and reunite
all its parts except the Colcothar, and with fair water and Galls you shall
fail as to the former Purple; and in all vitrioline Solutions with Galls may be
observed, The more Terra Metallica the deeper the Purple.

When Galls are added to this Spring Water, and also to a Solution of Sal
Chalybis, an Alteration in Color (as I said before) and an inky smell does
also ensue. The reason hereof is this; An inky liquor or Ink (and consequently
will smell as such) is made by a solution of vitriol precipitated, or made
opacous by the addition of Galls; whose stiptick parts do make Coagula with the
vitriolick, and hurry the vitriolick out of the former posture, and make them
like so many confused Atoms: they also fill these interstices and pores of the
water, which before made a diaphanous body, but is now become a turbid,
confused, and consequently a blackish liquor. In the ordinary way of making
ink, Gum Arabic and Sugar is added to the Galls and vitriol, by reason they
cause a thicker consistence, and their glutinous parts buoy up these confused
Atoms and Coagula, which by long standing would subside, and so the Solution
return diaphanous.

The solution of vitriol of Mars and Spaw-water, by instillation of spirit of
Vitriol, spirit of Nitre, or by other Acids, are reduced to a clear
consistence; because that spirit of Vitriol, etc. does work upon and scatter
those confused Atoms and coagula made by the Vitriol and Galls, which the Galls
had caused to float up and down in a confused posture. Wherefore the Liquors
return clear, the Acids having expelled the stiptick and Alkalizate Particles.

By instillation of oil of Tartar these Liquors become again turbid and muddy
inclinable to an inky color. For an Alkali precipitates and destroys an Acid,
such as spirit of Vitriol, spirit of Nitre, etc. and brings into confusion
what an Acid had cleared, and does by destroying the Acid drive out its
Particles from the interstices and pores of the water, and sets them, with them
of the Gall as yet unprecipitated into confusion; so that the coagulum betwixt
the vitriolick parts of the Water and Galls resumes it self. Upon the
instillation of spirit of Nitre, both became clear again, and with spirit of
Hearts horn both again turbid and muddy, for the same reasons before alleged.

Whence I infer a similitude betwixt a Solution of Vitriol and this Spaw-water,
as to Precipitations and Reductions by the instillation of Alkalizate and Acid
Liquors or Salts.

For farther trial and proof that this Spaw is vitrioline, and that only, I
took two or three quarts of this Spring Water, and evaporated it in an earthen
vessel ad siccitatem, where it left behind a redish white powder* on some of it
I let fall a few drops of spirit of Nitre, and immediately a great ebullition
with froth and fumes did arise with a sensible effervescence. Upon the same
quantity of powder I let fall some spirit of vitriol, and the like effect did
ensue. I let stand a quart of this spring water in an open vessel, and another
quantity in a glass-bottle closely stoped; out of both in a short time I found
precipitated a redish sediment, which being dried with the aforesaid Acids did
make an Ebulli^^on.

I then forthwith made trial with the same Acid spirits and vitriol of Iron or
salt of Steel. Upon a little vitriol of Iron I instilled a few drops of spirit
of Nitre, and an ebullition with forth and fumes did arise, like as upon the
powder left after evaporation, and also upon the sediment of water with spirit
of Nitre. Upon vitriol of Iron I let fall a few drops of spirit of Vitriol, but
could not perceive any Luctation, either by ebullition, effervescence,
exhalation, crepitation, or elevation. But why spirit of vitriol should not
ferment with vitriol of Iron, and yet should ferment with the powder left after
evaporation of this water, when, as I said before, that the strength of this
water consists in a vitriol of Iron with a terra metallica or Colcothar
adjoined to and precipitated with it; the reason is plain. In the making of sal
Chalybis or vitriol of Iron with oil of vitriol and fileings of Steel, the oil
does incorporate with the Steel or Iron; and being a strong Acid, and indeed
the most Caustic part of Vitriol (and improperly called Oil) does ferment with
the Alkalizate parts of Iron; and from the combining of these two different
Salts a neutrum quid, viz. vitriolum Martis comes. Now the pores of Iron being
fully saturated with the Acid of Vitriol, upon a new instillation of more
spirit or oil no fermentation follows; seeing the iron has already as it were
imbibed as much of the Vitriol as it can, there will not follow any
fermentation. For as Water works not upon Water, so neither spirit of Vitriol
on spirit of Vitriol, the same thing works not upon it self: neither can the
oil or spirit work again on the Alkalizate parts of Mars, which are already
subdued by the Acid of vitriol, and utterly incapable of making a new conflict
with it; but will with spirit of Nitre being a subalkalizate Acid, because the
pores of sal Chalybis are open to it. But why then spirit of vitriol should
make an Ebullition with the powder left after evaporation, and upon the
sediment, is, because the metallic particles brought from the Marcasites of
Iron are not fully saturated with the Esurine Acids in the water, which preyed
upon the Marcasites, and brought with it fragments thereof; whose pores are
still so disposed, that Acids may be able to close, and by their violent motion
divide and as it were tear in pieces, until the contrary salts have embraced
each other, and are united into a Tertium Quid or indissolvable Texture.

For a farther comparison betwixt this Spring Water and a solution of Vitriol
of Iron I took a quantity of Milk, but by mixing with this Spring Water could
find no coagulation, either with hot, cold, or boiling Milk. Then I made a
solution of sal chalybis with fair water, and mixed it with cold milk, with
milk warm from the cow, and also boiled it with Milk; but neither of them
curdled, yea no more than fair Spring Water and milk.

But now it may be Queried, What is become of the Acid, viz. the Esurine
acidity? And how comes a Solution of vitriol of Iron not to curdle Milk, when
as oil of vitriol goes into its composition, which is an Acid; and like other
Acids as Vinegar, Aqua fortis, etc. will curdle Milk?

Answ. The Esurine salt of the Earth preying upon the Metallic parts of the
Marcasites of Iron, so also the oil or spirit of vitriol in making Sal Chalybis
on the Iron or Steel; and the vitriol on the oil of Tartar in making Tartarum
vitriolatum, viz. an Acid upon an Alkalizate body. When they are in a
proportionate quantity the conflict betwixt these contrary Salts is great, but
the Acid being in a proportionate quantity cannot tear in pieces and shiver the
Alkalizate into invisible Atoms, but fixes its points in the pores of the
Alkalizate Matter; yet has not power to shatter it all to pieces, and free it
self from Combinations: but the Parts of the Acid lie sheathed and loaded with
the Alkali. So they being closed together, do by their own weight (especially
after the Liquor buoying them up is weakened by Evaporation) fall down to the
bottom: and by their mutual conflict or ferment having broken off and dulled
the edges of each others Particles, and combined together, do become a Neutral
Salt.

Some Authors have asserted, That from a Tartarum vitriolatum put into a
Retort, by the force of fire may be drawn off a spirit of vitriol again: as if
the Salts clasping together had not as it were destroyed each others pristine
texture of parts, by breaking off and dulling the edges of the saline
Particles. Nevertheless Experience proves, That what is drawn over the Helm
from Tartarum vitriolatum, is not a spirit like the oil or spirit of vitriol at
the first. For the Taste and Operation of it plainly shows, that the
Alkalizate salt of Tartar has almost wholly taken off its Acidity; yea I think
I might positively affirm, That it is an impossibility from these Neutral
Salts, such as Tartarum vitriolatum, vitriolum Martis, etc. to restore an Acid
to its pristine luster and efficacy.

I said before, when the Acid and Alkalizate Bodies are mixed in a
proportionate quantity together: For the Acid in too great a quantity dissolves
and destroys all these Coagula that it made with the Alkali, when mixed in a
small quantity. Whilst these Contraries are proportionate, the Alkalizate
Particles maintained their part against the Acid, so that both lay fixed and
free from motion, but by addition of more Acid its strength is increased, so as
to scatter and dissolve the Coagulation. And this may be seen, as I intimated
before, by instillation of spirit of Vitriol upon this Spaw-water or a Solution
of sal Chalybis with Galls; wherein the vitrioline parts of the Water with the
Galls make coagula, but by addition of more spirit of vitriol or other Acid are
scattered, that the Liquor becomes again clear. The same reason is, when the
Alkali is too strong for the Acid; it destroys and expells the acid particles
floating in the Liquor, and makes them unable to bear up a conflict. So also
when Milk is curdled by an Acid, the Acid has entered the Cheesy part, and
lost its motion; but upon the pouring on of more Acid the Cheesy part will be
precipitated, but at last the Coagulation will dissolve away, and quite
disappear. Many Instances I might produce, which I shall pass by, seeing they
allow the same Rationale.

As in the making of Tartarum vitriolatum the Salts combine, and work
themselves into a Neutral Salt, so also in this Spring Water; where by an
Esurine acid Salt acuating the Water is made a Solution of the Minera of Iron,
whose Alkalizate parts combined and clasped with the Esurine acid Salt, are
become a Neutral. Upon the instillation of a contrary Salt, whether volatile or
fixed Alkali, the Salts presently make an assault upon each other, and by their
closing together and taking off their edges by the ferment become a third or
Neutral Salt, In the conflict or duel they thrust forth and partly leave the
Mineral body dissolved by the Esurine Acid: which precipitates to the bottom,
and carries down with it some of the Salts of the Menstruum. For more than a
Colcothar must be here separated, because of the ebullition following an
instillation of Acids thereon.

But least that it should be imagined, that there may follow a fermentation by
instillation of Acids, because of the Alkali added to make a Precipitation, but
not belonging to it as a Mineral Water; we must consider, that a precipitation
may be made (besides that by droping thereon or mixing contrary Salts) out of
mineral Water three ways: 1. by exposing to the air (which causes a
putrefactive ferment) the Mineral parts will subside; 2. by heat, as in
boiling, distilling, etc. the Ocre falls; 3. by motion ab extra, as by
carriage, etc. The Powder thus precipitated did with Acids make a great
ebullition, which could not be from any Salts not belonging to it as a Mineral.
Wherefore the Sediment thus precipitated is not a simple Colcothar, but with
the Colcotar do fall some of the Salts of the Menstruum: for by pouring on
fresh water, and dulcifying the Sediment, a Salt is extracted from the
Colcotar, that may by Evaporation, Chrystallization, etc. be brought to a dry
body, and exactly answers sal Chalybis as to its Operation, Experiments, and
Effects.

I distilled a considerable quantity of this Water in a Glass Retort and
Receiver closely luted to it. The first Water that came over the Helm I found
by taking off the Receiver to be insipid, which would not with Galls, Balaustia
flowers, Avens, Bistort roots, etc. like vitrioline waters strike a Purple.
Then I distilled off more insipid Water, but to the sides of the Retort when
cooled I found sticking a redish powder, like that I found by Evaporation; the
Residue of the Water in the Retort by Evaporation ad siccitatem yielded more.
Upon this Sediment dried I let fall a few drops of spirit of Nitre, of Vitriol,
oil of Sulphur per Campanam, and Aqua fortis; an ebullition with a great
effervescence did immediately follow. But upon instillation of oil of Tartar
per Deliquium, spirit of Hartshorn, or other Alkalizate Liquors, not the least
ebullition or efferverscence could be perceived. From which Experiments, as
also from the former, may follow these two collateral Conclusions.

First, That this Spaw like other Mineral Waters by the precipitation of its
Ocre or Sediment does lose its tinging Property with Galls, and also is
weakened in its Operation. And although some of the Salt yet remain dissolved
in the Water after the falling of the Sediment, its former vigor and efficacy
is decayed; for by so much the Water has let fall of its Ocre and Sediment,
(which as I proved before is not a simple metallic earth, but does carry down
with it some of the salts of the Menstruum) by so much the water is weakened,
and by the falling of more Sediment grows weaker and weaker in its Operation.

Secondly, from the ebullition and effervescence of Acids poured upon this
Powder left after Evaporation, or precipitated by Motion, Heat, or Air; but
upon instilling of oil of Tartar or other Alkalizate Salts no fermentation
follows; I conclude, that the Salt in this Powder is rather Lixivial than Acid:
although it be (as I have hinted before) a Neutral Salt from the combining of
the Esurine Acid in the Water and the Alkalizate part of Iron, yet like
Tartarum vitriolatum, or vitriolum Martis, it inclines much to an Alkali.

And whereas an Ebullition and Effervescence followed the instillation of Acids
on the precipitated Sediment, like as upon vitriol of Iron, or Tartar
vitriolated, etc. and that an effervescence and ebullition follows the pouring
of oil of Vitriol on filings of Mars in the making of sal chalybis, and the oil
of Vitriol upon the Tartar in making Tartarum vitriolatum; both which
Compositions like the sediment of this Spaw will strongly ferment with Acids; I
conclude it is highly probable, that this Spring, when first it becomes a
Mineral water, (which is whilst the Esurine Acid preyeth on the minera of Iron)
is hot: but by long running through a Colander of earth or gravel loses its
heat, and becomes almost a cold Spring. Almost I said, for by comparing the
water of this Spaw with other ordinary Spring Water, but especially with a
Rock-spring, a sensible warmth may be discerned. And that the Effervescence is
scarce over at the Springhead, may be gathered from the Sparkling of the Water
in a glass, like bottled Sider newly emptied: and, as I have it by good
information, does much resemble the German Spaw-water sealed up in bottles, and
brought to Leyden and several places in the Low Countries.

I took about a Pint of Ilmington Spaw-water fresh from the Springhead, into
which I let fall a few drops of Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, which made a white
Coagulation dispersed through the whole body; but so small, that it was scarce
discernable. I then made a Solution of sal chalybis with fair water, upon which
I droped some oil of Tartar, and found a Coagulation in it exactly like the
Spaw-water with oil of Tartar, The coagula in both by an addition of spirit of
Vitriol were disp^rsed, but by Alkali's were reduced etc.

Now it may be questioned, How come Alkali Salts, as oil of Tartar, etc. to
make these Coagulum's, when as spirit of Vitriol or other Acids cause no
Alteration?

Answ. There are two sorts of ordinary Menstruums for Bodies; Ordinary I say,
because I must except Paracclsus's Sal circulatum, and Helmont's Liquor
Alkahest, the grand Solvents of Bodies into their first Principles.

First, Menstruums impregnated with acid Spirits or Salts, whether they be
Natural Acids, such as the Juice of Crabs, the sour juice of Plants, the Acid
of Marcasites of Iron, Alum, etc. or Artificially made from natural Salts, as
spirit of Vitriol, sp. of Sulphur per campanam, etc.

Secondly, Menstruums endowed with Alkalizate Salts, either fixed Alkali's, as
salt of Tartar, Wormwood, etc. or volatile, as spirit of Urine, Hartshorn, or
of the horns and hoofs of Animals, Sage, etc.

Some add a Third sort of Menstruum, viz. a vinous Spirit, which is the common
Menstruum for making of Tinctures and Extracts, because it is apt to imbibe the
sulphurous Principle from Compounds. But for my part, I take a vinous Spirit
not as a distinct Menstruum from the two former. For spirit of Wine is nothing
but an oil highly advanced by its volatile Salt, with a small quantity of
Phlegm. The quantity of oil is manifest by its inflammability, for good
rectified spirit of Wine once kindled will almost totally consume. In
Distillation the volatile Salt implexed in the sulphurous parts striving to
get free, does tear and divide them, until they be rarefied into a Spirit: to
which is added a little phlegm, for the better separation of the Salts
fermenting and exalting the oil. Now chiefly for its volatile Salt, spirit of
Wine is the Menstruum in making the Tinctures and Extracts of Senna, Rhubarb,
Aloes, Mirrh, Saffron, Hellebore, and of all dry Roots, Seeds, Flowers, Woods,
and Barks. For by addition of volatile Salts the Extracts are stronger, than
when made with spirit of Wine only.

Having this premised, I may return to the Question thus; That upon the mixture
of Acid and Alkalizate Salts they ferment and close together in a Neutral Salt,
(as I have already intimated) and forsake or rather thrust forth the Metalline
Body dissolved and buoyed up in the Menstruum, which with some of the Salts of
the Liquor falls down to the bottom. The Salts combined together and floating
up and down in the Menstruum, with some of the Mineral body as yet
unprecipitated do represent these Coagula: even as oil of Tartar poured upon a
solution of Vitriol made with fair Water, causes a separation of the Metalline
and Colcotarine Parts subsiding to the bottom, and Coagulums of the contrary
Salts for a time buoyed up in the Menstruum. So oil of Tartar with Ilmington
Water makes a white Coagulum, because it combineth with the Esurine Acid of
the Water. But the Curdling is very small, because of the small quantity of
Acid that does free, and as it were unsheath it self from the minera of Iron;
or is yet lodged in the pores of the Water, and is not as yet fixed and joined
to the Alkalizate part of Iron,

To try what figure the Salt bore that was contained in this Water, I took
about two or three Gallons of the Water, and evaporated it ad siccitatem. At
the bottom and sides of the vessel I found a redish white Powder, which I
dulcified with warm Water: And there was left behind an insipid Earth like red
Ocre or Colcotar. The Water I filtred, evaporated, and then set to
chrystallize, which yielded a Salt of an irregular figure: it was of a palish
color, but as to its operation answered vitriol of Iron.

It being asserted by some Authors (but the Truth thereof I much question) That
many Mineral Waters will loose in Weight by carriage, by loss of Spirits as
They say; or rather (if at all) I suppose by an Aporrhea Mineralis: I filled a
glass bottle with this Spaw-Water, and stoped it up close at the Springhead,
where I weighed it with an exact pair of Scales. After four or five Miles
carriage I tried and found it continue the same weight. After it had stood a
day or two, by examination I found the weight not at all diminished: so that by
this way, nor by Distillation could I find any volatile spirits, wherein the
virtue of this Water consists.

The Bottle thus stoped I kept for a fortnight, and then could perceive the
Sediment just begin to fall to the bottom* But in another Bottle carried with
This, and left open to the air, I found great part of the Sediment fallen in
twelve hours. Which confirms my former Assertion, viz. That not only Heat,
Motion by carriage, etc. but the Air also precipitates its Sediment.

Upon Trial I found, that the Water out of which the Ocre was fallen would not
tinge with Galls; but the Water kept close stoped for a fortnight did with
Galls readily strike a Purple, and so would more or less, until the Terra
Metallica was all fallen.

To sum up then that which has been laid down, I may say of this Spring, as
Helmont said of the German Spaws, Pawhont and Save^ir. Distillavi aliquando
serio Savenirium and Pauhonteum, and sane non tantum mineralium catalogum, imo
nil quicquam in iis offendi praeter Aquam fontanam and vitriolum ferri. Helm.
paradox. Quar. de aq. Spad. So in this Spring the Acid Salt, with which the
Water is impregnated, does in its passage through the subterrestrial channels
meet with a Minera of Iron, which it partly dissolves, and brings along by
its Current to the Springhead. And by a Fermentation betwixt the Esurine Acid
and the Metalline Parts of the Minera is made a vitriolum Martis, which gives
the virtue to this Spring.

PART III. SEC. 1.
HAving made an Hydrological Essay as to the Essential part of this Spaw-water,
I think it not amiss to speak something as to its Virtue, seeing Multitudes
resort to the Fountain, and especially the Poorer sort guided by a Hearsay,
who drink it as a Catholicon or Sovereign medicine for all Distempers, not
regarding the original of its Source, or what Mineral Ingredients are contained
therein.

We are told by the Learned Dr. Willis, That by the means of Ferments we are
born, bred up. decay and die; that Diseases thence take their Original, and the
Restoration of Health is owing thereto. Nec tantum ration^ Fermentorum nascimur
and nutrimur, sed and morimur: quilibet morbus virtute fermenti cujusdam suas
excitat tragoedias. And a little after, Quin and morborum curationes
fermentationis open molimur. Will. de ferm. cap. 5. I shall therefore only speak
somewhat of the Natural ferments of our Bodies, and their Depravations, in
order to my present business; but for a large account of them shall refer the
Candid Reader to Willis, Helmont, Sylvius, and other eminent Authors that have
fully handled that subject, brevity here being only intended,

As for the Notion of Fermentation take this Definition. Fermentation is an
intestine motion of the Parts or Principles of a Body, with an Inclination to
its Perfection or to its Change. By Change may be understood its Destruction,
or Dissolution of its Compages, or mutatio in quid aliud.

Upon consideration that an entire Function or Office of every Part in the Body
is the Effect or Product of Health, and that a Disease is an Ill Constitution
causing an impediment to the Parts in their Function or Office, some according
to the diversity of Functions have made a division of Distempers.

The Functions do either respect the Conservation of the Individual, or the
Propagation of the Species. These that respect the Conservation of the
Individual, are either Natural, such as Concoction of Aliments, Sanguisication,
Secretion of Excrements, Production of Vital Spirits, etc. or else Animal,
which do respect the Sensitive part of the Creature, as in its External or
Internal Senses.

These that respect the Propagation of the Species are peculiar to the Male or
Female Sex, and accordingly Authors have grounded their Distinctions.

I shall not proceed in this method, bnt rather take a Summulary of Distempers
(sufficient for my present purpose) from the Ferments, or rather from the
Depravations of them in our body, knowing that a large Explanation would raise
a Tractate to a large Volume.

Whereas the ingenious Franciscus De le boe Sylvius has laid down the
Dyscrasia of the Lympha, and of the Bilis for the two sole Causes of Fevers
either Intermittent or Continual, (under Lympha he comprehends Succus
Pancreaticus and Saliva) and ascribes Chylification chiefly to the Salt in
Spittle, which by Mastication is mixed with the Aliment or is already conveyed
into the stomach, but allows of no stomachical Ferment, I cannot assent to be
his Proselyte. For considering the structure of the stomach, how that its
interior or nervous tunicle has a Crusta villosae or hairy scurf with a
multitude of Glandules to percolate and imbibe the Liquors derived from the
Arteries and Nerves; we may well suppose an acid Ferment either implanted in,
or derived to the stomach from the same vessels that the Saliva is. Besides
this, Glisson, Willis, Diemerbroeck, yea authors both ancient and modern afford
us reasons all-sufficient to believe a stomachical Ferment.

But supposing an acid Ferment in the stomach, or else in the Spittle and so
the stomach to be only as a convenient Workhouse; it will be all one in a
manner, as to the Original and Cures of Diseases that arise from the
Depravation of the primary Ferment.

It will be too tedious and beyond my intention to describe the Modes of
Fermentations in humane bodies, I shall therefore content my self to enquire,
1. What are the Fermental Digestions of our bodies, and the Depravations of
them; 2. The Distempers thence arising; 3. Whether this Ilmington Spaw will
contribute to the Restoration or Cure of the disordered Digestions.

The Aliment in its way to Nutrition does undergo several alterations by the
Ferments of our bodies, it is several times percolated and as it were strained
and purged from its faeces, after the Changes it has received, before the
Animal spirits, the Instrument of Sensation, and the chief vehicle of the Soul,
are elaborated therefrom.

There are three Principal Digestions, viz. Chylification, Sanguification, and
Production of Animal spirits. Besides, there are others appropriated to
particular parts, such as that of the Spleen, Seminal vessels and Prolifick
parts, the fermental Digestions of every particular Part, by which it turns
the Nutritive juice into its own likeness, as the saline and tartareous part of
the Aliment into Bones, the sulphurous and oily into Fat, the more temperate
and balsamic parts (the saline and sulphurous being equally mixed) into
Flesh, etc. To which according to some may be added the Ferment of the Reins
for secretion of the Serum; a Ferment of the Glandulae Renales; and also in the
Liver for a secretion of the Bilis, and serous Liquor through the Lympheducts.

The Ferment of the Renal Glandules is only supposed and conjectural; That of
the Liver for separation of the Choler, and that of the Kidneys for separating
the serous humor may with good reason be believed to be conjectural and
fictious. For when the blood is rightly fermented and in its lax Compages, the
Liver is sufficient without any innate ferment to transcolate the Choler
through its Glandulous Substance, as Malpighius de Hep. has Observed. So also
are the Kidneys by the Observations of Bellinus de Ren: without any specific
ferment; yea any more then is peculiar to the blood in its Natural Crasis.

Chylification I conceive to be chiefly from the Ferment of the Stomach,
although other Things concur thereto. How Chylification is performed
Diemerbroeck Anat. Corp. Hum. Lib. 1. Cap. 6. has excellently well described.
Which in short is thus.

The Meat whilst masticated does inbibe the Saliva or Spittle, which not only
softens but impregnates the Meat with a Fermentative Quality (that is chiefly
by the Salt therein contained) Unto which concureth the Drinks often endowed
with acrimonious fermentative Particles. The Stomach receives and by
contraction of its Fibers closely embraces the meat thus prepared, and
communicates the fermentative juices from the Coat of the Stomach; to which do
concur the Relics left after former Digestions, which by staying in the
Stomach like an old Leaven are brought to an Acidity. The Acid Particles
excited by the Heat of the Stomach and adjacent parts do enter the Pores of the
Aliment, and ferment with its Saline and Spirituous Parts, until it be
dissolved and eliquated into Milky Cream or Chyle: which by Contraction of the
Stomachical fibers is sent through the Pylorus into the Guts, where it
receives another Ferment by the mixture of the Bilis and Succus Pancreaticus;
by which the thinner Parts are separated from the thicker and received or
rather squeezed by the Peristaltick Motion into the Orifices of the Lacteal
Vessels, but the thicker and gross ejected by Stool. This Precipitation and
Separation Sylvius compares to a Solution of Vitriol in fair Water, which by
the mixture of Salt of Tartar, presently leteth its Sulphurous and dreggy
Parts subside.

I shall not then like some take the perfecting of Chylification in the
Intestines to be a second Digestion distinct from the former; but rather a
Perfection and Depuration of the concocted Aliment or Chyle. Neither shall I
make that little alteration or rather preparation to Sanguification, which the
Chyle by mixture of the Lympha receives from the Mesenterical Glandules and
Ductus Thoracicus before its ingress into the jugular Veins to be a third
Digestion, and distinct from Chylification and Sanguification, but as a
Preparative to the Latter with a convenient Vehicle.

The acrimonious Particles of the Saliva swallowed, and the Acid Stomachical
Ferment, and the Relics of Aliment of former Digestions sticking to the Coats
of the Stomach and brought to Acidity, finding no Aliment to prey upon, do
molest and irritate the Stomach; which molestation being impressed upon the
Nerves of the Sixth, or according to Dr. Willis the Eighth Pair; and by these
communicated to the Brain, does excite a desire of Eating or Hungering after
Meat, to imbibe the ferment gnawing on the Stomach.

As for the Color of the Chyle; or why Mutton, Beef, Bread, Herbs, etc. eaten
together should be turned into a white Creamy Substance. Or why the Aliment
should not retain its pristine Color, I conceive to be as thus. The Saline and
Sulphurous Particles with which our usual Aliment does abound, being well
dissolved and mixed together, do by the Acid Ferment acquire a white Color.
Even as in making of Lac Sulphuris, the Flos Sulphuris and Salt of Tartar by
boiling together turn the Water to a dark Red, but by instillation of Vinegar
turns to a white. So every Liquid impregnated with a Sulphur and an
Alkalizate Salt, but more especially when the Salt is volatile; or with a Salt
well implexed in, and dissolved with the Sulphur, by addition of an acid Liquor
becomes white, as may be seen in the making of Resinous Extracts of
Vegetables, or by mixing spirit of Benjamin, spirit of Hartshorn, of Soot, or
such like spirits abounding with volatile Salt, with an acid Liquor or fair
Water.

The Chyle having passed the Stomach into the Intestines, the purer part is
received into the Lacteal vessels, (and perhaps some of the more Spirituous
parts into the Mesenterical veins, by reason of the sudden refection after
eating and drinking by those that are through labor and travel wearied) which
convey it to the Mesenterical or Asellius his Pancreas; and from thence is
conveyed by the Ductus Thoracicus into the Subclavian vein, where by the way it
is mixed with the Lympha brought by the Lympheducts, which is not as an useless
Liquor, but serves for a vehicle to the Chyle, and by its saline Particles
does prepare it for Sanguification.

The Chyle having once entered the subclavian vein is mixed with the recurrent
venal blood, and by the vena cava is conveyed to the Heart, where is chiefly
made the second Digestion or Sanguification. But first entering the right
ventricle of the Heart, from thence it passes through the Arteria Pulmonaris
called also vena Arteriosa into the Lungs. From whence it is reduced to the
left ventricle of the Heart by the vena Pulmonaris or Arteria venosa, in the
Diastole or laxation of the Heart it enters the left Ventricle, but by its
Contraction or Systole is sent forth into the Aorta, and by It is carried to
the whole body. But the residue after Nutrition is reduced by the veins to the
right ventricle of the Heart, from whence again it begineth its Circulation.
This is the Natural course in adult persons, but in the foetus or Embryo it is
something different.

An Embryo having not attained to Respiration, nor to a perfection of its
Lungs, the Blood cannot Circulate as in adult Animals. Wherefore Nature has
provided two vessels in a foetus that afterward grow obsolete and useless, viz.
the foramen ovale and canalis Arteriosus. The Foramen Ovale is placed under the
right Auricle of the Heart, and uniteth the vena cava to the vena Pulmonaria.
The Use of it is, to carry the Blood that does not enter the Right ventricle
into the vena Pulmonaria, that it may enter the left ventricle of the Heart.
The Canalis Arteriosus uniteth Arteria Pulmonaris to the great Aorta: whose Use
is, to convey the blood that has passed through the Right ventricle, and is
driven by the Systole into the great Artery, so that it slideth by the left
ventricle. By which we may observe, That the blood in its Circulation always
enters the Heart, but in an Embryo passes through only one ventricle.

I said before that Sanguification is chiefly performed in the Heart: for it
may with good reason be questioned, Whether the Effervescence of the blood (the
Accension, or flamma vitalis, as Dr. Willis would have it) be from the Heart,
or rather from the Fermentation of its contrary Principles, and according to
others Sanguis sanguificat.

Dr. Lower cap. 2. de cord. absolutely denies any Ferment to be placed in the
Heart. He tells us, The Heart owes its Heat to the Blood, and not the Blood
to the Heart; yea that the Blood by its heat does actuate and enliven our
bodies, and that Nature has not bestowed more heat upon the heart than upon
other Muscles: but it has a more brisk and lively heat than other parts of the
body, because it is in a continual motion, and so much surrounded with adjacent
parts. Neither does its Action differ from the Action of other Muscles. And
cap. 5. he tells us, The Chyle is turned into blood by the vital spirit and
other of its active Principles, which from the first Mixture with Chyle do work
upon it until it be refined, until the saline sulphurous and spirituous
Particles be set at liberty from the feculent, and associated to them of the
Blood.

Dr. Harvey that exquisite Searcher into the Generation of Animals speaking of
the Order of Generation of the Parts of the Body, says Ab initio Punctum
rubrum saliens, vesicula pulsans fibraeque inde deductae sanguinem in se
complectentes etc. Exercit. 50. That a red beating Spot or Bladder with Fibers
thence deduced containing Blood do first of all appear. And by exact
observation does conclude, In the generation of Animals blood is the first
thing that is made. And as Pulsation does begin in it, and from it; so at the
last moment of life does it end in the Blood. Quantum ex accurata inspectione
discernere licuit, ^it Sanguis, antequam punctum saliens efformatur; idemque
calore vitali praeditus est, priusquam per pulsum cietur: atque ut in illo and
ab illo Pulsatio incipit, ita tandem in ultimo mortis articulo, in eodem
de^^nit. Which I suppose gave occasion to Dr. Glisson in his Anat. Hep. Cap.
35. to assert, That the blood was generated and moved by the heart, but the
heart and blood were originally by the Vivifick spirit or juice, which
remains in the blood after its first production, and is the cause of its
future generation: seeing that the Womb by its heat does excite the Vivifick
Spirit of the Seed, and put it in action, which frames the Seminal Matter into
the structure of an Animal. So that the Quickening Spirit making the first
blood and heart of an Embryo, he supposes it still to perform the same office;
according to that Axiom, Idem qua idem, semper facit idem.

Against this Opinion Diemerbroeck Anat. Lib. 2. Cap. 11 does oppose several
Arguments, and endeavors a Confutation thereof, and concludes from his
Reasons, That the Blood is generated after, and by the Heart, and not by the
Vivisick spirit; which (says he) inhering in all parts of the body, quickens
and disposes them to their proper functions. So that he concludes of a
Ferment in the Heart.

The Learned Dr. Willis tells us, Natura posuit in cord fermentum, eujus
instinctu seu occursu sanguis impetuose effervescit, ac velut in flammam
accensus, de ferment. cap. 5. And in his Exercitation de Accens. sang Vitalem
sive flammeam animae partem in cord and pulmonibus sedem praecipuam and quasi
imperialem habere putemus. So that he avoweth, the Ferment of the Heart to be
the main Cause and Seat of the Flamma vitalis, or the Soul's vital flame. But
whether it be in rerum natura, may be questioned.

Variety of Opinions there are about the Motion of the Heart, the immediate
instruments of its Motion are agreed upon to be the Fibers; but then what sets
these Fibers in motion, is the (...) the main Query or thing sought after.

Some like Dr. Lower suppose the motion of the heart to depend upon the influx
of Animal Spirits into the Nerves and Fibers, which make a Contraction as in
other Muscles. Others suppose it to depend on the Dilatation of the Blood in
the Ventricles of the Heart. Others like Franciscus de Le Boe Sylvius think to
go a middle way, and make it depend partly on the Influx of Animal Spirits, and
partly on the Dilatation of the Blood. Others to depend on a Materia Subtilis,
that subtle Matter supposed to be in continual motion, and to move all Bodies
more or less, according as it has more free or difficult passage through the
Pores of them. Others suppose the heart not to move the blood, neither the
heart to be moved by the Animal Spirits, nor by a subtle Matter, but by the
Vivifick Spirit residing in the blood, and is the cause of its Generation. But
Maurocordatus not approving the above-recited Opinions supposes the motion of
the heart to depend on the respiration of the Lungs, and the respiration of the
Lungs to depend on the motion of the heart; as if the Heart and Lungs did put
their help in hand to each others Motion.

To run through each Opinion apart, and to recite the Reasons laid down for
confirmation thereof, would be too tedious and beyond my proposed Subject. I
shall therefore lay down some Experimental Observations as Mathematical Data,
and see what Collateral Conclusions about Sanguification and Motion of the
Heart may be thence deduced.

1. Observe. I took out the Hearts of two young Puppies about a Fortnight old,
and cut off their Nerves to prevent all influx of Animal Spirits, and separated
the Coherent Parts. I cut open the Ventricles of one of the Hearts, and let out
all the blood therein contained. The Hearts I exposed to the open Air upon a
cold Trencher, which did continue beating with a regular Systole and Diastole
as long as warmth continued. When their Motion had almost ceased I breathed
upon them, and perceived their motion recruted by the warmth of the breath.
When their motion again began to abate, by pouring on warm Water I renewed the
same. Thus they continued until the Natural Heat was totally expired; which was
near upon Three Quarters of an Hour after the first exposing out of the Body to
the Air. The like Effect I found upon the Hearts of Frogs, Tortoises and
several young Animals. Yea I cut out the Heart of a young Puppy and of a Frog,
and divided them into several pieces, I observed a Motion in a Systole and
Diastole for some Minutes to continue in each part thus separated; and that the
pricking them with a Needle did much excite decaying Motion.

2. Observe. A Girl about Fifteen years of age, by a Penknife had an Artery cut
asunder in the Wrist of her hand. With convenient Applications by a Chyrurgion
the Blood was stoped, but in his absence the Girl had plucked off the Eschar;
so that presently followed a great effusion of blood from the Artery. At the
return of the Chyrurgion, with whom I was also called; I perceived that she had
lost almost the whole mass of Blood of her body. In the time of her bleeding
(which was the greatest part of a Day) her Friends about her had given her Sack
and Caudle to keep up her decaying strength. At our coming we found, That which
the Artery sent forth did more resemble the Caudle then Blood (and so it had
been for some hours by the relation of her Attendants) for it was so pale and
watery, that it would notting a Handcherchief red. Her Pulse notwithstanding
had small remission. I administered to her Cordials with Spirits to buoy up
declining Nature; but before the Chyrurgion stoped the Blood, she died: which
was about One Quarter of an Hour after our arriving thither.

To this I may adjoyn a like observation related by Dr. Lower, de Cord. motu,
cap. 2. the Sum is thus. A Youth about sixteen years old bled for two days
without intermission or ceasing. [The occasion of it is not mentioned.] His
attendants and friends gave him broth to refresh and recruit his Vitals, which
he eagerly supped down. His flux of blood now and then thereby increased, but
at length the whole Mass was almost evacuated. That which run out was pale and
watery, neither of the Color nor Nature of blood, but was more like the Broth
administered, which he drank much of. The flux so continued for a day or two,
but the Heart in the mean time retained its Pulsation. At last the flux was
stoped, the Party recovered his health, and became a stout strong fellow. This
he relates from a Physician of Credit.

3. Observe. Dr. Lower in the forecited Chapter gives us an Experiment of his
own. He drew out of the jugular vein of a Dog about half of his blood,
injecting the like quantity of Ale and Wine mixed into his Crural vein. This he
continued by turns until a paler tincture instead of the blood issued out of
the vein, like water wherein flesh has been washed, or like Claret diluted
with much water.

4. Observe. I shall in the next place lay down the Observation of Dr. Harvey,
de genesis Anim. Exerc. 16. The Bulla or Punctum saliens (which says he makes
the Heart) is made before the Brain, that elaborateth the Animal Spirits. The
same also does Langly Obs. genesis Anim. affirm, and common Experience teaches
it. So that although it be questioned, Whether or no the Blood be formed before
the Heart, yet it is certain that the Bulla saliens is formed before the Brain.

From which Experimental Observations I shall gather these Conclusions.

First, the motion of the Heart in fieri cannot proceed from an influx of
Animal spirits. (...) panctum saliens; which is the Heart in (...) its motion
before either Brain or (...) are framed to elaborate and convey (...) spirits
to it, according to the (...) Observation.

(...), neither can the Pulse be from the (...) or Ebullition of blood in the
(...) of the Heart, for according to the second and third Observations, That
which came from the Arteries was far enough from Accension, being pale and
dilute like broth, and (as Dr. Lower intimates) was far from the color and
nature of Blood. From the two Observations before cited from Dr. Lower, Dr.
Gibson, in the Anat. Hum. Bod. Epitom. l. 2. c. 5. concludes a full
confutation of that Opinion, viz. Pulsation is from Ebullition and Accension of
Blood in the ventricles of the Heart. Which may be farther denied by the first
Observation, for the blood was all poured out of the ventricles of the Puppie's
heart, so that there was none left to make either Ebullition or Accension.

Thirdly, Neither could the Pulse be from a continued influx of Animal spirits
from the Brain. For according to the first Observation, All influx of Spirits
was stoped; because the Puppie's and Frog's Hearts were cut off from their
Nerves, by which the spirits do flow, if any at all.

Fourthly, Neither can it be from the Respiration of the Lungs; for by the
first Observation, the Hearts of them Animals cut off from the Lungs, much more
the pieces, did yet continue Beating* And in an Embryo there is Pulsation of
the Bulla saliens before the Lungs are formed, and long before they have any
Respiration.

Fifthly, Neither from the impression of Subtle Matter, for that concludes
for a general, but not a particular motion; nor why the Heart should keep a
Regular Systole and Diastole. Because the subtle Matter being in continual
motion, would press against all the fibers at all times; so that the Heart
would remain either in a Systole, or a Diastole. Besides, as Diemerbroeck
argues, This subtle Matter would restore the motion of the heart whist warm,
and so always recover life in creatures that are strangled.

Sixthly, Neither can it be from the vivifick spirit in the blood; for by the
first Observation, The Pulse continued after the blood was poured out of the
ventricles, and a stop put to all influx of fresh blood. And by Observe. 2. and
3. its proved, That when the whole mass of blood was almost emptied, and the
rest watery and dilute, the heart retained its Pulse; yet the vivifick spirit
of the blood must have been for the greatest part evacuated with the blood.

I shall now proceed to lay down, what I guess to be the genuine cause of
Sanguification and Motion of the Heart, although this may be accounted one of
Nature's Secrets, and too abstruse for Us peremptorily to determine. And first
for Sanguification.

In the beginning of Conception, the Spirituous part of the Seed by heat is
excited and collected into the Punctum or Bulla saliens from this Spirit as
from a Fermentative substance by the vis Plastica or Archeus are all the Parts
of the body deduced. For according to Dr. Harvey's Observation, the Bulla
saliens is first formed, from which are derived Sanguincous fibers, and one
part after another framed, until the whole Compages of the Body is perfected.
Whether according to the sentiments of Dr. Harvey, the blood be first made, and
the Heart afterward for the motion of the Blood, or, according to
Diemerbroeck, the Heart be made before the first Blood, it is not very
material. For on both sides it is concluded, That the vivifick spirit of the
Semen is the first Former either of Blood or Heart. This Spirit having got some
Blood for his Vehicle, and being by Heat stirred up and dilated, does enlarge
its Domicile the Punctum saliens; for being too close pent up does endeavor
for an eruption by particular assaults, which is the first cause of Pulsation.
As the Ferment is increased by the addition of new Matter from the
Colliquamentum Seminis at first, and other Matter afterward; so the vivifick
Spirit does farther dilate it self in the blood, uutil it has formed the Veins
and Arteries for its Channels, and as a Workman, according to the Divine
Impress stamped at first by God Almighty on blind Matter, or by the Direction
of the Archeus, (as Helmont calls it, but as for the Name of that Directive
Power call it as you please) has made every part of the whole Body. This
vivifick acrimonious Spirit does not only form out of convenient Matter, but
also inhere in the Parts formed, more or less, and gives to every Part a
peculiar Property or Ferment, as That of the Stomach for Chylification, That of
the Heart for Sanguification, etc.

But suppose that the first blood should be formed before the Punctum Saliens,
and the Heart contribute nothing thereto. Yet it must be granted that Things
proceed otherways in Adult Animals, then they do at the first formation. As for
Instance; There is Motion before the Brain or Nerves are formed, yet none now
deny that Office to the Brain of elaborating the Animal Spirits that serve for
Motion. The Embryo is nourished and increased before the Stomach and other
parts serving for Concoction are made; yet after they are made in a perfect
Foetus and in adult Persons, none except through a Spirit of Contradiction will
deny them to serve for Concoction; so that the Heart by his Acrimonious Spirit
implanted therein may serve for Sanguification, which I imagine to be as thus.

So soon as the Chyle is mixed with the Blood, the Vital Spirit and other
active Principles do work upon the Chyle to assimilate it to its own nature. By
the Stomachical Ferment the Salt, Sulphur, and Spirit of the Chyle are almost
set at liberty from the grosser parts of the Aliment; so that the Active
Principles of the Blood soon add to their Exaltation. When the Chyle with the
Venal blood is entered the right ventricle of the Heart, the Heart adds a new
Ferment thereto, and sends it into the Lungs, where it receives a farther
Alteration from the Nitrous Particles of the Air admited by Inspiration, and
intimately there mixed with its Compages, where the blood also receives from
the Air its florid Color: As may be seen by several Experiments of Dr Lower's,
and also by exposeing Venal blood to the open Air, for the superficial part
next the air will be of a florid Red, but the under part of a Blackish color.
Let the blackish part be turned to the air, and its superficies will be of a
light red* in the left ventricle of the heart it receives a more perfect
mixture, and enters the Aorta under the form of Blood, and is of a Scarlet
color, until the air is transpired through the pores of the skin. But Chyle is
not perfectly and exactly assimilated to the blood, until it has run through
many Circulations.

The most subtle and acrimonious part of the vivifick spirit planted in the
heart from its original gives its Ferment, by which the humors receive an
Effervescence and Dilatation (if capable thereof) and more or less as they are
inclinable thereto. Even as Gunpowder that of it self has no heat, but by fire
does soon dilate and has a great effervescence: So does the blood by the
ferment of the heart, and by the dilatation of the blood the sides of the
ventricles of the heart are molested, and the fibers of the heart are irritated
and provoked to expel the oppressing blood. After the expulsion the Heart
remains in its Diastole, until by a supply of fresh blood there is a new
Dilatation and then a Systole. But to a Systole, besides the vivifick Spirit
inherent in the Heart, the Animal spirits as in other Muscular motion are
called in to help, supposing a free passage; for else what means so many
Nerves derived to the Heart.

The Hearts of Puppies, Frogs, etc. cut from their bodies, and the ventricles
emptied from blood, will keep (as long as natural warmth) their Pulsation.
Because the vivifick acrimonious spirit placed in the Heart, by heat is set on
work to ferment and dilate the blood contained in the Pores and Interstices of
the fleshy substance of the Heart, and by irritation of the fibers is made a
Systole and then a Diastole until the blood contained in the Pores do suffer a
new Dilatation; to which both vital and Animal spirits as yet unspent, that
will make a tremulous motion for some time after the death of an Animal, do
concur.

The Third principal Fermental Digestion is That of the Brain, which is well
appointed with blood vessels, that serve as Channels to convey Matter to every
part of the Cerebrum and Cerebellum. Nature has so provided for a supply of
Matter, That as Dr. Willis has observed, Non modo arterias cum venis, verum
quod rarius and fere singular est, arterias cum arteriis; nempe arterias
Carotides unius lateris pluribus in locis uniuntur cum carotidibus alterius;
insuper vertebrales utriusque lateris inter sese and in posteriores carotidum
ramos prius unitos inosculantur. Anat. Cereb. c. 7 From the blood thus conveyed
by the Carotidal and Vertebral arteries, the purer and more subtle Spirituous
part is carried into the Brain by the winding Meanders of the Arteries, whilst
the Grosser part is absorbed and carried back by the Veins, and the Serum
imbibed by the Glandules and Lympheducts, in order to be restored to a fresh
Circulation. The manner how the Animal spirits are produced Dr. Willis de ferm.
c. 5. shows by a Similitude. As in making highly rectified spirit of Wine
with a glass Alembick, a Sponge being put into its Pipe, only the most subtle
part can pass; so from the hot rari^ied blood, only the most Subtle spirit (as
it were distilled) can pass through the Cortical substance of the Brain. This
Liquor thus distilled does obtain a higher degree of perfection, because the
Brain abounding with a volatile Salt does much exalt these distilled Spirits;
so that they are as it were endowed with a Ferment, and by their volatile Salt
penetrate like Spirit of Hearts horn, more than Spirit of Wine.

Cartesius seems to refer it to the Glandula Pinealis separating the Spirits
from the Plexus Choroides. But his Opinion being so wide from Truth, as may be
soon made appear by a ^^rutiny into the Nature of Glandules, I shall p^ss it by.

Riolanus would ascribe it to the ventricles (...) the Brain; but for a full
confutation there^^^ I shall refer the Reader to Dr. Wepfer, de (...), only
adding this Observation of my (...).

(...) was called to a Youth about eight years (...), whom I found much
complaining of a (...) and Dullness of his Head, with a (...) inclination to
sleep. His head I observ^^^ (...) exceed in bigness all the other parts in a
(...) proportion. The Distemper I found (...) a Hydrocephalus, and from the
Symp^^^ might easily perceive it a forerunner of (...) that did soon ensue. I
opened his (...), and before sufficient Testimony poured (...) the ventricles
of the brain near a full (...) and half of clear Lympha like Rock (...) which
would certainly have hindered any (...) of Animal spirits there, and all (...)
into the Nerves from thence, (...) seeing his Senses remained clear, and (...)
for a long time gradually increased. (...) then it is that the Animal (...)
elaborated in the Cortical or Ash-(...) part of the brain, by the saline
ferment (...) ^^rcolation through the pores of the (...)* So that the Animal
spirits only by (...) high exaltation and purification differ (...) Vital
spirits, which latter are the (...) of the former.

Spirits thus elaborated are by others succeeding them impelled into the
medullous part of the brain or Corpus callosum, where they have a large place
to exercise the Phansy; in the Plicae of the Brain to lay up Ideas for the
Memory; and in the Corpora striata to exercise the Sensus communis; and
according as they are directed along the Nerves to perform Motion, or as they
receive Impressions undulating backward to perform the External Senses.

Probable also is the Opinion of Willis and Diemerbroeck, That there is a
Succus Nervosus or Nervous juice, serving as a spirituous ferment to separate
the Nutritive parts from the Blood. As the Blood supplieth Matter, so the
Nervous Juice is as an Active Form in Nutrition. And good Reason may be given
for this Opinion; for in a Palsy, wherein the Nerves are obstructed, although
the Parts are imbued with a constant supply of warm blood, yet the Parts will
fade away for want of Nourishment assimilated to them, as a supply to that
which was lost; because the succus nervousus is wanting, which precipitateth
the Nutritive Matter from the rest of the blood.

Next to the three principal Ferments comes in That of the Spleen. As for the
opinion of Dr. Glisson, lib. de Hep. cap* 45. that the Spleen does prepare an
Alimentary juice that is imbibed by the Nerves, and by them carried up to the
Brain, and back again through the N^rves to the parts of the whole body, to me
it seems irrational; that the same juice should be carried to and fro through
the same vessels, and that an Acid juice (for such is that of the Spleen)
should be supposed to be a vehicle for the Animal Spirits that are a volatile
Alkali. The proper Use then I imagine as thus.

The Spleen by its Ferment placed therein ab origin, does with the Nervous
juice deposited in the Glandules by the extremities of Nerves terminating in
them, cause an Acidity in the blood brought by the Arteries. By which Acidity
the Bile consisting much of retorrid ^ixivial Salt, is hastened toward a
separation, even as by mixture with other Alkalis and Acids may be seen: so
that the blood reduced from the Spleen by the Ramus splenicus does in the Liver
soon make a Secretion of its Choler.

An Acid Ferment may well be supposed in the Spleen from its natural structure;
which is chiefly made up of membranous Cells like the holes of a Honeycomb,
about which the ends of the blood vessels are twisted like the Tendrils of a
Vine. Now here the Glandules, as in other parts of the body, may be well
supposed to contain an Acid juice, and may the sooner impress its ferment on
the blood by its little stay in the cells, before it is carried away with the
subsequent streams. For a large account hereof I shall refer the Reader to
Malpighius de Liene.

The Seminal parts both in male and female seem to be highly endowed with a
Ferment; insomuch that the Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, are as it were exalted
into a noble Elixir, from which the Embryo takes its rise; I mean the semen in
males and the ova in females, for both by the ferments of the Genital parts are
elaborated out of blood. The manner how is too large for me here to describe,
and may be seen in ample manner in Harvey and de Graef.

It is beyond my intention to take upon me here to dispute, whether or not Milk
is made by a bare transcolation through the Mammillary Glandules, or by an
innate Ferment of the Dugs; or how the Bile is separated in the Liver, or
whether all the Glandules of our bodies are endowed with a Specific ferment.
But this we may lay down as a Truth, viz. That the Archeus in the first
formation has bestowed on every Part a peculiar configuration of Pores, and a
fermental Digestion to receive its proper Aliment, and convert it into a
similar substance to repair that which was lost, and has assigned a peculiar
Office to every particular part.

PART III. SEC. 2.
AS from the fermental Digestions in their full vigor and luster the Organs
have that which is requisite to their functions, and consequently Health is
entire; so from their diminution and depravation Distempers take their
Original. The Concoction of the Stomach and other fermental Digestions of the
body may suffer by the inordinate Use of the Sex Non-naturalia; but I shall
take a short survey of Diseases as they are immediately derived from the
disordered Ferments.

The Stomachical Ferment may be vitiated, so as to leave a twofold Error on
the Aliment, viz. Crudity and Over-acidity, which concur to laying the
foundation of many Distempers. In this sense I mean, viz. That All Diseases
cannot be immediately derived from This, or the Other particular ferment, but
that the Generality of Distempers owe their original to the Error of Fermental
Digestions, the one many times concurring as a Procatartick, and another as a
Proximate cause.

When the Stomachical ferment is debilitated, the Aliment receives an imperfect
Concoction; whence a flatus is excited and a Pain in the Stomach, with an
inclination to vomiting and abhorrence of Diet. If it pass thus crude through
the Pylorus into the Intestines, it lays a foundation of a Diarrhoea, Worms,
Obstruction of the Misentery, etc.

An Error in the first Concoction cannot be corrected in the second; wherefore
the crude Alimentary juice being conveyed through the Lacteal and Thoracical
vessels, and so away to the Heart, does cause a spurious and febrile conflict
with the Principles of Sanguification; and according to the quantity of the
depraved Aliment, that in 24 or 48 hours etc does rise ad turgescentiam, and
able to vie (as it were) with the blood, so it gives the difference betwixt
Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan Agues, etc. as several modern Authors have
observed. And as it is a cause of Intermittent, so also it lays a foundation
of Continual fevers, according as the Principles of the blood by this depraved
Ferment become too much exalted. For if the Spirituous part be highly inflamed,
then a febris Synochus or Ephemera; if the Sulphurous part be exalted, or a
Putrefaction of Humors in the blood vessels, then a Putrid fever; if a
contagious Miasma be added, then a Malignant fever, such as the Plague, small
Pox, Measles, But whether this vitiated Juice be made so by the vitiated Bilis
and Lympha, as Sylvius de le boe would have it, is not to my purpose to dispute.

If the vitiated Succus Nutritious arrive to the Brain, and by Obstruction of
the Pores hinders the Third Digestion, viz. the elaborating of Animal
Spirits, or stop their motion, or subvert the volatizing Ferment of the Brain,
it causes an Apoplexy, Lethargy, Coma, or Carus. And according as the Nerves
are obstructed, and the Spirits with their vehicle the succus Nervosus defiled
and stoped in their passage, thence a Palsy great or less. And as the vitiated
juice has passed the Cortical substance of the Brain, and is confused with the
Animal spirits, so as to cause an irritation of the Nerves and explosion of the
Animal spirits, it causes Epilepsies, Convulsions, etc.

To these Distempers the depraved Ferment of the Spleen does contribute; for
when the bilious Particles are not evacuated, but by long fermentation become
retorrid and gross, then the Melancholy adust terrestrious blood subverteth the
refined Texture of the Animal spirits, and brings on them a mighty
gloominess, whence Melancholy Phancies; and as it impresseth its labes on the
Spirits and Genus Nervosum, so it concurreth to Hypochondriacal Fits, and many
Nervous diseases.

Every part in the body receiving a Succus Nutritious from the blood is deprived
of its due nourishment, when the fermental Digestions are deficient, and the
Aliment unprepared: instead then of assimilating the succus nutritious to each
Part, it being a succus depravatus does instead of assimilation cause
Aposthumations, Tumors, Ulcers, etc.

As the too much debilitated, so also the too great or over-acidity of the
Stomachical ferment will be as a Groundwork for many Enormities. A
proportionate Acidity (as I intimated before) is a cause of Digestion; so too
great, and especially when alienated from its natural Crasis, is a cause of
Coagulation, Precipitation, and Fixation, and consequently of Indigestion.
Besides the Appetitus Caninus caused by an exorbitant Acid gnawing the stomach;
and the Pica and Malacia from a depraved Ferment, causing an inordinate
appetite after objects unfit for Aliment, as Chalk, Stones, etc. a parallel*
instance may be given (of Precipitation, Coagulation, and Fixation of the
Aliment by too great acidity of the Ferment,) I mean that of our Cooks
Pickling, as of Sampier, Cucumbers, etc. whose Pores are filled with the points
of the acid Particles fixing themselves in clammy matter, which put a stop to
an ingress of fermentative Particles from the Air that may tend to the
dissolution of the Compages, and so are as a coat of Defense from putrefaction.
And as the aereous particles are not allowed free passage, so neither are the
fermentative particles of the Stomachical Digestion admited to enter, and raise
a luctation with the active principles of the Aliment, whose parts are as it
were linked together by the acid particles of the Pickle, that the Stomachical
ferment cannot tear them in pieces, except when they are taken in a small
proportionate quantity, and not able to outvie That of the primary Digestion.
A (...) instance may be taken from salted and dried ^^ats, as Beef, Bacon, etc.
which we (...) of a hard Digestion, and unfit for a weak stomach, because its
parts are tied together and pores obstructed by saline Particles, and not to be
freed and set in motion without a Ferment stronger than the Coagulation.

And that the Depraved ferment by over-acidity in the primary Digestion is a
cause of many disorders, yea whilst in the stomach affecting its Orifice
causes Ructatio acida, Cardialgia, Ardor cum dolor, etc. may be concluded
from their cure by fixed Alkalis, as Sylvius does observe, whose property is to
correct and destroy an Acid; and therefore in these cases may rationally
(besides Experience proves it) recommend Coral, Crab's-eyes, Margarites,
Chalybis limatura, etc. Sylv. de al^^. sermon. in ventric laesa Prax. med. lib.
1. c. 7.

This exorbitant Acid sent into the Intestines may, (with sharp vapors excited
therefrom) cause an Iliack Passion, Disenteries, Cholick, etc. But if it be
conveyed to the Blood Vessels, so as to pass the stage of the second Digestion,
it does destroy the sweet Balsamic Crasis of the Blood; and by altering its
genuine texture does give occasion to some of its Principles to become too much
exalted, and as the ingenious Dr. Willis, de Fermentatione and Febribus has
proved, does produce several Diseases; but its Effects may principally be
discerned in Putrid and Intermittent Fevers: The Phenomenon of which latter
Fran, de le Boc Sylvius de febr. ingeniously solveth from a spurious acid
succus Pancreaticus and depraved Bilis making sudden Eruptions into the
Intestines, and a mutual Conflict with each other, yea when absorbed by the
vessels into the blood.

Not only the debilitated (as I said before) but also the over-acid and
vitiated Ferment may concur to the Production of many Distempers; for it
precipitating the sweet and well-poised Temperament of the Blood, gives
Fluidity to its Compages, and from thence an Exaltation of its sulphurous and
saline Parts. This Dyscrasia sulphureo-salina and salino-sulphurea impressed on
the Blood and Genus Nervosum gives Being to the Scurvy, which shows it self
by its vitiated Ferment in various Dresses over the whole body, such as
Weariness, Dullness of Spirits, Spots, Swellings, Asthma, Change of Urine,
flying Pains, stinking Breath* Rheumatisms, Gout, etc.

Among the Distempers derived from a Pravity in the second Digestion may be
reckoned the Dropsy, and not as Sennertus, following the footsteps of ancient
Physicians, laying it upon an ill Constitution of the Liver, would have it. For
on all hands it being allowed to be from a Non-separation or an Abundance of
Serous Humors retained in the body, want of a due Ferment (to the destroying of
which an exorbitant Acidity will in no small measure concur) as well as an
Obstruction in the Vessels or viscera, may much contribute thereto. For when
the Saline and Sulphurous particles are deficient in their due state and
proportion, either by want of Aliment, or by consuming Chronical Diseases, or
by a depraved Stomachical Ferment communicating it self to the Alimentary juice
received into the blood, or by want of a due access of Air, or by a mixture of
heterogeneous things with the Aliment; then the blood becomes too much dilute
and watery. As by Obstructions in the Urinary and other Passages, so the loss
of a due Ferment (as many Cases might be produced of an Ischaria or Suppression
of Urine by a mere defect of Fermentation in order to a Secretion) to lax the
Contents in the Blood Vessels, or rather to make a Secretion, the Urinous Latex
is not separated from the blood, but regurgitates in its Vessels, until Nature
over-burdened lays it down in the Habit of the body* thence an Anasarca; or
in the Abdomen, and thence an Ascites; and if with a flatus in the Cavity of
the lower Region, thence a Tympanites.

Besides the Usual causes of a Consumption of the Lungs, such as an
Ill-conformation of the Breast, an Hereditary weakness in the Lungs and
Inclination, precedent Diseases as Pleuritis, Empyema, Variolae, etc.
obstruction of the Lympheducts of the Lungs, unwhosome Air, and acrious Steams,
a spurious Acidity impressed on the Blood and the Genus Nervosum has no small
share; in as much as the Corroding humor will soon exulcerate the Lungs, or at
least excite the Diathesis morb^s^ of them.

Beside the exorbitant Ferment of the Kidneys (if any there be) and their lax
Compage^ too much percolating the Serum from the Blood, this inordinate Acidity
causing a too loose Contexture of Parts, and consequently too great a Secretion
of Serous humors, does much concur to the foundation of a Diabetes. As an
Ischury many times does not so much depend on the Stone or Obstruction of the
Urinary vessels, but on a too strict and fa^^ compages of the blood, when for
want of a Saline ferment the Serous parts remain unseparated; so from too much
Acidity, too great a Secretion, and consequently a Diabetes.

This spurious Acidity assaulting and combining with the Tartareous recrements
of our bodies, does coagulate into Gravel or Stones commonly in the Urinary
passages. For all Stony Concretions take their Original either from a viscous
Matter, or fabulous Earth congealed together by a Saline Agent, as Nitre, Alum,
Sal Gemma, etc. or by a Seminal petrifying Juice, whence many stony Concretions
take their growth, as Coral, Coralline Moss, and many other Marine Concretions.
Yea perhaps it might be truly asserted, that Rocks take their growth from the
Plastic power of a petrifying Seed.

If this depraved Acidity arrive with the Blood to the Brain, so as to cause
Obstructions, (which are as Bars to stop a generation of fresh Animal Spirits)
or to deprave its Ferment, it effects a Coma, Lethargy, Carus or Apoplexy,
according as an acid, serous, or otherways vitiated humor has entered the
Brain more or less, and the Spirits retire from the outward parts of the Brain,
or are incapacitated for Motion. But if a putrid recremental sordes has
entered with, and defiled them Animal spirits that are generated, it causes an
Explosion of the Spirits until they have shaken off the heterogeneous Matter
offending, as in an Epilepsie, Convulsions, Swoonings, etc.

If for a Nutritive juice to be conveyed to each part, that by its proper
digestive ferment assimilateth a convenient matter to repair that which was
lost, a sour fretting Humor is advanced in its place; instead of Nutrition many
Diseases are occasioned. For the peculiar ferment of each part being hereby
depraved. That matter which should be Nutritive, will become a sharp corrosive
substance or humor, as in Cancers, Fistulas, Ulcers, Aposthumations, Leprosies,
Inflammations, Strumas, Scabies, and many other maladies.

If the thus depraved Aliment reach the Genus Nervosum, but not so powerfully
as to produce a multitude of Infirmities incident to that kind, yet sufficient
to cause the Succus nervosus to degenerate from a volatile spirituous Ferment
into an Acid humor, and by the extremities of the Nerves to be laid down in the
Synodia of the joints and the extremities of the Organs, where the nervous
fibers end, and it there meets with a Tartareous or fixed humor from the
blood; the Gout takes its offspring, or at least is excited from a latent
hereditary Seed. From the combination of these different saline humors (even as
from spirit of Vitriol and oil of Tartar) comes white hard Coagulums or
Nodings; and by the irritation of the nervous fibers a flux of Humors, and
consequently Solutio Continui is the Result; whence the Gout, attended with his
various symptoms or wracking Torments, approaches Champion-like almost
irresistible. The Gout Enemy-like having one displayed his Colors, how easily
are its forces increased by the eating of Salt-meats, drinking of Acid liquors,
and French-Wines much abounding with a Tartareous Salt: which makes the
aforesaid Cause very probable.

It may be objected, That if a spurious Acid or depraved Fermental juice of the
first Digestion be thus transferred from the stomach through the subsequent
Digestions, as to lay a foundation of so many Distempers; then from a depraved
stomachical Ferment, the Diseases resulting from the second and third
Principal, and other peculiar Digestions, will all arise together, because the
same depraved Alimentary juice is carried in a very small time through them all.

Answ. An Error in the first Digestion being not corrected in the second or
subsequent, thence it will follow; That an Error in the stomachical Ferment
will be as a Proximate or at least as a Procatartick Cause of many Diseases
immediately ensuing the Digestions subsequent to the first. Yet it may not be
concluded, that it always concureth as a necessary Cause. For many times
Distempers are the very Products of, and are derived from the Depravation of
latter Digestions, without any previous disposition from the primary Ferment;
as the Depraved ferment of Sanguification or Production of Animal Spirits may
be no less hurtful to our bodies, when it is immediately derived from the
Errors of subsequent Digestions, than when it is laid in the stomachical or
first Ferment.

Thus the Blood wanting a vital Ferment in the Heart and Arteries, or its usual
volatising Ferment from the Air, for want of a due Secretion of its recremental
sordes, by Obstructions of the vessels, want of Perspiration, and inordinate
use of the Sex Non-naturalia, etc. will cause Fevers, Scurvies, or other
Distempers incident to the blood, when the stomachical Ferment may be entire.

The Brain also being too lax or weakened by the irregular use of the Six
Non-naturalia, or by the illness of them, or otherways having lost its saline
volatising Ferment, may of it self give occasion to many Distempers incident to
the Genus Nervosum.

The Womb in the Female sex by its peculiar Ferment causes an inturgescence of
the Uterine blood vessels, so as to open them, and make a Lunar Evacuation of
the superfluous blood; which by the intention of Nature is designed for the
nourishment of the foetus, but if there be no Conception (excepting
impediments) then a Menstrual flux. If the blood vessels be obstructed by gross
humors, or their orifices closed by Cold, etc. then the superfluous blood ready
for Expulsion contracts a violent acrimony, and regurgitates with the
circulating blood to the Heart and Brain, whence Syncopes, Palpitations of the
Heart, Faintings, Convulsions, Suffocation of the Lungs, yea many other
Distempers according as the Blood and the Vital Spirits are tainted, or the
Animal de^iled. Instances might be given of an Epilepsie, Palsy, Tumors,
Scurvy, etc. occasioned by the stopage of the Menstrual course, which seem to
be from the enormities of the second and third Digestion; but the febris alba
peculiar to this sex with its usual symptoms plainly illustrateth, that the
Menstrual Obstruction may ill affect the second and third Digestion.

Not only in the Female, but also in the Male the Spermatick vessels,
exorbitant or deficient in their Ferment, may produce direful disasters.

The Spleen by its ferment helps to sublime and exalt the seculent and
terrestrious parts of the blood brought by the Arteries, so that by the
Splenical ferment the blood returns in the veins far more pure with its
exalted Principles, and ^itter to deposite the the ^ile in the Liver. But when
the Spleen is ill-affected, the blood either over-fermenteth, as in the
Scorbutic and Hypochondriacal diseases; but if obstructed or Scirrous, the
blood is deprived of its due ferment, and thence may occasion a Dropsy,
Cachexie, etc.

To these may be added the depraved ferment of each Part, all-sufficient to
produce Maladies in them, yea when the foregoing Digestions are in good plight.
But I shall not insist thereon, having taken a short Abridgment of most of the
Distempers incident unto our bodies, which may lead me to an Enquiry after the
Virtue of this Ilmington-Spaw.

PART III. SEC. 3.
AFter a short Cursory of Diseases, I come next to enquire into the Medicinal
Use of this ^^mington-Spaw; and finding it to be a Chalybeat Spring, a little
Scrutiny into the (...) Artificia Preparations of Mars (...) to our business in
hand.

(...) a Chemical Analysis is found to (...) Sulphur, and Earth, as the three
(...) Constitutive ^ngredients, with a (...) of Water and a less of Spirit.
(...) say not, that These are the first Principles, (...) other Metals is
derived from Water or a Nutritive Succus as a more remote, (...) Matter
indeterminate as the real primary Element) but that They are such which do
immediately make up the Body of Iron, and (...) it as such an Object to our
Senses.

Chalybs or Steel does differ from Iron only by Calcination with Horns, Claws,
and Hoofs of Animals, or with such like Alkalis laid stratum super stratum:
Which by their Alkalizate volatile Salts do carry away in Calcination many of
the soluble parts of Iron, and destroy much of its Acidity. So that Steel is of
a more fast and hard body, or of a closer texture of Parts than Iron, and does
much partake of an Alkalizate Salt.

The virtue and operation of Mars does chiefly depend on its Saline and
Sulphurous parts, and according as they are more or less set at liberty from
the terrestrious, so a Preparation is more or less Medicinal. The usual
Compositions are (...) Martis aperitivus cum (...) aqua, vel aceto. 2. Crocus
Martis (...) 3. Tinctura Martis. 4. Extractum Martis. 5. Mars diaphoreticus. 6.
Vitriolu^. Martis

1. Crocus Martis aperitivus cum sulphur is made by applying a Butt of
Brimstone to a hot Bar of Iron, or by calcining the Filings of Iron with
Sulphur in an earthen pot or Crucible. In either way the Acids of Sulphur do
penetrate the body of Mars, so as in the operation to carry off much of the
sulphurous parts of Iron, but by the addition of the acid parts of Sulphur to
much increase the Saline. Some of the Sulphurous do yet remain, is apparent by
the setid savor in Belchings after the taking of this Crocus. That the Saline
part is increased, is clear; because the Weight of the Iron will be increased
by the Preparation. For Sixteen ounces of good Iron, by weighing after the
Operation is ended, will yield Eighteen or Nineteen (except the Calcination be
vehement, which is needless) of Crocus.

This is an excellent Preparation, and works good effects upon a twofold
account, viz. 1. because of its Sulphur, 2. its Salt. The Sulphur will enrich
and add a new supply to a cold watery blood, so that in the Febris alba, Pica,
and Leucophlegmatia, it will reduce the pale-faced Patient to a florid
complexion; because of its Salt it is a good Deoppilative, as in Uterine
obstructions and those maladies peculiar to the Female sex, and in the Dropsy
may be of good use because of its vitriolick Stipticity, that binds up the
laxity of vessels and other parts.

In the making of Crocus Martis cum aceto, the Sulphurous parts are almost
separated, insomuch that after it is swallowed down it yields but a weak
sulphurous savor. But by addition of the Acid parts of Vinegar, the Saline
Principle of Mars is so much exalted and advanced so near an Acid; that by
instillation of other Acids it will scarce make any effervescence or ebullition
at all, yea weaker than Crocus cum Sulphur, that makes a far less ebullition
with Acids than plain filings of Iron.

This Crocus in the Preparation having lost much of its Sulphur, is unfit for
use when the blood is too low, or depauperated in its Balsamic Sulphur; as in
diseases proceeding from a waterish blood, or from phlegmatic Obstructions.
But where the blood is retorrid or adust, this Crocus cum Aceto by its Saline
Principle being cool and aperient is of good use, as in Hypochondriacal
distempers, Carbuncled faces, and to astringe a laxed blood-vessel, because of
the saline stiptick Principle implexed in the Terrestrious.

Crocus Martis cum Aqua is made by exposing Plates or Filings of Iron to the
Rain or Dew, until it has contracted a Rust, which collected is called Crocus
Martis cum Aqua, or ferri Rubigo. This Crocus consists of the sulphurous,
saline, and terrestrious parts combined together; yea indeed it is the very
substance of Iron, having its pores much opened by the Dissolvent or Saline
parts of Water; which not only makes its Pores more open, but by combining
with it makes this Crocus an excellent Aperient medicine, whose Deoppilative
virtue chiefly depends on this Salt.

The Sulphur of Iron being retained in this Preparation renders it a fit
ferment for blood, whose active Principles are weak and faint: And the Saline
part (being exalted by That of the Dissolvent Water that much laxeth the body
of Mars) renders it a good Aperient in Obstructions, as of the Liver, Spleen,
Mesentery, Lacteal vessel, or Womb with its coherent parts.

Crude filings of Iron taken inwardly may be dissolved by the Acid stomachical
Ferment, as by extraneous Acid Menstruums, which may be concluded from the
fetid strong scented Smell, and the blackness of their Excrements that take it
unprepared. But then it must be a strong robust Constitution, able to bear the
Iron in its solid substance; but in Constitutions where the acid stomachical
ferment is weak, there is danger, lest that the Filings should remain
undissolved and cause Obstructions, or else grating on the Tunicles of the
Intestines cause wracking Torments. Besides, the Sulphurous part of filings of
Iron unprepared will more increase the Ferment of the Blood than the Saline
stiptick can repress; which makes it unfit for Use in hot Constitutions, or in
Distempers proceeding from a wracking fiery Blood. And if the Filings of Iron
be of so hard a Dissolution, much more these of Steel whose substance is more
fast and compact, and pores more closed, that its Dissolution must be more
difficult.

2. Crocus Martis astringens is made by calcining of Filings or Plates of Iron
in a strong fire, which carries away the saline and sulphurous parts that
made it an Aperient medicine. Some wash the Iron, in order to the Preparation,
with fair Water or Vinegar; which not only with frequent Washings may carry
away much of the drossy impurities, but also take away or at least destroy much
of its volatile Salt and soluble Parts, that must afterward by the violence of
^ire have been consumed or else disposed for a separation. The terrestrious
part of the Iron being deprived of the active Principles (for by a strong
Calcination those few that remain are become fixed) it imbibeth the saline
igneous Particles, which remain fixed therein. And being much deprived of its
Salt that renders it a Deoppilative, it is become a proper Astringent to be
used in a Diarrhoea, Breaking of a vein, Flux of Haemorrhoids, immoderate Lunar
evacuation in women, etc. for besides the Astringency it is endowed with, it
will imbibe much of the exorbitant Acidity of our bodies, seeing it is deprived
much of its Saline principle.

3. Tinctura Martis, made with Rust or Fil^ings of Iron and white Tartar boiled
together in fair water, is an excellent Aperitive: for besides the dissolved
Mars, the Tartar is also a great Assistant, especially in diseases proceeding
from an acid Humor. Whence it may be of good effect in a Cach^xie, Dropsy,
Vterine obstruction, and Hypochondriacal Distempers.

4. Extractum Martis made with the phlegm of Honey, juice of the White Wind
Grapes thoroughly brought to maturity, and the juice of Lemons, has its
aperient faculty not only from the Iron, but also from the saline part of the
Menstruum. Now this Menstruum being not very corrosive, does dissolve only the
saline and soluble parts of Mars, but leaves the gross and terrestrious parts
behind. So that the saline parts of Iron impregnated with the Essential salts
of the Menstruum, makes it a good Opener of Obstructions, such as those of the
Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, or of the other viscera of the Abdomen.

5. Mars Diaphoreticus made from Rust of Iron and Salt Armoniack sublimed
together into Flowers, which being dissolved in water will with oil of Tartar
or spirit of Salt Armoniack be precipitated in form of a Powder called Mars
Diaphoreticus; which takes its Sudorisick quality from the volatile
penetrating parts of Salt Armoniack, carried with and fixed in the Chalybeat
particles in Sublimation. These volatile Salts will soon open the Pores of our
bodies, especially seeing they carry with them Chalybeat Particles
all-sufficient to cut tough viscous humors obstructing the Pores or Passages.

6. Vitriolum or Sal Martis is made from the parts of Iron dissolved in an Acid
Menstruum, such as oil of Vitriol, oil of Sulphur, Aqua fortis, etc. but most
commonly with oil of spirit of Vitriol, which gives the Denomination to the
Composition: yet if we look into the nature of the thing, we may form a like
Composition of other Acids, with oil of Sulphur, spirit of Nitre, etc. as well
as with oil or spirit of Vitriol, only changing the name into Mars sulphuratus
or Sal Martis cum Sulphur, cum Nitro, etc. In the making of Sal Martis with
oil of Vitriol, and Iron either filed or in its gross substance, some Chemists
will add an equal weight of spirit of Wine to the oil of Vitriol, or else two
pounds of ordinary Water to one pound of good spirit of Vitriol. The reason of
it is, because the spirit of Wine by its Alkalizate Salt, or else the Water may
dilute and weaken the oil or spirit of vitriol, that it may not incorporate
with the main body of Mars, but with the saline and more soluble parts; that
there may be gained a more pure Salt, freed from most of the sulphurous and
terrestrious parts of Iron. In the Dissolution the saline parts of the
Menstruum do join with these of Mars, and in the mutual conflict of
Fermentation they take off and dull the edges of each other, and by combining
together become a Neutral Salt.

In this Preparation the sulphurous and terrestrious parts of Iron are
separated from the saline, from which dissolved in fair water by Evaporation,
Chrystallization, etc. is made sal Chalybis or vitriolum Martis.

Sal Chalybis being actuated by the Vitriol ^s of a stronger operation against
Obstructions than Crocus Martis; but for want of the sulphurcous principle of
Mars will not add so stronger Ferment to the blood, and consequently is not so
effectual in Cachexies, nor against Diseases proceeding from a cold watery
constitution. But where the blood is over-fermented, where it is either
Pontick, acrious, or fiery, and in Obstructions proceeding from such a
Dyscrasie of the Blood it may be of excellent use.

This Ilmington water (as I have proved before does derive its virtue from an
Esurine Salt preying upon a Minera of Iron, which by working upon and combining
with each other do become a vitriolum Martis. I shall then in the next place
show more fully as to particulars, wherein this Spring may be serviceable to
our Country in respect of its Medicinal virtue, and then lay down some Cautions
and Rules to be observed by the Drinkers of this Chalybeat Water.

After a short Account in the foregoing Section of Diseases, how they may be
derived from the Depraved digestions of our body; I shall now consider, how far
this Ilmington Spring will conduce to the Restoration of the lost or vit^ated
Ferments, and consequently be a Preservative for Health, or restore that which
is impaired.

First, the Scurvy, being caused by a Dyscrasie of the blood, either when its
saline or sulphurous parts are too predominant, may be much corrected or
curbed by this Chalybeat Spring: In as much as the Mineral Salt is herein
become near a plain Alkali, and will penetrate to the second Digestion, is able
to correct the sour saltish Blood. And being freed from the sulphurous parts
of Iron, will much correct the sulphureo-saline Dycrasie, when the blood like
Wine is become over-fermented or fretted. This Spring being a great Diuretic,
will help to carry off that which is superfluous, and being a good Aperient in
obstructions of the Spleen may correct its vitiated acid Ferment, that with
other Enormities may concur to alter the sweet balsamic temper of the Blood.

But considering that a Crude Digestion or spurious Acid Ferment of the Stomach
does many times as a Procatartick Cause lay a foundation of the Scorbutic
Ferment; this Water must be assisted with Purgatives to carry off the
recremental Sordes of the Stomach, and other Digestions, (more especially for
Cautions hereafter laid down,) and be also assisted with some peculiar Medicine
to restore the blood to its sweet and well-poised Temparament, according to the
Cause from whence the Dyscrasie took its Original: which requires the Advice
of a skilful Physician.

Secondly, the Spleen by a Specific Ferment conduces to a Secretion of Bilis,
but if by Obstruction or Depravation it be deficient in its fermental
Operation, the blood not purged from its sordes does become obscure and muddy,
so that the Animal Spirits thence elaborated are neither pure nor refined, but
dark and gloomy fit for melancholy Phansies. From a long supply of such
feculent blood are the Spirits spoiled, and Hypochondriacal Fitts and
Melancholy take their growth.

This Spaw-water, containing a vitriolum Martis, is a good Deoppilative in
Splenical obstructions, for being of a penetrating nature is good for these
abstruse Recesses. By the Reaction and Combination of the acid salt of the
Menstruum with the Alkalizate of Mars is made a Neutral Salt, but most
inclining to an Alkali, Whence it may be of good use to correct the spurious
acid Ferment of the Spleen but now communicated to the blood.

By restoring the Spleen to his natural Ferment in destroying that spurious
Acidity, by opening Obstructions, and its Diuretic property carrying off many
of the feculent parts, the blood may be freed from the opace Melancholy steams
that defile the Brain, the workhouse of Imagination and Judgment, and so be
restored to its natural Crasis. But withal observe, That this Water must be
helped with Purgatives to cleanse the blood from its faeces, lest that instead
of being an Aperient it should prove to be an Obstructer, especially in the
Extremities of the small Capillary vessels, where the Blood in its Circulation
is hindered by a viscous dreggy Matter; but besides Catharticks, where other
Digestions are deficient in their office, Specificks must also be applied.

Thirdly, the Dropsy consists in a dilute watery blood, or rather in a
Non-separation of Serum or Urinous Latex that regurgitateth into the
blood vessels, until it be laid down in the Habit of the body, and sometimes
with a flatus. The loss of secretion of this Latex is frequently from the want
of a Ferment in the bood, which chiefly depends on the Saline Principle as
the main cause of laxing the Compages of the blood for the separation of Serous
Humors. Besides the loss of a Ferment, Obstructions in the Urinous vessels and
Lympheducts many times do lay a foundation to the structure of a Dropsy.

Ilmington-Spaw may be useful in this case upon a threefold Account. 1.
Although sal Chalybis be freed from the sulphurous parts of that Mineral, and
consequently is not (as I said before) proper by it self in Cachexies and cold
Phlegmatic Distempers; yet it does mightily take off the spurious Acidity* and
laxeth the too strict compages of the blood. And this Salt coming nigh to an
Alkali is a great Diuretic, fit to carry off the superabundant Matter. 2. The
saline Particles with their Edges will cut the viscous Matter obstructing the
vessels, which many times put a stop ^o the Latex in its proper Passages. 3. It
being a Stiptick Medicine may be beneficial to restore the debilitated
Membranous parts too much laxed by the stagnating water. All which Properties
do exactly correspond with the Indications of Cure of the Dropsy. Yet we must
necessarily allow Specificks and other Medicines intermixtim applied, according
as the Patient is this or the other way inclined.

But withal take notice, That what is here spoken must be understood of a
Dropsy in its first growth; for otherwise the gulping down of three or four
Quarts of Water will help to swell up the debilitated parts, and add a great
Oppression to decaying Nature.

Fourthly, from Gravel-stones in the Reins and Bladder, and also the Strangury
and Dysury we may be relieved by drinking of this Spaw-water* in as much as it
will destroy that exorbitant Acid combining with the Tartareous recrements into
Gravel-stones in the Urinary Passage, and also as a Subalkalizate take off that
acrimonious Humor which causes a sharp fretting Urine. Besides taking off that
sharp Humor, that gives increase to these stony Concretions and fretting
Urine, it being drank in a large quantity, and a great Diuretic, it will keep
the Current open and lax the Urinary vessels, so as to carry off much of the
feculent Matter, and like a Brook with a Current-stream take with it some sandy
Concretions, which in our Bodies we call Sliping of a Stone.

Whether or not a Calculus may be dissolved whilst in the Kidneys or Bladder,
is not to my purpose here to enquire; for I look upon it to be beyond the
virtue not only of This, but of all other Chalybeat Waters.

Fifthly, the Jaundice proceeding not only from an Obstruction of the Hepatick
vessels by tough viscous ^umors, Scirrous Tumors, etc. but also by the Saline
and Sulphurous or Bilious parts of the blood, too much exalted and indisposed
for a Separation, but dispersed over the whole body. As it happens frequently
after immoderate drinking of Wine or strong Liquors, that too highly ferment
the Blood; so that the acrious particles remain unseparated, and show
themselves by a yellow Tincture of the skin.

For the Cure of the Jaundice we may have recourse to this Spaw, and that upon
account of answering these two Indications. 1. It opens Obstructions derived
from impediments in the second Digestion, and so may reduce the Choledochal
vessels to their proper functions. 2. The Vitrlolum Martis in this Water by its
Stiptick Vitriolick Salt will take off these high flown acrious Particles that
make too strong a Ferment, and whirl about these adust Choleric parts, which
by a due ferment and lax compages of the blood should have been thence
separated.

Sixthly, the Lunar Evacuation of Blood in the female Sex is checked in its
natural course by Obstructions in the Uterine Sanguinary vessels by viscous
tough Humors, Tumors, or when their Orifices are closed by Cold, etc. The blood
stopped in this Critical Evacuation does regurgitate by the veins up again into
the body; from whence follows a Depravation of the vital Ferment, and thence
frequently a Crudity of Humors causing the Green Sickness, Cachexie, etc. And
if by stagnating in the vessels the blood has acquired a virulent acrimony, so
as to oppress the vital Spirits, then Syncopes, Faintings, etc. but if it reach
the Animal Spirits, then Epilepsies, Hysterical Fits, and such like Diseases
will make their Assault.

In Diseases thus proceeding (for these Distempers may also otherways take
their Rise, as from passions of the Mind Hysterical Fitts, from loss or
defilements of the Spirits Lipothymia, Syncope, etc.) Ilmington-Spaw is of
excellent Use. For it will open Obstructions, sterge the excremental sordes,
and take off the spurious Acidity that is many times exorbitant in the blood,
and may adhere to the Orifices of the Uterine vessels, that often causes the
Febris alba to be of so difficult Cure in some young women. Sal Chalybis being
freed from the sulphurous part of Iron, it will not be amiss to add some
Crocus Martis or other prepared Medicine, that by its sulphurous Particles may
increase the Sanguinary Ferment in Cachexie, Green sickness, etc. by which the
Cure will be facilitated, and the pale-faced Patient brought to a lively
Complexion.

But if there is a virulent Acrimony contracted, then a more Appropriate
medicine is also requisite; for this Spaw will not reach the remote recesses of
the Genus Nervosum. So that Specificks of a penetrating nature and abilities to
correct the Enormities of the Digestions subsequent to the Stomachical, with
Catharticks to purge off the faeces and dregs of our Bodies, must necessarily
be required.

Seventhly, this Spaw-water drank will help to cleanse and purify the Blood,
and may be used with good success in Distempers proceeding from a saline
acrious Humor, or from Obstructions in the second Digestion. But neither
Chalybeats nor Spaw-waters will help the Disasters of the Animal Spirits
suffering in their abstruse Passages. It may as a Subalka^izate correct a
spurious Acidity in the blood. and by opening the obstructed vessels as a
Diuretic carry off much of the recremental sordes of the blood, and so as a
Remote Cause help to prevent Diseases proceeding from exorbitant saline Humors,
such as the Gout; but cannot reduce the coagulated Salts from the Synodia of
the Joints, nor correct the spurious Acidity that has reached the Genus
Nervosum, when the Gout attended with direful Symptoms does appear.

Neither can this Chalybeat water reach the Morbisick Disposition or Seminal
Idea of the Gout (more especially in persons to whom it is Hereditary) which
only wants an Acid ferment to bring this latent Enemy upon the open Stage.
This latent Seed will show it self in growth as often as it is excited by
Saline Agents, such as Salt-beef, Stale beer, French Wines, etc. Which morbid
Idea first laid by the Archeus, is beyond the Power of any Spaw-water or
Chalybeat, but requires more noble Balsamic Arcana.

I shall now sum up the Virtue of this Spaw-water, as Van Helmont de aq. Spad.
Parad. quint. does of the German Spaws, Pawhont and Savenir, and of all such
that take their Medicinal virtue from an Esurine Salt, and a dissolved Minera
of Iron.

This Spaw assisted with Catharticks will help their Stomachs that are loaded
with a mucous Matter, and free us from a viscous filth that has entered the
more secret Recesses of the veins and viscera; but the more difficult, the more
remote from the mouth. It may be used with good success in obstructions of the
Liver, Spleen, Reins, and viscera of the middle and lower Region, and Diseases
thence depending, and may be of excellent Use to correct the Scorbutic
dyscrasie of the blood, and all Distempers proceeding from an exorbitant Acid,
and Tartareous Humor, by obstructions perverting the Temper of the blood.

Van Helmont (in the place before cited) determines the Spaw-waters in the
Sphere of their Activity. Potestas Aquarum non transcendat Hypochondrium. Non
enim supra Renes, ad Cor videlicet, Pulmonem, aut Cerebrum Aquae attingunt:
quocirca etiam affectibus illis ex idiopathia genuinis nisi per accidens
succurrunt Spadanae. And a little after, nec Potae Spadanae in Epidemicis,
Endemicis, and Astralibus morbis, ut sunt Pestis, Pleuritis, Prunella, etc.
neque conferunt plurimum quibus venenum subest, vel assumptum vel intus genitum
vel contagio participatum, neque in morbis Tincturae, quales sunt Lepra, Lues
Veneris, Morphea, Cancer, Epilepsia, etc. But for my part, I cannot adhere to
his Opinion, viz. That we must not expect Cure of Diseases that proceed from a
higher Rank than the viscera of the Abdomen: For it must needs be granted, that
Diuretics enter the Blood Vessels, and the blood in its Circulation does pass
through the Heart, yea like a Torrent washes all parts of the Body. Yea we are
not sure of any vessels to convey this Water drank or serous Humors from the
Stomach or Interstices immediately to the Kidneys, but before it can enter the
blood vessels must be conveyed above the Hypochondrium, and by the Circulating
blood may be hurried to all parts of the body, until by Transpiration, Sweat,
or Urine it is separated: and whilst mixed with the Blood may by its Active
principles of Salt and Sulphur working upon the blood alter its depraved
Crasis, and restore it to a well-poised Temperament. But though it may with the
blood be carried to the remote Parts from the Heart, yet thence it will not
follow, that this Spaw-water is able to reach and cure the Maladies of the
Brain and Genus Nervosum. For besides the Contrariety of its Saline Principle
to that of the Brain, a Watery blood is an unfit Subject for the elaborating of
Animal spirits. When instead of pure Blood a deluge of Water is supplied by the
Arteries, the Brain seems as it were overwhelmed, and Nature to suffer: as
may be concluded from the frequent observation of Water-drinkers, that after
large quantities taken do feel a dullness and heaviness of Head, stupidity, and
other infirmities incident to the Brain, and its Appendices the Nerves,
according to the previous inclination of the Patient, either toward a Palsy,
Lethargy, Apoplexy, etc, But this happens usually when the Water-drinkers
proceed headlong, without preparing their Bodies, or being regular in their
Watercourse, or taking Purges to carry off the Water lodged long in the blood,
and the faeces that may cause Obstructions, or considering their Habit of Body
and Inclination. Upon which accounts they may as soon drink for their Ruin as
for the restoration of Health. Which may be spoken by way of Caution, but more
of This in the next Section.

Instances might be produced of several Persons, that by drinking Chalybeat
Waters have found relief from an Asthma, Epilepsie, Palsy, and many Distempers
derived from a Pravity of the Brain and Nerves. But then as Helmont rightly
adviceth, we must distinguish Diseases and their Cure by their true Causes. For
Example, upon obstruction of the Menses in women there may ensue an Epilepsie,
Asthma, or Palsy, and the Spaw water by provoking the Menstrual Course may
free the Patient: yet we must not recommend the Spaw-water as a usual Specific
to cure the Epilepsy, Apoplexy, Asthma, or Palsy; for what is done as a
Procatartick Cause, and upon a secondary Consequence cannot be a Specific, nor
answer the Primary Intentions of Cure. Accordingly then must we stear our
course, and act with respect to the true Cause. For these Distempers proceeding
from an ill-affected Vterus, are far different from these that are common to
both Sexes.

Whatever Helmont's Spaws might be (which, says he, took their virtue from an
Esurine Acid and a dissolved Minera of Iron) as to Use in morbis Tincturae,
under which he comprehends the Leprosy, Morphy, etc. I shall not take upon me
to determine: but yet do see no reason why this at Ilmington may not be
beneficial in a Leprosy, that proceeds from an acrious corroding Humor,
especially when applied in external Washings.

Of what excellent Use are Vitriolick Waters for the cure of old running sores
Chirurgical Practice may testify, and many already by the washing at this
Spring. To which agrees the Testimony of Agricola speaking of Atramentous
Waters, (which are such that tinge with Galls,) Aquae atramentosae sive ipsum
Atramentum sutorium combiberunt, sive Misy, sive Chalcitida, sive Sorry, sive
Melanteriam, easdem vires habent quas Aluminosae, multo tamen efficaciores,
quod multa acrimonia cum astringendi vi sit conjuncta. Qua de re etiam prosunt
Vlceribus, quae pascendo serpunt. Agric. de nature. eor. quae Efflu. ex ter.
lib. 2. So that he concludes all Vitriolick waters more excellent as to the
Cure of corroding Ulcers and other Distempers than Aluminous; whose virtues he
reckons to cure the ulcer of the Bladder, to help a weak Stomach subject to
vomiting, to cure the inordinate Courses in Women, Abortions, Ulcers of the
Mouth, swelling of the Gums, weakness of the Nerves, (by washings I suppose,)
effusions of Blood, and immoderate Sweatings.

PART III. SEC. 4.
I Shall now proceed to propose a method to be observed by the Drinkers of this
Spaw-water; which I shall do, First, by way of Caution, showing some ill
Consequences to the rash undertaking a Watercourse; Secondly, by laying down
some Rules how to prevent these inconveniences, and to drink the Water with
good Effect,

I might refer the Reader to Van Helmont Parad. sext. de Aq. Spad. and many
other Eminent Authors, that have given good Directions for the right Use of
Chalybeat Waters. But this Section is chiefly designed for the Poor Countrymen,
who most commonly are incapacitated to apply themselves to such Authors: yet
were their Abilities so great, different Springs do require different
Directions; especially this Spaw, that is so highly impregnated with a Mineral.
Besides, I observed many poor People resort to the Spring, that could not
require the Advice, much more the Attendance of a Physician except upon mere
Charity; yet they boldly undertook the drinking of a large quantity of this
Spaw-water, without preparing their Bodies, yea for any Distemper; neither with
Advice nor Physic, but proceeded with their own confidence, or rather
Ignorance, and might as well have drank for the Destruction as Preservation and
recovery of their Health. For upon rash Undertakings in this kind, these Ill
consequencies may ensue.

First, this Spaw-water containing in it a great quantity of Ocre or Terra
Metallica, (for out of a Quart of this Spring Water I have got the best part of
a Spoonful of an Earthy sediment) which being drank with the Water, although as
I have proved by the Experiments on the Spaw, it is not a simple Earth, but
contains much of the Sa^t of the Minera and of the Menstruum, may endanger
the Drinkers with Obstructions in the Capillary blood vessels, or in the
Lacteals conve^ing it from the Intestines to the Blood. And what may be the
Result from Obstructions perverting the right use of the Spleen, Liver, or
other viscera of the middle and lower Region, I have above Par. 3. sec. ^. and
3. sufficiently hinted. But if the Sediment enter not the Lacteal vessels, it
must needs load the Intestines of these (it being not Purgative) that drink it
without Physic or Advice.

Secondly, Too frequent drinking of this Spaw and also of other Mineral waters
in a large quantity, and especially when not taken gradatim, will relax the
fibers of the Stomach, extend the vessels and other membranous parts, upon the
Relaxation of the Stomachical fibers a loss of Appetite will ensue; and upon
the Extension of the blood vessels, Lympheducts and Membranous parts, will
follow Weariness, Difficulty of Breathing, and Increase of a Dropsy in them
that are far gone, besides other Distempers according to the Inclination and
Habit of the body.

Thirdly, This Water like most other Vitriolick will cause a Vertigo or light
giddiness in the Head, especially in them that unprepared drink it to the
quantity of three or four Quarts at the first onset. Not only a Vertigo but
also a Lethargy, Apoplexy, or other Cephalic Distempers, caused by an
oppression of the Brain and stoppage of the Animal spirits, may ensue the
taking of a large quantity, when neither faeces nor the restagnating water are
carried off

I shall therefore propose this Method to the Drinkers of this Spaw water, for
the avoiding of these Enormities; yet shall not be Dogmatical, but leave the
Physician to direct his Patient according to the Indication of the Distemper,
and thereby directing his judgmen. And

First, Purge off the Recremental sordes of the Stomach and Intestines; but
rather (if the habit of body and strength will bear it) begin with a Vomit:
Such as a Dose of Sal Vitrioli; the Quantity is usual from One scruple to Four,
but may be increased or d^minished according to the condition of the Patient.
This Medicine I propose, because it usually works both by Vomit and Siege;
and not only cleanses the viscera of the Abdomer, but also by its Stipticity
will notably fortify the membranous fibers of the Stomach against Relaxation,
that often ensues upon drinking large Draughts of Water, and also it will help
to reduce the fibers to their proper state when too much extended, and
consequently are weak and unfit to embrace the Aliment taken in at the mouth.
The fibers of the Stomach and Intestines being well fortified will the better
contain a large quantity of Water without Relaxation, and by the Peristaltick
motion of the Guts the Lacteal vessels will sooner imbibe the Water when their
Orifices are scoured and like the little holes in a cleansed Strainer. Yet
other Catharticks accordiug to the particular case of the Patient may be
requisite.

Secondly, Then begin to drink of the Spaw-water. They of an ordinary
Constitution may begin with a Pint, but they of a stronger with a Quart or
three Pints, and so increase each morning a Pint until they come gradatim unto
four Quarts, which may be the measure for a strong Constitution; and as some
few may exceed, so many may fall short of it. Thus may they continue in their
Watercourse for a Month, and cease gradatim as they increased at first, lest
there should be left a distention of the fibers and membranes.

But withal observe, That the Water must not be drank to its full Dose at once,
but rather with walking up the Hill, or moderate Exercise after every full
Draught; that it may have time to searse through the Drinkers body, especially
until it begineth to show it self by its Diuretic faculty. For the sudden
drinking of a large quantity will cause a distention of the Stomach, with cruel
Tormina or Gripings in the bowels.

Thlrdly, In case the Water lies long and heavy on the Stomach and Intestines,
and at last works off in a Diarrhe or looseness, it signifies the body to be
unprepared, and probably Obstructions in the ^esenteryor viscera: which
requires a Preparation by some Deoppilative Pills or Medicine, with convenient
Solutives to carry off the feculent Matter. But in these cases I cannot lay
down any one Prescription general serving for particular Persons, that
according to their Distempers must have different Directions from their
Physicians.

Fourthly, Because of the great quantity of Ocre or Vitriolick Earth contained
in this Spring water, let the Drinkers hereof observe to take at least twice a
week a Dose of Physic to carry off the filth of the water, free the Stomach
and Intestines from incrustation of the Earthy sediment, and the vessels from
Obstructions. But the Water-drinkers must forbear the Spaw on the days he
designeth for Purgation; except he take such a small quantity of Pills etc. on
the overnight, or very early in the morning, only to keep his body from being
Costive. For which purpose Van Helmont recommendeth a Dose of Ruffy Pills (the
Dose may be from a Scruple to a Dram) taken three days together in the
morning before drinking of the waters. This he advises for the German-Spaw,
Pauhont and Savenir, whose Mineral Ingredients are like this at Ilmington,
though not so highly impregnated as this new found Spaw. Ruffy Pills may be of
good use to purge off the filth of the viscera, and also the sediment of the
Water, and being gentle in operation may be taken on the overnight, or in the
morning designed for drinking the Water. But according to the Observations of
Physicians, undoubtedly the best method will be, to compose Pills (or Physic
in such form that the Patient shall like best) of Deoppilating Ingredients and
Antiscorbutick, or with such Specificks that may answer the Indication of
Patients Distemper, but yet with such purgative Ingredients that may make the
body soluble to the number of three or four Stools, and may be taken through
the Water course,

Fifthly, For a more speedy passage of this Water through the body, let the
Drinkers take a Glass or two of good White or Rhenish Wine, about an hour or
something longer time after the full Dose of Water is drank. This is
convenient, but especially for them, upon whose Stomachs and viscera the water
lies long and heavy; and if the water lies still lodged in the vessels and
habit of body, Catharticks and Diuretics may be helpful.

As the waters drank in a regular course will increase (but especially for a
time) the Appetite after meat, or Hunger; so an irregularity in Diet in a
Watercourse will not only take off the Appetite, but may also lay a foundation
of many Distempers, yea may produce more Evils than the Water is able to
correct. Wherefore I shall propose some Observables about Diet.

First, Fast at least two or three hours after drinking the Waters, that they
may have time to pass off but by eating too soon may hinder the Digestive
Ferments in their Operation, or mix with the Chyle and so be carried into the
Habit of the body, and leave much of the feculent sordes in the remote parts,
that may endanger the Drinker with a Fever Dropsy, Scurvy, or Obstructions
very difficult of Cure.

Secondly, Take that Advice of Helmont de Aq Spad. Parad. 6. sect. 5. Spadanas
bibenti consulo, ut sobrietati consulat, edatque parce instar Accolarum. And a
little after, Ea sola Diaetae norma Aquae permeabunt tuto, celeriter, ac
jucunde. sec. ^. Whereby Moderation in Eating and Drinking is recommended, lest
that by over-glutting the stomachical and subsequent Digestions should be
overpowered and unfit to perform their proper functions, which of necessity
must cause future Enormities. For in most cases over-charging Nature will pluck
down Health faster, than the Physician is able to repair.

Thirdly, Meat well ordered and of an easy digestion, must be observed in all
these Courses of Physic. For well known it is, that Salt meats and Seamens
fare will alter the sweet Temper of the Blood into a saline scorbutic Ferment;
which, if continually supplied, will be able to withstand the Operation of a
Vitriolum Martis.

Fourthly, The Drink is to be of a middle sort; not too small and thin to
depauperate and dilute the blood, nor too strong to over-ferment it; not too
stale and sharp to produce an Exotic Acidity, nor too muddy to fill the
vessels with a faeces; but rather clear mellow Ale, and now and then a Glass or
two of good Wine, that will be a convenient Vehicle for the dry Aliments, and
fit to renew the sweet Balsamic temper of the Blood.

Last of all I shall advise the Drinkers hereof to use such Specificks in their
Watercourse, as shall be peculiar to their Distempers; besides Solutive Pills
to carry off the sordes, that the depraved Ferments of the body may be amended.
For so long as the Diet is good, and regularly taken, and the Ferments of our
Bodies are entire, Health will remain safe and sound.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS.
PAR. I. Sect. 1. THe Aristotelian Principles inconsistent with Experience. p.
2, 3. Spirit and Earth are not distinct Chemical Principles from Salt, Sulphur,
and Mercury. p. 4, 5, 6, 7. The Chemical Principles are but secondary Elements
made out of Water or a Succus according to Helmont, Thalesius, and others; and
so are Bodies in the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral Kingdom made out of Water
or a Succus, as the more immediate Matter specificated by the Plastic Power or
Archeus. p. 8, 9, etc. Not only Water but all sublunary Compound Bodies are
made out of Matter indeterminate as the First Principle according to the
Operation of the Archeus or Impress stamped at first by God the Creator. p. 22,
23, 24, etc.

PAR. I. Sect 2. The first Matter created was a Confused Chaos or undigested
Lump of Matter, in which were lodged the Seminal Principles of future
Vegetables and Minerals. p. 30, 31. etc. According to the Diversity of Mineral
Glebes or different Seminal Principles lodged in diverse Parcels of the Earth,
are made different Salts from the Esurine or common Salt of the Earth, as the
more immediate Matter in order to their Composition; contrary to Dr. Lister. p.
34, 35, 36, etc. The Variety of Mineral Waters, as at Ilmington, Astrap
Tunbridge, etc. is caused by Water impregnated with the Esurine Acid or Mineral
Salts, meeting with and preying upon Minera^s as of Iron, Copper, etc. p. 41,
42. etc.

PART. II. THE Weight of this Spaw-water. p. 48. No Acid Salt is here
predominant. p. 49. A Pint will tinge with the sixteenth part of a grain of
Galls p. 50. It is the strongest in England in its kind. p. 51. Not Aluminous.
p. 51, 52, etc. A Paradox that Nitre is not an Acid salt. p. 56. No Sulphur in
Nitre. p. 57, 58. No Nitre in this Spaw. p. 59. No Mineral Sulphur in this
Spaw. p. 59, 60. etc. The Nature of Vitriol, and its Species. p. 64, 65. No
white Vitriol, nor Vitriol of Copper in this Spring. p. 66, 67. A Comparison
betwixt a solution of Sal Chalybis and this Spring Water, and the Cause of the
Difference in Color. p. 68, 69. etc. Color is caused by Refraction of Light.
p. 72. The Medicinal virtues of this Spring is from a Vitriolum Martis. p. 75,
76. Acid and Alkalizate salts fermenting together do work themselves into a
Neutral salt. p. 77.

PAR. III. Sect. 1. A Summulary of the fermental Digestions of our Bodies. p.
90, 91, 92. The three principal Fermental Digestions. p. 93. How Chylification
is performed* p. 94, 95. Experimental Observations about Sanguification and
Motion of the Heart. p. 103, 104, etc. The Third principal Digestion in the
Brain. p. 112. Other particular Digestions, as that of the Spleen, etc. p. 115.

PAR. III. Sect. 2. A Survey of Diseases arising from the lost or depraved
Ferments. p. 118, 119, etc.

PAR. III. Sect, 3. THE difference betwixt Steel and Iron. p. 132.

The usual Preparations of Mars, with an Enquiry into the Nature and Operation
of each. p. 133, 134. etc. Against what Diseases Ilmington-Spring may be
beneficial, or what Distempers this Spaw will cure. p. 140, 141, etc.

PAR. III. Sect. 4. DIrections for Drinking of these Waters, or how to avoid
all its ill Consequences, and receive Benefit there1by. p. 154, etc.


