THE Jesuits Policy To suppress MONARCHY Historically displayed. With their
SPECIAL VOW Made to the POPE.

Printed in the Year, 1669.

BABEL: OR Monarchomachia Protestantium.
Aldred, against the Match with Spain, and of that scandalous Libel against the
Ambassador Count Gondamour; as also by the instigation of some Hot-spurs in
their Pulpits; the people of London were much incensed to snarl and murmur even
at the very name of Spain; and every Artificer presumed, like an Aristarchus,
to censure the King for that Negotiation, as for an error of State, which might
possibly cast the whole body of the Kingdom into a distemper. As if (forsooth)
the Kings affection to the Kingdom, and his own issue, had been unnaturally
frozen, or that his judgment had failed him, and those Superior Planets of the
Counsel had also lost their light, and erred in their course. Whereupon I was
urged by diverse of my good Friends, to write the Apology of that Action and
Proceeding; because some of them had heard me deliver, at sundry times, not
only a full Answer to all the Objections of the contrary faction, but also
diverse Reasons in defense thereof, founded, as they thought, upon very just and
solid considerations.

both the Kingdoms; which is a matter of greater importance, then they seem to
apprehend, who so much oppose it. Secondly, Traffic will thereby be
established and increased, when the Seas by a concurrence of both Kings, shall
be scoured of Turks and Pirates. Thirdly, The Kingdom will be again stored with
Treasure and Coin (provided we keep it locked up within our Four Seas, and not
suffer so much of it to be offered daily to that Idol of Cambaia.) Fourthly,
The Crown will be disengaged from a burdensome weight of Debts, and by
consequence, the Subject likely to be much eased in matter of Contribution and
Taxes. Add hereunto the renewing and confirmation of the ancient Treaties with
the House and Dukes of Burgundy, which is not to be reckoned as a Cipher in the
business; and what it is to have so great a Monarch, as the King of Spain, a
firm friend and ally, England very well knows. It is true, the Kingdom was
never so full of Money, as it was by spoils and depredations, betwixt the years
1576. and 1590; but how dear those purchases might have cost us, wise men saw,
if God (who had determined to give the Crown of this Nation to her issue, who
suffered both disgrace, and death here for his glory) had not made both Winds
and Sea, at that time, to fight for England. Lastly, Virginia (a Colony of ours
tenderly to be regarded) shall hereby settle her Staples and Mart, and ad^^nce
their Trade by a much safer passage and intercourse with the Islands: But to me
it is above all arguments, That this Match is so much for the Honor, Safety,
and Commodity of Prince Charles, which every true Patriot, I conceive, is bound
in conscience to further and advance.

Holland in the briars, an old and assured Friend, and of power upon all
occasions to assist the Realm. God grant the Prince never stand in need of
them. And for our selves we may remember, how small furtherance, nay, rather
how great hinderance they have been to the Traffic of this Realm; and what
great losses and damage our Merchants have sustained by their means, in the
Indies, Muscovy, and Greenland. I need not tell you, how chargable a Neighbor
they have been, nor how unsure a Friend, ever prefering France before England;
and yet notwithstanding the Favors, which they may still receive at his
Majesty's hand, are neither few nor small; if themselves by inconsiderate
courses deserve not otherwise.

Spain? They object the Sin, the Curse, the disparagement to Match with a
Catholic. Have they any reason for that? Yes: Because the Jews were not
permitted to marry with the Ammonites, nor Religious persons with the profane.
But that is an opinion, which relisheth too much of Judaism, and the Talmud;
the Bar is removed, we are now under the Law of Grace; both Jews and Gentiles,
Circumcision and Uncircumcision, in Christ are united and made one, and
incorporated into one Body, his Church. It is true, the Jews might not marry
out of their Tribes, because the promise was made to Abraham and his Seed;
therefore his Seed was not to be stained with impure blood, or a commixture of
Paganism. But now, the promise being already performed, that Judicial Law is
abrogated. Yea, say they, but still it shows, that God is not well pleased,
when his children mix with superstitious people. True: But who are the
Superstitious? and of which side is the true Religion? We know that is a
question, and will be. But this is out of question, That they are both of them
Christians, both are Baptized into that blessed Name, both lay hold on the
promises, on the Testaments, on the Gospel, both pray the same Pater Noster,
both confess the same Creed; yea, both reverence the first Four general
Councels of the Church. Who indeed is the Catholic, is Filius Christi, of the
surer side, by reason of the Mother Church, and of the elder House.

Elizabeth's Treaty with Mounsieur (which yet how far and fairly it was
proceeded in, by both parties, Camd. in Elizab.
our famous Camden shows at large.) Did not Henry, King of Navar, a Protestant,
and the Protector of the Protestant Churches in France, marry with the French
Kings Sister, a Catholic? Thuanus lib.
It was propter bonum publicum (as this is) for public tranquillity and peace
sake; and therefore did the Elders and Consistory of Genevah so much as check
or reprove him for it? nay, did they not allow it? The same King afterward
matcheth his own Sister, an earnest Protestant, to the Duke of Lorrain, Thuanus
lib.
who is known to be a Prince no less earnestly Catholic, and a Champion of the
Catholic, Church in France. Nay, did not Lewis himself, the Prince of Conde,
and Protector in chief of the Hugenot party, when time was, apprehend with
great desire the overture of a marriage with Mary, Thuanus lib. Leslae. hist.
Scot. in Maria Stuarta.
Queen of Scotland? and which certainly had taken effect, had not the Admiral,
for his particular interests, laid blocks in his way. But above all others, it
is memorable, and by us Englishmen not unfit to be considered, what a bloody
quarrel it was made, Goodwins Annals, in Ed. 6.
that King Edward the Sixth, who was a Protestant King, and the first that ever
was known in England, might not marry Queen Mary of Scotland, a Papist, as all
the World knew; yet the Protector made it no scruple of Conscience, to pursue
that business to the utmost hazard. Calvinism and Lutheranism, are themselves
as opposite as the Antipodes, yet they enter-marry frequently, and their issue
bear witness thereof.

Spain? Or is there any particular cause of scrupulosity and fear in this
overture, more then in those other? does the State of the Kingdom, and fear of
alterations, trouble them? that fear is vain. The Husband is head of the Wife,
and though the Infanta be born in Familia Imperatrice, yet there is no
Sovereignty invested in her, she can make no mutation of State, least of all
without consent of the State; and we have little cause to distrust her, having
had such a president before of King Philip; who being king of England, yet
neither did, nor could attempt of himself, any alteration. And if the English
be sure to hold their Religion, it were neither Justice, nor Humanity, if she
should be denied hers. There is no man of Honor would offend a Lady of her
Dignity, for a difference that concerns her Soul, her Faith, her Devotion
toward God. What then is the reason, why this Match seems so distasteful? Is
the name, are the qualities of a Spaniard become so odious amongst us? Surely,
ab initio non fuit sic, of old it was not so, it is neither an ancient quarrel,
nor a natural impression in the English. In the time of Edward the Third, there
was a firm and fixed amity between England and Portugal, and from that
Lancaster of England the Kings of Portugal are descended. As for Castile, John
of Gaunt married Constance, the Daughter of King Peter, by right of whom the
Crown of Castile appertained unto him; and his Daughter Katherine was married
afterward to Henry the Third, King of Castile; upon which Match, as appears yet
in the Records of the Savoy, John of Gaunt resigning that Crown, the
controversy ended; and the Kings of Spain, as flourishing Branches of the Tree
and Stock of Lancaster, have ever since quietly possessed that Kingdom. So that
Prince Charles by this Match is likely to warm his Bed again with some of his
own Blood. I might add further, that King Henry the Seventh married his Son to
King Ferdinands Daughter, on purpose to continue the Successon of that amity. I
might remember the Treaties of 1505. between King Henry the Seventh, and Philip
of Austria, Son in Law to King Ferdinand, for the preservation and strengthening
of that League: And how much the amity of England was esteemed, and how readily
embraced by Charles the Fifth, Emperor and Grandchild of Ferdinand, appears
very well by the Treaty Arctioris Amicitiae, in the year 1514. And by that
renowned Treaty of Calice (the greatest Honor perhaps that ever was done to the
English Crown,) and by the Treaty 1517. between Maximilian the Emperor, Charles
King of Spain, and King Henry the Eighth; not to speak of the Treaties for
intercourse in the years 1515. and 1520, nor of the Treaty at Cambray 1529. nor
lastly, of that famous one 1542. Let it suffice, that by them all it is
manifest, with what mutual, constant, and warm affections both Crowns, and both
Kingdoms, entertained the strictest correspondence that could be; till the
Schism of Henry the Eighth, and disgrace done to Queen Katherine, by that
unhappy Divorce, and the Kings confederating with France, made the first
breach: So as in those days we see, there was no such unkindness, no such
hatred, no such Antipathy betwixt the two Nations. The first spark of
difference between them brake out in Queen Mary's time, about the matter of
Religion; no other pretext could be found, to make that breach which Wyat
desired. Yet neither is this the true, nor the sole motive of the grudge, which
is now taken: There is an other impostume, which will not be cured without
lancing: The remembrance, the hatred ever since Eighty Eight, Manet alta mente
repostum, Sticks still in our Stomachs; and it is most true, Hinc illae
lachrymae, from hence springs all our pain. Well; but let us be as indifferent
as we can; let us consider, not only their attempts upon us, but the
provocations, that is, the wrongs which we first did unto them. Strad. de bell.
Belgic.
Let us remember the Money intercepted, which the King was sending unto D'Alva,
the want whereof, at that time, hazarded well nigh the loss of all the
Netherland Provinces, so lately reduced; Camd. in Elizab.
the assistance given to the Prince of Orange, by Gilbert, Morgan, and others;
the first voyage of Sir Francis Drake; the sacking of Saint Domingo; the
Protection of Holland by Leicester; the infinite Depredations, Letters of Mart
executed to the infinite damage of the Spaniards; beside, the Philippicks, the
invectives which were in every Pulpit, the Ballads and Libels in every Press
were provocations, such as Flesh and Blood would not endure in the meanest
persons. I speak nothing at all of the Portugal voyage, nor of the surprise of
Cales, nor of the Island voyage; but can any wise man think, That the King of
Spain should not be sensible of such indignities? Was it not probable, nay, was
it not equal, that he should send a fury to Kingsale, to revenge these wrongs?

Spain alter his course, and send the Constable of Castile, as the Dove out of
the Ark, to see if the Floods of Enmity were any whit fallen, and to seek Peace
with an Olive branch in his hand, to establish a general Amnestia, or Perpetual
Oblivion of all unkindness past, to bury all quarrels, and reconcile the two
Crowns and Kingdoms into an everlasting Friendship. And surely, cursed will he
be, that seeks to violate this Peace, and under color of Religion to extirpate
Charity and public concord. And I pray, what would be thought of the loyalty
of that man, who should now set himself to trouble and exasperate men's minds
with the old feuds and quarrels, which this Nation has had with Scotland? But
stay here, my Pen must intrude no further, without warrant, into the Labyrinth
of this secret Council: I know not whether it be agreeable to the Kings
pleasure, or no; or fit matter for private Subjects to discourse upon. I know
very well, how unsearchable the secrets of Princes are, in what an abyss they
lie, and how much too deep to be sounded by every shallow discourser. I
remember also, what Praying and Preaching here was against the Match of Queen
Elizabeth with Mounsieur, a business of very like nature with this in hand, and
declaimed against, upon the same pretended peril of Religion, alteration of
Government, and what not? Yet it is very well known, That those of the Council,
who did most oppose it, were men, which of all others, were thought to care
least for Religion. Sir Philip Sidney indeed, (like a Noble and worthy
Courtier, as he was) endeavored by a short Treatise, to present unto Her
Majesty the unfitness, disproportion, and inconveniences of that Match, both
in relation to Her Person, and the whole Realm; but he did it privately, and
with discreet circumspection. Stubs, like an indiscreet and fiery Zelot, taking
the question in hand, and prosecuting it in a way more likely to incense and
corrupt the people, then to advise or inform the Queen; Cund. in Elizab.
his hand paid for his presumption. And though some of the greatest and wisest
of the Council appeared very earnestly for it, as a thing which was likely to
unite the whole Kingdom of France unto England, and would surely bring along
with it the offer of the Netherlands, by the Prince of Orange, and the States,
whereby England was like to become a petent Monarchy; yet was the whole Body of
the Kingdom cast into much distemper and jealousies thereby: Some upon
partiality and faction, others upon distrust of the practices of France; some
for their own; some for their friends sinister ends and ambitions; as in this
very case, I am persuaded, men are not a little possessed with the same
diseases and humors. And if I did not well know the nature of the multitude
(which is a Beast with many heads, and as mad brains) I should wonder, how they
durst oppose the designs of their Sovereign, a Prince of so great Experience
and Judgment, and who has managed this business from the beginning with such
wariness, caution, and prudence, as this great Conjunction cannot portend any
other effects, then honor, comfort, and prosperity to the whole Nation. Is he
not the fittest to judge in his own case? And his case being the case of the
Commonwealth in general, if any private man shall arrogate to himself either
more wisdom to amend what is already done, or pretend more affection to the
State, or more providence to foresee and prevent inconveniences; certainly he
must needs fall into the custody of the Court of Wards, till he recover
himself. But having said this, I shall leave the whole matter as a deliberative
still; and tell you in few words, what the occasion was of this Discourse,
which follows.

The occasion of the following Discourse.
London (where Merchants, for their Table and Hospitality, do worthily bear the
Bell from all the Merchants in Europe) diverse persons of quality, where being
together in a Garden before Dinner, T. Aldreds Letter, the Pamphlet aforesaid,
and some strange reports of seditious practices from Amsterdam, were read, and
discoursed upon. In the midst of all, comes in a fine Chaplain, belonging to a
great person in England, and one that was of the Merchants acquaintance; who
hearing but a little of the discourse (which at that time was the common
Table-talk of City and Country) with much vehemence he affirmed, the Match was
likely to breed great troubles and mischief to the Kingdom; and that (forsooth)
in regard, as well of the increase of Catholics within the Realm, which it
would occasion, as also in regard of Spain, which he ignorantly called an
ancient Enemy. Hereupon also he took occasion to rail bitterly against the
Church of Rome, as the Seminary of all the commotions in Europe, and the
contriver and plotter of all Treasons in England. And being resolved to show
his Rhetoric in the Ruff, and to omit nothing, which might exasperate the
company against Catholics, he alleged for examples, in thundering language,
Heywards Reign of Edw. 6.
the death of King Edward the Sixth, (sillily enough that, you will say) the
many conspiracies against Queen Elizabeth; bu^ especially that horrible project
of the Gunpowder Treason, which being undertaken only by a few desperate
Malcontents, in justice might rather be buried with the offenders, then
objected perpetually to innocent men, who do generally with great sorrow abhor
the very memory of the fact, and were publicly acquitted thereof by the King
himself in the next Parliament following. See the Kings Speech in Parliament.
Besides this he urged, That Princes be disquieted, yea, endangered many times
by Excommunications, Bulls, and other censures from the Pope, by the Catechisms
and Doctrines of Jesuits; and that the Subjects of England are withdrawn by
them from their obedience to their lawful Princes: Lastly, That they are a
people so full of treacheries and disloyalty, as no Nation can show the like.
He forgot nor, you must think, to arm himself with the authority of Doctor
Morton, whose Maxim it was, That we may now as well expect a white Ethiopian,
as a good Subject of that Religion. He produced a Book entitled, A discovery
of Romish Doctrine in the case of Conspiracy and Treason; wherein, the Author
plays his master-prize against poor Catholics with equal malice and
indiscretion, charging them with an infinity of scandalous accusations, able to
drive men into despair of the Kings Grace toward them, and to breed in His
Majesty's Royal Heart an everlasting distrust of them. He urged Parson Whites
rash and uncharitable judgment against them, That all their Religion was full
of such Doctrines, as afforded Monsters of conspiracy against the State; that
they teach men to murder Kings, to blow up Parliaments; and that since Bells
time, never was there such a ravenous Idol found, as are the Priests of the
Seminaries. Ormerode also, that famous Picture-maker, was alleged in this
heat, who by a great mistake, took upon him to condemn the singular and
renowned Doctor Allen, as affirming, That Princes may be slain by their
Subjects, from the Text, Numb. 25. At length he concluded all with that
Rhetorical flourish of Monsicur Lewis Baily in his Book of The Practice of
Piety, page 783. which he produced with much oftentation, as if it alone had
been enough to cast the whole Society of the Fathers into a fit of a Quartane:
Jesuits and Priests, says he, are sent to withdraw Subjects from their
Allegiance, to move Invasion, and to kill Kings: If they be Saints, who be
Scythians? Who are Cannibals, if they Catholics? This conclusion, for the art
and wit of it, could not but deserve a plaudite; so the company went to Dinner,
and after Dinner this fine Chaplain was gone in haste. Thereupon, some of the
company, not so much taken with his Rhetoric, as were the rest, desired a
Gentleman then present, who well understood the World, and was a freeman, not
obliged to any particular order, furthen then as a Son of the Church, to
deliver his opinion of the Ministers invective; which at last, upon their much
importunity, he was persuaded to do, in such manner, as is here, with his leave,
and particular information, represented to you.

Claudius accusat Maechos, quoth he, Catilina Cethegum. This is most
ridiculous; who can endure to hear a Gracchus inveigh against Sedition? A man
may perceive by the Prologue, That Protestants have set it down as a decree
against Catholics, and labor to imprint it as an Eternal scandal in the hearts
of the people; that Catholic Religion and Doctrine is dangerous to the State,
an Enemy to Sovereignty, and therefore neither allowable nor tolerable in a
well governed Monarchy. Now this being a matter of so great importance, as
indeed it ought to be esteemed (for querelam Ecclesiae quilibet Catholicus
facit suam, every good Catholic thinks himself injured, when the Church is
wronged.) I will endeavor to sift out the truth, and show you, what is therein
to be holden as matter of infallible v^rity; as well to justify them, viz. the
Catholics, as to inform my self in a point, which I know has made many good
men in England to stagger much. And that I may not wander in my discourse, nor
lead you up and down in a Labyrinth, I will show you first the true state of
the Qu^stion to be argued, and the method in which it is most regularly
propounded.

Whether to be a Catholic, that is, one who professes due reverence unto the
Church of Rome, and to be a true Subject to his Prince and Country, be
incompatible, or no? Secondly, If they be incompatible, whether this
incompatibility, or repugnancy that is betwixt them, be general; that is, as
unto all Principalities and States; or particular, that is, to some one, or to
some few only? Thirdly, Whether it be so originally, and ever, or only
casually; that is, at some particular time, or upon some particular joyncture
of affairs in State? Fourthly, Whether it be so simpliciter loquendo, and as
malum in se; that is, whether the being a Catholic, be looked upon as a thing
evil intrinsecally, and in its own nature; or that it be only accidentally
such, or made so by particular Statutes and Laws? Lastly, whether Lutheranism
and Calvinism, be not more incompatible with Loyalty, more opposite and
contradictory thereto, and that ab origin? To judge rightly betwixt Catholics
and Protestants in this grand charge which we have in hand, it is necessary,
that every one of these particulars be clearly considered and resolved; and so
I oblige my self to do, at least to endeavor, before I end my discourse: But
yet to pay Master Parson some thing in his own coin, I shall make bold to begin
with the last Question first, and in lieu of his general, or rather
hyperbolical accusations of our Doctrine, to return him double measure, both of
Doctrine and Practice, in each kind, from his own men: That is, I will examine
and declare obsignatis tabulis, and by evidence of fact, That the Treasons,
Factions, Seditions, Tumults, which have so troubled all the Kingdoms of
Europe, and filled Christendom with blood and calamity, for these hundred years
last past; have sprung not so much from any opinions or practices of
Catholics, as from the opinions and practices of Protestants; and that the egg
of this Cockatrice was not laid at Rome, nor Rhemes, nor Doway, (as the World
must be made to believe) but indeed, and very truth, at Wittemberg, at
Smalcald, at Genevah. And this I shall do not Theologically, or like a Divine,
(for I will not arrogate so much to my self) but Historically, sincerely,
plainly, being one that desires to defend the Loyalty of Religions and Innocent
men, rather then their Opinions and Doctrines, which they are best able to
maintain themselves; and as a faithful relator of what my self have both known
and seen, and learned the rest from others; of whose authority and credit in
this kind, no just doubt can be made: Neither, shall I affect any rhetorical
flourishes, or elegancy of style in this discourse. Integrity and Truth (which
I profess) appear always most gracious in their own unborrowed beauties; they
need no paintings, no art, no colors. Come we then, by the Will of God, to our
intended business.

Titulus Primus. LUTHERANISM; OR The Troubles in GERMANY.
Rome, and all the Princes and States of Christendom; and till then, neither in
England, nor in any other Country of Europe, had there been such a Question
ever disputed, viz. Whether a Catholic might not be a good Subject. In the
year 1517. Martin Luther, an Augustine Friar, a man of a turbulent spirit,
learned, but never counted any famous Clerk, was the first that broke this long
and happy Peace. Surius in Chron. An. 1517.
This man unhappily interposing himself in the business of Indulgences, which
were sent at that time by Pope Leo the Tenth into Germany, although it
concerned not him further, then he made himself the Proctor and Advocate of his
Order; yet having once begun to inveigh against the injury done to his
fraternity, as he conceived, (for as much as the Preaching or publishing of
those Pardons, was committed unto the Dominicans, and not to them, viz. the
Augustinians, as had been usual before) he fell afterward to tax the abuses
and covetousness of the Collectors, and then to question even the authority of
them, by whom those Collectors were nominated, and such a levy of money
required in that nature. This was a popular and plausible Introduction, fit to
win upon the vulgar, who can never well endure the pressure of Contributions,
especially extraordinary, and where the covetousness or scandal of Officers
gives any occasion of murmur. He quickly therefore found many favorers; but
much more, when he began to exclaim against the ambition of Prelates, against
the riot and disorders of Religious men, taxing some for Tyranny, some for
Avarice, some for Idleness and Ignorance, all for corruption and abuses. In
this manner he stood in arms, and, as it were, a challenger for some years,
only against the defects of the Clergy, and without much danger: For diverse
good men at first conceived, That he only intended and sought Reformation of
disorders, and restoring of Ecclesiastical Discipline, punishment of
irregularities, and amendment of life. And this they did not without some
cause: For Saint Hildegardis had foretold a storm to the Church for their sins;
Savanarola a Dominican had awakned Italy with predictions of terror; and Friar
Thomas of Guien prophesied a Vae, Vae, a scourge and desolation to Bourdeaux,
an inundation of misery to France, and the whole World: All these not long
before Luthers time.

Populo placere, quas fecisset, fabulas, that the sport, which he had begun,
did take with the people (as novelty is ever welcome to the World) and that his
actions and designs seemed generally to be applauded; that many of the best
wits (especially such as had been bred in Erasmus his School, and were any way
touched with his humor) were ready to second him; yea, perceiving that some of
the greatest Princes in Germany were content, (though for other ends) not only
to give him hearing, but encouragement also in his proceedings; the man's
ambitions and vain conceits of himself were infinitely raised above his first
projects: Whereupon, as a man sick in his spirits, and of a fiery disease, he
begins now to rage against, and to defame all Church Government, he abandons
his Cloister, throws of his habit, breaks, yea, tramples upon his vows,
renounceth all obedience to his Superior, Preaches against the whole State of
the Clergy, and especially against the Superiority of the Bishop of Rome (which
was ever unto this time, held Sacred in matters Ecclesiastical) as against a
Tyranny in the Church; persuading the people not to render any kind of
obedience to them. The Pope himself (whom yet not long before, and since the
beginning of the difference, he had honored with the title of Christ's Vicar,
and protested unto him very much humble Reverence and obedience) he now calls
Sathanissimum Papam, Messire Asino: The Prelates he calls Blind guides, the
Religious men Swine, Candles put under a Bushel, and what not? And why, think
you, Preached he all this? Because (forsooth) otherwise the people should live
in darkness still, in the shadow of death, still be fed and misled by ignorant
and blind guides, still remain in ignorance, and in the Captivity of Babylon.
This Prologue having gained him attentive Auditors, he begins the Tragedy,
which was afterward acted, as you shall hear, with such incredible Sedition
and Tumults: His whole study was now bent to undermine the Church, and to
abolish all Ecclesiastical order; which by consequence was of necessity to
shake the Foundations, and hazard the State it self: Yea, this humor fed him
with such vain and extravagant hopes, That he imagined to conquer the whole
World, and to subdue the Pope himself, whom he was the first, that ever
absolutely affirmed to be that Antichrist, Man of sin, and deceiver of the
World, whom the Apostle mentions, 2 These. 2.

1519. Maximilian the Emperor was dead, whose power and wisdom he had great
cause to dread, and that Charles the Fifth was chosen to succeed him; Surius in
Chron.
a young Prince, not fully Twenty years of age; whom therefore he vainly hoped,
he should be able to persuade to subdue the Popes power, to keep his own Court
at Rome, and make the Castle of Saint Angelo subject to his commands; and that
by the assistance of such an Emperor, Martin should be able to reform the
Church, and cast it into what mould he pleased; especially seeing John
Frederick, the Elector and old Duke of Saxony, was already his sure Friend and
Patron; who for his strength, riches, alliance, and other abilities, was far
Superior to any other Prince of the Empire.

Germany, endeavoring, what he can, to weaken their authority, to abrogate
their power; yea, to make them odious and contemptible to the whole World:
Therefore in his Book entitled, C^ntra Statum Ecclesiae, Tom 2. oper. Latin.
Jenae.
and falso nominatum ordinem Episcoporum: He sends out a Bull against the said
Bishops, in these words, Attendite vobis Episcoporum umbrae; Hearken, says he,
or rather, Look to your selves, ye Mock-Prelates, ye Bishops in show, or shape
only; Doctor Luther intends to read you a lesson, which he thinks, will not be
much pleasing to your tender ears; as indeed, it was not likely it should be.
For after a short Exhortation, he gives advise, what his godly Auditory should
do well to see performed, viz. To this horrible intent or purpose. Quicunque
opem ferunt, bona, famam, sanguinem impendunt; Whosoever, says he, will
venture their Lives, their Estates, their Honor, and their Blood, in so
Christian a work, as to root out and destroy all Bishops and Bishoprics (which
are the Ministers of Satan) and to pluck up by the Roots, all their Authority
and Jurisdiction in the World; Hi sunt dilecti filii Del, etc. These, yea,
these, are the true children of God, and obey his Commandments. And again in
his Book against Sylvester Prieras: Tom. 1. oper. Latin. Wittemberg.
Si fures furca, latrones gladio, haereticos igne tollimus. If, says he, we
dispatch common Felons with a halter, Malefactors at the block, and Heretics
by fire. Cur non magis hos magistros perditionis; As for these sons, yea,
masters of perdi^ion; these Bishops, Cardinals, Popes, etc. Why should we not
fall upon them with open force, and not cease, till we have bathed our hands in
their blood? Was there ever such an Incendiary heard Preach? But, Objicient,
says he going on, periculum esse; Perhaps some body will be telling us, it may
cause Tumults and Sedition in the common people: Tush, says he, I answer, must
the Word of God be prohibited, and the people perish for fear of Tumults? The
two Mar-Prelates of England and Scotland were not possessed with such a spirit
as this; and though they were mad enough, yet they came not up to such a height
of fury. Let the Lawyers therefore judge, Brunus, Minsinger, Gail, whether this
Sermon and Proclamation of Luthers, would not bear an Action of Sedition and
Conspiracy; and whether it were consistent with the Laws and Peace of the
Empire, any more then it was with the duty of a good man. For hereby was the
people taught and encouraged (when they should be able) to pull down and
destroy those principal Pillars in the State of Germany, viz. The Archbishops
of Mentz, Colen and Triers, the Primate of Magdeburgh, the Archbishop and
Prince of Saltzburgh, the great Master of Prussia, the Bishop of Wurtzburgh,
Bambergh, and many others; who, beside their Spiritual Relations (which were so
eminent in the Church) had also a voice and place in the Imperial Diet, and
thereby a great influence and hand in the Government of Germany. Can this be
avowed to be the act of a dutiful or loyal Subject of the E^pire? Does any Law,
Reason, or Example warrant it in Civil Government? That a private man, himself
a Subject, of himself alone, should attempt thus insolently against the chief
Magistrates, and Princes of the Country where he lives? That a Sheep should
presume to depose the Shepherds? And by such wicked suggestions, stir up
Insurrections and Rebellion against persons of so eminent quality, both for
Place and Calling? Nor did he ever cease, or give over these Preachings, till
out of Sax^ny, Hess, and Wittemberg, yea, generally out of all places, where
his Seditious Doctrine prevailed, he had expulsed, or procured to be expulsed,
the very name, as well as the Authority and Jurisdiction of Bishops.

Cochlaeus in act. Luther.
At Wittemberg he took upon him to burn, not only the Popes Indulgences,
Bulls, and such like, but even all the Canon Law it self, that he could but get
into his hands. If you ask, by what warrant? He gives you none but his own
Authority, his private spirit was Commi ^^on, and pretense of the Gospel (as he
called it) all the Apology he could make for such pranks. An insufficient
pretense certainly: For although it be true, That the Canon Law, for the most
part of it, be originally nothing but the Constitutions of Popes at several
times and occasions published, yet much of it is also the decrees of Councels,
Provincial, National, and Ecumenical, and all of it ratified by prescription,
(which is Common Law) by general approbation and use of the Country, and by the
Imperial Laws themselves; and therefore his audaciousness was intolerable, in
giving so public an affront to the Government of Germany, as well Civil as
Eccl^siastick: And the Laws themselves (how needless or inconvenient soever,
this vain man could imagine them, yet) could not be lawfully and orderly
suppressed in the Empire, but by the Authority of the Empire it self. But as he
did thus presumptuously, and of his own head, abrogate (so far as he could) the
Canon Laws; so did he vilify and despise the Civil Laws also, as shall be
shown hereafter in due place; for as yet we must trace him in his
extravagancies and furies against the Church.

Almayns; that in such state they might not be able to see, either his errors,
or their own folly, to be so much abused and bewitched by a Sot. Universities
must down; which because Cambridge and Oxford will not (perhaps) believe, I
shall produce his own words in his Book against Ambrosius Catharinus: Ad
Evangelium funditus evertendum, nec astutius, nec efficacius commentum, etc.
The Devil, says he, never invented a more cunning, and more pernicious means
to root up utterly the Gospel of Christ, then the design of founding the
Universities. And that no man should go about to color or excuse this Paradox,
by some favor^ble interpretation and sense, he seconds it with another
elsewhere, full as absurd or worse: Lib. de abrog. Missa.
For dissuading the people from sending their children to be bred up in the
Universities, he passes a sentence of condemnation on them in these words:
Academias per idolum Mo^och figuratas puto. I am of opinion, says he, that the
Idol Moloch in old ^ime was a Type of these Universities: And therefore, that
it was as un^awful for the people to send their children thither for breeding,
as it was of old for the children of Israel to give of their sons to be
consecrated unto that Idol, of which we read, Levit. 20.2, 3, 4. The reason he
gives is like his assertion, Ex isto enim fumo: for out of the smoke, says he,
of these Universities do arise all those Locusts, which at this day possess the
Chairs; that is, the places of Dignity and Honor in the Church. But why will
the man have all Universities thus suppressed on the sudden? Is it because
Catholic Religion and School Divinity was taught in them? that can hardly be
thought. For why did he shut up the S^ho^l-doors at home, Cochlaeus in Act.
Luther.
at Wittemberg, where he prevailed for many years together? Why did he neglect
the teaching and educating of youth in his own Religion and Profession? Why did
he forbid Aristotle, Tully, and other Authors to be read, who meddle not with
Religion? Vlemberg. in vita ejus.
Why did Carolstad choose rather to go to Plough, then read a Lecture? Nay, his
own Fidus Achates, Philip Melancthon in his Book called Didymus, commends
Witcliff for a wiseman, Qui omnium primus vidit Academias ^sse Satanae
Synagogas: Because he, forsooth, was the first that discovered the Christian
Vnive^sities to be Synagogues of Satan. Well said Master Philip! in whom indeed
so loose an assertion was the more to be wordr^d at, being himself otherwise so
great a Scholar. But thus we see, what a spirit of confusion and giddiness
possessed them at the beginning, and how uncertain they were all, what to hold
or maintain: But above all others, Vlemberg. in vita Philippi.
this was true of Melancthon, who was indeed a very Academick, always
Skeptical, inconstant and wavering; so as neither himself, nor his own party
knew well, what he was: And for this opinion in particular against the
Universities and Humane Learning, he retracted it in his Book Ad Waldenses,
which Carolstad would never do; and therefore died very miserable and poor in
the Country.

usually Subject; which we may not a little wonder at, seeing men
extraordinarily called by God (and such they would be thought to be;) as for
example, the Prophets, Apostles, St. Paul, and others, were completely fitted
for their work, from the first instant of their vocation. It appears also, what
Luthers design was, viz. At three blows to have cut down three great Cedars of
the Empire, The Clergy, the Canon Law, the Universities: For without
Vnivers^ties the Clergy could not well be educated, nor without Laws could they
be governed; and so being necessarily chained together, he could not break the
Link, without subverting all. Neither did he, as it is clear, seek a
Reformation, but an Extirpation of them all together. And this I dare affirm,
That all those hundred Gravamina presented unto the Emperor Charles at
Noremberg, did not contain one quarter of the danger, mischief, and public
calamity, which these three Articles would have brought upon Germany, could
they have been executed to his mind. And yet behold a greater mischief
follows, if greater be possible; for I am now to lay down some few of his
Positions of State, by which it shall appear yet further, what prodigious
incivility, arrogance, and presumption was in the man; and to how great
contempt and prejudice his proceedings tended, not of Ecclesiastical Prelates,
and persons only (whom he made it, as it were, matter of Conscience, and a
part of his Gospel, to revile and slander) but of the Emperor himself, and the
other Princes of Germany, yea, of all Princes, States, and Magistrates
whatsoever, that stood in his way, and complied not with his strange and
exorbitant courses. And to discover his spirit the better, you shall have a
taste in the first place of his behavior with King Henry the Eighth of England,
a Prince at that time famous and renowned, as any in the World; and whom, but a
little before, upon report of his disgust with Cardinal Wolsey, he had
extremely flattered and bedaubed with praises: But now finding by some tartness
in the Kings answer, That it was but to build castles in the air, to expect any
favor or countenance from him; the poor Friar runs presently mad with rage, and
fowl language. The King is no longer now a King with him, Lib. cont. Reg.
Angliae.
but an evious mad fool, full of bastardy and baseness; he has not a vein of
Princely blood in all his body; he is a Basilisk, to whom this impudent
Apostata denounces damnation. A glorious King indeed, that lies most stoutly,
and like a King. Nay, He is a lying Fel^ow covered with the title of a King;
not a King, but a Sacrilegious theif. Lastly, which is the height of all
imaginable scurrility and rudeness, Jus mihi erit, Majestatem tuam stercore
c^nspergere: If I were near you, says he, I should make bold to dress such a
Majesty as it deserves. The passage is so extremely fowl, that to render it
otherwise; would both offend the Reader, and defile the Paper. I omit infinite
more of the same stamp and stain, which the Reader, if he please to be further
curious upon such a subject, may find gathered together by no less honorable a
person then Sir Thomas Moor, Lord Ch^ncellor of England in those times, and
published by him in a Latin work of his against Luther, Printed at Lovain in
the Year, 1566.

Germany, much better. He not only wrote a Book expressly with this title,
Surius ad annum. 1521.
Against the Two Edicts of Caesar (which we must also know were Edicts legally
published, and with consent of the other States and Princes of the Empire) but
therein he openly charge the Emperor himself, and the other Princes with
false play. Turpe est Caesarem ac Principes manifestis agere mendaciis. What a
shame is it, says he, that an Emperor and Princes should lie thus palpably.
And in the same Book, of the same persons speaking, Deus mihi dedit negotium.
It is Gods will, says he, that in this business I should not have to do with
reasonable men; but, I see, these wild Beasts of Germany will murder me, if
they can. And therefore more bitterly, maliciously, and traitorously
afterward, Oro cuncios pios Christianos. I beseech, says he, all godly
Christians, that they would only pray for these blind Princes, by whom God
afflicts them in his great wrath; but, says he, let us not follow them by
any means, let us not serve them in their Wars, nor give them any Contribution
against the Turk: (For that was a thing either then in debate, or but lately
consented to by the States of the Empire,) For the Turk, says he, is a Prince
ten times wiser, and more honest then they: And what good, I pray, can such
fools expect against the Turk, who do themselves so horribly blaspheme and
offend God? Will any man think this tolerable? but he proceeds. Art. 367.
In his Book against the Five hundred Articles, Quid ergo boni in rebus
Divinis? What good, think we, says he, can such impious and wicked Tyrants
appoint in matter of Religion? Before they were fools, now they are Tyrants.
And still he goes on from worse to worse, that is, higher and higher, as it
were, by degrees in his impudence. For in his Book De Saeculari potestate,
concerning the Civil Magistrate, or the Powers of the World, He delivers his
opinion of all Kings and Princes in general; and how he would have them
esteemed, in these words, Scire debes, etc. You must know, says he, that from
the beginning of the world to this day, it has ever been a rare thing to find
a wise Prince; but more rare, to find one that was honest: For commonly they
are the veriest fools and knaves in the world. And again, Quis nescit, etc. Who
knows not, says he, that Princes are like Venison in Heaven; very dainty and
rare, it seems; scarce one of a thousand perhaps saved. This was the charity of
the man toward Christian Princes in general; as for the Emperor himself, in
his Book De bello contra Turcas, he expressly denies him to be the head of
Christendom, or so much as a difender of the Faith; and least this might be
capable of some tolerable sense, he explicates his meaning plainly in the
reason which he gives, Eos namque esse pessimos hosts; For, says he,
Emperors and Princes are commonly the grea^est enemies, which Christianity, and
the Faith have: Yea, in his Book Contrae Rusticos, against the Boors, (which
was an occasion and subject, where, if ever he meant to do it, a man would
think, he was obliged to favor Magistracy and Civil Dignities, yet even there)
his Language is the same, or worse. Sciat^^, boni domini, Deum s^c procurare,
quod subditi nec possunt, nec debent, etc. You must know, my good Lords, says
he, That G^d will have it so, that your Subjects neither can, nor will, nor
ought any longer to endure your Tyrannical G vernments. Mark well that debent,
they ought not, it was not put in for nothing, I warrant you. Those good men,
the Boors, were not altogether, or too much to be discouraged by that Book of
his, though titled against them; it having been from his Sermons and Doctrines
commonly divulged, that they took the chief grounds of their Insurrection.

Neroes, Dioclesians, Julians, that ever persecuted the Church? Did Elias speak
thus to Ahab and Jezabel? and yet his flatterers commonly call him the Elias of
Germany. St. Paul (if he had pleased to regard him) gave him a far better
example, Acts 26.25.
using Festus the Roman Governor with much more reverence. And without all
doubt, no true Christian zeal can be so irregular, so rude, so intemperately
passionate and scurrilous. To revile, and speak evil of dignities, is the
property of another spirit, then the Spirit of God, Jude 8.9.
or else Saint Jude deceives us. To give Caesar his Sovereign, and all the
Princes of Germany the lie, although it were very insufferable, yet it may seem
but a personal, or particular contempt; but to proclaim them all Savages,
Fools, Knaves, Tyrants, and to say that the Turk was a wiser and honester man
then any of them, in whose Government, as all the World knows, the Sacred Law
of Christ our Savior is wholly abrogated, and the blasphemous Dreams of a
wretched Impostor set up, and maintained by force in stead thereof, and the
Moral Law of God publicly and daily, by a contrary law of Mahomet, in many
respects violated and broken, (to the great dishonor of God, indeed, and shame
of Christendom,) is a Language so absurdly seditious and scandalous, as it can
never be sufficiently detested. Then to give out to the world, and publish in
Print, as it were in open scorn and contempt of all authority, That a wise and
good Prince was as rarely found, as a black Swan; that commonly Kings and
Princes be the most doting Fools, or wickedst Knaves in the World, and that
they are such a Reprobate crew, as there is scarce a place in Heaven for them;
what is it, but by such epithets and execrable boldness, to bring Majesty it
self, and all Governments into contempt, to take the Crown from Princes Heads,
and to expose Magistracy, and the just preheminencies thereof (without which no
Government could long subsist) to the malice, contempt, yea, fury too, of the
meanest of the people.

Something to be added here from Page 87. of the Book.
and all this was said to Catholic, that is, Popish Princes, and his Enemies.
Well, admit it were so, that they were Popish Princes, yet were they
Magistrates notwithstanding, and at least in as good capacity as Nero, and
those others, Romans 13.
to whom St. Paul commands every soul to pay obedience and honor; yet were they
the Lieutenants of God upon earth, they had the Image (that is, the Authority)
of God upon them; and for that Image sake, were to be used with due reverence.
They had the Laws, the Customs, the Constitutions of the Empire on their side;
they were not his Enemies, further then his irregularities and offenses,
together with their own duty, obliged them to be so. Neither is it true, that
he used his own Princes of the House of Saxony much better. Surely, as for Duke
George of Leipsig, his bitterness and incivility toward him was notorious,
calling him, The Apostle of Satan, Surius Anno 1533.
Enemy of the Gospel, Murderer, Tyrant, and what not? Last of all styling him
with a most scurrilous kind of contempt, Illustrissima inclementia vestra:
Your most Illustrious Surliness. And as for the Prince Elector himself, his
Grand Patron and Protector, old John Frederick, Duke of Saxony, it was not
possible he should escape without some dirt in his face, as well as the rest.
For whereas the Duke had granted Commission to certain persons, viz. unto John
Psaumitz, a Nobleman, Jerome Schurffius, a Lawyer, Philip Melancthon, Hawbitz,
and others, to make a visitation of Saxony (which, themselves had filled with
disorders) Luther was much offended at this, and therefore when they returned
their Commission, and made report of things, he took occasion to show his scorn
and contempt of their proceedings arrogantly enough: Trotz, quoth he, A fig for
these visitors, they have done nothing; and all this, because himself was left
out of the Commission: That was it which vexed his ambitious soul, so as he
could not hold, but must discover himself in his very Sermons, Nescio qua de
causa: I cannot tell, Sermon. in Dominica Intravit.
says he, why the Prince should neglect me in this business. But because he
was neglected, see how he takes it, and what respect he professes to the
Orders agreed upon in that Visitation. Lib. cont. Ambros. Catharin.
Si licet mihi decretales Papae; Is it lawful for me, says he, for Christian
liberties sake, not only to neglect, but to contemn and trample under my feet
the Popes Decrees, the Canons of Councels, the Laws and Mandates of the Emperor
himself, and of all Princes; Vestrasne res gestas, etc. And think you, says
he, I shall value your Orders so much, as to take them for Laws? No, I warrant
you; himself must, and will be judge always, what is fit to be Law: Neither the
Duke, nor his Commissioners, must prescribe rules to him, further then his own
humor pleases. And therefore, whereas the Duke had once presumed to forbid him
writing any thing against the Archbishop of Mentz, (because he being so great a
Prelate, and a Prince Elector of the Empire, it might occasion some public
disturbance,) speaking of this to Spalatinus, a famous Lutheran, Loc. Com.
Class. 4. cap. 30.
and great friend of his; What says he? Non feram, quod ais, non passurum
principem, etc. I cannot endure, says Luther, that you should say, The Prince
will not suffer me to write against him of Mentz, nor that the public Peace
should be broken; rather then this shall be, I will loose both thee, and the
Prince too; Potius te and principem ipsum perdam.
(if I translate him well.) Si enim Creatori ejus Papae, etc. For, says he,
seeing I have resisted his Maker, the Pope, I will not surely submit now to his
Creature. No, Spalatinus, no, that shall never be.

Luthers personal doctrine and spirit, by which you may sufficiently judge of
the man, and perceive, how contrary they were, both of them (person and
doctrine) unto the Peace and Established Government of the Empire. We are next
to see what Tragedy followed this Prologue, and what effect such principles of
Sedition as these had upon the people; which indeed was very answerable to
them. For when as this Wild Boar in the Church of God (as he may be justly
termed) had broken down the Pale of Order and Discipline, and the common people
by his means had received such a pleasant new Gospel, as taught them, That they
were exempted (now) from all Canons and Injunctions of the Church (made to
restrain licentiousness and disorder;) That true Christians were freed from the
Captivity of Babylon, that is, from all such Constitutions and Ceremonies, as
they found burthensom, or less pleasing to themselves; That there was a more
compendious way to Heaven lately found out, then had been formerly thought
upon, that is to say, By Faith only, with freedom from merits, and all the
burden of good works; That Rome was Babylon; That Bishops had seduced them for
a long time together; That Religious men were Idolaters, and all Princes that
favored or protected them, Tyrants; That the Will of God was not to suffer the
poor Commonalty any longer to bear so heavy a yoke and subjection under such
oppressors; when, I say, the common people had well drunk in, and were become
mad with these intoxicating doctrines of Sedition and Liberty, no long time
passes, but they rise in Arms, make Insurrections, and commit Outrages and
Ryots all the Countries over: Each man was a drum and firebrand to his
Neighbor, every one gave alarm to other, to rise and root out so corrupt a
Clergy, and depose such unworthy Princes. First of all, the Boors and Peasants
in Germany run together and make havoc of all things in Swevia, Franconia,
Alsatia, and in many of the Imperial Towns also: They in Franconia profess they
take Arms to expel the Nobility out of Germany, and to cut down those Oaks of
the Church, which stood in their way, viz. The Bishops, Archbishops, and other
Prelates, to abolish the old Laws, and to establish others new in their stead.
The heads of these tumults, and; as it were, Tribunes of the people, were
chiefly Thomas Muncer, and Phifer his Comrade, with one Christopher Schaplerus.
Muncer was a most audacious fellow, and, as some report, of a Priest, was
become an Apostate: He had been formerly Scholar to Carolstad; Melancth. in
Hist. Ana.
yet Melancthon confesses, That he came also to Luthers Lectures; which is not
improbable, seeing he acted some of his doctrines so much to the life. In
Alsatia he first began to Preach against the Pope, yet dissented in many things
from his Masters doctrine; because, as the Popes Laws were too severe, so
Luthers (even in his opinion) gave too much liberty. There he also first
preached against Mass, and against the Baptizing of Infants, because it was not
expressly commanded in the Scriptures. There he taught, That Christ did not take
flesh of the Virgin Mary; and that Magistrates did forfeit or loose all
Authority, so often as they committed Mortal sin; and lastly, That the people
(that is, Cent. 15. p 445.
such a rabble of the people as followed him tumultuously, and without any
lawful order) might correct Princes when they offend. This fellow, to make his
name and practices more reverenced by the people, pretended, as others did,
extraordinary vocation from God; That what he did was by revelation and warrant
of the Holy Ghost; that he had received from God the Sword of Gideon, cogere
universum orbem, as the Centurists write of him, thereby to compel the whole
World, to acknowledge and set up the new Kingdom of Jesus Christ; to fight for
Israel, and to depose Idolatrous Magistrates: And with such fantastical
pretenses as these, he made shift to draw into the Field infinite numbers of
people of Franconia, by whose help he won by force the strong Town of
Winspurgh, slew the Count Lodowick of Helphens^ein; and either killed, or
captivated all the Noblemen of the Country, whom they could encounter. Besides,
they sacked and destroyed all Ch^rches, Monasteries, and Religious places,
where they came; Insomuch, Surius Chron.
as Conradus Wimpin, and other Authors affirm, That in this only Circle of the
Empire, they pillaged and spoiled near upon Three hundred Monasteries, Castles,
and Forts; and yet these wretched people could pretend, they took arms for
edification. Is it not likely they did so? At last for want of Victuals, and
other necessaries (as multitude and fury are seldom provident) they were forced
to divide their Camps; so some of them marched toward the Duchy of
Wirtembergh, where by Truchses, General of the League of Swevia, they were all
put to the Sword, or flight; yet very great numbers of them remained still in
Franconia. Whereupon, because their tumults and proceedings tended so
manifestly to the d^struction of all State, Laws, and G^vernment whatsoever, at
last John Frederick, Duke of S xony, (who had before connived at Mu^^ers
P^eaching in Alstadt) his Uncle Duke George of Leipsig, together with the other
Princes, (the Emperor himself being then in Spain) joined their forces, and at
Franckhuisen made a bloody slaughter and execution of those Peasants in their
Camp; where Muncer and Ph^fer, both, were taken prisoners and executed, and
above a hundred thousand men lost their lives in these Tumults and Rebellion.

Alsatia they made new uproars, and above Twenty thousand of them were slain by
the Count Palatine, and Anthony, Duke of Lorrain. After this an other multitude
of them put themselves in Arms at Petersheim, in the Territory of Worms, but
were likewise d^feated and put to the Sword. To conclude, no part of the Empire
was perfectly clear from this plague of Conspiracy: For as the Boors in the
Country, so in the Imperial Towns the common people would needs be reforming of
Religion, and removing of such Magistrates, as did any way support the old. At
Erford they degraded and committed all the Officers of the Town; at Franckford
with more fury they spoiled the Churches, banished the Clergy, and put all the
Authority and Government of the City into the hands of Twenty four Commoners;
they created all inferior Magistrates new, made new Laws, expelled the old
Senators, the whole Clergy, not without much threatening and terror; Surius in
Chron.
they selected and set forth Forty and seven Articles out of Luthers new
doctrine, which they decreed should be observed religiously, and professed by
all men; they sent them also to their Brethren at Colen, and Mentz, who had
attempted the like pranks there, standing in Arms, and being Masters of the
several Cities for some days together; but in the end failed. In the Territory
of the Bishop of Triers, one Francis Sicking, a private Lutheran, yet out of
his zeal, and to comply, as some say, with the instigations of Bucer, and
others, feared not to take up Arms, and to invade in hostile manner the Country
of that Bishop; took by assault a strong place of the Princes own possession;
marched with his Army up to the very Walls of Triers, with intention to
besiedge it: But as his cause was wicked, and undertaken without any just
ground of War, so the success was answerable; his forces being suddenly
compelled to retire, himself with many of his accomplices apprehended and
attainted, and their Lands confiscate. Briefly, and to give you the sum of all
these mischeifs under one view, This Inundation, and, as it were, First fury of
these Reformers of Germany, was so general and violent, that all Church-Goods
whatsoever, where they came, became prey and booty to them; Cathedral Churches
were broken down, and shamefully defaced; Monasteries ransacked and robbed;
Bishops and Bishoprics spoiled; as Magdeburgh for example, the Seat of the
Primate of Germany, and a Prince of the Empire; Breme, Lu ^ck, and no less then
fourteen more beside: So as the Imperial Chamber at Spires was for a long time
after much disquieted, and troubled with Actions, Petitions, and Complaints,
about those spoils; the Emperor himself marvellously perplexed, how to procure
a Cessation of these disorders, and to stop the Torrent of these Reformers:
Neither could he do it effectually till many years after, viz. Anno 1544. when
by an Edict he appointed Commissioners particularly to enquire in bona
Ecclesiae invasa, after all Church-Goods purloyned. Till that time, himself had
his hands full, and at some time more then enough to do, to make resistance
against their fury, and to pacify the troubles, which continually grew upon
him from these beginnings, as will hereafter more clearly appear. All which
things are reported and testified to the World by Jo. Cochlaeus, Jo. Cochlaei
Acta and Scripta Lutheri.
an Author beyond all exception, whose writings, out of which, most of this
has been taken, were published in Luthers life time, and never yet challenged
by any man of false play. They are reported also generally by Pontanus,
Hortensius, Surius, Mountford, Elorim. Raemundus; Flor. Raemundus de ortu and
Progress. Heresium.
yea, by Sleydan himself, and others. And for my self, I can but protest to
have used all sincerity in citing the evidence, which I had from so many worthy
Witnesses: And that I do, as the Romans were wont to say in such cases, Ita me
Jupiter, si sciens fallo; Let me not live, if I forge any thing, which I know
to be otherwise.

Luther wrong, to charge him with these Tumults, and the Insurrections of the
Anabaptists; seeing that he vehemently reproved their proceedings, gave them no
encouragement at all, ever disliked those wild fantasies of Muncer, and his
followers, ever Preached in defense of Magistrates and Civil Government: Thus
pleads Doctor Bilson, and some others in his behalf; but their labor is like
the washing of a Blackamoor, all they can do will not make him white: For let
the World judge by what has been said already, whether such Positions and
Exhortations, as we have instanced in out of his own writings, vehemently
delivered by him, and as greedily swallowed by the people, could be any thing
else, but fire to this fuel. Let his Bull against the Clergy, his Invectives
against all Ecclesiastical Persons and Orders, be well considered, and they
will plainly appear to tend to nothing else. For what man is so senseless, that
would not be moved to contemn Authority, and endeavor by all means to
enfranchise himself, when he shall hear Preached by an Elias, a man whom he
supposes to be sent extraordinarily from God, to teach and reform the World,
That Princes were Tyrants, Bishops blind and false guides, Religious men
Idolaters; and all the Powers of the World generally such, as by their
corruptions and wickedness had forfeited their Authority; and that Christians
had, and ought to enjoy, such a Charter of Liberty, as did exempt them in
Conscience from all Humane Laws and Constitutions? I say, what man of sense can
imagine, but the people fully persuaded of such maxims as these, from the mouth
of such a Preacher, should not be always ready, and in a posture to rebel upon
any occasion offered? And that Luther had taught them this, and much more in
substance, is manifest, as I said, by what has been alleged before; yet, as
to that last particular, Of exemption in point of Conscience from Humane Laws,
it may require a word or two more.

Cochlaeus alleges out of his First Book, Cochlae. in Miscel.
Exhort. ad Pacem, in these words, In saeculari regimine nihil amplius facitis:
You Princes of the World, says he, what do you else, but fleece and pillage
your poor Subjects to their very skin, to maintain your pride, till they can
bear no longer? Nor upon that which follows, Non sunt Rustici; They are not the
Boors, but God Almighty h^mself, which is coming against them for the^ Tyranny:
These s^all pass as pieces of his accustom^d Malapertness with them, or, if it
be possible, with some tolerable interpretation. But certainly that which
follows, admits none. Cap. de B^ptism.
In his Book, De captiv. B bylon. Ab omnibus hominum l^gibus, (...). We are,
says he, freed from all Laws of men whatsoever, by virtue of that Christian
Liberty, which is given us in Baptism. And in the same Book, Cap. de Matrim.
Scio nullam rempublicam, etc. I know, says he, very well, there is never a
Commonwealth in the World well governed by these Laws of men: And therefore
concludes it to be, Cap. de Sac. Ord.
Turpe and iniquiter s^rvile; A shameful thing, and a slavery unworthy of a
Christian man who is free, to be subject to any Laws, but the Laws of God, and
of Heaven. I know some men endeavor to put Interpretations even upon these
Passages, to make them seem less scandalous. Respons. ad rat. 8. Campian.
Doctor Whitacre in particular tells us, That Luther meant not, that men are
so exempt from Humane Laws, as that every one ^ight do what he list; but that
the Conscience of a Believer was free from all Humane Laws, in respect of
Religion. As if to obey Magistrates, in obedience to the Will and Ordinance of
God, as Magistracy is plainly, Romans 13. and as we ought to do in all the
obedience we give to them, 1 Pet. 2.13. were not matter and duty of Religion;
As to do it for Public peace sake, and in regard of that Authority which they
have by consent of men; and for our good, is an act of Morality or Civil
Justice, due unto them upon the account of Natural Right and Hum^ne Reason,
abstracting from the Law of God: or, as if, out of the case of scandal, peril,
or some other such extrinsecal considerations, a man might neglect, or not
observe, the just Laws of men, at his pleasure, without offense against God; or
lastly, as if to resist lawful Magistracy out of a man's private Authority,
Passion, or Spleen, were not a thing contrary to Religion. But let Luther
interpret himself, Dico itaque, neque Papa, neque Episcopus, etc. I say
therefore, says he, as Sir Thomas Moor cites him in his Latin work
abovementioned, Lovan. 1566.
That neither the Pope, nor Bishops, nor any mortal man whatsoever, has
authority to lay the least syllable of command upon a Christian, unless it be
by his own consent.

when they sound Liberty, or any thing agreeable to their corrupt Passions and
Humors, as these do. And that we may see his design did drive directly against
the Laws themselves, and not only against such impertinent and imaginary
niceties, which men might raise about the observing of them, in his Book Ad
Nobilitat. German. he absolutely vilifies the Law it self, so far as to prefer
the Turks Alcoran before it. Men say, says he, there is no better Government
in the World, then with the Turk, and yet he has neither Canon nor Civil Law,
only his Al^oran: But with us it is plain, there can be no worse Government
found, then that which we have by the Canon and Civil Law: What did he mean,
think we? What rule did he leave the people to be guided by, but their own
Humors and Passions, who before had traduced the Princes themselves for
Tyrants, for Oppressors; and now debaseth the Law (that is, the only rule by
which the Princes pretended to govern) even beneath the Alcoran it self?
Hospin. Hist. Sacram.
Add hereunto, that his own friends, and such as follow him in most things, do
for this very reason charge him directly, To have been no small cause of the
Wars in Germany; yea, Centur. 16. p. 16.
his own Osiander testifies, That the Boors, who made such havoc for a while
in Germany by their conspiracies, and especially against the Clergy, did not
only pretend the Gospel, and the Liberty of the Gospel for their doings, but
did even appeal therein to Luther himself: Ad Lutheri judicium pr^vocaverant;
They appealed, says he, to Luthers judgment: Not to urge what Erasmus has to
this effect, Hyperaspist. advers. Lutherum.
nor what Menno Simonius, an Anabaptist, acknowledges in his Book De cruce
Christi, Quam sanguinolentas seditiones Lutherani, etc. What bloody Riots and
Murders the Lutherans have committed, for some years past, to maintain the^r
Doctrine? And as to that part of the Objection, that Luther did reprove, yea,
write against the Boors, it is the poorest fallacy of all: He did it, but how?
With such calumniating and taxing of the Princes themselves, as they could be
little secured by his writing, and the Boors as little discouraged. He did it,
but when? When it was too late; when he could forbear no longer; when he found
himself generally censured, and murmured at by the Nobility, and better sort of
people, as an occasion at least, if not an Instrument and Fautor of those
mischeifs. Lastly, He did it, but when? When he saw the Boors go down, that
they were not likely to maintain their quarrel, nor to go through with their
work; then indeed he left them in the Briars (wisely enough) though they
appealed to him, though they used, yea, alleged his own Homilies and Sermons,
for what they did, though they were all for Reformation, all for Liberty, all
against the Church of Rome, and against Bishops, yea, and that their very word
in the Field was Vivat Evangelium; Let the Gospel flourish*

Luthers doctrinal extravagancies, and touched upon the evil practices, or
fruits thereof, only in such men, as either for the privateness and meanness
of their condition (being all of them Boors, Peasants, and rude Country people)
or for the unsuccessfulness of their designs are generally disclaimed: Such as
neither Luther, nor any of his followers will readily own. I come now to give a
further instance of the mischief, which the doctrine and doings of this man
brought upon Germany, in a business which was publicly owned, not by Luther
only, but by many of the Princes themselves; who for the defense of his new
Doctrine, and protection of his wretched person, bandied themselves against the
Emperor, their Sovereign Lord, and against the general body of the Empire, of
which they were both Members and Subjects, and by the Public Laws, whereof
themselves in that relation ought to have been governed. The beginning,
proceedings, and issue of which confederacy was briefly thus.

John Frederick Elector, and Duke of Saxony, the Landsgrave of Hessen, with
some others, already caught with the Liberty, and other advantages which they
made of Luthers new doctrine, (besides an old and inveterate emulation in most
of them against the House of Austria, which then was, and still is Imperial)
first enter a League at Smalcald, which is a Town of Hessia upon the Frontiers
of Saxony, only (as they pretended) for their own defense, and to maintain
their Religion and Liberties against such men as would invade or persecute
them. We must observe here first, That the Religion spoken of, was a Religion
but then newly and privately taken up of themselves, contrary to that which was
publicly received and acknowledged in the Empire; and by virtue, or rather
pretext whereof, they were obliged to do, and suffer to be done many things,
which were expressly contrary to the Constitutions of the Empire; which
Constitutions, the Emperor, together with themselves, were by oath solemnly
bound to observe, and see observed. In this League were also comprehended, the
Duke of Wittemberg, and some of the Imperial Towns: They renewed it again at
Franckfort, and after that again at Auspurgh, confirming it with a general and
solemn Protestation of what their opinions were in matter of Religion; which
Protestation being then exhibited unto the Emperor in their names, the Title,
or Surname of Protestants, became thenceforward appropriate to that party.
After this, viz. Anno 1536. Suspecting some opposition would be made against
them by the Emperor, and other States of Germany, for such proceedings, and not
willing to be taken at unawares by him, they bring ( viz. themselves first of
all) an huge Army into the Field, commanded by the young Duke of Saxony, John
Frederick (his Father being dead,) and the Landsgrave of Hessen, with
resolution by force of Arms, to find or make themselves right, as they called
it. The Duke of Wittemberg, the Imperial Towns, Auspurgh, Vlm, Strasburgh, and
Franckfort, sent them aid. The Count Pala^ine of the Rhine had levied Two
hundred horse for them, but upon better thoughts revoked them, when they were
upon their march. The Duke of Brunswick and his sons, the Duke of Luneburgh,
the young Marquess of Baden, the Prince of Anhalt, the Counts of Furstenburgh
and Mansfield joined with them, either in person or power. Surius in Chron.
Their Army consisted of about Seventy thousand fighting men, and among them
Seven thousand and seven hundred at least were Horse; they had an hundred and
twelve Cannon and Field pieces, with such an infinite quantity of all sorts of
Provisions, as gave them an assured hope and confidence of Victory. The eyes of
all Princes were upon this action; and Germany it self trembled in expectation
of the event and success of such an Army prepared, as they saw, to swallow up
the Emperor, (if they could) and to subvert the whole Government and Religion
of the Empire; I mean that Religion and Government which was then established,
and had stood so established many hundred years, before the Fathers or
Grandfathers of any of those Princes, now in Arms to destroy it, were born.
The Emperor had only God, and a just cause on his side; for his friends, those
I mean, who openly and avowedly appeared for him, were few; viz. The King of
the Romans, his Brother, the Duke of Bavaria, and the Duke of Cleve: For though
Duke Maurice of Saxony followed him, yet in regard of his affinity with the
Landsgrave, whose Son in law he was; as also for his Religion, being a
Lutheran, he could not but be suspected. However, it pleased God,
notwithstanding this huge Army of the Princes, that the Emperor became Master
of the Field, with a most complete and signal Victory; yea, (which was an
accident more rare) the two Generals ( Saxony and Hessen, both of them) became
prisoners, and their whole Army was defeated. The young Duke of Saxony (a person
much honored and pitied) had his life given him, with some connivence for his
Religion; yet his impregnable Fort at Gotha was demolished, and the Electorate
with all the Lands thereunto belonging, were bestowed by the Emperor upon Duke
Maurice. The like mercy for life was showed the Landsgrave, who after some
time, obtained his liberty also. The Duke of Wittemberg for Two hundred
thousand Ducats; and the Imperial Towns, partly with Money, and partly upon
their humble Petitions and Submission, made their peace at last with the
Emperor. And thus, by the good Providence of God, and happy conduct of Caesar,
was the Empire preserved in Statu quo prius; the Electors Ecclesiastical and
other Prelates, continued, and their Dignities maintained; whereas, in all
probability, had the Princes prevailed, as they had already by the instigation
of Luther, and such Preachers, swallowed the Revenues, extinguished, yea,
wholly buried the Title, State, and Authority of Bishops in their own
Provinces, so would they have done all the Empire over.

Luther and Lutheranism of the odiousness of this Action, yea, and the Action
it self from the imputation of Rebellion. First of all Doctor Bilson affirms,
Differences of Christian Subjects, etc.
That the Lawyers of Germany do in some cases permit resistance to be made
against Caesar; but he names not one: Then he says, The States of Germany are
not absolutely subject to the Emperor, but only upon some conditions.
Secondly, Centur. 16.
the Divines of Magdeburgh plead, That if the Magistrate pass the bounds of his
Authority, and command things wicked and unlawful, he may well be resisted, and
must not be obeyed. Thirdly, Sleydan says, Lib. 19. fol. 263.
We may resist Caesar with good Conscience, when he intends the destruction of
Religion and Liberty. Lastly, Consil. Evangel. Part. 1. p. 314*
Philip Melancthon with great confidence gives Authority to the Inferior
Magistrate, to alter Religion and overthrow Idolatry. So they all conclude the
War lawful, both by Gods Law and Man's: And this indeed is the substance of the
Reasons, alleged by the Duke, and the Landsgrave, both when the League was
first made at Smalcald, and when they first proclaimed War against the Emperor.

Caesar passed the bounds of his Authority; for if he did not, it is clear,
they passed theirs. 2. That he commanded things wicked and unlawful. 3. That he
went about to destroy true Religion, and their Liberty: All these must be
proved, before it be lawful to take Arms, and resist him, by their own
confession. I demand therefore of them this Question, When Caesar or the
Supreme Magistrate commands any thing to be done, which is not apparently
contrary to the Laws of the Empire then in force, who shall be Censor, who
shall Judge, whether Caesar passes the bounds of his Authority? and whether
the things which he commands be impious, or no? They answer, he absolutely
sought to destroy their Religion and Liberties: But I reply, it has been an
old and usual stratagem of Satan, to oppose Religion against Religion, thereby
to bring in Atheism, and leave us no Religion. Beside, making Lutheranism to be
the only true Religion, and their Liberties to consist in the free profession
of that, they take that for granted which Caesar both at Worms and Auspurgh
made the greatest Question. So they argue not well, because they do not proceed
ex concessis; yea, it is manifest, that when they did presume to set up a new
Religion, they passed themselves the bounds of their Authority; and the World
might judge Caesar a very simple Prince, if he should either change his own
Religion, or tolerate theirs upon the bare credit of Luthers private opinion
and spirit, or upon the bare Protestation of the Confederates. For were they
competent Judges against the whole World? or can Religion be lawfully and
orderly changed by Civil Magistrates only? and when neither a General Council,
nor National Council has decreed it, nor any Imperial Diet established it? may
every Elector or Prince frame a new Religion for his own Province by Law,
without consent of the Emperor and States? Give me an Instance, show me a
President, when any such Innovation was ever made in the Empire, without an
Imperial Diet. Show me a Law, or some color of Law, by which it might be done,
or else confess, That the Princes taking up Arms against the Emperor was
without Justice, and their quarrel without lawful ground. Beside, was it lawful
for the Confederates to coin a new Religion, and maintain it by Arms, and was
it not more lawful for the Emperor to defend the old, which was already
received, and to reform them? The Boors took Arms upon the self-same pretenses,
viz. For Religion and Liberty; yet the Princes with their own forces, and with
no less Justice and Honor, subdued them. Why might not therefore Caesar compel
the Confederates unto the same terms, as they did the Boors, viz. To exercise
that Religion which was established, at least with a quousque, until a legal
Reformation could be had, and to obey the Laws in force, and to keep the Peace
of the Commonwealth? Does the degree or dignity of the persons make the cause
so different? I trow not. And for any designs of Caesar upon them, under color
of Religion, it cannot be made good: They were first in the Field; the Emperor
had not any forces ready a long time after; yea, they pursued him with their
Army, and compelled him to fortify himself: P. Avila, de bello Germanico
So that if men's Councels may be guessed at by their actings, it is clear, they
had rather designs upon him: And his favorable dealings with all of them after
the Victory, do more then refute such a calumny. But, says Dr. Bilson, The
Emperor is not absolutely to be obeyed by the States: It is no matter. He is to
be obeyed in seeing the Laws and Constitutions of the Empire observed, and that
is enough to justify his proceedings in the case. How far he is absolute, and
how far the Princes do ow fealty and homage to him, and obedience to the
Public Constitutions of the Empire, their several Oaths taken at the
Coronation of the one, and Investitures or Instalments of the other, do best
show.

Caesar did observe the Law, and that the Confederate Princes did violate both
the Laws and Liberties of Germany. For what Prince soever stands Rectus in
Curia, having the ancient and known Laws of the Kingdom on his side, must
always be judged to hold a better plea then Subjects, who arm themselves
against him illegally, disorderly, and by authority of their own private
opinions only. At that time Caesar was bound by Law to extirpate Lutheranism,
and to maintain the Popes authority in Germany, as it was acknowledged in the
other parts of Christendom, he was bound to maintain Catholic Religion, and
the Immunities or Rights of the Church; so manifestly, that even their own
Goldastus does acknowledge it to be the Emperors Oath so to do; which is not a
new Oath neither: For the same in effect was taken long since by Carolus 4.
Otho 1. and 3. and by Carolus Magnus, which is a prescription every way good
and indisputable. The like profession also we find made by those ancient and
religious Emperors, Theodosius, Gratian, Valentinian, Justinian, and others,
both in the Code and Novel Constitutions. How therefore could the Emperor,
either maintain or suffer any other Religion in the Empire, then that which he
found already established, and allowed by all his Predecessors, declared by so
many Councels, continued so many Generations, ratified by all the Imperial
Dyets, and lastly, by his own Oath? Beside, did the Duke of Saxony, or the
Landsgrave, when they were prisoners, ever plead the Law on their side? did
they ever use any such argument, any such excuse? No; they submitted
absolutely, and craved pardon for their lives, from his hands to whom they were
forfeited; and how ridiculous also had the plea been? For shall the Duke of
Saxony take arms for the defense of Lutheranism, and may not the Count Palatine
of Rhine do the same in defense of Calvinism, which yet the Lu herans will not
endure? or an Halberstat for Epicurism? or a Muncer with his Boors for
Anabaptism? and so by Anarchy, under pretense of Conscience and Liberties, rend
in pieces the Empire, and open the Ports of Germany to the Turk. But to stop
the mouth of Learned Ignorance, I will discover more particularly, and lay down
the foundation of this great quarrel betwixt Caesar and the Confederate
Princes, and the legal order and method of proceeding, which the Emperor
constantly observed therein.

Luther at Worms, and out of his special Grace and Benignity, further required
the Archbishop of Triers, and the Elector of Brandenburgh, to treat with him,
and persuade him to Conformity; but perceiving him obstinate, and resolved not
to submit himself to any due Authority, and finding that all his Course, Books,
Sermons tended to nothing but Sedition, and making further divisions among the
people; at last he made a Decree, with the general consent of the States, not
to put him to death, such was his mercy, but to banish him the Empire, wherein
was shown, as appeared afterward by the event, much more lenity then just
providence. In which Decree, after the Causes and Reasons of such proceedings
at large declared and set down, he concludes thus. Mandantes de eorundem
Statuum consensu, sub crimine laesae Majestatis, etc. Commanding by and with
consent of the said States, under pain of High Treason, and forfeiture of
whatsoever, Lands, Principalities, Goods or Privileges holding of us, and of
the Sacred Roman Empire; as also of Proscription, or our Imperial Ban to be
ipso facto incurred, etc. That neither you, nor any any of you do presume to
receive, maintain, or harbor the said Martin Luther, etc. And that ye burn all
those his foresaid Heretical and Seditious Books. And this Edict was directed
to all the Electors, Princes, Imperial Towns, and States. Now can you imagine,
that the Duke of Saxony, or the Landsgrave, were exempted from this Edict? or
that the Emperor had not as full power to call them to account for their
contempt of it, as any inferior persons? or otherwise, that those Princes were
the Ephori of Germany, and might curb the Emperor himself, if they saw cause?
Then certainly the Emperor of Germany were but a poor shadow of an Emperor, a
Titulus sine re indeed, a matter of nothing but empty Title, and it were true
that which Bodin says, that Imperium in Imperio quaerendum est; Jo. Bodin, de
Rep.
A man might seek for an Emperor all the Empire over, and not find him: Which
yet by his leave, is a gross error. Well! The Duke of Saxony, notwithstanding
this Edict, would maintain and protect Luther; as he did at Als^at a Town of
his own in Turingia; which place Luther with no small arrogance, or impiety
rather, was wont to call his Pathmos; and in the mean time changed Religion,
and established Lutheranism in all his own Dominions; and at Smalcald, as we
said before, entered a League against the Emperor for maintenance of it.

Andrew Gail that famous Lawyer shall tell you, Gailius de Pace public. c. 10.
sect. 36.
Receptores bannitorum perinde puniantur, etc. The Receivors, says he, of
Outlaws or Banished persons, are liable to the same punishment, that such
people are; and Domini Praediorum, The Lords, says he, of those places where
they lurk, are bound to deliver them up; viz. To Justice. And again, Qui
bannito commeatum and annonam suppeditat, He that supplieth an Outlaw with
provision or victuals, is ordinarily judged as a receivor. Advers. Here Is. lib.
1. c. 4.
Brunus shall also tell you, That in excommunicatis, qui bannitis; That the
very entertainment of excommunicate and outlawed persons, is criminal and
liable to punishment. If you suppose, that these Laws respected only inferior
receivors, and that the Duke was free, hear what Gail says again. Conditio
Pacis publicae, Lib. 1. c. 1. sect. 9.
etc. An Edict for the public Peace, obliges all persons in the Empire of
what state, condition or dignity soever, as well the Princes themselves, as the
inferior people; yea, says he, though it were published against some one or
more of the Princes. The Duke therefore not obeying the Law, and knowing that
the Emperor had often written out of Spain, that the Edict of Worms should be
executed, he aggravated his crime fearing the indignation of Caesar; and
thereupon took up arms, and entered into the League, as has been said. And yet
notwithstanding after this League entered, such was the lenity of Caesar, that
his Ambassador at Spires, in the year 1529. offered the Confederates most equal
and moderate terms of accord, viz. No more then that utrinque ab omni injuria,
etc. That henceforward both parties should abstain from doing injury to others,
and from all offensive language or reviling each other; and that only
offenders against this agreement should be banished. A man would think this
were a reasonable offer from the Supreme Magistrate to the Inferiors, obnoxious
both to him and the Law: Yet was it rejected by the Confederates. At Auspurgh
again in the year 1530. the Emperor most graciously entertained the Duke, and
received a Petition from him, with as much favor and indifferency as could
stand with his honor: And there again revived his Ambassadors motion at Spires,
that no further Innovations might be made, no more Books published, but that at
least all things might abide in quiet State, till the Seventeenth of May
ensuing: So much did his Imperial Majesty yield for Peace sake. And yet the
Duke rejected his motion; which so much displeased the Emperor, that he forbore
not to tell him, and the rest of the Leaguers, That if they obeyed not, they
should repent it. And yet again, at Spires he labored to have prevailed with
them by fair means; but thither the Duke (being grown more jealous and fearful
of Caesar) would not come. However by this course, which the Emperor constantly
held toward them, you may see, how unwilling he was to disturb the Peace, or
to begin the War; and how inexcusable they were, that rejected so often the
offers of accommodation.

Charles of Gaunt, Surius in Chron.
usurping the name of Emperor; whereby they renounced all obedience to him, and
so far as in them lay, deposed him: Which was an indignity the meanest Prince
of them all, would not have accounted sufferable in his own person. I must not
forget, that the Landsgrave did usually, both by Letters and Messages, with no
little bravery and confidence assure the Princes, and Towns of the League, that
within three months they would force Charles to fly out of Germany, and leave
the Empire to them. But how then did their pretenses hang together? that this
League was made only se defendendo, and for their Lawful Protection? Surely
they aimed at some thing more, when they talked of expelling the Emperor out of
Germany. As they also did when they solicited the Kings of France, England,
Denmark, the Hans Towns, and Swisses, to join with them, and dishonorably
abused him by many foul and infamous aspersions. It is true, France indeed,
(though his enemy at that time) nobly denied them; Denmark lingered, expecting
the success; neither was King Herry forward, though his great Counselor, and
Favorite, Cromwell, solicited their business diligently, and was so forward, as
to promise an hundred thousand Crowns for their aid. At which time Doctor
Thirlby, Bishop of Westminster, and Sir Philip Hobby, were the Kings
Ambassadors with the Emperor, and by that occasion witnesses of the whole
Tragedy.

Worms above mentioned, which as Gail the Lawyer has told us, in the case of
public Peace, obliges all persons alike: Let us remember the Decree of
Maximilian the First Emperor, about the year 1500. in these words,
Consentientibus Statuum and Ordinum votis, etc. By the general consent of the
Princes and States of the Empire, an Edict or Constitution was published
necessary for public Peace, called in the Language of the Empire Landtfrieden.
By which Constitution, Proscription or Banishment was adjudged to all such as
disturbed the public Peace by force of Arms; Gailius de Pace. lib. 1. c. 14.
which Gail further explains to this sense. Omnia Bella, etc. All War, says
he, made without consent of the Prince, and Commission from him, upon private
revenge or quarrel only, is adjudged unlawful. And Cap. 5. In crimen laesae
Majestatis incurrit, etc. He commits high Treason, says he, whosoever within
the Empire raises Arms, but by the Emperors Authority and Commission; because
he usurps to himself, that which is the proper Prerogative Imperial. Yea, Lib.
1. tit. 190.
their own Goldastus confesses it to be ancient Law, Nemo intra Imperii fines,
etc. That no man presume to gather Soldiers within the bounds of the Empire,
but by consent of the Prince of that respective Circle where he is; and that he
give sufficient Caution to the State, that he intends not to attempt any thing
against the Emperor, or against any of the States of the Empire. Tom. 2.
And in another place he alleges a Decree of Ludovicus Pius, against the King
of the Romans and his Confederates, as guilty of High Treason, for attempting
against the Emperor. The like also of Henry the First, against Arnulphus, Duke
of Baviere, who rebelled against him; and of Otho the First, against Ludolphus,
King of the Romans; and lastly, of Maximilian the First, against Emicho, Earl
of Lingen, whom he proclaimed Traitor, confiscated his Lands and Estate, and
gave them to other Princes of the Empire, only for going to serve the French
King in his Wars, though out of the Empire, contrary to his Proclamation. And
as for the Imperial Towns, which confederated with these Princes, there is as
little to be said for them: For it is a Maxim of Law, recorded by Gail, Vbi
supra; that Civitatum Imperialium solus Imperator est dominus. That the Emperor
only is Lord of the Imperial Cities, and not their several Magistrates: And
that they pretended their Liberties in this case against the Emperor, to no
purpose.

Luther, who was the primum mobile, and chief wheel of all these motions; or
rather the malus Genius, that Fury which agitated the people, and stirred them
up to all these disorders, if the Princes and Towns were thus guilty, he could
not be innocent. If the Flock did err, the Shepherd which led them, was to
blame. I shall not here charge him again with any small faults, I will not
accuse him of belying Caesar most impudently, when he wrote to his friend thus:
Wormatiam ingressus sum. In Epist.
I entered Worms, says he, at a time, when I knew that Caesar would not keep
Faith with me. Nor of his traducing or vilifying that most Fundamental
Constitution of the Empire in Aurea Bulla, making it one of the chief miracles
which Antichrist was to work, viz. The translating of the Empire from the
Greeks to the French, in the person of Carolus Magnus, Turesel. Epitom. lib. 6.
p. 204.
which was done by Pope Leo the Third: Nor of his usurping upon the Emperor and
Temporal Government, in those pretended Laws of his which he published,
concerning the Public Exchequer; and how he would have Church Lands and
Abby-Lands to be disposed, when he and the Princes should be Masters of all. It
shall be enough, that I say, He first counseled the Princes to take Arms, and
oppose Caesar in his quarrel; and this Sleydan himself acknowledges. And that
all his Preaching, and all his endeavors were to overthrow the Ecclesiastical
Electors, whose Dignities and Estates being established by the Aurea Bulla, it
was Treason, or Sedition in the highest degree so to do. The three
Ecclesiastical Electors, are three Chancelors of the Empire, and in respect of
their Regalities, immediately subject to the Emperor; so as there lies no
appeal from them to the Pope, but to the Emperor, and Chamber at Spires. Luther
therefore contriving their ruin, attempted treacherously to pull the fairest
Flowers out of the Imperial Crown. Neither could he effect the suppression of
them, but he must undermine and endanger the State of the Temporal Electors
also; who, as links of the same chain, must necessarily have fallen to the ground
upon the dissolution of the other; for they had no other ground, nor could
plead any other Charter for their Dignities and Immunities, then the
Ecclesiastics did.

Luther and his practices, I shall add one instance more of intolerable
iniquity and arrogance, Cochlae. in Miscel.
which Cochlaeus relates, either of Luther (as is most probable, for the Author
appeared masked, and was Anonymus) or at least of some Lutheran, published upon
these differences betwixt Caesar and the Princes. Atque ut ora eis obturem; And
that I may stop their mouths for ever, says he, they are to know, speaking of
the Pope, Emperor, and other Princes Catholic, That they are but Elective all
of them, and that they may be deposed for their misgovernment, as has been
oftentimes done. This is very modest, in comparison of what follows; for having
unto this Proposition added an Assumption, as full of calumnies and slanders,
he concludes very Logically against Caesar thus: Hunc ego exactorem; Such an
Oppressor and Tyrant, as this, such a Moabite, such a Phalaris, such a Nero to
drive him out of the Country, to pull him out of his Throne, cannot but be a
thing most acceptable to God. How justly therefore may that sage Counsel of
Mecaenas given to Augustus, be applied unto him, and those of his Gang; as the
Historian relates it. Dio Cass. lib. hist. 52.
Eos, qui in divinis aliquid innovant, odio habe and coerce. They that
introduce Innovations in the matters of Religion, detest, says he, and be sure
to restrain, not only for the sake of the gods (whose honor yet whosoever
neglects, does seldom advance himself much) but also for thy own: For such
persons by bringing in of new opinions, and new customs concerning the gods, do
very much disquiet the people, and make them desire change in the Affairs of
State: Whence proceed Seditions, Conspiracies, Factions, and Tumults among
them; all which, are things prejudicial to the Dignity of a Prince, and should
be avoided. How true this is, Germany and these other parts of Christendom have
been a sad example, for these hundred of years. And how justly it might be
done, Luther himself will tell you as clearly as any man, if you consult him,
when he is himself: For though he were a mad Doctor, yet he had his lucida
intervalla, and could now and then discern Reason, especially when he declaimed
against Sacramentaries and Anabaptists; for then the Magistrate must do his
office, and no man must complain. Neque is Sectarius, Enarrat. in Psalm 82.
Tom. 3. f. 488. Wittemb.
in quem animadvertitur per Magistratum, cogitur ad fidem. For, says he, such
a Sectary as is punished by the Civil Magistrate, is not compelled to the
Faith, as they commonly pretend; but his impious and unsound Doctrine is
suppressed, his blasphemous mouth stopped, and the danger of corrupting of
better Christians, prevented. And therefore, Eat alias; Let him go, says he,
whether he will, let him go exercise his gifts among the Turks and Pagans,
rather then abide here to corrupt Christians. And again, Nam ut saepe dixi: For
as I have often told you, says he, they that will live in any City, are bound
to observe the Laws of the place; nor are they to be endured, who shall presume
to do or speak any thing contrary thereunto: Yea, they may be stoned, as
blasphemers were by the Law of Moses, and condemned, Indicta causa and in
audita.
even without trial: And if such a course had been taken with Muncer,
Carolstad, and the rest of that Rabble, in the beginning, when they first began
to publish their opinions privately, and without any la^ful calling, we had
seen much less calamity in Germany at this day. Thus sharply and truly, Luther
against them. But how is this evil Servant condemned by his own mouth! For is
it lawful, and the duty of the Civil Magistrate to punish and restrain the
Preaching of new unsound Doctrines in Muncer, Carolstad, and the rest of them;
and shall it not be permitted to Caesar, to take the like legal course with
him, doing the same things? He must needs perish by his own breath, and by the
verdict which he gives against his adversaries, he draws an Indictment
against himself; under which we leave him, and pass on, to see what pranks our
Masters of the Reformation played, upon the like principles or pretenses, in
the other parts of Christendom.

Titulus Secundus. CALVINISM: OR The Tumults in France.
Germany, and launch out into an Ocean of as great miseries in France, and
enquire there, whether Calvinism does any better dispose people to obedience
(which is our grand quaere) then Lutheranism did. The first founder of this
Sect was Huldericus Zuinglius, whose followers Luther always called
Sacramentaries, but now generally they have their title from Calvin; whose
transcendency in evil, has overshadowed the others glory, and is solely
reverenced as the Patriarch and Architect of Genevah; that framed all her State
and Discipline, and ordered the motions of her sphere with much art and policy.
Luther was harsh and stern, using neither modesty nor good manners with men:
Calvin was more cautelous and of a subtler spirit, appearing at first to the
World in Humility, and covered with a Foxes skin. Luther was the first cause,
but Calvin glories that he gave perfection to all. Both of them were vain
glorious; both br^d in the Schools of Law and Contention; both special friends
to the Flesh and to Pleasure, and neither of them commended much for Piety or
Devotion. For the description of the Life and Conversation of Calvin, of his
Nature, Behavior, Diet, and general Epicurism, I refer you to one, that sat
long by him to draw his Picture, and has done it to the life. Hier. Bolsec
vita Calvin.
It is Dr. Hierome Bolsec, one that was used to feel his pulse, and knew his
humors. A man not hired, nor corrupted to do it; (as some have affirmed without
any show of proof, only to weaken his testimony, and maintain the credit of
their Cal^pha) and who in the beginning makes a most serious, yea, Religious
Protestation of Truth and Candor in the business. Baldwin Apolog.
Francis Baldwin, a man that lived long with Calvin, and knew well what blood
ran in all his veins, concurreth with him: So does Florimundus de Raemund, De
ortu and progress Heresium.
a French Gentleman of eminent quality: Claudius de Saints, Bishop of Eureux,
and others; not to mention any Lutherans. These have all left us lively Images
of Calvin, and of his Successor at Genevah; the fine Mr. Theodore Beza, who
could as easily usurp another man's Wife, Pantal. in vita ejus.
as an other man's Parish, and was ever more in Love, then in Charity, as they
that knew him well, say. But I intend not to meddle here with their lives or
virtues; nor yet with any of their School points and Doctrines, which I leave
to the more learned to discuss. That which I shall insist upon here, shall be
according to my principal purpose to deliver their seditious Paradoxes, and
show unto the World, how much their new refined doctrine does derogate from
Royalty, and that sovereign Authority which belongs unto a^l Kings, Princes,
and States, rightly constituted; and how much it favoreth the worst of
Governments, that is, Pure Democraty or Popularity. And I shall begin with
Calvin, who goes more slily and cunningly to work, nothing so rudely and
bluntly as Luther.

Sanhedrim, at Genevah, he labors to d^base Monarchy, and to prefer Aristocracy
before it, Non id quidem per se; Instit. lib. 4. c. 20. sect. 10.
Not in it self (forsooth, as if he had been very tender of the Rights of
Kings) but by reason of men's natural corruption. Quia rarissime contingit;
Because it is seldom seen, says he, that Princes can govern their Passions so
well, or are so wise and prudent, as they ought to be, to uphold good
Government. So he makes it a rare thing, to find a wise and moderate King; and
so concludes from a general defect, which he supposes in Kings, that it is
best f^r many jointly, and not one alone absolutely to command. For, says he,
where many govern, one supply^th the d^fects of another, both in point of
Counsel and Justice. This was his way (politic and plausible enough) to
prepare the hearts of his people at Genevah to the Discipline, which he
intended for them. For you must know, the Genevians had now ejected their
Bishop, who was also their Sovereign Prince, and had been so ever since the
time of Frederick the First. Bodin de Rep.
So that their Monarchy was newly changed into a popular State, yet governed
Aristocratically; which Calvin therefore smooths unto the people by such
Reasons, as it concerned him to do, this change being as the First Fruits of
his new Gospel in that City. So having given this first blow to Monarchy
(though therein he seems to forget, that himself was born at Noyon,) and
finding himself safe at Genevah, he proceeds; and to prevent your objection in
behalf of Monarchy, That Kings, have always grave and wise Counselors to
advise them, and to supply their defects, in case themselves be weak, he gives
his resolution elsewhere. Kings, says he, Comment. in Dan. 11.26.
make choice of such men for their Counselors, as can best fit their humors
and accommodate themselves to their appetites in the ways of cruelty and
deceit. So he makes them little better by having Counselors, and stains the
reputation of Counselors themselves with a scandal intolerable. Daniel.
But Chap. 2. v. 39. he is yet more passionate: They are, says he, out of
their wits, quite void of sense and understanding, who desire to live under
Sovereign Monarchies; for it cannot be, but order and policy must decay, where
one man holds such an extent of Government. Yea, Chap. 5. v. 25. Kings, says
he, oftentimes forget they are men, and of the same mould with others. They are
styled Dei Gratia, but to what sense or purpose, save only to show, they
acknowledge no Superior o^ Earth? yet under color of this, they will trample
upon God with their feet; so that it is but an abuse and fallacy, when they are
so styled. Which is a pretty descant, (is it not?) upon Dei Gratia; and
therefore, Voila, says he, See what the rage and madness of all Kings is, with
whom it is an ordinary and common thing to exclude God from the Government of
the W^rld. And this he writ, not in quality of a Statesman, but of a Divine; in
that master-peice of his, his Institutions: and in his Commentaries upon
Scripture he delivers these dangerous Positions, as matters of Doctrine and
of Discipline, to be generally received by all; and makes a Nebuchadnezzar of
all Kings: But rather out of his own spleen, then out of his Text, by his good
leave. For to what purpose can such expressions tend, but to disgrace Scepters,
and to scandalize all Governments, that are not framed according to his own
mould?

Chap. 6. v. 25. in Daniel, h^ charge them directly. Darius, says he, will
condemn by his example all those that profess themselves at this day, Catholic
Kings, Christian Kings, and Defenders of the Faith; and yet do, not only
deface and bury all true Piety and Religion, but corrupt and deprave the whole
worship of God. This indeed is work for the Cooper, not by a Mar-Prelate, but a
Mar-Prince. The most Christian King must be new Catechized; he that is
Catholic, must be taught a new by an Uncatholike, that is, a private spirit;
and the Defender of the Faith, must have a new Faith given him to defend, by
this great Prophet Calvin: And so by a new Model all the old Religion of the
Church, and all the Laws of State concerning it, must be abolished. Thus does
Calvin presume to reform Kings and Government, and pretends to build an Ark
(but it is of his own head) to save the World, having dreamt, that otherwise it
must perish by a deluge of Ignorance, Impiety, and Superstition; of whom it may
be truly said, Plusquam regnare videtur. He must be much more then a Prince
himself, who thus presumes to play the Aristarchus, and censurer of Princes.
And that he may not seem to come short of Luther his Predecessor, in any degree
of immodesty, Les Rois (Chap. 6. v. 3, 4.) sont presque tous; These Kings,
says he, are in a manner all of them a company of Block-heads, and brutish
persons; as wild and ungoverned as their Horses, preferring their Bawds and
their Vices, above all things whatsoever. Yet did he write this in an age, when
to say but truth, the Princes of Christendom were not so extremely debauched.
Lewis the Twelfth, Francis the First, and Henry the Second of France, have left
a better fame of themselves to Posterities, then this: So have Maximilian the
First, and Charles the Fifth, Emperors in Germany. Henry ^he Eighth of England,
degenerated only in his latter times, and not till he was corrupted by some
principles of this Reforming Liberty: In his children, Edward the Sixth there
was much hope at least, and in Queen Mary much virtue. In Scotland reigned
James the Fifth, and two Mary's, that might be canonized for their merits: And
for Castile, and Portugal, their Kings never flourished more for Government,
Greatness, increase of State, Plenty, Peace, then in those times. What could
his meaning then be, to censure them all so much for stupidity and vice, but to
breed a contempt of Kings, and to induce people, that live under Free States,
to despise and hate them; and their own people to cast of their Government, and
procure their Liberties at all adventures? especially under the cloak of
Religion; for at this he drives altogether, as knowing well, That in popular
and tumultuary States he should prevail more, then where men of wisdom, and
discerning judgments sit at the Helm. And as Zuinglius before him had found,
That he could not induce Francis the First to favor him, so Calvin well
perceived that Kings, and Dei grat^a, would be always blocks in his way.
Therefore he is willing to remove them, so far as he can, out of the way, that
they may not impeach the current of his Pr^achings; and to that end, tells them
in plain terms, Dan. 6.22.
Abdicant se potestate; Princes deprive themselves of a^^ power, when they
oppose God; and it is better in such case to spit ^n the^r faces, then to obey
them: Which irreverence yet he never learned from the example of any Apostle or
Prophet. There is a respect due to the persons of Princes, even when they
forget their office, if we be not much mistaken.

Bilson labors much to save Calvin's credit in this business with Princes, and
to expound the words in some tolerable sense: Christians subject to Antichrists
Rebellion.
He says, Calvin speaks not a word of depriving Princes, or resisting him
with Arms. That by Abdicant se he means not, they loose their Crowns, but their
power to command unlawful things (a fine gloss, they loose a power, which they
never had) but in lawful things they retain their power still. The phrase
Conspuere, he confesses to be harsh, and that the comparison was urged by him
in vehem^nt words, yet is willing to excuse them. But as to the first plea, it
is wholly impertinent, For what though he use not the words of deprivation and
res^stance, are therefore the words he uses, excusable? to speak too plainly
had been to err too palpably, which stood not with Calvin's craftiness. Beside,
what was Daniels defense, which he urges, it was only in Humility, Patience,
and Prayer? It was not after the violent fashion of Genevah, he did not spit in
Nebuchadonozors face, nor tell him, he was unworthy to live. And for the
second, Abdicant se, what means he that Kings do loose? not their Crowns, but
only their Power to Command. Speak plain English, and be clear: You confess
the King loses his Power to Command, but you add obscurely in these things,
meaning in matters of Religion; for so it must be understood, though you cast a
cloak over the words, and cover the matter. But I desire to know, what is a
Kings Crown without power to command: He that teaches, they loose their Royal
Power, does he not say as much as that they forfeit it? and if they forfeit it,
who may challenge and take the forfeiture of such a Crown? But by such Lectures
and Doctrines as these, does not Calvin plainly enough arm the Subjects against
the Prince, when they revolt for Religion? And is not this the very ground of
all the Combustion, and Civil Wars in France? Yea, but in other things lawful,
Princes retain their power. First, these are not Calvin's words, but Doctor
Bilsons, who writes and lives under a Monarchy. Calvin's words are indifinite,
Abdicant se potestate: They deprive themselves of the power they have, without
exception or limitation; absolutely, not after a sort; in all things, not in
some particular; for altogether, not for some time only, and then to be
restored: For Princes, once dispossessed, seldom recover their hold again.
Secondly, what Court or Magistrates shall take cognizance and determine,
wherein Kings loose their power, and wherein not? who shall judge and decide
the difference between the matters lawful and unlawful, that you speak of?
Though, as I say, Calvin's own words import no such restriction at all; which
does plainly appear by his harsh phrase (as you call it) of spitting in his
face, that is, to defy them openly, and to contemn them and their acts,
according to your own interpretation. But this, you say, is far from Rebellion;
true, but not from Treason. And therefore though he teach not the one, yet he
may teach the other. Extenuate the words, as much as you can, yet they will be
really heinous and seditious: For he that holds a King is not worthy to be,
or to live among men, does he not sufficiently excommunicate him from his
Government? As for your Insurgunt contra Deum, it is a stale and Arbitrary
pretext, and serves only to make them odious under a feigned charge of
impiety; it convinces nothing but much impudence and malice in the objectors,
who should first learn to be virtuous themselves, before they charge vice so
freely upon others, especially Princes: A thing which they never yet were, in
any kind, that the World knows. To conclude, this you grant in effect, That
if the King of Babylon threatens Daniel with punishment, in case he will not
worship his Idol; or the King of France commands his Subjects to obey the Laws,
and communicate at the Altar of the Church, in both cases alike abdicant se
potestate; the Kings loose their power, and Subjects ought not to obey them,
but rather to spit in their faces. And this was the reason why Doctor Al^^
obje^ted it to Calvin, as seditious Doctrine; and Doctor Bilson well knows,
that seditious Doctrines are not so dainty at Genevah. For there it was, that
in hatred of th^ee Queen Mary's of England and Scotland, that Calvin first set
a broach that more then seditious Paradox against Gynocraty, or the Government
of Women; and by instruction and example from him, Knox and Goodman afterward
published their several Books of that subject. Look but upon the History of
Scotland, Printed by Wautroller, Page 213. and you will find, that Knox
Apologized for all his practices from the authority and judgment of Calvin,
viz. That it was lawful for Subjects to reform Religion, when Princes will not.

Calvin's opinion in the point, may be yet more manifested, the practices of his
darling and Scholar, Master Theodore Beza, must be considered; who perfectly
understood his Doctrine, and did no less bravely put it in execution. In the
Preface to his Translation of the New Testament, which he makes to Queen
Elizabeth, he writes thus. Quo die (Scil. 19. December.) Upon which day, Anno
1564.
says he, two years since, the Nobility and Gentlemen of France, under the
command of his Excellency, the Prince of Conde, being assisted with Your
Majesty's Auxiliaries, and some others from the Princes of Germany, laid the
first foundation of the true Reformed Religi^n in France, with their own blood.
This, I hope, Master Bilson himself will confess to be Rebellion; yet Beza
justifies it openly, yea, glories, that himself was not an accessory, but a
principal in the business. For after he had commended some other good services
of this nature, which the Reforming Parties had done at Meaulx, Orleans, etc.
He concludes, Id quod eo libentius testor; Which I speak, says he, the more
freely, because I my self, as it pleased God, was present at most of those
Counsels and Actions. It is true, there be some that would excuse even this
Action of Conde, and the Hugonots, pretending, it was not against the King, but
against an evil Counselor, and to deliver themselves from the oppression of
one, who abused the Kings youth: That same one was the Duke of Guise, who being
himself a stranger, say they, and hating the Nobility of France, on purpose to
oppress them of the Reformed Religion, and to set the Crown on his own head, in
case the King should die, armed himself into the Field, etc. That thereupon the
N^bles of France perceiving his malicious designs, viz. To murder and destroy
so many innocents, took up Arms to defend themselves against such a Tyrant.
That, for the Kings consent it was not to be expected, nor, as the case stood,
much to be regarded, seeing he was in the hands of the Guises; and had neither
age to discern, nor freedom to deny, nor power to execute the Law. Lastly, say
some, Beza teaches obedience to Magistrates in his Book De confess. fid. very
largely, Cap. 5. Sect. 45.
and prescribes no other remedy to private persons oppressed by a Tyrant, but
prayers and tears to amend their lives. Touching the first point, the
Apologists will seem confident, that this Battle of D^eux was neither against
Law, nor the King; and yet afterward confess, that they understand not the Law
of France* nor the Circumstances of the War. So they pretend certainty in a
matter, wherein they have not Science; which is to beat themselves with their
own weapon. But was indeed that War neither against the King, nor the Law?
Assuredly against them both, as will appear by the Laws of Charles the Eighth,
1487. of Francis the First, 1532. of Francis the Second, 1560. at Fountain
Bleau, which I shall cite hereafter in the case of Rochel and Montauban.
Secondly, it is certain, that Battle was not in King Francis his time, but in
the Reign of Charles the Ninth: And after the death of King Francis, all men not
unacquainted with the proceedings of that time, know full well, that the House
of Guise did bear no sway at Court; the Duke was made, as it were, a stranger
to the State, the Queen Mother, the King of Navar, and the Constable sat at
the stern, and ruled all. Therefore it is not true, that the King was in
captivity under the faction of Guise; nor true, that the Duke armed himself
into the Field, for the Constable commanded in chief; he and the Marshal of
Saint Andrews, were the Kings Lieutenants, and had the Kings Commissions to
warrant what they did. The Duke of Guise lead only the Rear of the Army; Mons.
Lanow's discourses Mons. Mauvissier. Comment.
and though it were his fortune to stand master of the Field, and to win the
day, yet he had not any charge in the Battle, but only of his own Companies.
Thirdly, Neither did the Princes of Bourbon take arms only to deliver
themselves from the oppre sion of Guise: For if it were so, why did they not
lay down, when they saw, not the Duke of Guise, but the Constable Montmorency
coming against them, armed no less with the Kings Authority, then with his
Forces, to chastize them as Rebels. The Constable was a man, against whom they
could pretend nothing; he was the Honor of the Admirals House, the Admirals
Kinsman, and his great friend, especially when he was prisoner at Melun, by
commandment of Henry the Second: He was now the Kings Vicegerent in the Field,
why did they not reverence him? yea, why did they themselves begin the fight?
why did they first affront and assail the Kings Army? This therefore is but
matter of mere pretext; for Beza himself confesses plainly, This Field was
fought to restore or establish their pretended Religion. Vbi supra.
Fourthly, Neither is it true, that the Duke of Guise is a stranger in France.
Is he a stranger in France, who is descended clearly from the Stock and Line of
Charlemaign, who is no stranger in France, I wis? Is he a stranger in France,
who is a Peer of France, and Cosin-German to the Prince of Conde, their
Protector? whose own Mother was Antonietta, Princess of Bourbon? whose
Ancestors have enjoyed the greatest Offices and Honors in the Court of France?
Neither, may we forget the great services they have done for the Crown of
France, at Rome, at Metz, Verdun, Theonville, and at Calice especially, in a
time when all Fran^e was in mourning, and distress too, for the loss which
Monsieur the Admiral had received at St. Quintins. Lastly, that dream, viz.
That the Duke should aspire to the Crown, is the pitifullest of all, a mere
fable taken out of the Legend of Lorrain, and other Libels of that time. For
how many Walls of Brass were betwixt him and it? The King himself young, his
Brothers younger; their Mother living, the King of Navar their trusty and Noble
Friend, with the whole Nobility of France, as they themselves acknowledge: Was
it not then a likely object for such a Strangers pretensions?

that is, under the power of Guise; let us consider the last Proposition, viz.
That the Kings Commission, which the Constable had, and the Prince wanted, and
fought against at the Battle of Dreux, was not much to be regarded, because at
that time the King had neither age to discern, nor liberty to deny, etc. As for
Liberty, it is answered already. And for age, what if the King wanted age
naturally, in his politic capacity he did not. We are to know, a King has two
bodies, or his person may be considered under a double capacity, that of
Nature, and that of Policy. His Body politic, as it never dies, so it is
never defective of Authority or Direction. The acts of the Body politic be not
abated by the Natural bodies access: The Body politic is not disabled to
govern by the nonage of the natural. See 26. Lib. Assis. Placit. 24. where, by
Justice Thorps judgment, the gift of a King is not defeated by his nonage. In
the Book of Assis. tit. droit. placit. 24. Anno 6. Ed. 3. for a Writ of Right
brought by Edward the Third, of a Manor, as Heir to Richard the First, the
exception of nonage against the King was not admitted. For though the Natural
body dies, yet the Body politic (which magnifieth and advances the quality
of the Natural) is not said to die. So 4. Eliz, The Leases of the Duchy made
by Edward the Sixth, were resolved by all the Judges to be good, though made in
the Kings minority. So though the Kings Body natural, cannot discern or judge,
yet that disableth not the King, that the acts of his Minority ordered by his
Counsel and the Regent, should be of no validity; which their own Hottoman in
his France-Gallia might have taught them. And let them resolve us, whether the
Counsel and State of England would take it well, if a Catholic should affirm
(as he might do, much more truly,) that the change of Religion made by Edward
the Sixth, was not warrantable, being done in his Minority, and when he had
neither age to discern what he did, nor liberty to discern any thing to the
Protector, and Northumberland, in whose hands he was. If you approve not this
Argument, why do you disallow the same plea for the Authority of the King of
France? was the age of the one a Bar in Law, and not in the other? or was the
one an absolute King, and not the other? was King Edwards consent sufficient to
authorize his Uncles doings, and was King Charles his consent insufficient, and
nothing worth to authorize the Constable with his Army to pursue and punish
their Army of Rebels? Beza's opinion therefore In c^nfess. fid. is much
contrary to what he allows and commends here. For if there be no other
remedy, but preces and lachrymae for private persons against the oppressions of
a Tyrant, he betrayed the Admiral and the Prince very foully, to bring them
into the fields of Dreux, to fight against the King for Religion. Doctor Bilson
has taken up somewhere one notable singularity to excuse the Prince of Conde,
viz. That he was not an absolute Subject of France, ought not simple subjection
to the Crown; Ergo, might lawfully do something more then others. But it
argues such a gross ignorance in the Laws of France, and in the state of that
Prince, that it deserves more to be pitied, then answered. Neither could it
help the Admiral, who had no other Protection then that of his Sword, nor
Privilege, but from his new Religion.

Beza above mentioned, is so much insisted on, and cunningly used, as it were,
to cast a mist before the eyes of an unwary Reader, it will be necessary to
clear that business a little further, by letting you see the man himself in
more proper colors, as in relation to this point. First, therefore read his
Positions and Catechism of Seditions, viz. That Book of his called Vindiciae
contra Tyrannos: There acting the part of Junius Brutus (a Noble Roman indeed,
but great enemy of Kings) he propounds in the first place this Question,
Whether Subjects be bound to obey their Kings, when they command contrary unto
Gods Law, and resolves presently, Page 22. We must obey Kings for Gods sake,
when they obey God: But otherwise, Page 24. we are absolved; For as the Vassal,
says he, loses his Fief or Lordship, if he commit Felony; so does the King
loose his Right, and his Realm also, viz. By commanding contrary unto Gods Law:
Which considering that Gods Law is only as they themselves shall think good to
interpret it, is dang^rous enough. But Page 65. he is more notable. Conspiracy,
says he, is go^d or ill, according as the end is, at which it aims: Which is
a most pernicious Maxim, and a Doctrine fit for nothing but to encourage
Ruvillac, Poltrot, or some such villainous assassinate to his desperate work, or
to be a buckler to the Conspirators at Ambois. So Page 66. The Magistrates,
says he, or any one part of the Realm may resist the King, being an Idolater,
as Lobna revolted from Joram, when he forsook God. And Page 132. The Government
of the Kingdom is not given to the King alone, but also to the Officers of the
Realm. And again, Page 103. The Kings of France, says he, Spain and England,
are crowned, and put, as it were, into p^ssession of their charge by the
States, Peers, and Lords, which represent the people. And Page 199. There is a
stipulation in all Kingdoms Hereditary: As in France, when the King is crowned,
the Bishops of Beauvois and Loan ask the people, if they desire and command,
This man shall be King. What if they do? it is no argument, that the people do
therefore choose him to be King (for his Kingdom is confessed already to be
Hereditary, and so the Succession determined by Law;) much less that they make
him such. It is an acceptance only, not an election; a declaration of their
willing Subjection, Obedience, and Fidelity toward him, and nothing else, as
you may be well informed out of Francis Rosselets Ceremonies at the
Consecration or Inauguration of the Kings of France. Was there ever an Assembly
of Estates held to consecrate or elect a King of France? or do the Kings of
France count the time of their Reign from their Inauguration only, and not
from their entrance? was not Charles the Seventh full Eight years King of
France, before he was crowned, as the French Historians themselves report?
Gaguin. Giles.
or think you, that the Peers are Ephori? No, they are Pares inter se, but not
Companions to the King. They are not States, as in Holland, to rule and direct
all Affairs: For in France and England all the Authority depends upon the
Kings; and what is the State, but the Authority of the Prince? Who only by his
Letters Patents creates Peers, disposes all Offices, gives all Honors,
receives all Homages in chief, as being the sole Fountain from whence
springs both Nobility and Authority: And he that would either restrain this
Sovereignty within any narrower bounds, or communicate it to others, makes no
difference between the Crown of a King, and the Berrette of a Duke of Venice.
Many other Maxims and Rules he has of this nature, fit for nothing but to
introduce Anarchy, and confusion in the World; most of them false, all of them
dangerous: Vails only to cover the ugly faces of Sedition and Treason; because
in their proper shapes, no man living can abide to see them.

De Jure Magistratus; for his it is, as most men think, or else Hottomans, who
was his Comrade. But I shall leave them both; for indeed they touch the string
of Sovereignty with too rough a hand; yea, rather they strain to break it, if
they could, by such gross and misinterpretable Paradoxes; as when they say, The
States are above the King; that is, the Body above the Head: As if any man
could seriously make it a question, whether people should be commanded by the
Master, or by some of their fellow servants, by the Subject, or by the
Sovereign, by the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral, or by their Lawful King and
Sovereign, King Charles. And therefore had King Philip good reason to cut off
the head of that Justice of Arragon, upon a just occasion, and to teach the
people by example, what the true meaning was of Nos qui podemos tanto come vos.
All which Paradoxes, it were easy to refel, but that I have undertaken only
to discover, and not to combat: And because they are both learnedly and
piously confuted already by Barclay, Baurican, and Blackwood. Only by the way
I shall desire you to observe, how politickly they go to work. They profess not
openly and absolutely any desire to change the State, or to depose Kings. But
this they do, They labor by insinuation, first to breed some dislike of
Monarchs in the minds of people, and to show how inconvenient it is, for such
an infinite multitude and variety of people to depend upon the Edicts of one
man. This being done, they know it is then easy, and they may much better
advance the authority of inferior Magistrates; and by them, emboldned by such
degrees to contest at last, and jar with their Superiors, under a pretense of
Reforming abuses, and pulling down Idolatry, they become able to pull down
Kings themselves, and to level the Creators; that is to say, the chief Authors,
and origin of all lawful Power exercised in their respective Kingdoms, with the
most inferior Creatures themselves, upon whom it should be exercised. And after
this, they are sure, their Consistories and Elders must rule all, be Judges
both of Clergy and Law, Council and King: They must be henceforward the only
Rabbis, and from their only Sanbedrim or Genevian Consistory, must the
Oracles of all Government be fetched both for Church and Kingdom. Neither can I
forget how irreverently Eusebius Philadelphus (viz. Master Theodore Beza
disguised) used his Sovereign King Charles in his other Book of Reveille Matin,
where usually he calls the King Tyrant, and of his name, Charles Valois, makes
this Anagram Chasseur Desloyal, that is, neither more nor less, Perfidious
Hunter, or Persecutor, choose you whether. Read his rimes and scandalous
reproaches of the Queen Mother, himself being a fugitive, for more crimes then
one, deservedly most infamous. Peruse the Forty Articles recorded in that Book,
for the better advancing of seditious Government: For example, Art. 25. All
Generals and Commanders in chief, must observe the Ecclesiastical Discipline
ordained by their Synods. Art. 40. They are bound never to disarm, so long as
their Religion is persecuted (as they call it) by the King. This is the
patience of those Saints: But what is become of their Preces and lachrymae in
the mean time? That pretending to reform the World, are so little masters of
their own Passions. But in Article fourteen and fifteen, their spirits and
designs appear in their bravery, aiming at no less, then the utter overthrow of
the King; and extirpation of the whole family of Valois, as any man may
perceive that reads them. These were those Holy Articles of Bearn, Anno 1574.
so much talked of over all France, coined with Beza's own stamp, and at Melion
dispersed, and communicated to their inferior Moschees, all the Kingdom over,
to the intent, as they expressly avowed, That they might make war more strongly
against their Enemies, (who were no other but the King, and whole State of
France,) and ^ill it should please God, say they, to turn the heart of the
Tyrant; that is, of the French King, their Natural and Lawful Sovereign. About
the same time also was framed and published by their Emissaries, that libellous
life of Catharine de Medices Queen Mother, Franco-Gallia, the Tocsan of
Massacreurs, together with that fine-piece mentioned before, called the Legend
of Lorrain. For this is very observable, and it is an honor which the House of
Guise has had a long time, that no man ever professed himself an Enemy to the
Church of God in France, but he was likewise at deadly feud with them.

England; those, I mean, of better note and more moderated judgment do
acknowledge them with dislike. The Protestants of the French Church, says
Doctor Sutcliff, Answ: to a Lib. suppl.
for thirty years together taught violent Reformation by the Nobility, people,
and private persons. And again, Beza, says he, in his Book De jure
Magistratus, does arm the Subject against the Prince, and in effect
overthrows the Authority of Christian Kings and Magistrates. And the Book
Vindiciae contra Tyrannos gives power, says he, not only to resist, but to
kill the King, if he impugn Gods true Religion. The same also is affirmed by
the late Archbishop of Canterbury, Doctor Bancroft, in the Survey of
Discipline, but most copiously and at large in the Book of Dangerous Positions,
especially about Page 192. and seq. To these I may add Francis Baldwin, a
famous Lawyer of France, who lived a long time with Calvin at Genevah, and knew
all their proceedings very well. Mirabar, says he, Respons. ultim. ad Jo.
Calvin.
I wondered a long while, whether your fiery Apostle (viz. Theodore Beza) would
tend, who in his Sermons here so much extolled that fact of the Levites running
up and down the Tents of Israel, Exodus 32.
and slaying every man his Brother that had committed Idolatry: But I hear now,
that your self are not much satisfied with such Ministers. And again, Page 128.
Leviora sunt isia, All this is nothing, says he, in comparison of that which
follows. For now men make war even upon the dead; The Statues, the Sepulchers,
the very bones and bodies of Martyrs, Princes, etc. escape not their barbarous
hands; Cities are sacked, Churches robbed and spoiled, etc. Which Beza is so
far from excusing, that he justifies them rather, and professes to his Friend
Christopher Thret^^s, Epist. 40.
, That for his part he has no thoughts of peace, that is, that if such
outrages and villainies should cease, Nisi de ellatis host^bus, until the
^nemies (so he calls the Kings Army, and all the Catholics of France with
them) be totally subdued. But we ought not to wonder at it: It is Morbus
innatus, to all Sacramentaries, a disease bred in their bones, that is, in the
very vitals and entrails of their cause, to be seditious, and dangerous to
their Princes. Zuinglius, their Patriarch, first taught them the Lesson, who
Tom. 1. of his works, Art. 2. delivers this for an Oracle, viz. That Reges
quando perfide and extra regulam Christi egerint, etc. When Kings break Faith
with their people, and do otherwise then the rule of Christ directs them (which
rule themselves will only interpret.) Possunt cum Deo deponi; They may be
deposed with right good Conscience. Doctor Bilson is here again entangled, and
troubles himself and his Reader not a little to find some Apology for this
Paradox. I undertake not, says he, first, To defend each man's several opinion:
Wisely spoken. Secondly, They may be deposed, says he, when they advance
ungodliness, as Saul was. May they so? where is the Samuel, the Prophet
extraordinarily, and on purpose sent from God, that shall do it? may the people
do it? No, says he, blushing, or afraid to affirm that, and therefore seems to
leave it as a privilege, or a matter reserved to the judgment of the Elders.
But Zuinglius himself deals more plainly, and tells you, Art. 42. and 43. who
shall do it. Cum suffragiis and consensu totius aut majoris, etc. When, says
he, such a Tyrant is deposed by consent of all, or the major part of the
people, it is well done, and as God would have it. Therefore in his Epistle to
Conradus Sonnius, Lib. 4. p. 868.
he professes, That obedience or respect, is due unto Caesar, only upon
condition, viz. That he permits them entire Liberty of Religion; which yet is
more then the Lutherans themselves, their pretended Brethren, will do:
Otherwise, says he, it should be sin in them, and make them guilty before God
to obey him. Thus boldly does a Minister of Sedition take upon him to
determine, whether, and upon what terms a Sovereign Prince, yea, the supreme
and chief of all Christian Princes, shall either hold his Dignity, or be
dethroned. If Caesar will be wise, and advised by them, they will obey;
otherwise, they not only may with Justice, but are obliged to take a course
with him. To which end, and that they might be ready, when time and opportunity
should serve their turn, to put such Doctrine in execution, in his Epistle to
them of Vlm, Lib. 4. p. 196.
one of the Imperial, or free Cities of Germany, as they are called; he
advises the fraternity of Ministers there, very properly, viz. That they
remember by little and little, warily, and by degrees, Detrahere personam
Imperio Romano, etc. To pull of this vizor of the Roman Empire from their
Auditory, and make them see, what a folly it is for them to acknowledge a Roman
Empire in the midst of Germany, which is not regarded at Rome it self. Could
there be a project devised more wretchedly dangerous and disloyal, then this,
against the Emperor? O the depths of Heretical malice and treachery! They must
do it, not suddenly, not openly, not all at once, (for that were to spoil all,)
but sensim, paulatim, prudenter, now a little, and then a little, as the people
shall appear capable of such Counsels, and the poison of Rebellious suggestions
shall be most likely to be received, and to work upon them. Certainly a most
plain and full discovery of the Reforming Design; and by it the Princes and all
States of Europe may see, what they are to expect from that sort of people,
when they have once given them power enough to pull their Superiors down.

French Church, viz. Zuinglius, Calvin, and Beza, those Ecclesiastical Tribunes
of the people, and Ringleaders of Rebellion; I am now to make it appear also
ex effectis, or by the evident practice of such principles, That Genevah is,
and has been a School of Rebellion to all these parts of Christendom, and a
Seminary in particular of all the Civil Wars in France. Neither shall I blot
their names with any false aspersions: For as their practice is the best
Commentary of their Positions and Writings; so it is the best trial of their
Loyalty, and can give in best evidence, whether they be (as they will yet
pretend, and seem to be) good Patriots, and faithful Subjects. I shall show
both their first beginnings, progress, and continuance, at this present time;
and this so much as may be, in a method, ordering their disorderly crimes under
these general heads, viz. First, Their Conspiracies against the King: Secondly,
Their Battles fought against the Kings Armies and Officers: And thirdly, Their
horrible Outrages and Villainies committed, incomparable for cruelty, and
incredible for disloyalty.

Ambois; there they began the Scene of their Tragedy, on this manner. At an
Assembly they had at Nantes, in the year 1560. certain of the Calvinists
conspired among themselves to seize the Kings person, and surprise the Court;
to apprehend the two principal of the Guises, upon an accusation, That they
sought to invade and possess themselves of the Crown, and thereby to ruin the
Princes of the Blood, and to suppress Religion. This being secretly, yet upon
great deliberation concluded by them in the Month of January, was to be
executed the Tenth of March following, at Blois. The chief of the Conspiracy
was Godfrey de Barry, surnamed de Renaudy: By this man it was imparted to the
Prince of Conde, who disliked it not, but only wished it could be executed in
some form of Law. While they stood thus at Demurrer, the business happened to be
strangely, and beside all their expectation discovered; first, by a Secretary
of the Cardinal of Lorrains, afterward by more perfect Intelligence and
Information from Cardinal Granvellan, out of the Low Countries. Whereupon the
King suddenly removing to Ambois, the Conspirators were disappointed, both of
time and place; so as the forces which they had levied and appointed for that
exploit, wandered up and down for some while without any Commander in Chief
appearing, and were in a short space after, most of them apprehended and
gathered up by the Duke of Nemours his Troops; among others there were taken,
the Baron of Castelnau, and Monsieur Pardillan. Mons. Castelnau Comment.
Renaudy the General was slain, and some others executed. The Duke of Guise, in
the mean time, providently took order for the safety of the King, and the
Court, and so assured himself of the person of the Prince of Conde, that he had
not power to attempt any thing to their prejudice. He was afterward committed
upon this business, yea, condemned to loose his head: Yet nevertheless, Charles
the Ninth, upon some politic Reasons of State, and because he was so near a
Kinsman, and a Prince of the Blood, not only gave him enlargement, but, for
his honor, and to assure his fidelity the more, if that had been possible, he
acquitted him also, and declared him innocent of the Conspiracy. This was the
first attempt of the Calvinists for Religion, and Bonum Publicum. Their second
should have been executed at Meaulx upon the person of Charles the Ninth, in the
year 1567. But by the noble service of the Duke of Nemours, and of the
Switzers, the King, though with some difficulty, escaped. Their purpose was
here, as before, to have possessed themselves of the Kings person, and of the
Duke of Anjou his Brother, to have put the Queen Mother with some others marked
out, to death: but, as I said, by the valor and fidelity of the Duke of
Nemours, with the aid of the Switzers, they recovered Paris by a sudden flight
in the night, and so were all saved: Only the Cardinal of Lorrain (a person,
whom they principally desired to entrap) was forced to take another way, yet he
made shift to get privately to Rhemes, and there died. A third was at St.
Germans in lay against both King and Queen Mother; for which, although only
Mole and Coconas lost their heads, through the ill management of the business;
yet were there so many heads and hands both, engaged in it, That it was matter
of great trouble, disquiet, and danger unto France, for a long time after. And
this only of their Conspiracies, or of such Treacherous designs, as never went
further then Intention.

Dreux, of which Beza formerly boasted, That the foundations of Reformed
Religion in France were first laid, and as it were, consecrated therein. Let us
remember also the Battle of Saint Dennis, the Battle of Jarnac, the Battle of
Coutras, the Battle of Moncontour, together with the besiedging of Roan; and
how much, and Noble Blood was spilt in all these Actions. At Roan the King of
Navar lost his life; at Saint Dennis the Constable was slain; at Jarnaec the
Prince of Conde; and at Contras the Noble Duke of Joyeuse ended his days. Tho
Fields are yet stained, France was let-blood too prodigally, and strangers
brought in, as Surgeons to lance her wounds, who have left behind them,
greater cause of Lamentation, then Remembrance. At Moncentour, where the
Admiral stood alone, as the sole Champion of the Reformed Churches. The
Missa-pulta testified what their quarrel was, which by Beza's devise was
advanced as a Basilisk, to beat down the Royal Standard of France, and the
Labarum or Cross of Constantine.

Pol^rot in this Calendar must have the first place, for killing the Duke of
Guise, who was the Kings Lieutenant General at that time, so basely and
treacherously as he did; confessing, it afterward before the Queen Mother, and
avouching that Beza had both counseled and encouraged him to the Action. After
him, we may remember how the Protestants in Valentia used Signeut de la Motte
Gondrin, the Kings Lieutenant in Daulphin, who had assured them, in case they
would live peaceably and quietly with the Catholics, he would bring none of
the Kings Soldiers upon them; yet notwithstanding this, they assembled forces
of their own privately, surprised La Motte, and hung him up instantly in cold
blood, without any provocation, save only of their own malice; to show their
contempt of the King, and scorn of his Officers among them: Which was a villainy
not sufferable in any Commonwealth, especially where such favor and connivence
had been offered, but immediately before. We may remember the Conspiracy of
Simon May, a man induced by the same spirit, and instructed out of the same
School, to kill the Queen Mother, and Henry the Third: But his purpose being
discovered, he was apprehended, and had his desert. Neither can the business be
excused or shifted off with any colors; himself confessed it, and accused
Seigneur de la Tour, and Monsieur d' Avantigny, two Gentlemen of good
parentage, yet birds of a Feather, to have been hi^ Counselors and Abettors in
the Plot: Whereupon they were both of them apprehended, but afterward released
by His Majesty for private reasons, not being willing, as some thought at that
time, to search too deep into the wound, either for the men engaged in it, or
the matter it self; yet this was not all. They proceed much further, and seize
upon the Kings own Rents and R^venues; they coin money, and surprise, either by
fraud or force of Arms, the chief Cities of the Realm, Orleans, Troyes,
Poictiers, Tours, etc. putting in Garrisons and Governors of their own party,
and for their own ends. They deliver one of the Keys of France into the custody
and command of Foreigners: All which were attempts of the Highest Treason that
could be, and usurpations of the Prerogative Royal, being done without color
of Commission, or Warrant from the King, and contrary to his express Will and
the Law. Lib. des Financ. de France.
Nicholas Froumenteau, a Minister of the new Edition, confesses, That in
Daulphin, only the Army of the Hug^nots killed Two hundred fifty and six
Priests, and One hundred and twelve Monks and Friars, burnt Nine hundred Towns
and Villages. And yet what a pitiful tale do the Calvinists, and others, tell
of a Massacre at Vassy, by the Duke of Guise, as if no cruelty had been
comparable to that? Which yet indeed was nothing at all in comparison of these,
and was done without the Dukes consent; as not only Monsieur Chasteauneuf in
his Commentaries, but also Thuanus, Thuan. Historian. lib. 29.
who was a man never suspected to be of the Guisian Faction, do expressly
avouch: Yea, the blood that was drawn from the Duke himself, laboring to have
appeased the fray at the beginning, was the cause, that some quantity more was
drawn from those Hugonots, by the Dukes servants, then otherwise there needed
to have been. No, it was a toy and a trifle in respect of those outrageous
excessive carnages of Montbrison, of Mornas, and many other places acted by the
Hugonots. But such was the calamity of those times, They which most justly
deserved, and unjustly complained against persecution, did persecute their
Neighbors most unjustly and tyrannically. Let the world, and all indifferent
men judge by this. In these Civil Wars there were no less then. Twenty thousand
Churches destroyed by Protestants: and yet these men were born, as they say, to
edify the Church. Is it not likely? Could Mahomet himself edify better? or
was his Alchoran, and Turkish Superstition set up any other way, then by the
power of a Tyrants Sword, and pulling down of Christian Churches? I shall not
commend any Act of Cruelty in whomsoever, yet let men that are impartial,
consider, how they can justly blame Charles the Ninth, King of France, for his
proceedings against this sort of people at Paris, and some other places, in the
year 1572. The Admiral, being the principal Instrument and mover of all those
Seditions and Troubles, which for a long time had disquieted France, and
endangered so much the very life and person of the King, the Queen Mother, and
other of the Princes, who can wonder, if his Majesty at last were compelled to
use a mean extraordinary and somewhat rough, for the cutting off such a
Pestilent Member with his Accomplices, who did nothing, but Gangren-like,
perpetually corrupt and endanger the whole body of his State, yea and often
threatened the Head it self. It Is well known, he was come to such height at this
time, that he Reigned in France, as it were some Petty King in a Commonwealth,
merely through the assistance of such people as had, by his Means and
Solicitation chiefly, revolted from their Lawful and Natural Sovereign; he
maintained in France an open War against the King and Crown of France, he
Solicited and called in strangers to his aid, levied Contributions, exacted
Tributes, coined Money, seized the Kings Revenues, invaded his Towns, contemned
all his Laws; yea what actions of Sovereignity did he not usurp and exercise,
in contempt of his Sovereign? For which, having been first proclaimed Traitor
in the year 1569. he afterward met with the punishment, which both he and his,
had most justly deserved, though the way of Execution was very extraordinary
indeed, and has no excuse, but necessity.

such violencies, as were formerly used, are now ceased, and that, at present
more charitable, mild, and civil proceedings are held by the Hugonots. It is
not so; They have the same principles, and the same spirits still, which upon
occasion they are not slow to manifest: And to make this more plain, I shall
give you a relation of the true state and condition of those reformed Churches
(as they call themselves) in France at this very time, viz. Anno 1621. wherein,
not to trouble you with any thing concerning the infinite troubles and great
charges, which they forced their Sovereign Lewis 13. to be at, and endure all
the last Summer and Winter; nor concerning their Garboils at Tours; nor the
practices of the Rochellers to have put a Garrison of Six thousand men into
Saumur, on purpose to have given work to the Kings Army thereabouts, and to
hinder their March to Montauban; nor concerning their revolt and disloyal
practices at Gergeau, standing out against the Count St. Paul Governor of the
Province of Orleance; and at Sancer, against the Prince of Conde: not to
exaggerate the Treacheries and Conspiracies of Vattevile in Normandy, which yet
were so plainly proved by his own Papers and Instructions intercepted, that the
Duke of Longueville was compelled thereupon to disarm those of Deep, Roan, and
Caen, to prevent danger, and fearing, least they should join with Vattevile; I
say, omitting all these, which yet were actions and passages, wherein much
malignity and undutifulness to their Sovereign was apparent, I shall begin
only with the business of St. Jean d' Angely, which held out a long time, and
refused submission, Notwithstanding the King in person demanded it of them, and
that Monsieur Soubize, Commander of the place for the Hugonots, were Summoned
to render the Town, or to stand to the Peril and Attaynt of Treason; yet they
contemned all, and held it out to the very last point, that they had any hopes
of help left them. At Montauban how was his Majesty defied and despited, as it
were, to His Face? continuing in person at the Siedge thereof for a long time
together, with an Army of Noble and most Expert Soldiers, many of whom (men of
Eminent Desert and Dignity) were lost in that service, especially the two
Brothers the Duke of Mayenne, and the Marquis of Villars, who were generally
lamented. And to draw the Kings eyes the more upon them, it is said by some,
They had set upon their Gates this insolent Motto, viz. Roy sans foy, Ville
sans peur, importing, that the King had no Faith nor the Towns no fear. Yea so
obstinate were they in their resolution of disobedience, that for the present,
they forced His Majesty upon advice, to defer their merited punishment, and to
raise the Siedge: Whereupon the Insolent Burgers, after the Kings Army was
departed, lead the whole Clergy of the Town, as it were, in Triumph, using them
with many scornful indignities, for which they smarted, not undeservedly, the
year following. In Montpellier and Languedoc the Hugonots deprived Monsieur
Chastillon of all his Governments, by a pretended Sentence of their Consistory,
which is very observable; and razed at the least Six and thirty Parish
Churches, and Chapels there. Nor do they usurp only upon the Royalties of the
King (though that be too much) they are as bold, where they prevail, with the
Inheritances and Estates of Private persons. At Privas they would not suffer
the Viscount l' Estrainge to enjoy his Lordship of that place, only because he
was a Catholic: They put him out of his own Castle at Lake, whereof the
Marshal Momorency had but lately given him possession, and give it to Brison
one of their own fraternity, upon a pretense that it belonged to him: yet was
it none of the Towns of assurance, nor comprised in the list at Brewet in the
year 1598. neither would they permit the Kings Justices, delegated thither to
compound controversies, so much as to hear Mass, though private, or to have any
exercise of their Religion.

Temporal Affairs, wherein he only pretends to command them. At Saint Jean d'
Angely the King assured them, he would protect all those of the reformed
Religion in France, that would obey him, and obse^ve his Edicts. He promised
and performed n^ less to Mall^ret, who was sent to him, as Deputy from the
Assembly of Lower Guienne: He did the like to the Duke of ^removille Son in Law
to Monsieur B^v^ll^n, who came to that seidge tendering his service, and
protesting obedience to His Majesty; was not the Government of Saumur that so
famous, and considerable a place, given by His Majesty to the Count de Sault,
Grandchilde of the Duke Desdiguieres, though he were known to be of the
Reformed Religion? Did he not long before, viz. in the year 1615. answer the
Petition of the Hugonots, That he meant not by his Oath at Consecration (which
was for the Repressing of Heresies) to comprehend therein, Those His Subjects
of the Reformed Religion, who would live obediently under his Laws and
Authority? And how graciously the King dealt with Rochel, all the world
knows; how willing was he rather to regain and reduce it, then to destroy it?
How much and often did His Majesty employ Monsieur the Duke Desdiguieres to
persuade them to conformity and obedience? How much and often did he (the said
Duke) solicit them accordingly by Letters, to return to their duty, proposing
them Articles, which all the world, but themselves would have thought
reasonable? Yet the Deputies Chalas, and Favas, obstinately refused them, till
it was too late: What can a King do more then seek the winning of his Subjects,
so far as it is possible, by fair and gracious means? Yet see the recompense,
which His Majesty found from such Spirits: It was no other, then a long and
frivolous Declaration published against his proceedings, wherein, instead of
acknowledging their own Crimes, they tax His Majesty of much injustice,
persecution, and I know not what other designs, which they charge him to
prosecute by the counsel and inducement of certain persons, that were Fnemies
of the State, as they said, and of their Religion, the Cankerworm of it.

ab origin, and deliver you the true causes of the Kings proceedings against
these Malcontents; and how great reason, or necessity rather, he had by Arms
to maintain his Royal Authority, which they by Arms sought either to contemn or
usurp: that is, wherefore he was constrained at Myort to proclaim Rochel and
all their Adherents Rebels against him, and guilty of treason. First it appears
by the Edict of Nantes, Art. 77. That King Henry the Fourth had discharged the
Protestants from holding any Assemblies General or Provincial; likewise from
all Unions and Leagues, and from holding of any Counsel, or Decreeing and
Establishing any Acts by them: Likewise Art. 82. from holding any
Correspondencies or Intelligences without the Realm: Yea Art. 32. They might
not hold any Synods Provincial, without the Kings License. All which Articles
they also promised to observe; but, as all France and the world knows, have
broken them every one. And not only so, but they have intruded upon the State
it self, taking and fortifying places of assurance, without any Warrant from
the King,; and contrary to an express order set down in August, in the year
1612. whereby it evidently appears, to be of the Kings Royal favor and
goodness to assign them places of surety, and not for them to choose, or usurp
where they please. Add to this their notable presumption, and disobedience
shown, in laboring so much to introduce the reformed Churches of Bearne, and
to annex them to those of France by an Act of Union (as they called it) both
Spiritual and Temporal, passed at Rochel in the year 1617. In which business
they were so confident, That they did not only justify their pretended act by
Apology, but promised all possible assistance to Bearn; yea, and bound
themselves by Oath, First, To observe and execute whatsoev^r was determined in
that Assembly; Secondly, To venture their Lives and Estates in maintenance
thereof; and thirdly, Not to reveal or make known any Propositions, Advices, or
Resolutions taken or made in that Assembly, unto any person whatsoever, no not
to the King himself. All which was done by them, not only irregularly, and
without Law, but most contemptuously also; in as much as they well know, that
the King of France had sent to all the Provinces, and expressly forbad that
Union; yea, and had made a Decree of his Council to the contrary. Besides, how
they used Regnard, whom the King had sent into Bearn as his Commissioner about
the Church Goods, and what disorders they committed at Paw against him, is
scarce credible. Not to speak any thing of their Assembly holden at Loudun,
with most obstinate disobedience to the Kings command. At Grenoble the King was
content, and gave them leave to hold an Assembly; but that all the World might
see, what a factious and froward spirit governed them, they refuse the place,
and by their own authority assemble at N^smes. At Chastelrault and Saumur the
King suffered them to Assemble, only to choose two Deputies, who were to remain
at Court, and receive the Kings Orders concerning them, and to exhibit from
time to time their own Plaints and Grievances, as occasion should be: Contrary
to this they make an Act of Union there also, and take the same Oath, which the
Confederate Catholics, then in Arms, had not long before taken; yet with this
difference, That whereas the Catholics protest their service to His Majesty,
so long as he continued Catholic; which was to oblige him to no more, then his
Oath and the Interest of His Royal Office required of him, so long as he lived:
These Hugonots protest theirs only on this condition, viz. Le Sovereign Empire
de Dieu demeurant tousiours en son entier; that is to say in effect, So far as
may stand with their duty to God: Which, whosoever knows, what a Hugonot thinks
is his duty to God, will confess to be a restriction of an equivocal and
perilous signification to a King of France. And so they did plainly show,
sending presently after to the Camp at Sansay, and offering to join with those
Frenchmen, who had taken arms to oppose the Kings marriage. And not only this,
but they established in each Province of France, a Council of their own to hear
Affairs, and to take notice, what the Order and Government of the Country was;
yea, and importunately urged to have Counselors in the Parliament at Paris.
Lastly, to show in one Act, as in a Mirror, the height of their Presumption and
Treason, in the year 1621. at Rochel, out of their own only authority and
arrogance, they divide the Provinces of France into Seven Synods, which they
call Circles, adding Bearn for the Eighth. And having formerly resolved to have
War with the King, and to make good their actings by force of Arms; in this
Assembly now they make Orders for the Government of their Army; they choose a
General and Officers for every Circle, (which what other thing was it, but to
Cantonize France? Art. 35.
) They Decree, That no Treaty, nor Truce should be made without this Assembly.
They Order, That this pretended General Assembly of theirs, in respect of the
great charge, which they must necessarily undergo, should arrest all the Kings
Rents, and Money due for Tails, Ayds, Gabels, etc. They appoint Officers for
collecting the same. Art. 36. They order the seizing and letting to Farm of all
Goods Ecclesiastical, and profits of Churches, Revenues of Parsonages, etc.
Art. 41. They take the same order for all the profits of the Admiralty. And
when all was done, the Articles are every one of them signed by their President
Combart very solemnly; yea, as foul as their fault was, and beyond all color
of excuse; yet there is nothing pretended in the business, but Justice and
Loyalty, and His Majesty's service: All is covered with that false mantle of
Religion, and Public good. But wisely, and truly, was it long since observed
by the Orator, Tully.
Totius injustitiae nulla capitalior, etc. Of all injustice, says he, none is
more odious and abominable, then where men act their villainies under a vizard,
and pretense of good.

Civilians, what a Sect is, what meetings of people are justly called
Conventicles, and declared to be against the Prince, and the ancient Laws; nor
how Faction and Conspiracy are defined by the Lawyers, and when they fall
within the compass of Treason; as conceiving it matter, though not altogether
impertinent to my subject, yet something more then I have undertaken. For this
therefore, I refer you to Farina^ius, Part. 4. to Decius, Lib. 7. c. 7, 20. to
Bossius, to Gigas, and others, who can with greater authority resolve you. I
shall only allege the Municipal and Common Laws of France in such cases,
which heretofore have used to be a rule, and bridle of Justice, and to be able
to keep men in aw. In the year therefore 1477. this Decree or Law was made by
Lewis the Eleventh, King of France; viz. All Treaties against the Kings Person,
or his Estate, or against the Realm, are declared to be Treason: Which was
revived, or a new Law enacted to the same purpose and effect, by Charles the
Eighth, in the year 1487. and in the year 1532. by Francis the First; in the
year 1560. by Francis the Second at Fontainbleau; and by Henry the Second, in
the year 1556. All men were forbidden to bear Arms, or to hold any particular
Intelligences, Councels, or Assemblies for Conference, but in Town houses, or
public places. By Henry the Third, at Bloys, in the year 1579. prohibition was
made against the assembling or gathering of any Troops, upon occasion or
pretense of private quarrels; or to enter into any such kind of Association.
It was also Enacted, That to hold intelligence, to make Leagues offensive, or
to have participation with such, either within or without France; to levy
Soldiers without the Kings License, should be judged and deemed High Treason,
and offenders herein to be holden as disturbers of the State. All which Laws
are set down in the Code of Henry the Third, Printed at Paris, 1597. And all
the Lawyers of France affirm the same; viz. Francis Rogueau des droicts Royaux.
Bodin de Repub. Le grand Coustumier, and others. And surely with great reason:
For, as without Order there can be no Peace, so without Justice no Society. And
Calvinists in this respect, differ not at all from the worst of Anabaptists, if
they refuse submission to the Superior Magistrate, and to the Law. Magistrates,
as King Josaphat says, 2. Paralip. 19. Non hominis, sed Dei exercent judicium;
Do execute the judgment, not of man, but of God. And verily it cannot be
denied, but that this seditious Sect and Doctrine of Calvinism has cast the
State of France into a very desperate disease, under which it laboreth at
present, and such as may seem to require more then an Aesculapius, to give it
perfect cure. For as much as neither the Majesty of their King, nor the Forces
of his Armies, nor the Wisdom of his Council, and Parliaments, nor the
Authority of the Estates so often assembled, nor the Obedience due to Justice,
nor their own Peace and Safety, together with that of the whole Kingdom, can
move a few desperate Outlaws, sheltring in Montauban, and Rochel, to yield up
themselves and their Arms to the King, and to seek from His Royal Grace and
Favor that Peace which all other his dutiful Subjects, even of their own Tribe
and Profession elsewhere, do securely enjoy.

Titulus Tertius. KNOXISM: OR The Troubles in SCOTLAND.
Genevah, if it were transplanted into some colder Climate; as for example,
into Scotland, it would cool somewhat, and be found of a better temper. Not one
jot better. Calum, non animum, mutant: It is to change air only, not
complexion. Their spirits, that come from thence, are too much fixed upon
mischief, to be easily dispersed; much less to be sublimated unto true goodness
and virtue. As experience has shown, in the example of an infamous Empirick
sent from Genevah thither, whose practices have inflamed the whole Body of that
Kingdom, and filled it with so much irregular Zeal, and abundance of ill
Humors, as thereby has grown a Pleurisy of Troubles in that State, which has
cost much blood, and is not perfectly cured to this day. The Authors of the
Tumults and Alterations in Scotland, with the Actors also, were as violent as
Whirlwinds; they blew down all that stood in their way, even Royalty and the
Crown it self. John Knox, Goodman, Gilby, and Buchanan, were the principal
Instruments of the Work, and emissaries of Master Calvin; yet bravely seconded
by Master David Fergersson (a Learned Shoemaker, but Minister at Dundee,) by
Master Coverdale, Willox, Rous, Harriot, and Montgomery. Victrix Legio, a man
may well say, Et Novatores strenui. Men of invincible obstinacy in their way,
and as perfect Innovators, as could be desired. All of them Ministers, and of
such Saltpeter Spirits, as were fit to blow up, and put into Combustion any
Nation in the World. By these was the Church of Scotland Reformed, according to
the Standard of Genevah, and the Platform of those Elders. Knox was their
Nehemia's, but far unlike him, both in proceedings and qualities; yet he
pretended to act his part: How properly and piously his Countryman will best
inform you, Langius vita Joh. Knoxi.
who wrote of his virtues. Buchanan was ever a rude and slovenly Swiss, of a
presumptuous audacity, and by nature factious. He was one of them, that in the
time of James the Fifth, at Edinburgh, did solemnly in Lent eat the Paschal
Lamb; and being convicted of that Judaism (a business which the King himself
examined) his Companions were condemned and burnt for the Heresy; but he
himself escaped, and fled over into other Countries, as a man reserved to be a
scourge to his own. But to discern their spirits clearly, and to judge of their
peaceableness, patience, sanctity, etc. which yet they so much pretended, we
must first read their Theorems, and by the Maxims of their Doctrine, we shall
find them Doctors extraordinary indeed, and such as were scarce to be matched
again in the whole World, for the business which they came about.

Knox first, who in his Book to the Nobility and people of Scotland, instructs
them thus in the point we treat of, viz. Of obedience to Princes, and Loyalty,
Neque promissum, neque juramentum obligare potest, etc. Neither promise, says
he, nor oath can oblige any man to obey, or give assistance unto Tyrants,
against God. It is true; no man says that they can, when the Tyrant expressly
commands, that which God expr^sly forbids; but that is not the case: All
the World knows, in the sense of Knox and Genevah there is much pretended to
be against God, which is not at all forbidden by God. And when a Christian
Prince commands nothing, but what his Office and the Laws of his Kingdom do
require him to command, certainly we may not so hastily presume it to be
against God; some better Authority must declare it to be so, then the bare
opinion of a Knox, or a Buchanan. So in his History of Scotland, Princes, says
he, may be deposed by the people, if they be Tyrants against God and his Truth;
and their Subjects are free from their Oaths and Obedience. Secondly, Goodman
his Companion and Fellow Boutefeu sings to the same tune out of Exodus, Goodm.
de obedientia.
in a Book which teaches any thing, more then what the title promises. Toti
populo hoc onus incumbit, etc. This is a duty, says he, which lies upon all
the people in general, to see that Idolaters be punished, whosoever, or how
great soever they be, none must be excepted, neither King, nor Queen, nor the
Emperor himself. This is his Homily; If Governors fall from God (and still we
must remember, what it is to fall from God in his sense) ad furcas abripiant,
away with them, God requires it of the people, that they fall upon them, and
Hang them up instantly. Most excellent Consistorian Doctrine verily! such
Spirits, and such Preachers deserve the countenance of the State. Neither is
Buchanan much behind in such grave and wholesome Counsels. Buchan. de jure
regn. apud Scotos. p. 61.
For first he tells you, that the people is above the King, and of greater
Authority then he. If he means this of the people Collectively taken, and
Legally represented; albeit it were true, yet is it not any way pertinent to
his purpose; for never did he, nor any of his reforming brethren beyond the
Seas, act any thing by the Authority of the people in that sense: if he means,
as he must do, of the people dispersedly, and rising, in tumults here and there
of their own heads, it is apparently seditious, and destructive of all
Governments whatsoever. After he has said this, and that the people may bestow
the Crown at their pleasure (notwithstanding that the Law orders the descent
thereof in a particular and certain succession) he falls at last into a
Dialogue worth your observing. They hold, says he, meaning Royallists, that
Kings must be obeyed good or bad. It is blasphemy to affirm that, says
Buchanan. But, God places often times evil Kings, say the Royallists: So does
he often private men to kill them, says Buchanan. But in 1 Timothy we are commanded
to pray for Princes, say they. So are we commanded to pray for Thieves, says
he. But say the Royallists, S. Paul commands obedience to Princes. Saint Paul
wrote so, says Buchanan, in the infancy of the Church; if he lived now, he
would write otherwise. It has been said, that nullum magnum ingenium sine
aliqua mixtura insaniae, These great high-soaring wits have commonly some
tincture of frenzy following them. Buchanan in his time was counted for such, a
great wit; but questionless had he been perfectly sound, he could never have
let slip such a Hysteron-proteron, as this is, from his Pen; he would never
have set the Cart thus before the Horse, the people above the King, arming them
to kill their Princes, under any undeclared, unjudged pretense of Tyranny; For
when such a thing is done without justice and public order, what can be more
impious and abominable? yet Kn^x not only justyfieth it, but could be content,
there were public rewards appointed for such Assassinates, Histor. of
Scotland. p. 372.
and Murderers of Tyrants, as he calls them, which there are for such as kill
Wolves. So far does the zeal and light of their new Gospel carry them. The
sword of Gideon is now in their hands, and all are Midianites, Moabites, and
Enemies of God that stand in their way. But I pray thee good Reader what is
Anarchy, Sedition, Treason, if this be order or good government?

Dangerous positions, etc. gives a general Sentence, that such Divinity as
this, is not holden by Knox and Buchanan alone, but generally, says he, for
ought I can perceive by the chief Consistorians beyond the Seas. He means the
Presbyterian Divines, Calvin, Beza, and the rest of their Gang; whose opinions
have been but too much reverenced here in England, since the year 1570. and it
would be very unhappy, that such shops of sedition, as their Consistories be,
should be ever set up, or opened: here Whittingham in his Preface to Goodmans
Book of Obedience, testifies from Genevah, that it had been allowed, and much
commended by the chief Divines of that place. Calvin himself Epist. 105. to
Knox does applaud his practices, and encourage him to proceed. Buchanans works
passed for a long time as current in Scotland, as if they had been Printed Cum
privilegio; till the King at last found it necessary to prohibit them. So we
see, it was not Goodman alone, nor Knox alone, but the whole Congregation of
Presbyterians, that defended such dangerous Paradoxes; and not in one Country,
but generally where they were admitted; not lately or newly, but originally and
from the beginning of their sect. Yea their Genevah Bibles pretend to prove it
from 2 Chronicles. 15.16. where they allow the deposing of Queen Maacha, by her son
King Asa, for Idolatry. But it is an example, which by no violence they can
use, will be fitted to their purpose. For first it was done, not by private
persons, Mark that.
but by Asa the King. Secondly, not by the King alone, but with the full
consent, yea, Covenant of all the people, V. 13. and not contrary, but
according to the express Law, Deuteronomy. 13.9. What is this to private persons, or
the people tumultuously running together against their Princes, and killing them
not only without any public order or authority acknowledged, but even contrary
to the Laws established, and while the Princes themselves are doing nothing,
but what the Laws established and their Office oblige them to do? Such
practices as these are not allowed at Doway; nor are there any such notes to be
found in the Rhemists Testament. Leslaeus Hist. lib. 10.
The Bi^hop of Ross charge them, but Knox especially, that in his Sermons he
bitterly inveighed against ^he Nobility, Quod Jesabelem illam ^x medio non
sust^lerunt, etc. because ^hey were slow in removing that Jezabel (so he calls
the Queen Regent of Scotland) either from the Go^rnment, or out of the World:
For ^t is not certain, which he means, and the phrase, as his Spirit,
in^lines to the worse. And therefore, because the Nobility, as it seems, would
make no more haste, they ^egin the Reformation themselves, ^iz. He and thirty
more of his ^ompany; first of all, by surprising ^he Castle of Saint Andrews,
and ^urdering of the Cardinal Betun. This was in the year 1546. The Queen
hereupon summoning him ^o appear, and answer for such out^ages, he refused; she
proclaims ^im Traitor, he contemns her Pro^lamation; and having secured himself
at Saint Johnstons from any danger of apprehension by the Queens Officers, who
sought him, he was so far from relenting, or showing any respect to the Queen
Regent, that at the same time he persuades the Burgesses of the place, viz.
Saint Johnstons, and of Dundee, to suppress the Frieries, to pull down Images
in the Churches, and overthrow the Abbeys of Stone, and Saint Andrews: Which
they did, keeping Forces in the Field two months together, taking the Coining
Irons into their custody, and proceeded so uncontroulably, and without
resistance in their disordrous courses, that it even brake the heart of that
Noble and Religious Queen Regent to see it. After whose death, in the year
1560. (the Queen being then in France) by the instigation and procurement of
Knox, it was enacted, as a Law perpetual and fundamental in the State, That
Catholic Religion should be abolished, and that whosoever defended the Popes
Authority in Scotland, should be banished, and that all former Acts to the
contrary should be repealed. This was pretended to be done by the three
Estates; but the Queens Commission could not be shown, nor any consent of hers
to confirm such Acts; beside the opposition which the Clergy or State
Ecclesiastical generally made against such proceedings, See Jo. Leslaeus hist.
of Scotland.
not only in the Parliament or Convention of States, where they happened to be
overborn, but all the Kingdom over. Therefore to make that seem good by a
color of Law, which was at first begun by mere Faction and Violence, some
years after; viz. Anno 1567. and after the deposition, or rather unjust and
forced Resignation of their lawful Sovereign the Queen, they procure an other
Parliament to be called (the Earl Murray being then Regent, and the King scarce
out of his Cradle) which confirms the Acts of the Parliament, 1560. Cap. 9.
and prescribes an oath to be taken by all succeeding Kings, to maintain the
Religion then received (to which as yet no King had ever consented) and
establishes the Confession of that Church. The Queen provoked with their many
and insufferable indignities, had, before this time, sent for some French
Forces into Scotland to oppose them: But this they take so ill, and the
Preachers of new Doctrine in all parts of the Kingdom, improve the occasion so
much to her disadvantage, and to the further incensing of the people, that at
last, they not only make shift to exclude her from all Government, putting her
in condition of a private person, but dishonor her beside with most capital and
criminous Accusations; yea; and cast her into prison, not without great danger
of her life. Beza (that Tibullus of Genevah) instigating and encouraging them
much thereunto, who is pleased in his Reformed Zeal and Eloquence to call her
Medea, Athaliah, and what not? Nullum ejus sceleribus nomen, etc. The Good Man,
it seems, could not find words bad enough to express her guiltiness; and yet
how well is it known, he had store of them always at command; and how
maliciously he pleaded against her, while she was prisoner in England, only
out of hatred to the House of Lorrain, appears abundantly in his Book called
Reveille-Matin.

Henry Darley, out of a desire and intention to marry Bothwel, who was
principal in the murder. Therefore say they, for zeal to Justice, for the
Honor of the Realm, and satisfaction to Foreign Nations, it is necessary, that
she be under restraint, til she clear her self from the imputation of such
heinous crimes. These were their Accusations and pretenses. But touching the
Murder it was very unlike to be true; and certainly required manifest proofs,
if ever any cause did. Her Sex was not fit for such a Butchery; and her nature
known to be too Royal, to harbor such dishonorable Treachery: though she had
some just cause of offense against him. If she had desired to put him to death,
he was her Subject, and she might have done it, openly, legally, and by course
of Justice. He had been of the Confederacy for the killing of David Riza her
Secretary; his own Dagger was found in his Body. The Earl Morton being fled
into England upon that offense, he presumed to revoke him, and call him home
without the Queens knowledge or allowance. Neither was he Loyal to the Queen in
respect of Conjugal affection and duty; his off^nsiveness in that kind was
very notorious and scandalous to all the Court, and occasion of much disquiet
and difference betwixt the Queen and him; and from whence their common
Adversaries took advantage, in a short time, to ruin them both: What then is
the proof of such a crime? what evidence bring they to convince her guilty of
the Fact? First they object, that Douglas, Earl Bothwels man, was executed for
it. True. And that it was he, that brought a Box of Letters of the Queens to
Bothwel, which he had received of Sir James Balfoor at Edinburgh to carry to
his Master; by which Letters intercepted, their juglings and practices ( viz.
of the Queen and Bothwel) were discovered. It is answered, Lies have commonly
one Leg short; and so it is here. For is it probable, that either the Queen, or
the Earl should repose such confidence, and so great secrets in a man, that was
known to be at the devotion of a contrary Faction, as Sir James Balfoor was? Is
it likely she would at all send such a Packet, which she knew contained matter
of great Peril, but of no consequence at all to her self? For she directs them
to be burnt, and might have done that her self well enough without the labor of
sending them to him. Beside, the Queen ever denied those Letters to be hers,
though her hand had been counterfeited to them; neither was there
Superscription, Indorsement, Seal, Date, or any thing else, that might possibly
discover more clearly, whose they were, or from whom coming. Her hand was only
Subscribed, the Letters themselves of another Character; and truly it is not
probable, that in a business of so great privacy, she should require the State
of a Secretary, and that of some Stranger too? for had it been the hand of any
of her ordinary Amanuenses, the case had been clear, and a discovery would have
been easily made. Neither could he, who delivered them, ever be found out to
discover the Pack; and Douglass, who was the man accused to carry them,
protested at his death, that he never knew of any such Letters. Lastly,
supposing that she had indeed sent them, yet was there no express proof of any
unlawful act, attempt, or practice to charge her with. Suppose she had desired
to have her husband murdered: doubtless it had been a great offense against
God, and odious to all men; but was it a sufficient cause for her own Subjects
to take Arms against her, and to depose her? Was not David in a like case, in
the business of Vriah and Bathshebah? Yet he forfeited not his Crown. Saint
John Baptist reproved Herod for his Adultery, yet did neither exhort nor
counsel the people to deprive him of his Dignity, though he were both a
stranger of Idumaea, and an usurper. Edward the fourth of England was not
deposed for keeping another man's Wife, though he committed a great sin; Nor
Henry eighth for cutting off the Heads of so many of his own Wives, and
committing as great sins, Spectante populo, in the view of his Kingdom and of
all the world. Surely these Bou^efeux, while they presume to punish their Kings
for sin, without any good authority or proof, do precipitate themselves
unhappily into far greater. Zeal in them is like a Sword in a mad man's hand,
dangerous to himself and others. But to the matter; What other probabilities
did they produce against her? Many, She mourned faintly for his death, which is
a sign, she was weary of his life. She acquitted Bothwel for his death, and did
not punish him, as he deserved, Ergo, let her die. But what a Nugipoliloquides
is this Buchanan? are such conjectural presumptions, as these, matter of
evidence sufficient to depose Princes? As for her Mourning and the Funerals,
His Body was Embalmed, and laid by James the fifth her Father; the Lord
Tracquaire, Justice Clerk and others attended the Corpse; indeed most of the
Counsel being Protestants, the Catholic Ceremonies were not permitted: and in
Scotland it is not the custom to reserve the Corpse Forty days. Nor was it
decent, that the Queen her self should have been there personally mourning, as
a Subject: therefore she mourned privately, as his Sovereign and Wife; which she
did so long, that her Counsel, and Physicians both were forced to dissuade her
from it, and to cease. All which Sir Henry Killegrew might witness, who was
sent from England to condole and comfort her. What could be required more of a
Wife?

Bothwel and the Marriage following, herein the juggling of Murray and his
faction was most admirable, and worthy to be known. For First, was not Bothwel
acquitted for this crime by his Peers? was not Murray himself, (who best knew
the Plot) together with the Lord Lindsey, Sempil, and other adherents,
principal to procure his purgation? The Queen did not acquit him out of her own
affection, or will only, but by their advice and Counsel, who were the chief
Pilots of the State, at that time. Nay, did not the same parties Murray,
Sempil, etc. procure others of the Nobles to join with them, and solicited the
Queen to Marry Bothwel, pretending it necessary for her to take such a Husband,
to defend her in troublesome times; yea did they not in some manner force her to
it? and by their Handwriting to Bothwel, did they not bind themselves to obey
him, in case he would marry her? did not they themselves, viz. Murray, Sempil
and the rest, (in order to this) procure the Divorce of Bothwel from his first
Wife, sister to the Earl of Huntly? and are thereby most clearly convinced of
double dealing? But what follows? The charg of the Murder. And of this the
Lord Harris accused Murray himself, viz. that at Craigmillar, he, Morton, and
Bothwel did consult, conspire, and determine the Kings death; for the effecting
whereof Indentures were there drawn and subscribed by them. And to convince it
more evidently, Pourry, Paris, and Hay, who were all three Executed for the
Murder, confessed at their death, and called God to witness, that those two (
Murray and Morton) were the principal contrivers of it. The like did John
Hepburn, Bothwels servant, at his Execution for the same Fact; protesting that
he had seen the Articles and Writings drawn to that purpose, as we said. To
blind the world therefore a little, Murray and Morton take up Arms upon a
pretense to apprehend Bothwel, and send out ships to pursue him at Sea, whom
themselves had sent away; yea had sent the Lord Grange on purpose to him, to
advise and will him for his own safety, to be gone, promising, that no body
should pursue him: as indeed none did very hastily: for he stayed after this no
less then two Months in Scotland, viz. until Murray was returned out of France.
Then of necessity he must be gone; otherwise by his stay, or their taking him,
they would be all betrayed themselves: So he finding himself overreach't by his
Associates in the Conspiracy, and being as sure to be overpowered by them, if
he should abide it, was content at last to withdraw, and be offered up as a
Sacrifice to the censure of the world for their purgation. This therefore was
the Texture and sum of the Plot concerning the death of the Lord Darley Husband
to the Queen, and the Queens Marriage of Bothwel. These two Catilines ( Murray
who was the Queens base Brother, and Morton) caused the King to be slain, using
Bothwels consent and assistance in it; which Bothwel they persuade afterward to
Marry the Queen, and deal as effectually with the Queen, that she should be
willing to Marry Bothwel: and this on purpose, that they might have ground
hereby to ruin them both, and possess themselves of the government; as in a
short time they did, upon a colorable, though feigned, accusation brought
against them, viz. against the Queen and Bothwel, as conspiratours and
contrivers of the Kings death. It Is well known, the Earl Murray never truly
loved the Lord Darley. He was once in Arms and in the field to have killed him;
and thereupon fl^d into England. After this he persuaded the Lord Darley to
give his consent to the Murdering of David Riza the Queens Secretary; in which
action a Pistol was also set to the Queens Belly, being then great with Child,
to terrify her, and, if it could have been, to procure her Micsarrying: but
the Lord Darley, having obtained the Queens pardon for this, yet fearing lest
Murray should inform Her Majesty concerning him, further then he liked, he
resolves with himself to kill Murray; but first, out of I know not what reason,
discovers his intention to the Queen, whom he supposed to be very much incensed
against Murray; but she utterly disliked the business, and would not endure him
to speak of it: which coming afterward to Murrays knowledge, as he had before
practisd to estrang the Queen from her Husband, and offered to procure her a
Divorce from him, (which she also utterly condemned,) so now he resolves to
make away him viz. the Lord Darl^y, and to that end Plots with the Earls Morton
and Bothwel, as has been said, yet himself cunningly, to divert suspicion, and
that he might be thought absolutely innocent in the business, when as now all
things were agreed upon, withdraws himself, from the Court first, and then goes
into France, a little before the Murder was committed. All which passages,
being indeed the most intricate maze of Treachery (one of them) that ever was
devised by wicked men, were made to appear plain enough unto Queen Elizabeth's
Commissioners at York, as is manifest by Sir Ralph Sadlers Notes concerning
that business, which I have seen; but afterward more clear then the Sun, at the
Trial and Execution of the Earl Morton. Surius. Chron.
For Murray had met with vengeance before; having been Pistolled by a man of
his own profession, as he rode in the Street at Edinburgh, about the year 1570.

viz. That which they used toward her at Carbery hill, their slanderous
Libels, their imprisoning her at Lough-Levin; and their Act of Parliament for
her deposition, as appears by the words of the Statute. Lastly the
resignation of her Crown; which yet they stoutly affirmed at York, to have been
voluntary and of her own seeking. But whether it were so or no, their course of
proceeding will best manifest. For first, themselves had drawn up the form of
Resignation, before she understood any thing of it. Then Athol, Liddington and
the rest send Sir Robert Melvin to her, to signify from them the great danger
she was in; and to persuade her to yield to their Motion touching her
Resignation: yea they alleged, as out of duty and well wishing to her, as they
said, that in case the condition of affairs should change, what she should do
now, could not be any prejudice to her, being it was extorted. Sir Nicholas
Thro^morton was about this time arrived in Scotland from the Queen of England;
upon other pretenses indeed, but a most fit man to further such a work: which
he did, so like a cunning Artificer, that what wind soever blew him thither, he
deserved well at his return to have been created Lord Hurly. At last comes the
Lord Lindsey (one whose hands had been formerly washed in the Secretaries
blood,) with a Commission from the Counsel to the Queen, and with stern looks
tenderd the writings of Resignation to her, threatening fearfully, in case she
should refuse to sign them. Whereupon she subscribed, being prisoner; and to
save her life, lost her Crown. Was this a Free Resignation, think you? Their
Act of Parliament indeed calls it so, but the world will judge. Beside this
they make her give power to the Lords, Lindsey and Ruthen (as her dearest
Friends) to renounce the government in her name, and to appoint Murray Regent,
which was the thing he had long and earnestly gaped for: when th^s was done,
and she was now become, as it were; a private person, they decree, Chap. 12.
that she shall remain prisoner until her Trial. And Chap. 19. They draw up her
Indictment most scandalously and falsely. Among the causes they pretend of her
Resignation, they say first, That she was weary of the Government. But, their
Tyrannous and Disloyal proceedings had made her so, if she were. Secondly, That
she was not able in Body and Spirit to endure the pains. She was in the flower
of her age, and a Princess of no mean Vivacity, quickness, and Magnanimity of
Spirit, as they themselves and the world knew. And thirdly that she might in
her life time, see her Son settled in the government. She would gladly have seen
him first of age to govern himself. This was the direct way to loose both her
Son and her self, for ought she could expect or foresee otherwise: But it is
true, Domini est salus, qui evellit de laqueo pedes suorum, Salvation is of our
Lord, and he delivers the Feet of his people out of the Snare. For as it
happened, the Queen makes a very strange Escape: and at Hamiltoun, the house
of a Noble Family, and at that time well affected, she rovoketh all, whatsoever
she had done in her imprisonment, Confessing and Prot^sting that it was all
again her Will, and by Force and Violence extorted from her; That no form of
legal proceeding had been observed in it; That the Noble Earls of Huntley,
Argile, Lord Harris and many others, never consented to it. That in the
Parliament, where it was transacted, there was not above Four Earls, Six Lords,
One Bishop, and Three Abbots. With such manifest partiality, and dislike of the
greater and better part of the Kingdom was the business carried!

Scottish Nation, to cast themselves into such a Gulf of disloyalty against
their natural Sovereign, as they must needs either perish themselves, or run
the whole State of the Kingdom upon a Rock, and wrack it; but for some reasons
I must do it under the Vail of an Apologue; For all things are not to be spoken
plainly.

IN Africa then there were two great Forests near adjoining; In the one a Lion
governed the Beasts, in the other a Lyoness. The Lion was Rich and full of
Prey, yet feared, least his Neighbor the Lyoness getting her a Foreign Mate,
should gather so much strength and courage, as to pick some quarrel with him,
and invade his Forest. Wherefore ca^ling a Counsel of his Beasts, he c^nsulted
with them, how they might secure themselves of the Lyoness: The Bull,
presumptuous of his strength, and used to go^e all that came in his way,
together with the Boar, and the Bear contemned such vain fears, as not worthy
of the Lions courage: yet the Major part of the other Beasts concurred in
opinion with the Lion, That there was ground of fears and jealousies: which an
old Ape perceiving, that had lived long in the Forest, and was used to
counterfeit, gave advise presently, that the Lion should f^ign kindeness, for,
says he, being an old dissembler, Great hearts are soonest won with fair
semblance. Neither did Reignard the Fox dislike this Counsel; but knowing that
the Lyoness had many hungry. Wolves and Wily Foxes about her, advised the Lion
to send the Goat, agrave Bearded personage, to visit the Lyoness and renew
Freindship: and under color of such friendly Negotiation, to deal privately
with some of the Wolves and Foxes about the Lyoness, and breed in them some
sear and apprehensions of her cruelty; yea and if he found them inclinable to
such Counsels, to persuade them to stand more upon their own guard, and not to
suffer the Lyoness to rule so Arbitrarily, as she did, but rather, if they
could, to make themselves a Free State, and to be under no other command, but
their own. The Goat performed this service so wisely, that the Mongrel, a Beast
much used and very near the person of the Lyoness, upon hearing the Motion,
resented it so well, that he undertook to persuade some other of the Counsel.
But, says he, we have some cruel Beasts among us, which favor the Lyoness
much, as The Tiger, the Leopard, the Unicorn, etc. if they perceive this, they
will oppose us instantly, and make a Party too strong for us. Fear not that,
said the Goat, we can spare you a Regiment or two of such Mastiffs, as shall
defend and guard you sufficiently: only be sure, that you stand to your
business; and when you are once Masters of the Field, there will be Prey and
spoil enough. Upon this the Mongrel, the Wolve^, and the Foxes, with such
other Brutes as adhered to them, lay their Heads together, and never leave
consulting and conspiring, till they had entrapped the Lyone^s, and drawn her
into such a Pit-fal, as she was not able to recover her self, but they seize
upon her, disongle her at their pleasure, and put her in ward. Reignard a great
Counselor of the Lion in the other Forest, and a Contriver of this Treachery,
hearing what success it had, and that the Lyoness was secured, sends another
Messenger to the Mongrel, advising him to make sure of the Lyoness Whelp, and
then he might securly rule and govern all: For, says he, Possession is the
chief point in Law: and when you have him, you have all. Perhaps, out of
sullenness and restraint, he may die; however, if he lives, he shall be sure to
live at your pleasure and disposing, if you take him in time, so he did
accordingly. This is the Fable. The Moralizing of it, I leave to those that
expound Riddles; though this be such, as needs not an Oedipus to declare it.

Scotland, and of its irregular and tumultuous Reformation, but that I desire
to satisfy the Reader a little further in the true cause of this particular
distemper, or more special abuse and contempt of Civil Magistracy, which the
Reformers of this Church seem to have shown all along their work. It proceeded
without all doubt from the Spirit and humor of Calvin, who first devised it;
and was himself a bitter enemy against all Magistrates, in whose Counsels he
could not rule: In so much, as at Genevah it self, he was at first expelled for
a seditious person by the Magistrates of that City; and compelled to go live
with Bucer at Strasburgh. Yet afterward, the party, which favored him,
prevailing at Genevah, he was recalled back again; but refused to return,
unless upon condition and promise, that his discipline should be received. So
it was promised by a general consent of the City, and at his coming performed;
His consistory, that is to say, an Oligarchy of certain pickd Elders, was
erected, as it were the Inquisition of Genevah. This, by the way, was a strain
of policy much beyond Luthers dull reach, and which madded him all his life
long. For by this Calvin did not only set up a Church Independent of him, and
without consulting at all with him, viz. with Luther, but became a Dictator
general, as it were, to all the Protestant or reformed Churches abroad; and so
very much Eclipsed Luthers glory. But the seat of his Dominion was at Genevah,
as we said, having settled his discipline in such manner there, that by color
and pretense of it, he was able, not only to censure offenders at his
pleasure, but to carry on designs against any opposition whatsoever: For indeed
through the concurrence of his Eldership (who were commonly all at his book) he
was upon the matter inv^sted with a kind of Sovereignety both of their Town
and Church: He and his E^ders ruled all there. And to the end it should be
received abroad with due reverence (though it were indeed the Idol of his own
fancy, yet) they set it down ( viz. Calvin's Presbyterian Discipline) for a mark
of the True Church, and join it in equal rank with the Preaching of the word,
and Administration of Sacraments. So that by means of this Discipline he not
only in a short time became himself the great Sultan of the Lake, but sent his
Mammalukes also out into all the Provinces of France, and planted Reformed
Churches there after his Model of Genevah: The Sinods or more general
Assemblies whereof, seating themselves in the principal and chief Towns of the
Kingdom, are thereby enabled to hold such correspondence with the Nobility and
Gentry of the Nation inclined to novelty, as that they are sure of a constant
and strong support from them upon all occasions; yea to engage them perfectly
in their way, they take them many times, very politickly, into their
Consistories in the quality of Lay Elders, and do questionless nourish in
themselves no faint hopes, to be able one day by their means to subvert those
Pillars of the Catholic Church, which so much obstruct their proceedings, viz.
the Bishops, Archbishops, and other Prelates of France; and to set up Calvinism
and their Consistories all the Kingdom over. This, I say, is the Train of their
Policy, and the reason, why they are so implacable in their hatred, and
incessantly violent and active against all such Princes and States, as do
oppose the introduction of their Discipline; which is the Medium whereby, in
France; Scotland, the Palatinate and elsewhere, they have made, or endeavored
to make themselves Supreme heads and Masters of misrule over all others: as
has been in part declared already, and shall be further manifested in the
sequel of this narration. Hence it is, that all commanders, Generals, and all
other Officers whatsoever in their service, are so strictly enjoined by the
Articles of Bearn, Art. 25.
as has been said, to observe the discipline Ecclesiastical, as it shall be
from time to time, ordained by their Synods: And hence, that is to say, from
this Arrogant confidence of theirs it was, and indiscreet zeal, that they
refused when time was, at Rochel, so much as to speak with Monsieur Byron, the
Kings Ambassador; and used Monsieur la Nove with so much, and so long
incivilities, that at last he was constrained to forsake them.

they can or dare, all other Ecclesiastical government whatsoever all Order of
Divine Service, Rites and Ceremonies, which are not exactly after their Mode,
or framed according to their Pattern. And in this particular the Protestants
church of England has, from the beginning so much tasted of their spleen, or
madness rather, that Mr. Butler of Cambridge may seem to have shown no less
judgment, then wit, in the definition which he once gave of a Puritan, viz.
That he was a Protestant frayed out of his Wits; which King James in the
Conference at Hampton Court disliked not. The reason whereof may be this. We
find by experience, that Ceremonies and Solemnity have ever in the Church of
God stirred up and bred a reverence and devotion in the hearts of good people
toward the service of God; that they help to elevate and awaken their souls in
time of prayer and other Divine worship: also that the order, and gravity of
Bishops and other Prelates of the Church were, not only wont to find, but apt
to procure estimation and respect with the people. Now ask a Puritan his
opinion of a Rochet, a Surplis, cornerd Cap, or any other Habit, which
distinguishes Ecclesiastical persons from the Laity, he tells you presently,
They are the rags of Antichrist, badges of Superstition; The Communion Book he
calls the Portess and Breviary of Satan; set prayers extinguish zeal with him,
yea are tantum non flat Idolatry; The Ecclesiastical Courts are the Synagogues
or Shops of the Devil, and but the excrements of a corrupted discipline, which
they would fain reform. As for the Authority and Government of Bishops he
subscribs to Doctor Ames, Hunc Episcoporum ordinem and medio tollendum, etc.
That either this Hierarchy of Bishops must down, or Popery will come upon us,
do what we can. Cujus contrarium verum est. But let that pass. The Clergy of
England they count Atheists, call them soldiers of Antichrist, and a Bastardly
Ministry. And from the Fountain of this frenzy sprang in late times, all those
infamous and scandalous Libels of Vdal, Penry, Brown, Greenwood, Martin,
Marprelate, Martin junior, Hay any work for a Cooper, The supplication to the
President of Wales, and many other to the late Queen, and troublesome to the
State. But the springhead of all was Calvin himself, who Epist. 105. declares
magis sibi placere, etc. that he (forsooth) did rather approve the Scottish
Reformation, then that of England. Gramercy good Sir John. You like it better;
why? because it was the issue of your own happy Brain: it is well known, Knox
fetched his Coals from your Fire, and cast his Engine of Reformation in your
Mould; and so upon the matter, in commending it, like a wise man, you commend
your self. So Epist. 26. he tells Cranmer, relictam esse congeriem, That there
was a great heap of Popish superstitions yet remaining in the Church of
England, which did not only dim, but even much darken, and corrupt the purity
of Gods worship. Hence it was, that during all Queen Mary's Reign, The English
Church at Genevah, as they called themselves, was Antagonist, and at defiance
with the English Church at Franckfort: for they at Franckfort defended the
Authority of Bishops, and used the Leiturgy and Ceremonies which were commanded
by King Edward the sixth; notwithstanding Mr. Calvin, writing to the Protector,
by whose Authority they had been established, was so modest, as to call them
scoffingly and by way of contempt, Tolerabiles Ineptias, certain fooleries, but
yet such, as might be born withal for a time.

Presbyterian Discipline is the Palladium of Calvinists, for which they do not
only contend but fight, tanquam pro aris and focis, against all Kings and
Princes that oppose it, more eagerly and bitterly, then for any other thing:
which no man will deny, that knows, what their proceedings have been, and are
in France, Scotland, Low Countries, Bohemia and elsewhere; or that has read
Bsialicon Doron, written by a Pen, that had cause enough to be sensible of
their disorders; or that Book of Philippus Nicolai, De regno. Xti.
which is full of predictions of what lawless attempts and practices they would
serve themselves to advance their consistory above the court, which have not
all proved untrue: or lastly that of Joannes Schutz a learned Lutheran, Lib.
50. cause.
who tells them plainly that they trust only upon their Soecular power, That
they are seditious people, and defend their opinions best with a Sword in their
hand. But that which King James himself says of them, is most remarkable Ego a
Puritanis, Prefat. monitor.
etc. I, says he, have been vexed with these Puritans from my very Birth, yea
they persecuted me, while I was yet in my Mothers Belly, and it mist but
little, that they had not murdered me, before I was born. Among which Pranks
that of the Ministers at Sterling must not be forgotten; who appeared
themselves in the field, under the Command of some of the Nobility of that
faction, and forced the King to yield his person to them, and to suffer a new
guard to be put upon him, and his old removed. For which insolent attempt the
chief of them, viz. Mr. Patrick Galloway, Pollard, Carmichel, and Andrew Melvin
were glad afterward to take covert in England: yet James Gibson stood to it,
and called the King Jeroboam and persecutor; Lawson opposed and affronted him
to his face: Pont and Balcanqual by open Proclamation and in the presence of a
public Notary, censured him very formally, and did what they could to withdraw
the peoples Loyalty and affection from him. When Philautia and Phantasia, that
is, self-love and self-conceit do meet in Conjunction in the Brain, there must
needs be a great Eclipse of the understanding; and a Heart swollen and blown up
with singularity does so far contemn, yea hate, whatsoever opposition is made
against her, that being not able to govern the strong passion, and those
fervors of a proud spirit which boil incessantly within her, Men run like so
many furies, upon rash and inconsiderate attempts, both against the reverence
due to Majesty, Justice, and all good government. A thing manifestly
observable in these Zelots. And therefore the Zuinglians, who are (otherwise)
more then their half Brethren, can scarcely approve them in the point of the
Consistory. For says Gualter Minister of Zurich, Comment in 1 Cor. c. 5.
Galli habent sua seniorum Concilia, etc. The Reformed French, says he, have
their Consistories of Elders, in whose hands all power and authority
Ecclesiastical is, as it were, deposited; and in These all counsels and
resolutions are taken, all Taxes and impositions laid for the maintaining of
War against the King. Proper work doubtless for the Ministers of Gods word, as
they will be called, and for a Spiritual Court, as it pretends to be, and to as
good a purpose. De Offic. Ministror. lib. 15. cap. 19.20, 22.
Musculus also shows as little esteem of them, in his Loci. Commun. cap. 10.
But above all Schultingius in his Hierarchica Anachresis does most graphically
and to the life discover their exorbitant and absurd practices, showing how all
Kings, Princes, and Governors are made subject to their Excommunications, that
truly Brutum Fulmen, of their elderships. How Nobility and Commons both must
assemble at the Summons of the Pastor, who is more then half Pope in his
Parish, being attended by Assisting Elders, rather to countenance what he will
have done, then to do any thing contrary to his mind. Lastly, Calvin at
Genevah is the Supreme Oracle, beyond whom there is no appeal, really Papa,
though out of a dissembled humility he seems not willing to be called Doctor.
So he. And what confusion in the Civil State this Constitution of pretended
Discipline may further cause in time, Hooker in the Preface to his Books of
Ecclesiastical Policy shows at large.

Titulus Quartus. GEVXISM: OR The Troubles in HOLLAND, AND THE United Provinces.
Holland, Zealand, and those other united Provinces, that is, at an Aceldama a
Field of blood, where the Principles mentioned so often already in this
Narrative, and the Tragical effects of them have been acted with most
lamentable fury and rage for many years together. I will not be large in the
declaration of them, to show you, how, the Lutheran faction first began, and
how violently the Calvinists succeeding did prosecute their work; for then I
should weary you. I shall labor to be as brief as I may, and rather to
Epitomize things, then dilate them. Of all their Actions That Union of Vtrecht
was the most notorious; a devise clearly according to the rules of Junius
Brutus, and in imitation of the Switz and Cantons. This Union was made by the
States in the year 1578. For seeing on the one hand the fortunate Proceedings
of the Duke of Parma, and on the other the course of the Malcontents, they
enter a perpetual League; which was comprised in Twenty Articles: In the first
whereof Holland, Zealand, Frize and Gelders join contra omnem vim quae sub
praetextu, etc. to maintain one another against all force whatsoever that shall
be made upon them in the Kings name, or for matter of Religion. After this,
viz. in the year 1579. the Prince of Orange (who was the contriver and
ringleader of all) with those of Antwerp and Gaunt enter the League, and
subscribe on the Fourteenth of February: and it was again confirmed at the
Hague the Twentieth of July, 1581. The design in all being to expel their Liege
Lord the King of Spain, and to deprive him of those Dominions; as presently
after they did; publishing an Edict in the name of the States unit^d, with this
title or prescription, Que le Roy a' Espague est descheu, etc. That the King of
Spain is fallen from the Dominion of the Low Countries: and injoyning an Oath
or form of Abjuration to be taken by all the people of those Countries in these
words, I W. N. Comme un bon vassal du 'pais.
Swear anew and bind my self to the Provinces united, to be Loyal and Faithful
to them, and to Aid them against the King of Spain as a true Man of the
Country. Upon this they break all the Kings Seals, pull down his Arms, seize
and enter upon his Lands, Rents, Customs, and all Hereditaments whatsoever,
taking them into their own possession, and as absolute Lords, they Coin Money
in their own names, they place and displace Officers of State, Banish the Kings
Counselors, seize upon Church livings, suppress Catholic Religion, beseidge
Amsterdam, and do all other acts that might import Supreme and absolute
Dominion. And all this with so much terror and violence, that, as it is
reported, Raald a Counselor for Frizeland, upon only hearing of their manner
of proceeding, and of the new Oath against the King, died suddenly therewith,
as of an Apoplexy. The reasons they give, why the King had forfeited his title
and right to these Countries were these. First, because he labored to suppress
Religion. They mean their own, which they had newly taken up contrary to the
old; and which, had it not been for the opposition made against it by the Kings
Governors in the Provinces, had long before this time destroyed the Kings
Religion, which was legally established, and received by the ge^eral consent,
approbation, and profession of the whole Country. Secondly, for oppressing,
that is governing, them, not according to the Law, but by Tyranny. Thirdly, for
abrogating their privileges* and holding them in a condition of bondage and
servitude. Such a Prince, say they, we are not bound to obey as a Lawful
Magistrate, but to ^ject as a Tyrant. But this is a Presid^nt of v^ry dangerous
consequ^n^e doubtless. For if private Subjects (as (...) that time they were
without difpute,) may depose their Prince merely upon general Charges, and
without having done any one overt Act contrary unto the Laws or the duty of his
Office, and may make themselves sole Judges in the cause, of what is right
betwixt the Prince and the People, of which they were in no capacity (either
formal or virtual, that is representative) more then a Minor part, Qui stat,
videat ne cadat, there is no Prince, nor State in the world can be secure. The
Rochellers may plead this, as much as the Hollanders; and so may any
discontented party under a government which they like not, as well as they.

But it shall not be amiss, to enquire a little further into this business, and
lay open to plain view the grounds, occasions and consequences thereof, so
compendiously as we shall be able. The original, primary and true cause of
these troubles was the spring and growth ^ heresy, which by this time was,
like a Gangreen, spread over the greatest part of Germany, and not the least in
these Low Countries; where under the shadow of religion especially of abetting
and promoting liberty of Conscience, as they called it, All factions of State
and discontentments of Ambitious persons shrouded themselves. The peoples
natural inclination to Novelty was great, and set it much forward; yet there
wanted not the Concurrence of some Foreigners, (to blow the Coals of
dissension) both out of England and France. Charles the Fifth, Emperor, a wise
and provident Prince, remembringing what a piece of work Luther had lately cut
him out in Germany, and with what danger, difficulty, and charge he overcame
it, intended, as well for the quietness of these Provinces, as for his own
Interest and Honor, to prevent, as much as he could, the Propagation of
Martinests and all other Sects whatsoever. And to that end, finding no other
means more proper, and fit to be applied unto such a Malady, had established
the Inquisition among them, about the year 1550. for the Execution whereof
Mary, Queen of Hungary, then Regent of the Low Countries procured such
Explication and Mitigation of some Circumstances, as was judged necessary. But
after this, the Emperor resigning the whole government of these Provinces to
his Son King Philip, retired himself, by a most memorable example, voluntarily
from the world, and cons^crated the last act of his life entirely to God and
devotion. King Philip at the first entrance into his government, finding how
much the Sects increased daily in Flanders, notwithstanding the means opposed
against them, and considering what danger would ensue upon it to the State,
followed strictly his Fathers advise, and in the year 1555. renewed the
Commission, Instructions and Articles for the said Inquisition. But this, as it
happened through the general contagion and distemper of minds, which Heresy
had bred in the people, proud only matter of further discontent to the
Inhabitants of the Nether-Lands, and did no good. They allege, that all
Strangers would thereupon be forced to depart the Country, and by consequence
their Trading would decay, which was the Golden Mine and maintenance of those
Provinces. Thus they complained; but indeed their inward grief was the humor of
Innovation, to which they were much inclined, and therefore feared themselves.
There was another Politic Act of the Kings, yet withal of very religious
concernment and design, which added Fuel to this Fire, namely, the Erecting of
those new Bishoprics at Gaunt, Ipres, Floren. vand. Haer de tumult. Belgic.
Antwerp, etc. which he intended all the Provinces over. And a third, viz. the
authority and power of the Bishop of Arras, whose Cardinals Hat lately procured
him by the Kings favor, made him the more odious; so as the greater his
Obligation was to his Holiness, or the King their Sovereign, so much more, it
seemed, was the malice both of the Nobility and common people incensed against
him. Lastly, they urge their Ancient privileges and liberties which they
pretend, were violated by the King; They would have no Strangers rule or bear
Office among them; The Spaniards must be dismissed the Country; and some new
liberties granted, viz. Liberty of Conscience, and Toleration for Religion.

Liberty and Religion made the Standard-bearers, as it were, to their future
Commotions. But let us concerning their several grievances. As concerning the
first, that of the Inquisition, the name is of greater Terror then the thing:
It was first devised upon a nece^sity against the Moors in Spain; and upon
experience of the use and benefit thereof, continued. And though I shall not
commend any sign, or proceedings, that savor of cruelty, yet I cannot condemn
this: because it adds nothing to the punishment of Heresy, which the Law did
not inflict before; but requires only a more strict Execution of the Law, and
a more diligent course of examination to be used by the Inquisitors. And
certainly, under God, it has been the chief Antidote, which has preserved
Spain so well and so long free from the infection of heresies, and from such
dangerous and lasting tumults as do commonly follow them, and wherewith the
other Kingdoms of Europe have been generally embroyled. The Spaniards
themselves, when they were most discontented, never complained of it; nor is it
in it self a more bloody Law or Execution of Justice, then the Consistory it
self at Genevah does maintain, and has executed more then once, though
unjustly and Tyrannically, considering what principles they pretend, and what
outcries and obtestations they once made for Liberty of Conscience, Liberty of
Prophesying, Liberty of the Spirit, which is their only Judge of
Controversies, according to the written word alone, and not any Consistory, or
company of men whatsoever. Besides, as it was at first propounded by the King,
out of his zeal for the good and quiet of the Country, so was it by his wisdom
suspended afterward, finding, they were not capable of such a remedy. For the
second, viz. the Erecting of the new Bishoprics it was a prudent and necessary
resolution to bridle Sectaries, and as a Sithe, to cut down those Weeds, which
grew so fast in Gods Church. For by appointing in each Province grave and
learned men, to stand as Watchmen and Sentinels against the Enemies of the
Church and State, it would be more easy, by concurrence of their Authority,
and by their vigilance over their Flocks, to preserve the people from danger of
seducement. Neither was it a new design. For Philip Duke of Burgundy had long
before desired it, as a thing very needful; because in his time all the
Seventeen Provinces (except only the Diocese of Arras were under such Bishops,
as were strangers to the Country, and Subjects of Foreign Princes; which could
not be convenient for the State. And what good their Erection has wrought,
experience daily shows, in those places where they still continue. For now
every Diocese is carefully visited by a Bishop of the same Country and
Language; who as he has more natural compassion, so has he also more
knowledge and care to instruct his Countrymen in the way that is right, and to
weed out disorders. And therefore was the Erection allowed, and ratified by
Bull of Pius Quartus in the year 1559. Concerning the third, viz. the Cardinal
of Arras, Although his wisdom and experience in affairs of government, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, was sufficiently known to the King, yet because the
Prince of Orange with the Counts Egmond and Horn, did jointly write to the King
against him, His Majesty, though to his great disservice, was content to
remove him, for their satisfaction. But when this was done, neither was the
Country any whit the quieter, for his calling away; nor did they themselves
cease from further practicing. As for their liberties and franchises, had not
the King confirmed them all at the joyful entry? When did he violat them
afterward? was it for preferring Spaniards? There were very few of them left in
the Country, and of these fewer cum imperio. Was it for the Offices of State?
See how the governments were distributed among themselves. Count Egmond was
Governor of Flaunders and Artois; The Prince of Orange, Governor of Holland,
Zealand, Vtreckt and Burgundy; Count Aremberge was Governor of West-Frezeland,
and Over-Issel; Count Barlamont of Namur, Count Mansfeld of Luxemberge and
Clinay; The Marquis of Berghen of Lisle and Doway: So as it is not easy to see,
how the Nobility could complain justly they were neglected, or not honorably
employed. And yet for addition, and their further assurance of the Kings good
affection to them and the Provinces, he left his Sister the Duchess of Parma
Governor General with them, a Woman of a very peaceable and mild Spirit, and
one that was like to hold the bridle of Government with a Gentle hand, and to
be advised by their Counsels.

Brederode and his Associates presented their Petition to the Duchess; which
containing many things neither fit for them to ask, nor safe for her to grant,
was, not without reason, looked upon as a Prologue to some future Troubles.
Henceforward the Heads of the Faction plot the advancing of their party, and
begin to strengthen themselves both at home and abroad. These were, the Earl of
Culembergh, who had lately married a Germane Lady of the Lutheran way: Horn,
who was matched with the Sister of Count Harman: The Prince of Orange was
already by his Mother allied to the Count of Solms, and his Wife was Sister to
Maurice Duke of Saxony: And Grave Scheremberg had married his Sister. There was
also Count Lodowick, the Princes Brother, a Soldier, and a man of great Spirit,
Lutheran all over, and as fit an instrument, as could be desired, both to make
a party, and to back it. Besides these Flacius Illiricus, a most turbulent
Preacher of new Doctrines, had been sent for privately out of Germany, with
some other Ministers, and were dispersed in all corners of the Country,
incensing and corrupting the people with as much industry as was possible.
These were Lutherans, and did mischief enough; But when Calvin's Quicksilver
came to be cast in among them, the fire then could be kept in no longer, but
the flames break out in all places. The people in spite of Laws mutiny every
where; down go the Kings Arms, down go Images, and all the Ornaments in the
Churches; The Churches themselves, as if they had been the Castles and Forts of
some Enemy, are Sackd and Pillaged, Strad. de bell Belgie.
Monasteries rifled, Religious houses robbed, pulled down, and spoiled, the
Religious expeld and driven out by force of Arms, and all Magistrates
whatsoever, that endeavored either to pacify or oppose them, are contemned,
abused, resisted: yea their fury and violence was such, as they forced the
Governess her self to consult of retiring out of Brussels; which she had done,
if the Counsel of some of the Nobles had not prevailed with her to the
contrary. Yet did not the causes of her dislike and distrust cease, but rather
grow and increase daily, viz. the private Conventicles, preachings, and
insolency of the people, openly now Lutheranizing, and even in the Face of the
Court: yea the frequent and private meetings of many of the Nobility were
matter of much jealousy to her, whereof she often complained in Counsel, but
without redress. She knew very well, the people could work no great effects
without a head, and that the Nobles wanted power to execute any of their
d^signs without the people; but that both of them conspiring to countenance and
a^^st each other, much mischief might follow. Orange, who was the chief Captain
and contriver of all, yet played least in sight, and would very seldom seem
outwardly to favor any change of Religion, all that he did, was, as he
pretended, for the interest of the Commonwealth and for the public good. He
was assisted chiefly by the Marquis of Berghen Montagny, and Florence
Montmorency, alias Count Horn, who by this time was grown a perfect
Malecontent; yet not for Religion, but upon some private respects, viz. of his
own debt, and for being denied the government of Zutphen, but especially for
the execution of his Brother Montigny in Spain. The meetings, in which they
agitated Counsels, and brought their designs onward to perfection, were first
at Breda, whither the Count Egmond was also invited, as a man of the greaest
Military power and interest in that Country: and presently after, as an effect
or resolution taken at that assembly, Brederode and his accomplices delivered
their Petition to the Governess, as has been said, for Liberty of Religion.
They had meetings also at Hoochstrat, Osterweal, and Saint Trudon, at which
that Noble Count Egmond was undone; For at his Arraignment it was one of the
principal things chargd against him, that he had been privy to the
Confederations and agreements made at those Assemblies. Secondly, that upon the
same day the Petition was delivered by Brederode, he came with the Prince of
Orange and Count Horn to the great Banquet at the Earl of Culemberghs house,
where there were no less then Three hundred Confederates, and dined with them;
at which time the name of Geuses was publicly assumed by the Confederates.
Thirdly, that afterward he sent his Secretary, Backerseal, to the Crew,
offering them his aid. And lastly, which himself acknowledged at the Bar, That
he had offered his assistance to hinder the Duke D' Alvas coming into the
Low Countries, and that he had neither disliked, nor dissuaded the proceedings
of the Confederates; Horn was endicted upon the same Articles, with this
further charge against him, That he threatened to levy Fifty thousand men to
rescue his Brother, and bring him home upon force out of Spain. Upon proof of
which accusations, they were, both of them, condemned and lost their heads; as
it seemed, not only just for matter of Law, but also necessary for reason of
State, for the example of others, for the Regents safety, and for vindication
of the Kings honor and authority; which partly by their practices, and partly
by their connivances contrary to duty, had been insufferably vilified and
abused by the rude multitude. Sir Roger Williams History.
Yet is it commonly thought, that Count Egmond was rather drawn in by the Craft
and Policy of Orange, then that he engaged much of himself; being otherwise a
person of a plain, yet Noble and Magnanimous disposition, and therefore
generally lamented.

of Religion, committed so many great and scandalous disorders? the Nobility,
whose office and duty it was by their places to have suppressed and punished
them, conniving at their proceedings? When the Cities were all in uproars, and
the whole frame of the Commonwealth seeming to be shaken? Had not the King all
the reason in the World to send D' Alva and forces of his own, when the
Provincial Governors would not be commanded to apply theirs effectually to the
business? It was certainly high time to do that which he did, not only to
repress and keep in order those rebellious Spirits, which were dispersed and
acting in all parts of the Country; but also to encounter and oppose Orange,
who by this time, what by his open backwardness and oppositions to such
Counsels as tended to a speedy redress of those evils, and what by his secret
practices and abetting of the Delinquent party, had no less undermined the
government it self, then he had discouraged and wearied the Governess. And for
the Companies, which D' Alva brought out of Spain, at which the people were
taught so much to murmur, could it be lawful for the Prince of Orange to bring
in the Reisters out of Germany, and for his Brother the Count Lodowick, with an
Army of French to invade Henault, and was it not lawful for the King to send in
forces to maintain his own? Was it lawful for them to surprise Montz, and was
it not more lawful for the King to expel them? Let no man dream, that if the
Dukes forces had not come, the Country would have been quiet: for that was
incredible to any body, that knew the State of affairs. The fire was not
quenched, but covered, and would have broken out again in a greater flame. The
Confederating of so many and great Persons, countenanced by the chief Governors
themselves, did Prognosticate a storm to be yet coming; and all men of
understanding saw, they were not likely to be governed long by the Bridle in a
Woman's hand. Therefore was the King forced upon the matter to send D' Alva. And
the rather, because he could not but know, that Monsieur Chastillon, Jean
Petit. l' Histor.
the Admiral of France, had sent to Baron Brederode, both to incense him
further against the King, and to persuade him not to agree with the Duchess of
Parma; for, says he, that would but deceive him: and offering moreover in case
of necessity, to a^^ st him with Four thousand Gentlemen. That Count Lodowick,
after his def^at at Mont^, did lie at Rochel among the Calvinists; and that the
Prince himself was gone into France on purpose to prepare for a future
invasion. He knew, that the same Admiral afterward did solicit Charles the
Ninth, King of France, to turn all his Wars upon Flanders, and to take upon him
the protection of the Low Countries; That Aldegund, a great Incendiary, was in
Germany soliciting a party there with like eagerness. So that they laboring on
all sides to offend the King, shall it not be lawful for his Majesty to
provide for his own necessary defense, but he must be taxed with Tyranny?
Certainly it is a most unequal censure, and argues much more partiality then
reason. D' Alva could be no cause of those disorders, which made his coming
necessary; for they all preceded his coming. The Regent, notwithstanding all
her mildeness, yet was at last forced to deal with them by Arms; and having by
that means once reduced them, yet they are insolent and factious still, and to
bring their evil purposes to effect, they seek to Foreign Princes for aid. Who
can wonder then, if the Duke, finding their distempers such, as that gentle
proce^dings did rather aggravate, then allay the malady, did make his War with
some rigor? It was no more then necessity, and the general malice, with which
they had possessed the people against him, compelled him to do for his own
safety. In the Passion week, presently after his coming, there was a Conspiracy
to kill him, whiles he was at his Devotions, at the Monastery of the Green
Valley in the Forest of Sauve not far from Brusels. Monsieur Risot, Carli,
Villars with Seven hundred Horse and Five hundred Foot were designed to do it,
when the Duke, the Nobles, and all his followers should be at Mass; and with
fire and instruments devised for the purpose, to burn both men, and Monastery,
and Church, good and bad, friends and enemies all together: as the two Guidons
confessed. Such another business was intended also at Brussels against the
Spaniards, Mich. ab. Isselt. de bell. Belg.
as both Petit, Mendoza, and others testify. Neither did their malice much
cease, when he was recalled. For as that Noble Lord the Duke of Areschot
discovered, and advised Don John, there was a Plot to have surprised his
person, of which the Prince of Orange was reported to be the chief manager; and
another to kill him at Namur by Radcliff and Gray, two Englishmen. I enquire
not who set them on work; Latet anguis in herba, its a business not to be
looked into too far. And did not those Calv^nists at Antwerp as finely
contrive, to have blown up that famous Duke of Parma, as he should be going
along the High Street, with all the chief State of the Country attending on
him? So that it is clear, how strange soever they make of it, Protestants may be
charged with Assassinats and Treasons, as well as others.

Orange (who signally deserves that Character,) was a very popular, and no less
politic man, and beside a great Housekeeper, which qualities, especially the
last, very acceptable to that sort of people, stood him in no small stead in
order to his designs. The house of Nassau in Germany was Ancient and Honorable,
but advanced in this Country chiefly by marriages. This William (his Father
falling to Lutheranism) Charles the Fifth, Emperor, out of a Princely affection
to him, took from his Father, and commended him to the care and Education of
Mary, Queen of Hungary, his Sister. Afterward he admitted him to be of his
Bedchamber; Then made him General of his Horse, and after that raised him to be
Leivetenant General of the Army. And yet further to endear his obligation to
him, when he was to ^^nd the Imperial Crown to his Brother Ferdinand, he made
choice of him, as a man of most Trust, and commended him likewise very much to
his Son, King Philip; notwithstanding diverse often warned him to take heed,
that he nursed not a Snake in his Bosom; to these favors we may add how much
the Emperor favored his match with the Count of Burens Daughter and Heir, who
was his first Wife, and by whom he was highly advanced; and that he procured
Rhenatus of Challon, Prince of Orange, to make this William his Heir, when the
President Schorus was wholly against him. These things considered, and also the
many favors, and great trust, which King Philip also showed to have in him,
committing so many and so great Governments to his charge and fidelity, viz.
Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht, and Burgundy, as has been said, it might seem
impossible almost, that any thing should corrupt his Loyalty. The first visible
disgust he took, was upon the Kings going into Spain. The Prince being then a
Widower, aspired to marry with the Princess Christerna, Duchess of Lorrain,
Cousin Germane to the King, and labored also, that she might be made Governess
of the Provinces in the Kings absence; to the intent, that by such Alliance he
might in effect sway the whole Government of the Provinces himself: a thing
indeed for which he had gaped a long time, and stood competitor with Count
Egmond. But the King preferring the Duchess of Parma, he lost both his hopes
and his Wife. Upon this grew his first hatred against D' Alva and the Cardinal
Granvellan, by whose Counsels, he supposed, the Duchess of Parma was
preferred. So as Ambition and Pride being indeed the true internal motives of
his discontent, Religion, and the Commonwealths interest, must be made the
Mantle to hide it. Hereupon he marries into the house of Saxony, which was
already Lutheranized, and sets Brederode and his fellows to work, as we have
seen already. Then labors to make a difference between Granvellan and Egmond
(although the former had been his good friend in many matters of importance:)
practices what he can to hinder the coming in of D' Alva; nor did he ever,
after that repulse concerning the Duchess of Lorrain, show himself well
affected to the Kings affairs, nor content with any favors. But after all this
that has been already recited, he invades Frizeland, directs Lumay to possess
himself of Brill, and what else he could in Holland; gives order to his Brother
Scheremberg to make himself master of Zutphen, and himself makes Saras
Governor of Flushing. Wherein (to note it by the way,) the World took notice of
a great oversight in the Duke d' Alva, to neglect a place of so great
importance so long, and to suffer it to be invested by the Enemy. In a word I
may well conclude, he was the great Wheel, whereupon the whole State of the
Confederates affairs turned. It is true, he did once seek to be reconciled to
the King, by intercession of the Emperor, and Duke of Bavier, but not being
able to procure it modo and forma as he desired, he grew desperate in his
resolutions, though he met with ill success in all things for a long time, and
could find no harbor but Holland. That Country indeed being now become,
through his means, a receptacle for all Religions, afforded him a place of
retreat, not only to preserve what remained, but also to repair and make up
his decayed Estate. There factions were ripened to their full Maturity; and the
place so fortified both by nature and art, that, till he should be able to
appear in Action to the World and fight, he might lie secure and write
Apologies; encourage seditious people abroad, and settle his new Religion at
home; which, although at first, and from his Father, it was Lutheran, yet after
he had been in France, he Professed rather to favor Calvinism, providently and
wisely foreseing, as he was a man that wanted no insight into Worldly affairs
of this nature, that they, viz, the Calvinists, were to be his nearest and
surest Neighbors.

Artois and Henault, when they were, in the year 1579. reconciled to the King,
with the assent of the most Honorable Duke of Areschot, they bind themselves
in the Fifth Article of Agreement, to prosecute the War against the Prince of
Orange, as the Enemy general of the peace of those Countries, and to find at
their own charge Eighteen thousand men for that purpose: which certainly being
Persons of such Religions and right Noble quality, as it is known they were, and
of so great experience in all the passages and pretenses of Orange, they would
never have done, if they had not known both him and his practices to be very
bad. I confess, that the Hollanders are a people very industrious, and skilful
to make use of their labor, but yet of such a temper, that as a Learned Censor
says of them, Nec totam libertatem, Thu^n.
Nec totam servitutem patiuntur, They endure not well, either absolute Liberty,
(which makes them insolent;) nor absolute Servitude, (which makes them mad.)
Friends they are somewhat too much to change, and not always content with the
present State: which would appear more then it does, but that their minds are
now wholly set upon their Trade and profit, wherein finding much sweet, by
their successes at home and abroad, they are extremely jealous of any thing,
that sounds but to the least obstruction of either of them. The Prince of
Orange therefore understanding their natures very well, and to feed this
jealous humor of theirs with fit matter, discovers a certain secret Counsel to
them, which he pretended, Henry the Second, King of France, had taken with the
Duke d' Alva, to suppress the Protestants by force of Arms, and to erect the
Seventeen Provinces into one Kingdom; and this the French King himself should
tell him at his being in France. But first was it so likely, the Duke would
discover such a secret of his Master to an Enemy newly, or scarce reconciled?
Beside, King Henry dying suddenly, as he did by mischance, there was now no
body living to disavow the imposture, but D' Alva only; and him, he was sure
the people would not be over hasty to believe. He was the first also that gave
out, that factious and stale Calumny against the Emperor and King of Spain,
That they should affect a Monarchy Universal over all Europe: which forgeries,
how palpable soever, yet they served his turn thus far, viz. to terrify the
Hollanders, to make them rely still upon him, and to procure some distrust and
hatred in Foreign Nations against the Spaniards and house of Austria.

it; and these the Actors which prosecuted the business: against whom what
exceptions may be taken for their Estimation, Integrity, Testimony, especially
in their own cause, every man may see. It remains, that we enquire a little,
whether the King stood guilty of those Crimes, which they charged upon him,
Injustice and Tyranny. For if he be innocent, these men were grand usurpers: if
guilty, another question will arise, whether his error in Government will give
them title, and his offense free them from Subjection. It is manifest to all
the world, that the King ever desired peace, and with great care, so far as in
him lay, labored to prevent the desolation of his people and Countries; as the
course that was taken by that excellent and most loyal Prince the Duke of
Areschot, and by the States General at Gaunt in the year 1574, do testify.
When they found it requisite to decree, and did decree a general Amnestia or
Oblivion of all things past on both sides; and took order for the dismission of
the Spaniards, Notwithstanding that in this pacification all things were, in a
manner, referred to the States, and the King scarcely so much as mentioned: yet
Don John did ratify it, and procured the Kings consent for the confirmation of
all, as appears by the perpetual Edict. This agreement was made by the States
General of the Provinces, and for the general good and quiet of them; yet would
not the Prince of Orange, Holland, nor Zealand accept of it. They persuaded the
States General not to receive Don John for Governor, till the Spaniards were
gone; although themselves refused at that very time, to dismiss those Foreign
forces, which they had in Holland: that is to say, They would bind the
Governor to perform promise, but they themselves must be at liberty to break.
Was it for Religion they did dissent? that can hardly be said. For in the
Articles of Agreement there was provision made for their security in that point
by this Article, Vt sola Romana religio in iis exerceatur, excepta Hollandia,
and Zelandia. Roman Religion was to be exercised only in the other Provinces,
but Holland and Zealand were excepted. And for the Prince himself in the
general Amnestia, he had as absolute indemnity offered and assured him, as
could be imagined; if that had been all he had sought: And the States had
prevailed more in his behalf, then the Emperor could. But Malice and Ambition
transported him still, and the more His Majesty gave assurance of his desires
of Peace; the more he prepared and was inclined to War: wherein yet the World
did never count him a Hannibal. This appeared yet more plainly in the colloquy
at Breda in the year 1575. where the King offered reasonable conditions, and
the Emperor had sent the Count Swartzembergh to persuade them to concord; yet
the Prince would listen to nothing, the Treaty was fruitless, and at the same
time the Hollanders were Treating by their Agents, Jean Pe^tit.
Aldegund and Douza, to submit themselves to the Queen of England. Yet
notwithstanding all this, which the King knew well enough, such was his
patience and royal goodness, and so far was he from the baseness of Tyranny
toward him or any other, that he proclaimed not Orange Traitor till the year
1580, that is, till his malice appeared to be irreconcilable, and his courses
desperate; and that the Traiterous Union of Vtrecht was framed and published,
which is about Fifteen years after the beginning of the troubles.

Colen in the year 1579, and made choice of most Honorable and eminent persons
for that purpose, viz. Two of the Princes Electors, the Bishop of Wurtzburgh,
the Count Wartzemburgh, and Doctor Lawenman, the King of Spain was as forward,
and sent thither the Duke de Terra Nova; And the Duke Areschot with some
others, were Commissioners from the States with Commission Signed by the
Archduke Mutthias. The States had by their Letter to the Emperor bearing date
June the Eighth 1578. promised, that they were, and so would continue,
constantly resolved, Vt in Belgio colatur religio Catholica, and sua Regi
constet Authoritas, that both Catholic Religion and the Kings Authority should
be maintained in the Netherlands. Before this at Worms in the year 1577. the
Agents of the States submitted and referred themselves to the Emperor; as
likewise the King of Spain did: Therefore both parties being so inclinable, and
consenting in Eodem Tertio in the same Umpire, who could expect, but that a
general peace should follow? But Davus perturbat omnia. When the Emperors
Commissioners were come to Colen at the time appointed, viz. by the beginning
of April, the States Commissioners appeared not till the Fourth of May, and
then with a Commission insufficient, and their Treating restrained to a Term of
Six weeks and no longer; when as themselves had been twice the time in but
framing their instructions, which the Commissioners of the Emperor took for a
great error, as justly they might do. All which delays had been craftily
procured by the Prince of Orange and his party, on purpose to obstruct the
peace. And in the Articles themselves the States Commissioners propounded many
things contrary to promise. In the Articles proposed by the Duke de Terra Nova
in the behalf of his Master, All kind of severity relating to Religion was
mitigated, as the Emperors Commissioners had assured them, to the intent, ut
nemo just queri possit, etc. that no man might complain of the King, as if he
desired, either to Tyrannize over their bodies, or to Seize their Estates, or
to Oppress their Consciences for matter of Religion. But nothing could prevail:
so the Imperial Commissioners finding such dallying and delays in the States,
That in Sixteen weeks they could get no answer, and that in their Letters they
did only renew old grievances and quarrels, they broke up the Treaty and
departed. Nevertheless B^lduc and Valenciennes received the Articles: So did
Over-Issle and Tournay, Artois and Henault guided by the Bonus Genius of the
Country; and Em. L^lain that valiant and religious Marquis of Renty, together
with Monsieurs de Capre, Heze, Barze, and the rest contemned the course of
Orange, offered their obedience to the King, and made peace with the Duke of
Parma. But as for the Hollanders they were now further off then ever; they
publish discourses against the Treaty, and labor by all means possible, how to
make good their usurpation, and perfect their Union, which they were all this
time a framing: not forgetting to scatter seeds of dissension and further
discord among the Provinces; in which business their Ministers helped them not
a little. And lastly at this time also, by the advice of Orange and England
they admitted Monsieur, the Duke of Alenson in the year 1578. to a kind of
Protectorship of the Provinces, creating him Duke of Brabant and absolute
Prince of the Netherlands: And all to show, how irreconcilable they were to
their natural Sovereign.

D' Alva's times, and under the moderate Government of the Duke of Parma, and
after so many significations of the Kings gracious disposition and offers to
ease their burdens, if they would themselves, this may rather be judged a
Cavil to shift Peace, then any desire to be rid of War. But as for the business
of the Tenth Penny, an exaction which they so much complain of, we must draw
the Curtain a little, and tell you, it was necessity, and not his own will,
which forced him to require that; and that otherwise, neither would he have
done it, nor the King have suffered it. But, as it happened, being driven to an
extremity for the satisfying of the Soldiers, (who always grow wild, if they
want Pay,) he was constrained to incur an inconvenience, that he might avoid a
mischief. England and Orange were the cause of it. For about this time some of
the Counsel here, by the instigation of the Prince, had made stop of no less
sum then Six hundred thousand Ducats, which were sent out of Spain, to the
Army, but driven by hard weather and ill fortune upon the coast of Hampshire;
notwithstanding as some say, the Queen had given a safe Conduct for the passage
thereof. But the Politicians of those times, and Enemies of Spain, knew well,
into what Streights the want of this money would drive D' Alva; and that of
necessity he must commit some error or other, which would increase the hatred
of his Government, and perhaps arm the peoples fury once more to sedition.
Besides this the King had sent another sum of Two hundred thousand Ducats by
the Duke de Medina, but that also was intercepted at Sea by the Zealanders, and
converted to other uses. This man was of a milder nature, and sent on purpose
to qualify the severity of D' Alva, who by his natural Sterneness and some
errors in Government, (which the general malice of the people, and disfavor of
some Foreign Princes did much aggravate,) had made himself, it must be
confessed, not a little odious: but having, as was said, lost his money and
Ships, he had small heart to stay among them; so he quickly returned home
again, and with a resolution, it seemed, never to have further dealing with
such sharking Cormorants, and left D' Alva in a Labyrinth of difficulties, how
to get money and govern his Soldiers. But however, it appears by this, that it
was never the Kings pleasure nor purpose, but merely the necessity of his
present wants, which compelled the Duke to demand that Tribute; and that the
quarrel upon it was rather made and contrived by themselves, then given. And
these great pretenders for the Commons, that seemed then so extremely careful
of the peoples ease, and sollicitous to keep them free from Taxes, Impositions,
etc. Let me ask them one question, Why do they now Tax them so much? Why do
they lay such heavy burdens upon them, they themselves now they have them in
their power? Excises? Subsidies? Taxes of all sorts? which they have augmented,
and do daily augment and raise in such sort, that never any Commonwealth in
Christendom groaned under the like burdens. It Is certain, The Gentle Father of
the people (as they once called that Fox the Prince of Orange) did propound and
endeavor to wrest from them, not the Tenth but the Sixth Penny toward his
charge and maintenance in the year 1584, Mich. ab Isselt de bell. Belgic.
after he had made them a Free State. This you will say, was a Note above Ela.
And though the people denied it and murmured grievously at the motion, yet is
he still in Holland Pater Patriae; so well and cunningly does he both shuffle
his Cards and play his Game. Barnevelt in his Apology confesses, that in the
year 1586. he found the order of Government out of all good frame; many
Protestant Preachers would not acknowledge the States, because they had not
that command and discipline after the French fashion, which they desired; The
Common people all contrary-minded one to another, and the Towns wishing for
Peace; The Expenses of the State exceeded all incomes by Twenty six Millions,
and that (which I cannot but wish the Reader to observe,) West-Frizeland, which
in the beginning of the troubles did contribute only Eighteen hundred thousand
Florens, was now charged to pay Quadragies centena millia librarum and duos
Milliones. I have put it down in the Authors own words, because I would not
have the Reader po^^ bly mistaken. Who is now the Tyrant and Exactor? It seems
though the people have changed their Lord, they have not laid down their
burden. D'Alva may be said to have beat them with Whips, but the States with
Scorpions. Do but consider their Excises and Impositions upon all sorts of
Commodities, even the most necessary for humane life and subsistence, viz.
Meat, Drink, Fuel, yea menservants Wages, and what not? Besides Loans and
Benevolences, which are both commonly required, and heavy. Cnickius directly
charge them, that they exact one way or other the Fourth part of the peoples
Revenues, that are Hollanders and live out of the Country: But, says he, Si in
Provinciis nostris, etc. if they live in any of our Provinces by leave,
Semissem jubent solvere, etc. they require them to pay the one half; and in
case they refuse or neglect, They take all.

D' Alva, (which was objected so much to little purpose in the Treaty at Colen,
and has been since Rhetorically aggravated by their Doctor Baudius) let us
call to mind, See Baudii orat.
what provocations were at first given him, by the oppositions and malice of
the Nassovians, by the War at Montz, by the practices used to impead his
entrance into Brabant and by so often contriving his death: yet were these
venial sins. But when he found the Nobility so far engaged with the Geuses, as
they were, that the Kings Authority was slighted, Catholic Religion generally
deserted and profaned, the chief solemnities thereof in some places most
impiously and contumeliously abused in the face of Heaven and of the Catholic
Army; when he saw the Towns in Holland and Zealand revolt, Harlem, Alcmar and
others refusing the Kings Authority, what indifferent man can wonder, if
severity were used at first, to such of them as fell under his power? Who would
not think that Cauterizing was necessary, when there appeared so much proud
flesh in the wound; and that purgations must be somewhat violent, when the body
is so much and so generally distempered? Nor could the peaceable nature of the
Commendador Ludovicus Requesens, who succeeded D'Alva, do any good upon such
rough and irreconcilable spirits. How often was he heard to cry out, Dios nos
libera de estos estados, God deliver me from these States once. Insomuch that
Sir Roger Williams, a Gentleman of our own Country and Soldier of good note,
who had served on both sides, and knew the nature of the people very well,
condemns the revocation of D'Alva as an error of State; Because, says he, See
his History.
nothing but rigor could reduce such violent Spirits unto order, and nothing
but a Sword in hand keep them in obedience. As for the Kings Oath which they
say, he has broken in the matter of privileges, if they would decide the
matter by justice, they must make it plain and evident, by what Fact, in what
case, instance, example he has broke it; and ought not to presume so much as
they do, viz. to be (Themselves) both Plaintiffs, Accusers and Judges. Again
supposing that the King had broken his Oath, may not many things happen after
his Oath-taking to excuse him from perjury? By Law every Oath or promise, how
absolute soever, yet has always this necessary condition tacitly employed in
it, viz: rebus sic stantibus, that things remain so as they were, when the Oath
was taken. But if such difficulties or alterations happen, as render the
promise either impossible or unlawful to be performed, a man does not then
commit perjury, nor any other kind of injustice, by not performing his
promise. What if that which the King at his Inauguration promised for the good
of the Province, cannot be observed now, but with the great damage of the
Province, and of all Europe? and this occasioned by the distemper and change of
the people themselves of the Province? of necessity, if the case, that is to
say, the condition and state of affairs be so far changed, resolutions and
proceedings upon them must also change. Again, supposing he had broken his
Oath, sua culpa and blameably, yet were not the States thereby enabled or
authorized to depose him, and choose a new Prince. For in the Articles of the
Joyful Entry this is a Clause. Vt si in omnibus, aut in vno quopiam Articulo
pacta ista Dux Brabantiae violasset, etc. That if it shall happen that the said
Dake of Brabant does violate or break either all or any one of these Articles,
it shall be lawful for his Subjects to deny him the accustomed services, until
the thing in Controversy be either revoked or amended. So long they might, but
after the grievances complained of should be redressed, they were to return
again to their duty, and to rest in statu quo prius of obedient Subjects. And
the world knows, how often the King offered unto the Emperor, to other Foreign
Princes, and to the States themselves to revoke and amend, whatsoever could be
proved amiss. Beside, the States and Courts of Brabant are more proper to
decide this question, then the States of Holland; who have no such privileges
Originally, but only by Participation and Union: And they, that is, Brabant,
Flanders, Artois, Henault and the rest have conformed themselves, and are
returned to their due Allegiance, being obedient to the King, his Laws and
Government. And if Holland would but follow their example, the business were at
an end.

ex mero motu and gratia speciali, out of his mere grace and favor, and to
gratify, and endear the affections of good Subjects to him? Do not all their
Charters run in this still? Speak they not all this language? What ungrateful
presumption is it then for people to be so ready and industrious to molest
their Sovereign Princes upon the advantage of their own favors? What if they be
forced to break an Article, or some clause of an Article upon urgent cause?
must it be judged a crime unpardonable? what would they have said to Philip
Duke of Burgundy, and of the Netherlands, who upon occasion resumed into his
own hand, Henric. Berland. Histor.
and by his own Authority, all the Privileges and Immunities of Gaunt? yea
detained them all his lifetime; teaching them thereby to acknowledge from
whose grace they held them? And though the people compelled his Son Charles to
restore them, upon his coming to Gaunt, yet it proved to their cost: for they
were forced to seek pardon, and to cast themselves and their Charters once
again at his feet, and to stand to mercy. The like he did at Machlin, but not
without great suit made to him, and upon such conditions, as himself thought
good. And it is not a little strange to be considered, why this Prince of
Orange, who urges so much the Kings Oath, and that it ought to be kept, yet
makes so little conscience to perform his own. For he may remember, when he was
made Governor of Brabant, Mich. Baius. de Union. Stat.
he took his Oath to maintain Catholic Religion in that Province. Has he
performed it? When he retired into Holland, he professed and protested
publicly, he would alter nothing, nor dispossess the Catholic Clergy of
their livings: The like he did at Amsterdam, and further bound himself there
with a Solemn Oath; yet he performed none of these, but the clean contrary most
perfidiously and wickedly, as soon as ever he had power in his hands, and could
attend to do it, so that to serve his own turn, and for his treacherous end, we
see how much he could urge another man, though his own sovereign, to his duty:
but for his own, Religion and bonum publicum gives him a dispensation. And it
is just according to Calvin's Institutions. Lib. 4. c. 13. Sect. 21.
A man, says he, once perfectly illuminated by the light of the Gospel simul
omnibus vinculis obediendi legibus and Eccles^ae solutus est, is ipso facto and
at an instant discharged from all bands of obedience either to the Church or
the State. A blessed Lesson doubtless, and wherein he could not but have many
Scholars. But all this while no particular charge comes in against the King, no
instance, no example is given, wherein he did break his Oath, when it was po^^
ble for him to keep it; which through their distempers and undutifulness, was
become not a little difficult. Was it in his exactions? that is answered
already. Was it for bringing in Spaniards upon them? Time and necessity forced
him to be at that great charge and trouble much against his will, to defend the
Church, to defend the Religion of his Ancestors and of the Country, against the
insolences of rude, ignorant, impious people, connived at, and countenanced by
them; lastly to defend the Laws and laudable Customs of the Country, and to
make them know he was their Prince. Was it in the matter of Religion? Indeed it
is true, there is a clause in the Union, contra omnem vim, etc. That it should
be against all violence whatsoever, that should be offered them under pretense
of the Kings Authority for matter of Religion. It is to be observed, at the
beginning Orange, Horn, and Montigny joined with the people upon pretense only
of opposing the Inquisition; upon this ground only they would seem to
countenance Brederode and his accomplices, and for this end only they seem to
urge the Religions Vried, yea they publish books, and make liberal promises to
be content, if they may but enjoy their own Religion, and that they will not
prejudice or oppose the Catholics: and with such dissembling as this, they
drew a great part even of the Catholics themselves to join with them, yea
Prelates, and persons no way suspected for the matter of Religion, yet deceived
not a little with their pretenses of liberty and of the public good: for which
reason the Archduke Matthias was called in, and they engaged to assist and
defend him with their lives and estates, Well! the Religions Vried was granted,
and thereby, as it were, a Supersedeas to the Inquisition; all violence and
severity for matter of Religion ceased. What could they desire more? All the
Provinces, and Holland and Zealand among the rest, enjoyed what they would
have, Liberty, Religion, Et quid non? But it is an observation of infallible
verity, Faction and Heresy are always humble, till they get the Sword in their
hands; when they have it, they change their tune; as it manifestly appeared by
their proceedings. For in a short time they of Holland were so far from keeping
the Peace of Religion, which they had promised, that they expel the Catholic
Clergy out of all places under their power, They seize upon their Lands,
Sequester their Benefices, Imprison their Persons, yea molest and prosecute all
without exception, whose consciences suffer them not to conform to their
pretended Synods, at Dort in the year 1574. at Middleborough in the year 1581.
yea they drown, and use many other kinds of cruelty toward men merely for
Religion, not enduring so much as to hear of Toleration,, but only for their
own, and some few Anabaptists, and Semi-Arrians among them. The Religions Vried
so impetuously desired, or rather demanded, when time was, for themselves, is
now quite forgotten; and Merchants of Amsterdam, B^ewers of Delf^, Staplers of
Dort, Seamen of Horn, with some few illiterate Ministers joined with them do
now Direct, Rule, Govern and Judge in all things, Comme bon leur semble (as it
is in one of the Articles touching the Union,) according as to themselves
seems good: No man must gainsay them. Truly if the King had proceeded thus
with them, if he had taken Arms and levied forces to introduce a new Religion
upon them, as they did upon the Country, I should confess he had much
incroached upon their liberties, had broken his Oath, and incurred their hatred
justly. The States of Holland, Zealand, etc. have done all this, and much more
mischief and injury to the people of those Provinces, where they command, what
therefore do they desire? does not their own example and practices justify,
beyond all exception, the Kings proceedings? Shall they presume to introduce
and set up by force of Arms a Religion, which before themselves no man ever
owned? Shall the Consistory at Genevah be so precise, as not to permit any
kind of Toleration? Shall the pretended Churches of France, and Bearn more
especially, insult upon, and oppress those poor Catholics which live under
their power? And must the King of Spain only be content to sit still, and let
Sectaries play what pranks they please, and commit all outrages in his
Dominions, without check or control? Who can be so absurd, as to judge it a
thing reasonable? Deos peregrinos ne colunto. It was a Law of Romulus against
the introducing of new and strange gods. Numa Pompilius, Socrates, and all the
wise Statesmen of the world Heathen no less then Christian, have been always
careful to provide against Innovation, change and corrupting of Religion. And
shall his Catholic Majesty do nothing for the preserving of Religion sound
and entire, who, both by his own piety, and the dignity of his Title is obliged
to do so much? Shall it be necessary for the peace of their new State to use
severity, and shall it not be both necessary and just for the preservation of
his, which is so Ancient, so Old? For their conscience sake they will bar out
Catholics. Shall he not for conscience sake take the same course with
Calvinists? How strangly do their beginnings and proceedings differ? They take
up arms against their Sovereign for Liberty of Conscience; and yet by those
Arms they forbid Liberty of Conscience to their Sovereign. For as much as they
forbid it to his people, their Fellow Subjects, they forbid it to Him, who
pretends to no more in that respect, then what every subject he has ought to
enjoy: And that his person, together with some other of his Subjects, is free,
is not, because these men would not, but because they cannot bring them in
Bondage.

Spaniards made use of the Treaty at Colen, rather to oppress the Country of
the Netherlands, then to ease them; and therefore, to avoid utter ruin,
Pleraeque Belgicae Provinciae, quae in Union perstiterant, etc. Several of the
Provinces, say they, which stood firm to the Union, did at last renounce, or
abjure the King, and established unto themselves a certain form of Government,
in the nature of a Free State, and have been so acknowledged by other Christian
Princes for Thirty years together and more. The ground of this Plea is Tyranny,
exercised after the Treaty at Colen; but this Union was made before: how then
does it cohere to justify their doings? They say also, that the King of Spain
and Arch Duke acknowledge them as Free Provinces, in qu^s ipsi nihil juris
pretendunt, upon whom they pretend to have no Title. This is a new Plea, I
confess. But the Reader will observe, as it can only justify their possession
and title for the future; so does it manifestly suppose, that their actings
before that Declaration was made, and by which it was forcibly drawn from their
Prince, were Illegal, Disloyal, Rebellious. Which the States may do well to
remember, so often as they use that Plea. Nevertheless, because, by an
imperfect disquisition of the matter I would not do harm, where I intend only
good, I leave this wholly to the Consideration of the Honorable and Learned
Chancellor Peckins, who can best, in a convenient time, satisfy the world,
that this is but a Scar-Crow, a Fig-leaf-pretence, and a Thunder without a
Bolt. So that their whole Plea, at lest for their past actions, resting only
upon the stilts of pretended Tyranny, Exaction, and abrogation of privileges,
which have been so often and so manifestly disproved, what remains but their
condemnation? And that we abhor the principles, which have lead them into this
predicament of disloyalty and sin? And yet, to leave nothing untouched, that
can be easily thought on, let us once again suppose all their charges, viz.
Tyranny, Exaction, breach of Oath, etc, to be true; yet must we tell them, The
Tyranny of a King shall never warrant their usurpation and greater Tyranny. Yea
suppose, he has lost his right, by what Law, Order, or Privilege acknowledged
do they pretend to have found it? Nay what Law of equity or reason have they to
Act those things, which they confess to be Illegal, Unwarrantable, yea
Tyrannical in him? Is it so great an offense for the King to abrogate their
privileges, and is it not as great, or greater, offense for Subjects to usurp
his? nay to usurp greater, then they will acknowledge he ever had? May they
only be Parties and Judges in their own case, and to the prejudice, yea
punishment of no less Person, then their Prince? never was such iniquity heard
of, Posterity will not believe it. The Swit^ ers, The Amphi^ yons (those
Cantons of Grecia) never heard of such Liberty; what is, (if this be not,) to
confess plainly, Regn^ occupantium esse, that Kingdoms go only by conqu^st,
that possession and power are sufficient titles to any Government? It Is true, a
man may make himself Civis alienae rei^ublicae, a Subject to another State,
then that whereof he is native, perhaps more ways then one; But he can never
unmake himself Subject of that Country, where he is native, do what he can,
especially staying there: and much less of a Subject make himself Sovereign.
For let him Rebel, (as who doubts, but the Hollanders did,) yet he remains a
Subject still de jure, and of right. Add hereunto, if the King should forfeit
his Earldom of Holland, it were not to them he should forfeit it, but unto the
Emperor, to whom it escheates, as is clear both by the Imperial and Municipal
Laws. Forfeitures do not use to fall to the Tenants, but to the Lord of the
Fee. And it is evident, that Holland was erected into an Earldom, not by the
Grandsires of Orange, nor of any of the Burgers of Amsterdam, Delft, D^rt, etc.
but by the Emperor Carolus Calvus in the year 863. Qui cum audivit, etc. Who
hearing, says the Berland. Meyer.
Historian, that the County of Ho^and, being a part of the Emperors demesnes,
was much infested and spoiled by the Danes, at the instant re^uest of Pope
John, principatum ejus, etc. bestowed the principality thereof upon Theodorick,
or Thierry. If then the Earldom of Holland, etc. be not in the King of Spain,
to whom it descended lineally from Theodorick, The Emperor may give a second
Investiture thereof, to whom he please, as of a Fief Imperial. For to say, it
should be lapsed into the right of the Province, as perhaps particular Estates
may do, is vain. The Emperor takes no notice of their private customs, neither
can they be prejudicial to a third Person, who is so much superior to them, and
upon whom their very customs do originally depend. Beside, the Earldom was
never vacant, there was always an Heir notoriously known, either in possession,
or plea for it. They hold it therefore by the sword only; but that is the
worst title of all, and fitter for those Hoords of Tartarians, then for a
Commonwealth of Christians. Neither Littleton, nor Sum rural, nor Jus
feudale know any such Tenure. A certain Hollander, in a third defense which he
has written of the united Provinces calls the King Raptorem and Hereticum
notorium, Spoyler and Notorious Heretic and therefore to be set upon and
driven out of his Kingdom by a general League and Union of all the forces of
all Protestant Princes and States of Christendom, But, hoc tantum defuit, this
only was wanting to advance their Calumnies against His Majesty to the height
of impudence. Never was the King of Spain called Heretic by man, since he
deserved the title of Catholic; and it could not be done now, but by one,
whose Malice, and Heresy together, had corrupted his judgment unto madness.

viz. That they have been acknowledged and treated by foreign Princes, as Free
States, above thirty years. That time will not serve for Prescription: and if
it would, Prescription always pleads some other Title, and possession bona
fide beside: neither of which can they pretend without blushing. Neither can
the opinion of foreign Princes make their bad claym better; it may give some
reputation indeed to an usurper, but not any Title of right. And as in a bad
quarrel bravely defended, not the cause, but the success gains the credit; so
it is their prosperity, and not the justice of their cause, which does them
honor. Beside, it is not true that Princes have so reputed them: To Negotiate
with them under a quality, which they will assume, is one thing; and really to
adjudge that quality, as due to them, is another. They offered the Sovereignty
of these Provinces to Queen Elizabeth; but she refused them: The world does not
think, it was out of any Favor to King Philip, that she did so, but because she
knew, they offered something more then their own; and she was not willing to
give her own people such a bad President against her self. And when, for
private ends and some reasons of State, she was content for a while to take
upon her the charge and title of Protectress of the poor distressed States,
etc. it was observed, the business was most earnestly promoted by them, who
were now as willing to be rid of the E. Leicester.
Son, as when time was, the Marquis of Winchester had been to be rid of the
Duke of Northumberland. Camden.
Father. This is upon record, that Aversata est Regina the Queen could never
endure the offer of the Sovereignty of those Provinces: Neither was Sir Noel
Caron in her time ever acknowledged Ambassador, but Agent. But to join issue
with them more nearly, let us here what Damhouderius, Praxis Crimin. c. 132.
a famous Lawyer, and their own Countryman, says, Seditiosi sunt, qui
moliuntur conspirationem, etc. Seditious persons, says he, are such as hatch
or foment Conspiracies against the Governors and Lievtenants of the Provinces,
that procure unlawful meetings or assemblies of the people, or cause any
Tumults in the Towns. What is this but an Endictment drawn against the States,
considering their practices, not only against the Person of D' Alva, but of
Don John himself, the Duke of Parma, etc. their many and tumultuous meetings at
Breda, Osterweal, Saint Trudens, their encouraging, yea incensing the Genses
throughout all the Provinces, lastly with their defense and holding of Harlem,
Alemar, Leyden, and other places by force of Arms? Again Chap. 82. he teaches,
that to make a War just, there must be first a just cause, Second, honest
intention, Third, Authority of the Prince, or Supreme Magistrate, Sine qua,
without which, says he, it is Treason to make War. That same Sine qua of his
might make the States tremble, if they reflect upon it. For in all their Wars
they neither had good cause nor good color. Their Religion and Liberties were
all secured to them by the pacification at Gaunt, by the perpetual Edict, by
the Articles of the Treaty of Colen which were all quietly enjoyed without
disturbance, by such of the Provinces as would conform to them. Their Sovereign
was known to be His Catholic Majesty, and for their good intention, as no man
could judge of it but by their actions, so it appeared clearly to be only to
sow dissension among the people, and through factions and discord to arm them
by degrees against the supreme Magistrate under color of Religion. And the
Prince of Orange most disloyal of all other; because being a person of Honor,
and so highly entrusted by the King, he betrayed that great trust reposed in
him, and made a War, by his own Authority and that of his faction, against the
King: Although he had neither Office, nor any kind of Command in the
Low Countries, but what he had under the Wings of the Eagle, and the Authority
of the Lion. All his Belgic Lands, he held in Fee of the Duke of Burgundy, as
his Leige-Lord; he did Homage and Fealty for them, and knew, that a Sovereign
gives Law as well as offices to his Subjects. Besides, Claudius le Brun,
Process. Crimin.
another famous Lawyer adds this, viz. That whosoever surprizeth Towns,
Castles, Forts, without order of his Sovereign (as the Prince caused Lumay to
do in Holland, and as Voorst and Barland did Flushing) by which the peace of
the Country is broken; or who attempteth against the life of his Sovereigns
Lieutenant, it is Treason. And these are judgments, which all Europe do
consent in, decrees of reason, and principles of Government, which must not be
called in question: if the States of Holland themselves do permit them to be
disputed, they must never expect Peace, Order, or any settled obedience in their
Country.

true Religion may be supposed to give them, to use such proceedings against
the Sovereign Prince, I shall not enter into any Theological dispute with them,
as being beside my purpose, which is only to show matter of opinion, and
matter of Fact in this controversy of obedience due to the Supreme Civil
Magistrate: And therefore, because I write only to English men, I shall
content my self only with the judgment of Doctor Bilson against them. He was
a great Divine, and a great Prelate of the Church of England, and chosen on
purpose to write on this Argument, by the greatest Statesman of that time; and
he wrote cum privilegio of the State, and with the general approbation of the
English Church. Shall a King, Christian Subject, etc.
says he, be deposed, if he break his promise, and Oath at Coronation, in any
of the Covenants and Points, which he promises? He answers in the Margin, No.
The breach of Covenants is not deprivation: and gives this reason, The people
may not break with their Princes, so often as they break with God. And
afterward, Subjects, says he, cannot depose their Princes, to whom they must
be Su^ject for Conscience sake. This is Doctrine, we see, quite contrary to the
Aphorisms of Holland, and to the Divinity that is now current at Rochel. Now as
private subjects may not, by Gods Law, depose their Princes, so are they
forbidden to take Arms against them; and the reason hereof is invincible. For
says Doctor Bilson, he that may fight, may kill; and War against the Prince,
and killing of the Prince are of consequence inevitable. The Apostles, says
he, obeyed Tyrants, that commanded all things against Religion: And in those
things, which were commanded against God, they did submit themselves with
meekness to endure the Magistrates pleasure, but not to obey his will. Lastly,
and most of all to the purpose he concludes, if the Laws of the Land appoint
the Nobles, as next to the King, to assist him in doing right, and to withhold
from doing wrong, then are they Licensed by man's Laws to interpose themselves,
but in no case to deprive the Prince, where the Scepter is inherited. And
because some of good judgment have been lead into that error, that the Dukes
of Burgundy had not full Power or Sovereignty in the Netherlands, I will send
them to School to all the Lawyers, Records, Stories, and (which is most
infallible) to the practice and Common Laws of the Country, and unto Bodin;
Bodin. derep.
and satisfy my self to allege here that Ancient and Honorable Counselor of
our Nation the Lord Chancellor Egerton, who in his Oration for the Postnati
says thus, P. 71.
The Dukes of Burgundy were absolute Princes, and had Sovereign power in their
Countries. And King Henry the Eighth, had as absolute power, when his Style was
Lord of Ireland, as when he was King: For the difference of Style makes not the
difference of Sovereignty. I conclude therefore upon the grounds of all Law,
Divine and Humane, and (as you have seen) upon a full view and examination of
all their pretenses, complaints, excuses, etc. that as their usurpation at
first was without warrant, so they continue the possession with as little
conscience; That all their Pleas are either Nullities or Forgeries, and they
have indeed no better title, then what success and their Cannon gives them. And
that all foreign Soldiers that assist them, knowing the injustice of their
cause, and that the War is so utterly unlawful, do incur Mortal Sin and danger
of damnation; and may as justly be reproved, as King Josaphat was for helping
and assisting Ahab. Look to the end, for it is certainly fearful, and we must
know, that (...).

of the match with Spain; but only for the truth of the story, which induced
me, together with the danger of the President, and the manifold injuries that
were done to Religion. For though I remembered the general dislike that they
have of our government, their dealing with the Queens Officers, and how
unkindly of old they used my Lord Willoughby, as his Apology testifies; and of
late what complaints our Merchants Adventurers, in their Books, have made of
their ill usage by them at Moske, at the East Indies, etc. what contempt they
showed, when the Duty of Sixteen Herrings was demanded in his Majesty's right,
for Fishing upon the Coast of Scotland, presuming no less then to imprison him
that demanded it, and many such like matters; yet seeing the State is not
moved, why should I be offended? And when I say The State, I mean not the
people only, but especially the King, to whom Holland is most obliged; and
more particularly for Two Singular and Royal Favors, such as might in reason
require some reciprocal return of thankfulness, and breed in them good Blood,
good Affections, and also good Language. The first was in restoring to them the
Keys, which did open and lock up their Province; and this not for any reward,
but a restitution only of part of his due. The second for the Free permission
of their Fishing upon the English Coast; wherein they yearly employ above
Thirty thousand persons, who are set on work by it, and above Four thousand
Busses, Doggerboats, Galliots, and Pinks; to their exceeding great benefit and
enrichment: which is not a liberty they have by any Law, as some men pretend,
but a privilege, or permission rather of royal Grace and Favor. And Grotius
may prove, without any man's contradiction, Mare Liberum, in this sense, as the
Kings Highway is Free for every man to walk, that is, to go and come; but he
shall never be able to prove, that Fishing is Free, that is to say, taking away
the profit upon another Princes Coast, without leave of the Prince first had
and obtained. It Is true, they have had the boldness to do this for a long time
without leave; but they may hap to find at last, the longest time they can
pretend, will not serve them for prescription. And thus much for our new
Masters, and no very good Neighbors, The High and Mighty States of the United
Provinces of the Netherlands.

Titulus Quintus. PALATINISM, OR The Troubles in BOHEMIA AND THE PALATINATE
About Religion.
BOhemia is the last Stage of the Scene of Foreign Tragedies, or Tumults for
Religion, to which I am now going; yet so as I must take the Palatinate in my
way, an unfortunate Province of late, which in the space of an Hundred years
has changed Religion no less then Five times, and yet, as it seems, never
learned well that part of Religion, which is not the least principle,
concerning Obedience. But of this we shall cease to wonder, when we think of
Paraeus, Gracerus, and some other Divines, that have possessed the Chair
there; and of the Schools of the new discipline, which are open. Paraeus in his
Commentary upon the Thirteenth ad Romanos teaches plainly, Subditi, possunt
suos reges deponere, etc. That Subjects may depose their Princes for Tyranny,
etc. Tyranny is contrary to the very end and being of Government, and therefore
where it is Universal and general, and no other redress to be found, it is
capable of the less dispute; only it is not to be determined by private
persons, especially of his Robe; which yet most commonly they do: or when they
compel their Subjects to Idolatry. By compelling to Idolatry he means, if the
Prince maintains Mass, Confession, Priesthood, and other the Service and
Religion of the Catholic Church; (as all Catholic Princes are bound to do by
their Oath:) or indeed (with these men) if they maintain any other Religion
then pure Calvinism, it is to compel to Idolatry. This is the sentence, which
he pronounces against the Emperor, the Kings of Spain, France, Poland, the
Princes of Italy, Germany, etc. And yet this is but the first peale, which he
rang as a Toxsan or Alarum-bell to Bohemia. For he adds another Article,
which, if they look not well to it, may touch Reformers Freehold, as well as
other Princes. It is, Quando sub prae^extu Religionis, etc, When under color
of Religion they look after their own advantages or profit. This had not been a
Lecture to be read to Henry the Eighth, and the Courtiers of his time. And
surely, if a man should ask Murray and Morton, those two pillars of
Reformation, in Scotland; Orange and Horn in the Netherlands; Conde and the
Admiral in France; the Dukes of Somerset and Northumberland in England; Saxony,
Sweden, Denmark and the rest of the Lutheran Princes in Germany; whether they
had not some by-ends of Avarice, Ambition, and other sinister and worldly
nature, when they seemed to be most hot and zealously transported, it might
trouble them all, perhaps, what to answer. Last of all he assigns another
cause of deposition, viz. When they oppress their Subjects in matter of
Conscience. Which indeed is the strangest of all; for who ever knew a Calvinist
permit Liberty of Conscience to another man, whom he could compel to his own?
and yet in this point he is so earnest, that unless the people do this, viz.
Resist the Superior Magistrate in the defense of themselves and true Religion,
he tells them in conscientiis incolumes esse nequeunt, They cannot have true
peace of Conscience, They should offend God by not doing it. And in his
Commentary upon Judges he speaks yet more absurdly and dangerously,
Magistratus Minor potest occidere majorem, The Inferior Magistrate in this case
may kill the Superior, Bayl^ffs, Sheriffs, Constables their King and Sovereign;
or if they think fit, one another upon the quarrel of Religion, because, says
he, Domestic Tyrants are more to be suppressed or opposed, then Foreigners,
or such as are without us. Neither was Paraeus the only Master of Paradoxes in
that Country, (although it must be confessed, his Doctrine so corrupted the
Palatinate, that in England, to prevent the like evil, his Books were purged
by fire:) Gracerus, his Pew-fellow, teaches, that the Malice of Antichrist
(that is in his sense, the actings or zeal of any Catholic Prince for the true
Religion established) coercenda est gladio, must be resisted, says he, or
restrained by the Sword. And Aretius himself sufficiently shows his affections
to the Emperor and Christian Empire, when he teaches that the Dragon in the
Apocalypse, that is, the Devil, Dedisse Imperio potestatem suam, etc. gave to
the Empire its power and greatness; and that plenitudinem Diabolismi, the
Fullness of Diabolical malice and hatred against Christ dwells in the Empire.

ab origin: Yea their own Neighbors and Elder Brethren have felt the effects
of it, in much inhumane and uncivil usage from them. Ask Gieskenius, who was a
man of Learning, and no small account among the Lutherans, and he will tell you
one pretty exploit of theirs, Emdenses Illustrem Dominum suum mota seditione,
etc. They of Emden, says he, had by this time almost driven their Liege Lord
out of all his dominions, by their seditious proceedings. And that they rested
not, till they had obtained these Articles of him, who was himself a Lutheran,
Ne Illustrissimus Comes, etc. That his Excellency should not have power to
grant unto his Subjects of Emden the exercise of any Religon, but Calvinism. 2.
That himself only at Court may have a Preacher of the Auspurgh-Confession. So
it was matter of favor to him, that Subjects should tolerate their Princes
Religion; but for themselves it must be framed entirely according to their own
Mode. They must direct, and their Prince obey. If you object, that this was but
a private tumult, and that the Church of the Palatinate did not approve of such
proceedings against their Brethren, it is clearly answered by this, That in the
year 1602. there were twenty points established in that Church; The first
whereof was this, Schulting. Hierarch. Ana^res.
Totus Lutheranismus and omnes libri eorum, etc. That the whole Doctrine of
Luther (opposite to Calvinism) and all the Lutherans Books be for ever taken
away and prohibited. Neither are they permitted in any part of the Palatinate,
the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, or the Territory of Emden. It Is true, The
Lutherans, where they command, do as wisely provide against them; They have as
little footing in all the Duke of Saxonies Countries, Hamborough, or the Hans
Towns. That great Synod of Torgaw, convented by the means and procurement of
those Protestant Princes, do testify, that the Calvinists had troubled and
brought to ruin omnes Christianas Ecclesias, All Christian Churches,
Universities, Kingdoms and States, where ever they were admitted. And hence it
is, that they are not included under the peace and protection of the Empire,
the Religions Vried is no way permitted unto them; as appears by the Edict of
Charles the Fifth, De composit. pacis, etc. Anno 1532. Nor are they comprehended
in his Sentence, De confess. Suevica, 1530. Nor in the Interim, 1548. Nor in
the Constitution, De pace publica. And for the Acts made at Passau, 1552. by
the Emperor Ferdinand, the very words exclude them from all benefit. So also in
his Declaration at Auspurgh, 1555. And in the conclusion or agreement of the
Princes of the Augustan Confession, with the three Electors, and other Princes
and Cities in the year 1557. it was declared, that the Sacramentaries,
Anabaptists, Osiandrians, etc. were all excluded from the Articles of peace,
and that there should be Edicts published against them by common consent, and
for their utter extirpation. This was enacted in the year 1557. and in the year
1566. Caesar and the Princes of the Diet decreto publico scripserunt, etc.
published a general decree concerning Frederick the Elector Palatine of the
Rhine, that he should desert the opinions of Calvin, and not suffer them to be
taught in any of the Churches or Schools of his Country: And this Decree of the
Diet was intimated to him in the presence of the Bishops of Mentz, Triers, and
Colen, of the Elector of Saxony, and of the Ambassadors also of the Marquis of
Brandenburgh; and after his death, by his Son Lewis it was obeyed. In the same
year the Princes declare in their reply to the Emperor, permittere se nolle,
that they will not permit that any Sects whatsoever shall be harbored in their
Dominions, and that they count the Zuinglians and Calvinists for such, which
was also long before declared, viz. in the Recess of the Empire in the year
1555. Calvinism then being so long before not counted tolerable in Germany, the
Bohemians of late have made it much more odious and intolerable by their
practices; and most justly are they excluded from the protection and benefit of
those Laws, Liberties and Peace, which themselves would destroy, if they could
prevail; as the Sequel will show.

Paraeus and the rest of the Calvinists in the Palatinate were the Firebrands
of the Bohemian War; they seduced the people, set the Princes at variance among
themselves, and cast that whole Kingdom into a most desperate combustion,
though to their own shame and confusion at last, as it it pleased God. I need
not be very sollicitous, how to report the business aright; both the original
of the War, as also its progress and success are so generally known by the
relations of the French Mercury of Mercurius Gallo-Belgicus, and others, that
there cannot easily be any false play used. But the long, many, secret
practices and plottings about it were discovered chiefly upon the Battle at
Prague, by intercepting the very Rolls and Records thereof. First of all in the
Secreta Principis Anhaltini Cancellaria, printed in the year 1621. which
certainly was no Fiction, as that Catholicon published against the Leaguers in
France was; but a serious admonition, plainly and downright making report, how
things were carried, without any affectation or disguise; as a Treatise made
rather to deliver Truth, then to show Art. And hereof Lundorpius, an
Historiographer of Franckford, must needs be thought an impartial witness; who
sets down the Letters and Records themselves for some time, viz. so much of
them as concerned the time of his writing. And afterward they were verified by
Cogmandolo, who in his Treatise of like Subject, called Secreta Secretorum,
avoucheth the same things. So that, there being no just ground, as I conceive,
either of jealousy or doubt concerning this relation, I shall professedly upon
that foundation build my chiefest reports concerning this business.

Palatine of the Rhine, Christian Prince of Anhalt, and the Marquis of
Onoltzbach, Count Mansfield was a principal Agent, and in the year 1619.
contrary unto, and in contempt of the Imperial Proclamations, Letters, etc.
sent Two thousand men to the Aid of the Bohemians against the Emperor.
Afterward they admitted Joachim, Marquis of Brandenburgh, to be as it were
Vicar or Lieutenant General of the League. They admitted also the Marquis of
Baden, the Duke of Wittembergh, Landsgrave of Hessen, Duke of Dupontz, and
Strasburgh, Norimbergh and many other Cities. All which contributed so largly
to these Wars, as the Emperor never received the like Aid from them against the
Turk. For as Cogmandolo testifies, The several Taxes afforded by them from
the year 1608 to the year 1619 amounted in the whole sum to no less then Four
Millions, one hundred seventy six thousand, nine hundrd and seventeen Florens.
The concurrence of so many Princes could not but argue mighty force; which was
much increased by the Negotiations of Mansfeld, and Nomarus in Italy, (which
Nomarus was Baltazar Newwen principal Secretary to Onoltzbach.) and of Volrad
Plessen with the Hollanders; and of others with the Duke of Bullion, Bethlehem
Gabor, and the Rebels of Hungary. And though they could not persuade the King
of England to enter into their League, for great and weighty reasons which he
alleged, yet they hoped for some good assistance from the Grisons; and gave
out also that the Hans Towns favored their Union. They omitted not to solicit
the Venetians also with much earnestness, as conceiving it to be their interest
to keep the other Princes of Europe in balance, as much as may be, and to be
jealous of the too potent Supereminency of any one; but what answer the
Commonwealth gave them is not certainly known. The pretense of their Union
was, that it was purely defensive, for the protection only of their Religion,
Liberties and Privileges. Vetus Cantilena, the old song, I confess, but who
can believe them? Can it be supposed of Anhalt, that he took Arms only for
Conscience, having been so well beaten in France for it, both out of his Honor
and Fortunes? or that Count Mansfeld is a man that fights only for Conscience,
and Public liberty, whose Trade and patrimony is the Sword, and who, braving
the World most commonly with a running Army, more used to Pillage then Fight,
Robs and Spoils all, where ever he comes? Besides, does not Achatius a Donau
write to Anhalt, November the Fifteenth, 1619. that the intention of Bethlehem
Gabor, a principal Confederate, was pied a pied, by degrees, yet as closely as
foot could follow, to root out the Antichristian Papacy, where he came? This
was something more then to be only defensive. And in the Union it self, which
contains One and twenty Articles in all, although they say, it was only their
Buckler against the Catholics assaulting them, yet do they not profess, Art.
8. to have intention to expel Papism, as they call it? and to preserve
themselves from the Yoke of Spain and foreign Government? And does not
Bethlehem Gabor in his Letter to the Turk, profess also, how much he labors
now, Vt rasa Pontificiorum Cobors, etc. that those shaven Companies of
Papelings (so he calls the Catholic Clergy, and Religious,) might be utterly
destroyed. This therefore was certain, had they prevailed, Catholic Religion
long before this time had been extinct in those Countries, and Catholics
themselves banished, destroyed and gone. In order to this do they not decree
among themselves, Page 43. to fall upon Churchmen, and Church-goods first?
Page 131. do they not resolve to invade some part of their Adversaries Country,
(as they call the Catholics, having first compelled them to be so, for their
own defense?) and in particular do they not name and design out the
Archbishopric and City of Triers, as lying fairest in their way, and being a
Prince Electors Country, Catholic, and the Clergy rich? But their Noblest and
Chief project was to invest themselves of two Crowns, (goodly booties indeed,
if they could catch them, and Temptations fit for such high Spirits,) that is
to say, of the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary. The reason is given Page 25.
because thereby in the Assembly of Electors they should be always Secure of a
double Vote. And therefore does the Count Palatine confess in his Letter to the
Duke of Saxony, that he took upon him the Administration of Bohemia, among
other reasons, principally for this, viz. That by this means the Election of
the King of the Romans might be hence forward in the power of the Protestants.
This was certainly a main part of their design, according to that which Anhalt
writes unto Donau in May 1519. That it were better the Turk were chosen to wear
that Crown, then Ferdinand; yea Gabor tells the Turk, that the Palatine and
Brandenburgh were resolved no longer to endure Ferdinand, and that all those
Provinces that were Confederate with them,
Cord and animo omnia officia fidelissime praestabunt, were ready with heart
and goodwil to tender all faithful services to his Ottoman Greatness, and the
whole Nation of Turks; and that in a short time Ferdinand would surely be
expelled out of all Germany, and forced to seek his fortunes in Spain. But O
Monstrous! O Incredible.! that such desperate malice and impiety should enter
the hearts of any that profess themselves Christians! were it not, that the
Records themselves be extant fide publica, which do assure us thereof even
beyond contradiction, who could believe it? O Malice implacable! O Envy most
perfectly diabolical! And O happy house, Family, Name of Austria, which for the
interest of true Religion, and Constancy to Justice, deservest to be made the
object of such execrable Spleen, and to Combat perpetually with such odious and
Antichristian Conspiracies. Guicciard. Lib. 20.
It is no new thing. But Macte ista virtute; Be faithful to God, and to those
principles of piety and justice descended from so many, so Religious, and so
Renouned Ancestors, and reign in spite of Hell, so long as the Sun and Moon
endures.

German Clergy, and of the house of Austria, before either of them was in their
power. For as by their Chancery-rolls it is evident, Their intent was to
advance the Palatine to Bohemia, Cancel. Anhaltina.
Alsatia, and some part of Austria, enlarging his Dominion also with the
Bishopric of Spiers, and a part of Mentz. Bethlehem Gabor should be assisted
to keep Hungary, which afterwa^d (this Gabor having no issue) might also
probably fall to the Pal^tines lot. Too many Crowns her^^ you will say, to
expect any in Heaven. Onaltzbach gaped for Two fat Benefices, the Bishoprics
of W^r^^burgh and Bambergh his Neighbors: and therefore was it agreed, that
their Armies should Rendevouz in those parts. The Marquis of Baden thirsted
after Brisack, and was willing by this occasion to continue his possession of
the upper Marquisate, against the more just claim of the Count Eberstein.
Brandenburgh expected the least of all, being content only with a part of the
Bishopric of Wirtzburgh, which lay fit for him; But Anhalt intended to recruit
both his purse and broken fortunes with the spoils of Mentz, Banbergh, and
other Catholic places, as also with some Lands and Lordships, which were like
to Escheat in Bohemia. If the Venetians would join with them, they might make
themselves Masters of Istria and Friuli, and so Oceanum cum Adriatico (as their
Cancellaria speaks) they might join Sea to Sea, and Land to Land, and carry all
before them without control. Such were the vast, but vain, designs of their
Ambition and Avarice. But before we proceed any further, it may not be amiss to
examine their Plea. It is manifest, their design in it self was most
pernicious, and such, as (if it had taken effect, which God would not suffer)
had been of general prejudice to the State of Christendom, and not only to the
Peace of the Empire; which yet every one of the Princes Confederate were bound,
in some relation or other, to maintain: beside the subversion of all Laws,
which apparently it carried along with it. Who does not remember, how all the
Pulpits in England, when time was, and generally of all the Reformed Churches
abroad, sounded the Alarm against the League and Leaguers in France? Which yet
was not half so mischeivous as this; but was at first set on foot quietly,
without any sedition or insurrection, only for defense of the Ancient
Religion, always received and established in France: yea confirmed with the
Kings personal Oath and approbation. And though it were afterward continueed,
and more strictly prosecuted, upon occasion of some horrid Actions of murder
and tyranny, yet Monsieur Villeroy himself, (who was a wise man, and a great
Royallist,) professes,) that their aim was not the Extirpation of the King of
Navarre, but his Reformation; and that if they might be assured of his Religion
(which he had promised) he should be instantly assured of their obedience: as
in the conclusion it clearly appeared; every person in France, according as the
King condiscended to give them satisfaction in that point, entirely
acknowledging their Allegiance to him. And the mishap which befell him
afterward, was not in pursuance of the League, but upon a private account, not
to say, upon some new provocation given, and which no man living justified. But
as for this Union, it runs in a far wilder strain, and is for the advancement
of a new Religion, entirely disavowed by all the States of the Empire in all
their public Acts. How then can it be otherwise then extremely disloyal and
criminous? The Duke of Saxony himself, though a Protestant Prince, dissuaded
it, and advised the Palatine very prudently, and like a friend, to quit
Bohemia, and to seek for reconciliation and pardon, where as yet, he might
possibly find it. Beside it opened the Gates of the Empire to the Turk, which
mischief alone, had there been no other going along with it, had been
sufficient to condemn it. But Plessen confesses in his Letter to Anhalt, That
it was an Action of the same nature with Holland: and what that was, we have
seen already. In brief they took arms against a King Lawfully Elected, solemnly
Crowned, and established in possession by consent of the States. It is true,
when they first went about the work, they nominated the Duke of Saxony, as
Competitor with the Palsgrave for Bohemia; but that was merely craft, and a
trick of maliciousness, to render the Duke suspected with the Emperor. They
knew he had rejected their offer and Confederacy long before, when their Agent
the Count Slick solicited him in their names. By this means they put Austria
it self, the Emperors Patrimonial Country, into sedition; The people there,
through correspondence with the Turk and Gabor, were so bold as to tell
Ferdinand, that unless he would grant them Toleration, and such Liberty of
Conscience, as they desired, they would join with his Enemies. And they were in
this point as good as their words; For in the year 1620. all the upper Austria
did really quit their old Lord; and submitted unto a new Protector in his
stead. If the Catholics of England should attempt the like, how would it be
censured for sedition, and punished severely, as it might? and yet surely the
cases are much Parallel, and if there be any advantage, it is on our side; who
desire the exercise of nothing, but what was once public, owned for many ages
together by all the people of the Nation, and legally established before us.

Anhalt, and Onoltzbach, two such private and inconsiderable persons, in
relation to the business they dealt in, should take upon them ( insciis
Electoribus, without the knowledge and consent of the Princes Electors
themselves) to dispose of the succession of the Empire; and in order to effect
this more then treasonable design, should Confederate themselves with one, who
is a declared Enemy of the Emperor, and the Turks Vassal, a Reprobate, a
Monster, called Bethlehem Gabor, and calling himself Prince of Transylvania,
King of Hungary, and what not? one, who to hold himself firm in the Turks
grace, had already delivered up to him the Town and Fort of Lip, the Towns of
Solimos, Tornadg, Margat, and Arad, all well fortified places in Hungary? and
labored hourly how to do him further service, to the prejudice of Christendom.
One, who had ^worn Allegiance to his Soveveign Lord Gabriel Batthori, Prince of
Transylvania, yet afterward Tray^erously murdered him, and usurped his State.
One, who made a League with the Emperor Matthias in the year 1615. to be quiet,
and to attempt nothing contrary unto the Liberties and Peace of Hungary; yet
presently after invaded the Country in person with a great Army, took upon him
the Crown, carried the Emperors Lieutenant Andrew Dockzy (whom he had taught by
Treachery,) prisoner into Transylvania, banished all the Clergy, and maintained
his Soldiers with the spoils of the Church; profaned the Cathedral Church at
Poson with his own Heretical or Mohammedan Chaplains, and from thence certified
the Turk boastingly under his own hand, how successfully he had now begun the
wotk, which he promised; that most of the Nobles of Hungary were under his
command, and that since the Popes Clergy gloried to wear their Crowns shaven,
he would make bold to shave some of them, heads and all. Upon which good news,
and in expectation to turn all his Wars now upon Christendom, the Turk
instanstly makes Peace with the Tartar, and offers Gabor, to assist him upon
any occasion of need, with Forty thousand men. Yet, I say, upon this man's head
did the Union resolve to set the Crown of Hungary; to which end his nearest
Kinsmen lay all this time at Heydlebergh, as an Intelligencer, Treating with
them, yet disguised under the habit of a Scholar.

Germany, and see, as an effect of this wicked Combination, the picture of Troy
on fire, that is to say, the lively image and horror of War. And when he has
done so, let him reflect, how well it would please him, to see the face of L
ndon and Middlesex so disfigured ^^th wounds and desolation. T^^ ^^rious
Zealot, who is now m^^t^ ^rward to blow the Coals of d^ssention^, and to
infl^^me a State that is at quiet, would quake and tremble, when he should
consider in what devastation all that once flourishing Country of the Empire
now lies, mourning and groaning by reason of this War. Those fertile Provinces
about the Rhine all wasted, and impoverished by Soldiers on both sides,
especially about Worms; Tillage forborne, Traffic decayed, Trades ceased,
Taxes imposed, Fortifications raised at the charge of the Country; and for
what? only for defense and security of those, who oppress, or impoverish them:
No man master of his own, all at the will of Soldiers and Strangers; and above
an Hundred thousand persons reckoned to be slain. These are the effects and
issues of this War, the fruits of Calvinism; which though directly prohibited
by the Laws of the Empire, and only tolerated by connivance, and the mercy of
the State, yet was now come to such a point, that it sought to suppress the
Emperor himself, and hazarded the subversion of the whole State, both
Ecclesiastical and Temporal. An unchristian return doubtless, and without any
stamp of Religion: Their sole justifying Faith will scarce justify this,
because it was with breach of Faith, and of so many civil bonds, and contrary
to charity. The true marks of Charity are Humility, Patience, and Zeal
perfectly conjoined and qualified with the other two: Your little Patience, and
less Humility do convince your Zeal to be no less counterfeit, then your Faith
is fruitless. Charity would never have suffered you to invade the Duke of
Bavieres Country, notwithstanding he was willing to have stood Newter, and
only because he would not join with you. Charity never counseled Anhalt to
design for pillage, and, as it were, to devour beforehand the spoil of a City,
valued at Two and thirty Millions, as he did in his Letters to Donau, 1619.
Charity never directed Christians to seek assistance from the Turk, Christ's
greatest enemy; nor to frame so many treacherous and malicious plots, as they
did, Page 32, 42, 66, 80. of their Canc^llaria, against such as were either
Neighbors, or Friends to them, or their lawful Superiors. What the Laws of the
Empire are concerning such proceedings, has been seen above in the day of
Luther, where they are sufficiently condemned. I shall therefore add here one
only passage of Leopold, King of the Romans, in his Supplication unto his
Father Otho the first, Emperor; who, because he had broken the Peace of
Germany, and called in Foreigners, Membrum Imperii appellari non debeo; I
ought not, says he, to be accounted any longer a Member of the Empire, having
brought in Foreign and Barbarous Nations into the heart of Germany. ^ut these
Minions of Genevah stand not upon the Law, it is Gospel that they plead; let
the Gospel therefore condemn them. The Word of God says, Per me Reges, etc.
Kings reign by me; It is by Gods appointment, that they bear rule over men:
Therefore forbear, ye people, show reverence to the Ordinance of God, observe
your d^stance, Touch not mine Anointed. The Gospel says, Let every soul be
subject to the higher p^wers, etc. And he that resists, resists Gods
Ordinance, and shall receive damnation: Yea, the Gospel says, Be subject unto
every ordinance of man, viz. That is established, and by which, the Will of
Divine Providence may be seen, For the Lords sake, whither to a ^ing, as
Supreme, or more Excellent, or unto Governors, etc. How much do the Doctrine of
the Cospel, and the Doctrine of Calvin differ? The Gospel teaches us to honor
the King, to obey Governors, etc. Calvin directs us rather to degrade and
depose them. But this is a matter needs no disputation; Grace and Honesty would
decide it best.

Titulus Sextus. STATISM, OR The Changes in ENGLAND About Religion.
England, where it must be confessed, no such Paradox^s are now current, or
practi^es on foot, either among the Prelates, or any part of the inferior
Clergy, I hope, as abroad we have both heard and seen. And it is no marvel; for
now they have the wind with them, they live in a calm: There is no great trial
of their patience and temperature of Spirit, save only what Martin Mar-Prelate
and his Fellows do now and then give them. B^ing therefore in so great Peace
themselves, through the favor of the State, they were mad men, and should
forget their own Interest, if they did not Preach now very zealously against
Tumults, and Disloyalty in others. But if we look back unto times past, and
observe what spirit reigned in them, when they were in a storm, or that the
State seemed to frown upon them; you will find them much differing from
themselves, and that they were not always such peaceable men, and so calmly
spirited toward Authority, as now they seem, For if Master Fox does Register
his Martyrs aright, and that Wicliff and his followers were Protestants (as
Protestants will have them to be) there is cause of exception against them not
a little. For first their opinion was, That no Magistrate in the state of sin
had any Authority; Which Position alone opens as wide a gap to Rebellion and
Resistance against the Civil Magistrate, as Hell it self can desire. And that
we do not belly them herein, Comment. in Arist. Politic.
Melancthon himself confesses. Wicleff, says he, was the cause of much tumult
and trouble in England; Qui contendit eos, qui non habent Spiritum sanctum,
amittere Dominium, etc. Holding that such persons as have not the Holy Spirit
dwelling in them (or are not in state of Grace) do loose all Dominion and
Authority. De Jure Magist.
And elsewhere, Wicleff, says he, was so mad, as to hold, That wicked persons
are incapable of Dominion. Cent. 9.
Osiander witnesses the same. And therefore though the same Master Fox calls
him, Stellam matutinam in medio nebulae: The Morning Star in the midst of a
Fog, and the Full Moon of those times; yet surely the man's judgment in this
point was it self much befogged, and the Moon of his understanding suffered a
great Eclipse. Secondly, It can as little be denied, but that in pursuance of
this Doctrine, and for defense of his person, and some other Heterodox
opinions, which Wicleff taught, Sir John Oldcas^le, alias Lord Cobham, Sir
Roger Acton, and other his followers, Stow.
levied an Army of Five and twenty thousand men, with intention, as our own
Chronicles relate, to suppress the Monasteries of Westminster, Paul's, St.
Albans, and to destroy all the Frieries in and about London: Which they had
also effected, but that it happened, the religious and valiant Prince, Henry the
Fifth, was at that time in the state of Grace, and exercised his Royal Author^ty
so happily upon them, in Saint Giles his Fields (where their Rendevouz was)
that they were all either killed or scattered, and about Seven and thirty of
the principal of them executed. Sir John Oldcastle and Acton fled, but were
afterward both of them apprehended, and attainted of High Treason; for which,
and for Heresy, they suffered according to their merits. Master Fox laboreth
much to excuse or extenuate these things, but to no purpose; they being so
palpably and undeniably true, That our English Chroniclers themselves, Stow.
Harpsfield. Histor. Wicliff.
and other worthy Authors of our Country, do expressly avouch them. And certain
it is, that in the first year of Henry the Fifth, Schedules were set on Paul's
Church door, boasting seditiously of no less numbers, then One hundred thousand
men ready to rise against such as were enemies to their Sect. Sir John
Oldcastle being first committed to the Tower, for certain points of opinion
concerning the Sacraments, which the Synod of London had condemned, brake out
from thence, and was harbored by one Bennet; who for that fact, and for
dispersing Seditious Libels against the King, was himself executed: And Sir
John Oldcastle being the second time apprehended, was indicted in open
Parliament, as an enemy to the State, but answered most contemptuously, and
according to the Principles of his Sect, That it was a trifle to him, to be
judged by them, and that he had no judge among them, etc. At his death he spoke
more like a mad man, then otherwise, desiring Sir Thomas Arpingham, that in
case he saw him rise again within three days, he would be good to those of his
Sect.

Wicliff, beside some few of both the Universities, Oxford especially, whom his
Doctrines had caught and corrupted, found no mean Friends and Patrons even at
Court. John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, openly favored him, so did Sir Henry
Peircy, Marshal of England; insomuch that Wicliff, being upon a time summoned
to appear before the Bishop of London, both those Personages, the Duke and
Marshal, with diverse others of the Court, bore him company to Paul's, on purpose
to discountenance the Bishop, and to animate Wicleff, and his followers in
their courses. It is confessed, the Duke and Wicleff had several ends: The
first aimed to destroy the Liberties of the Church, and the Charter of London,
both which he found to be great blocks and obstacles in the way of his
ambitious designs; the other, simply to satisfy an envious Malignant humor,
which possessed him, against the Clergy, desiring, if he could, to make himself
famous by their infamy. But it is observable, the designs both of the one, and
of the other, failed them: For Wicleff (as great a Protestant as they would
have him) died a simple Parish Priest at Lutterworth in Leicestershire, Doctor
Harpsfields History.
where he said Mass to his death; and was never able to obtain the preferment
which he desired. And John of Gaunt lived to be accused publicly of many evil
practices, prejudicial to Religion, and to the Nation, and in particular, of
aspiring to the Crown; but his chief Accuser, viz. John Latimor, an Irish
Friar, was, through the power of the Duke, committed to the custody of Sir John
Holland, as they pretended, in order to his Trial. Howbeit the poor man, the
very night before he should come to his Answer, to prevent further trouble, was
found strangled in his bed, and that, as our own Chronicles report, by the same
Sir John Holland, and one Green.

Mary's times. A time of Trial, you will say, to some of them. True; but
therefore most likely to discover their true Genius, and Spirit. Now it is
manifest, That in the short space of Her Reign, which was not much above five
years, she had more open Rebellions and Insurrections made against her, from
such of her Subjects as were not well affected unto her Religion, then Queen
Elizabeth had from Catholics, in full Forty and five. How plain and sincere
her Government was, how far from tricks, and such strains of policy, or rather
iniquity, as were afterward used, is manifest to all the world. How great a
Justicer was She? It will be said, Somewhat too severe; and it may be as truly
answered, That severity was necessary, not only by the judgment of
Parliament, which a little before had Enacted those Laws, upon which she
proceeded, and before which she acted nothing in that kind: But also in
respect of her own safety, and of the State; against both which, that sort of
men, which tasted of the severity of those Laws, were not a little insolent,
and prone to attempt. Yet that she was withal a Princess very merciful, is
manifest by her compassion shown to such, as deserved not well of her; that is,
To the Duchess of Somerset, to Sir John Cheek, who had been the principal
corrupter of King Edward, her Brothers Infancy, to Sir Edward Montague, Lord
Chief Justice, who had both counseled and subscribed to her disinheriting, to
Sir Roger Ch lmley, to the Marquis of Northampton, to the Lord Robert Dudly, to
Sir Henry Dudly, to Sir Henry Gates, etc. who stood all of them attainted, and
the Duke of Suffolk. All which persons were very obnoxious to Her Justice; she
knew very well, they neither affected Her Religion, nor Title; They were
already her prisoners in the Tower, yet she released them all. But for all
this, the Zealots of her time would not be quieted, nor suffer her to enjoy any
quiet; They Libel against the Government of Women; they pick quarrels and
murmur at her marriage; they publish invectives and scurrilous Pamphlets
against Religion; yea, they forbear not to conspire and plot Her Deprivation,
out of a desire to advance Her Successor to the Crown, under whom every
Calvinist expected a Golden Age. The austerities and abstinences, which
Catholic Religion prescribed, and which the Queen, by Authority of Parliament,
had but lately reduced, and was her self very exemplary in the observation of
them, were not much pleasing to some Gallants about the Court; nor to many
others, both in City and Country, whose affections were better satisfied with
the Liberties of the former Age, and therefore desired some change of this. But
among other Instruments of mischief, that Book written by Goodman, entitled Of
Obedience, was a most pernicious Incentive among the commons, teaching
expressly, Ad Nobil. Scot.
P. 94. That Queen Mary deserved to be put to death, as a Tyrant and a Monster.
And that other of Knox, with whom the Zealots of England did correspond too
much, where he has, among many other of like nature, this passage: Illud and
acter affirmaverim, etc. This I dare boldly say, says he, the Nobility,
Magistrates, Judges, and whole people of England, were bound in Conscience, not
only to oppose and withstand the proceedings of that Jesabel Mary, whom they
call their Queen, but even to have put her to death, and all her Priests with
her.

Thomas Wyat takes up Arms (for which Master Fox worthily Chronicles him)
marches his Army, like another Cyrus, as some called him, over Sh^oters-Hill,
threatening both the Court and the City, Prince and People. And for this,
Goodman in his Book Of Obedience commends him, says, He did but his duty, and
that it was the duty of all who professed the Gospel to have risen with him.
This was their doctrine then: And though it be said, That Goodman recanted his
opinion in Queen Elizabeth's days, it was (perhaps) only that part of it, which
opposed the Government of Women. And if he did it absolutely, what does it
prove, but the inconstancy of such men, and how easily they can conform
themselves to times that favor them, and of what spirit they are under the
cross and affliction? Wyats pretense was parti-colored, looking, as he would
seem, both at Religion and bonum Publicum, in his opposing the Queens marriage
with Spain; as both Holinshead and Stow agree. They that suppose it to have
been merely upon a civil account, are confuted by the Queen her self in her
Speech at Guildhal, where she tells the City, That she had sent diverse of her
Counsel to Wyat, to demand the Reasons of his Insurrections, and that they
found, The business of the marriage was only a cloak to cover Religion, which
was the thing principally aimed at. For he urged also to have the Tower
delivered to him, to have power to nominate and choose new Counselors,
declaring plainly, That he would not trust, but be trusted. But Master Fox is
plain in the case, for he confesses of all that Rabble which followed Wyat,
That they conspired among themselves for Religion, and made Wyat their chief.
The marriage was looked upon by them only as an accessory thing, and a means
to strengthen that which they meant to overthrow, and eo nomine, for that
respect only it was to be hindered. Upon this account William Thomas a
Gospeller of those times, conspireth to kill the Queen, and at his death is so
far from repenting of such a foul intention, That he glories to die for the
good of his Country: Yea, the Faction grew so tumultuous and bold, That Doctor
Pendleton was shot at in the very Pulpit, Preaching at Paul's, and Master Bourn
had a Dagger thrown at him in the same place; the multitude being so
disorderly, That the Lord Major himself had much ado to quiet them; and the
Lords of the Counsel were forced to come thither the next Sunday with a guard,
to keep things in order, and to prevent further combustions which were feared.
At Westminster upon Easter Day, a desperate fellow wounded the Priest, as he
was at Mass in Saint Margarets Church there. After this they found out a Perkin
Warbeck, and brought him upon the Stage; one Wil^iam Fetherston counterfeiting
King Edward, (whom the world, and some of themselves especially, knew well
enough to be dead) on purpose to amuze the Queen, and disturb the State. There
was one Cleber, sometimes a Pedant, living at Yakesly in Norfolk, put to death
for a conspiracy against the Queen; Vdal, Staunton, Peckham and Daniel, were
committed for the same crime: for which, and for attempting to rob the
Exchequer, and her Treasury, and also for Heresy, they had their desert. Not
to speak of the Treasons of Dudley and Ashton, set on by the French; In
Devonshire Sir Peter, and Sir Gawin Carry, great Protestants, together with Sir
Thomas Denny, took arms to impede King Philips arrival in England, possessed
themselves for some time of Excester Castle, but afterward, seeing things go
contrary to their expectation, they made an escape by getting over into France.
Thomas Stafford, coming well instructed from Genevah, made Proclamations
publicly in several places of the Kingdom, that Queen Mary was not lawful
Qeen, was unworthy to reign; and, to abuse the people further, gave out no less
boldly, then falsely, that already Twelve of the best fortified places in
England were committed to the Spaniards. Upon which pretense Bradford, Proctor
Streachly, and he, surprise the Castle of Scarborough in Yorkshire, a Fort of
singular strength, which they would hold against the Spaniards, (they should
have said, against their Queen and Sovereign,) but they lost it, and their
heads beside. Henry Duke of Suffolk (one to whom the Queen had given life
before, being Father to the Lady Jane, and a privy Counselor in those Treasons
of Northumberland,) fled into Leicestershire with the Lord Gray, making
Proclamation against the Queens marriage; but not being able to raise a
Commanding Army, as he hoped, was compelled to fly and lurk in corners; Till
the Earl of Huntingdon, apprehending him, brought him up again to his old
lodging in the Tower; where he made an unfortunate end. I shall not urge the
practices of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, a man of great wit and policy,
notwithstanding he was Indicted of high Treason, and arraigned at Westminster,
with Arnold, Warner, and others; because though the case were plain, yet the
Jury acquitted him, but to their own cost and trouble. And it was well for him,
the Advocates of those times desired not so much to triumph in the calamities
of poor men, nor that the prisoner should loose his head, rather then they
their oration, and the glory of the day.

Goodman and Gilby? Were not they Ministers? Was not Jewel a Minist^^, ^ho
preached at Gl ce^^er, against the Queens proceed^ngs? Was not Doctor Sands a
Minist^r, though Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, when he walked ab^ut with the
Ragged Staff, and assisted the proclaimers of Lady Jane? Were not Hooper,
Rogers, Crowly Ministers, all enrolled as friends and favorers of these
actions? And were there not diverse other Ministers, both of Kent and other
Counties, who upon Wyats fall, forsook the Realm? or was there any thing more
likely to drive them out, then a guilty Conscience? what shall we say of those
two Apostles (falsely so called) of the time, Cranmer and Ridley? W re not they
Ministers, yet great instruments of the Queens troubles? And that not in King
Edwards time only, (upon which account some would excuse them,) but after his
death, and under the Reign of Queen Mary. For Ridleys Sermon of Paul's Cross,
wherein (like another infamous Shaw) he so highly magnified and defended the
Title of Lady ^an^, and persuaded the people to accept and obey her as Queen,
i^pugning, against all honesty and conscience, the right of King Henry's two
Daughters, was the Sunday after King Edward was dead. And it is well known, the
Reign of a Prince commenceth (not from the time of his Coronation, but)
instantly upon the death of his predecessor. And therefore was he justly
attainted and convicted of Treason. Cranmer was both Counselor and Oracle in
the business, and was therefore arraigned, and condemned with the Lady Jane,
and Guildford Dudly, as contriver and principal assistant in that Treason, as
appears by the Records in the Kings Bench. This man was a very Proteus in all
his actions, and of a disposition most servil, and vitiously pliable to any
humor of the King, and ready always to follow the prevailing party. He was
first a principal instrument of the Kings divorce from ^^^en K^^b^^ ne, whereby
the (...) Gat^^ were let opon to the Lady Anne Bolen; yet afterward to serve
the Kings Appetite, he was used again, as a chief instrument in her
condemnation, as appears by the Statute; where Cranm^rs Sentence is recorded
judicially, 28. Hen. 8. c. 7.
as of his own knowledge convincing her of some fowl act. Nor can any wise or
indifferent man but condemn him of inexcusable iniquity, that being a
Counselor of State, Primate and M tropolitan of the Realm, pretending also to
be a Reformer of Religion, would so much betray his Master, (whose creature he
was,) as to frustrate and make void his will, (whereof himself was made chief
Executor,) subscribe to extinguish his issue, as much as possibly he could, by
disinheriting his two Daughters, and transferring the Crown to another Line and
Family: and all this most basely, and contrary to his conscience, only to
please a Subject, and to avoid ^om^ ^inde of affliction, which he feared upon
the Succession of Queen Mary, and against which, it is manifest by the frequent
changings, lapses, relapses and perjuries, which he made, he was never well
armed.

Semper Eadem, always the same, and never changes. This was it, which induced
them of Genevah to expel their Bishop and Leige-Lord; This was it, which
induces them of S^ethland to renounce their lawful King; Them of Holland to
depose their Sovereign Prince; This was it, which Solicited the Bohemians to
depose the Emperor, their Elected, Crowned, and Acknowledged King, That
imprisoned the most Virtuous and Religious Queen and Martyr, Mary Queen of
Scotland, and cast her undeservedly into those calamities, which pursued her to
death; This was it, which held out Rochel and Montauban in defiance against
their King; and lastly, that which begat so many conspiracies, commotions, and
causes of jealousy unto Queen Mary of England; So, as within the space of
Sixty years, it has been observed. More Princes have been deposed and
persecuted by Protestants, their Subjects, upon the quarrel and difference of
Religion, then had bin by the Popes excommunications, or by the attempts and
practices of any Subjects Catholics, in Six hundred before. Of the troubles
which have arisen to other Princes upon this occasion, we have spoken somewhat
already. The business of Sweden is defended by one Master T. M. upon these
grounds. First, That it was done by the demand of the whole State. But this is
a manifest falsehood. For if you take the whole State, formally, that is, for
all the people of the Nation, it is certain, that Sigismund their lawful King,
had, not only a great, but the far greater and better part of the people, well
affected to him: If you take it Virtually, that is, for some general Assembly
representing the people, legally met and resolving upon that business, there
never was any such called. The meetings that were, were only of Duke Charles
his faction, who, in comparison of the Kings party both of Nobility and
Commons, were but few; yet, as it often happens, the better case was more
negligently managed: and those for the Duke (who were also inclined to
Innovation in Religion,) being more active, industrious and unanimous in their
design, made shift to secure the Military provisions, and to invest themselves
of the chief Strengths of the Kingdom before the others, and so prevailed; as
Chytraeus himself a Protestant Author is sufficient witness. Chytra. Continuat.
Crantzii.
Secondly he says, it was for the defense of their Privileges and Liberties.
None of which were violated, as by the same Chytraeus appears. Thirdly, that
it was for the fruitoin of Religion, That Is true indeed and confessed; That
they might introduce and establish a new Religion, they renounced their old
King: which is the thing we charge them with; and wherein whatsoever they did,
they did by private Authority and Faction.

T. M. for his better instruction, unto a great Doctor of his own Church,
Doctor Bilson above mentioned, who, as we have heard before, holds it tantum
non, as an Article of Faith, that Princes are not to be deposed; which is also
the judgment of the greatest Doctor of the English Church, and has been so,
for these Fifty years and upwards. But we demand of them, is it good Doctrine
in the Reign and case of Queen Elizabeth only? and not so, in the Reign and
case of Queen Mary? It is a position frequently defended in their own Schools,
Dominium non fundatur in gratia; and the contrary Doctrine is as generally
exploded in W^cleff. The difference then of Religion alters not the Authority
and power of Jurisdiction. And Wyat with his accomplices rising in Arms, without
and against royal Authority, was a Rebel against Queen Mary, as much as
Westmorland and the rest with them, whom the English Chronicles mention, were
Rebels in rising against Queen Elizabeth. But you will say, Queen Mary observed
not the Laws of the Realm, she abrogated the Statutes of the First of Edward
the Sixth, which all the Kingdom approved; and it is the profession of good
Princes to observe the Laws, and to govern by them. I answer it is true,
Legibus se Subjectos esse, etc. it is a most Christian profession of all Kings
to be subject to their own Laws; but it would be understood cum grano salis,
soberly, and to refer more to the directive part or power of them, then to the
corrective or punitive: especially in criminal cases, if any such should
happen; lest the remedy should prove worse then the disease, and the reparation
of a private person turn to the ruin of the public, which is contrary to
reason and the end of government. Beside in Princes we may consider their
private Acts (as I may so call them) of Government, which consist in the
Executive part of their Office, viz. in administering or dealing justice betwixt
man and man, and in seeing, so far as the Law or reason requires of them, that
all men under them live well, and according to their several duties; in these
Acts the Prince may be justly supposed to be bound up to the Law, and that he
ought not to do otherwise then the Law prescribes. But who ever accused Queen
Mary of breach of Law, or misgovernment in this sense? Happy had it been for
some of her Successors and this whole Nation, if they had affected arbitrary
Government and Rule, no more then she did. Secondly, we may consider in Princes
their more public Acts, which concern all their people in general, and consist
in the Legislative part of their Office; and in these they are Free, they are
absolute, unlimited, and bound to nothing, but only to proceed upon such
advise, as the Constitutions of their several Governments do require: that is,
most commonly (and as is best,) upon advise and the consent of their whole
people represented and giving them Counsel in Full Parliament. I say, in this
capacity the Prince is bound to no Law, but the Law of Reason and a Good
Conscience; as to all other respects at liberty to enact or abrogate, to make
or repeal what Laws he shall think fit, and most likely to procure public
good, upon such advise given. And did not Queen Mary so proceed? Did she do any
thing, but by public consent, advise and supplication of her people in
Parliament? Beside, if Queen Mary should be so subject to her Brothers Laws, as
not to alter them upon any reason in a legal and due manner, why was not Queen
Elizabeth so subject to Hers? yea, why was not King Edward the Sixth himself so
subject to the Laws of his Father? Why were they altered, and that in his
Minority too? When he was a Child, and understood no more, in things of that
nature and consequence, then a Child? you will say, The Religion, which Queen
Mary brought in, was corrupt and impure, That of her Brother before, and of
Queen Elizabeth after her was pure, and according to Gods word. But this is
your assertion only; we say still, That you proceed upon a false supposition,
that presumption and selfconceit rules the greatest part of your roast. That
thing viz. Whether Queen Mary's or Queen Elizabeth's Religion were best, is the
grand question betwixt us: And as it is certain, that it was never yet by any
general and orderly Counsel, no not of Protestants, determined on your side; so
we are sure, and the world, together with your selves know, it has been often,
legally, solemnly determined for us, by all sorts of Counsels, Provincial,
National, Ecumenical. And we pray, what reason can be given, why the Judgment
of Parliament restoring Catholic Religion under Queen Mary, with the consent
and advise of the chief and best of the whole Clergy of the Nation, should not
be as good, as that, which under Queen Elizabeth abolished it, not only
contrary to the Queens Oath taken at her Coronation, but without the advice or
consent of so much as any one Bishop or spiritual Prelate of the whole Kingdom,
who yet in a business of that nature, viz. concerning Religion, were by all
Laws, both of Malach. 2.7. Heb. 13.7.8, 17.
God and of the Nation, principally to be consulted with.

viz. that Queen Mary had indeed erred in the introduceing of some kind of
superstitions, ought she therefore presently to be censured by Ministers? or
deposed and put down by a Wyat? God forbid. Solomon himself, a wise and a great
King, did fall into grievous sins, and particularly into the grosest of those
kinds, whereof they presume to censure Queen Mary. He had many Hundreds of
strange Wives, contrary to the Law of Moses; and by reason of them fell to
Idolatry beyond measure. The Queen never took but one Husband, and he a
Catholic Prince, of the same Religion with her self, and with the whole
Christian world beside, except only some few Provinces, which Heresy had
lately corrupted. Yet neither did the Priest or people take upon them to depose
such a King as Solomon? They left him to him, who is the Supreme and most
proper Judge of Kings, and who, in the time appointed by his Divine Providence,
raised up Jeroboam to chastise him in his Son. Yea when Julian himself, of a
Christian Emperor, became Apostate, and persecuted the Christians of his time
with all manner of vexation and cruelty, which either policy of malice could
devise, neither the people, nor the Pastors of the Church, (though they sharply
reproved and inveighed against his proceedings, yet none of them) took up Arms
against him, none went about to deprive him either of Dominion or Life. And if
they thought it not expedient or becoming Christians to do so against a Tyrant,
acting Tyrannically, and only by the violence of his own exorbitant passions,
without any order or color of Law, and as no just Prince ought to govern, how
much less would they have thought it lawful, and how little would they approve
it to be done against such Princes, as govern legally, and do nothing,
concerning Religion or otherwise, but according as the Laws and and public
Constitutions, of their several Kingdoms do direct and enable them to do. He
that proclaimed the Prerogative of Kings in these terms Vos Estis Dii, I have
said, Ye are Gods, surely intended to teach the world rather a lesson of
obedience then rebellion. And there is no Prince or State in the world, Let
them countenance what Sect, or Profession of Religion soever, they please, but
shall find it, at one time or another, a necessary Bulwark for them to retreat
unto against the inundations of popular fury. Who does deny, but that it is
necessary, that the governments of all Princes whatsoever should be regulated
and moderated by Laws? and that all persons in Authority do observe all rules
whatsoever, that are proper for them, or prescribed to them, by those to whom
that power belongs. We pretend not, to enhaunce the Authority of Princes so
far, as to exempt them from the rule of Law, or to make them Arbitrary in their
government; but this we say, Vos Esi is Dii, in relation unto Princes, and all
Persons established in Supreme Authority justly, that is, by the will of Divine
Providence, and consent of the people, is a great exemption of them from any
popular Cognizance. For what does it intimate, but that Egodixi.
Allmighty God himself has made them Gods unto the people, that is to say,
persons of Knowledge, Experience, Foresight, Care, Providence, and other
abilities Intellectual (which are the natural and genuine principles of
government) competent and sufficient for the government of people, (who are not
otherwise, generally speaking Et pro majori part, able to govern themselves in
civil society,) and for their preservation in peace and quietness, which is the
end of Government. We think, it is most proper for God only to say Transferam
Regna de gente in gentem. Revolutions of Governments and Translating of one
Kingdom to another are the Extraordinary Dispensations of Divine Providence,
and for reasons only known unto his supreme and secret wisdom. Which although
they be acted, that is, brought to pass by the hands of men, yea through their
infirmities and many times blamable passions, as experience often shows, and
as in the case of King Rehoboam, the Son of Solomon, (1 Reg. 12.16.) may seem
plain; yet are not the common people licensed hereby to run upon any irregular
designs of their own head, and to renounce their Governors headily and hastily
of themselves, for every lght greivance and misgovernment, that may seem to
afflict them. To remove Tyrants and oppression from a people is the work of
Divine Mercy, as it is of his justice, to permit them to oppress; and from him
only must they expect deliverance, abiding in the mean while with patience,
until his Divine hand shall appear, leading them to such means, as they may
with justice and good order use to the procuring of their liberty.

The Second Part. JERUSALEM, OR The Obedience, Loyalty, and Conformity OF
CATHOLICS unto Public Order.
Religion is not framed according to their Mode, the indifferent Reader will
judge. It remains now, that we make good the contrary, concerning our selves,
and show, that those virtues, (which we pretend to be the true and proper
Characters of our Religion) viz. Humility, Devotion, Obedience, Order,
Patience, etc. are more generally and more constantly exercised by Catholics,
in times of Trial, then by any other Sect or Sort of people whatsoever. This we
intend to do, but not so much Theoretically, or by way of any long and
speculative discourse, as Practically, Historically, and by way of instance,
showing what the behavior and practice of Catholics have been in this case,
upon occasions given. Neither shall we range far abroad into the world, because
that would be less pertinent to our main purpose, (which is only to justify
our selves in this point, so far as reason and truth will give us leave,) and
enlarge our discourse beyond its intended bounds: But we shall content our
selves only with domestic examples, and that experience, which the Catholics
of this Nation have given of themselves, from time to time in this kind.

Lucius and the Brittons, I shall not need to relate, but refer you to the
Ecclesiastical Histories of those times; the rather because the Centurists of
Magdeburgh, and Master Fox in his Acts and Monuments will have these Catholics
to be Protestants and of their Church: which, (though it be very false, yet) I
may not engage for the clearing of that point now. Nor shall I insist any
longer upon those times of the Saxons, after they were converted to
Christianity, to show their virtues and singular devotion toward God: and how
happily, by means thereof, the Church and Commonwealth did grow up together
unto that perfection of Spiritual and Temporal glory, which they enjoyed under
that Blessed Prince and Saint, King Edward the Confessor. I shall not tell you,
how highly the good Prelates of the Church were then reverenced by the people,
nor how much their holy Counsels and Authority did conduce to the happy
government of the State. It suffices, Lamb. Archaion. Camden. Spelm. Council.
that many old Saxon Laws and other Monuments yet upon record, Venerable Bede,
and the Stories, of those times, with other Modern Authors are witnesses of it
beyond all exception. From King Edward the Confessor downwards to King Henry
the Eighth, there is no man of judgment will affirm, or thinks, that any
other Religion was known in England, but the Roman-Catholike, that is, the
same, that had been long before planted here by Saint Austin and those Good men
his followers, who were sent hither to convert the English Saxons, by Saint
Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome: for which charity toward our Nation Doctor
Whitaker gives him thanks, and professes, it was a great Benefit, and for
ever most gratefully to be remembered. In all which time although the Clergy
made Canons, and managed all things pertaining to Religion, by an Authority of
their own, that is to say, given them by God, and derived to them from an other
origin, then that of the State or Supreme Magistrate Temporal; yet never did
the Kings of this Realm find them generally otherwise then obedient unto their
Government, and ready to serve them, in such capacity, as the Laws and duties
of their function permitted, and to contribute their best assistance to the
support of the Estate Royal, and of the Kingdom wherein they lived. It is true,
through the malice of the Devil and Instigation of some Enemies of the Church,
some of them, for the asserting of their legal Immunities, and to preserve the
Liberty of their spiritual Jurisdiction entirely Free, as it ought, they were
dirven now and then, (yet very seldom, in comparison of such a long tract of
time, as we instance in,) unto some vehement and earnest contestation with
their Princes, and though much further then was pleasing to them, yet, I
suppose, not beyond terms of due respect, and the Authority of their Function:
much less did they endeavor to stir up rebellion, or instigate the people to
sedition and commotions against their Princes; nor did they ever, upon their
own account solely, concur in any thing of that nature.

Henry the Eighth, Flagellum Dei, that scourge of God, to the Church of
England, and all good Catholics therein; yet outwardly professing the same
Religion in most things with Catholics. This he did first by a pretended
Accusation of the Clergy, to be fallen in a Praemunire, because (Scil) they did
that, which all their predecessors the Bishops and Clergy of England, for many
Hundreds of years confessedly, had done without any exception taken, viz. for
acknowledging the power Legantine of Cardinal W^lsey; which yet the King
himself for his own ends, and in his own case, had first of all procured. 2.
upon the Statute of supremacy. And 3. by suppression of the Abbeys. These were
his Three first breaches, by which the Foundation, strength, and glory of the
Catholic Church in England became afterward utterly ruinated. By the first
his way was levelled to the Second; and the Second obtained, gave him power and
authority to compass the Third. By the First indeed only the Clergy smarted in
a fine of an Hundred thousand pound; The second lay heavy upon the Clergy and
Temporalty both. But by the Third, viz. the suppression of the Abbeys and
Religious houses, if we consider the infinite prejudice, which the poor
Commonalty suffered thereby, both in point of spiritual and temporal interest,
the whole Kingdom might be said, to be worse then conquered by him, that is,
Robbed, Spoiled, Enslaved to the exorbitancy of his sole Will, Prodigality,
Lust, and Tyranny. And all this done to be revenged on the Pope, who
condescended not to humor him in the business of his marriage. Therefore, and
to advance his own power and greatness, That Authority and Jurisdiction, which
had always been acknowledged, as sacred, by the English, ever since the English
were Christians, must in a moment be abandoned, disclaimed, abjured; himself by
an unheard of and fatal Ambition instead thereof, made Head of the Church: and
all persons who out of scruple of Conscience, refused to conform to such grand,
sudden, and sacrilegious Innovations, and to swear they knew not what, were cut
shorter by the head, executed at Tyborn, imprisoned, banished, and put into
such condition, as he was sure, they should not oppose him.

Praemunire was at first only a quarrel, which he picked against the Cardinal
Wolsey, but afterward stretched it upon the Tenters, and made it reach the
whole Clergy, who being thereupon Summoned into the Kings Bench, the business
was so aggravated there by the Lawyers, The Kings Learned Counsel, that in the
Convocation house, they presently concluded to submit themselves to the King,
and offer him no less sum then One hundred thousand pound for their pardon.
This was looked upon by the Christian world as a Prodigy, That so many
Shepherds should be afraid of one Wolf: And though it becomes us not hear to
censure, whether they did as they ought, yet certainly this weakness of the
Pastors boded no good to the Flock; and it is observed, that neither,
themselves, nor the Church, nor Religion ever prospered in England afterward.
However the King accepts of their off^r, and signs their Pardon; but with a
fetch far worse then the first. For under a pr^^e^ce of procuring this Pardon
to be confirmed to them in Parliament, he draws them in there (how willingly or
unwillingly, let the world judge,) to acknowledge him Supreme Head of the
Church. It was a course, even at that time, not thought agreeable to Justice or
Honor. For, as we said, the Cardinal Wolsey had the Kings License for the
exercise of his Legantine power, both under the Kings hand, and the Great Seal
of England; and was employed by the Kings particular Mandate and pleasure, in
the quality of Legate to sit with the other Legate, Cardinal Campegius, and
examine the business of his marriage. And could the Divorce have been granted
according to the Kings mind, it is easily conjectured the Cardinal had never
been questioned for his Legat-ship. Touching the Second of Supremacy, All the
Subjects of England ever acknowledged that the Crown and State of England,
quoad Temporalia, in Temporal affairs and matters is independent of any other
power, but of that Transcendent Majesty, which says, Per me reges regnant;
and this to the intent, that Kings and all Governors, considering, who will one
day take their Audit, may be more careful to rule with Justice and common
equity, without partiality, passion, prejudice against any man's person, further
then his crimes against Public Order, Common Right, and the Peace of the State
shall make him obnoxious: and by so doing may keep their accounts straight,
against the day of Account. And on the other side that Subjects remembering
their duty, and who it is, that lays this jugum suave, the sweet Yoke of good
Government upon their Shoulders, might be induced to obey with more fidelity,
and prompt affection. But the Question, which King Henry (the first of all
Kings, Princes or States of Christendom) propounded to his Clergy and People in
Parliament, concerned matters purely Spiritual, and wherein, not himself only
and his Subjects at home, but all Christian Kings, Princes, States, and people
in the world, were concerned. And therefore required far greater deliberation,
I say not, then was used, (for in truth that was little or none at all; the
Kings pleasure and resolution was known, and that, as the world went then, was
sufficient:) but, I say, then could poss^bly be used in England; which was then
but one single Kingdom, and a small Province of Christendom.

England were brought absolutely into Captivity, and stood merely (as they have
done ever since) at the pleasure of the King, and of the State. Their
Possessions (the greatest part of them) were seized, their Goods forfeited,
their Churches profaned and sacked, and upon the spoils thereof, together with
the sale of the Vestments, Chalices, Bells, and other the Movables and
Ornaments belonging to them, the Augmentation Court was erected. For the King
seeing this extraordinary passiveness and submission of the Clergy, could never
think he had power sufficient, till he had more then enough; and therefore
having already discharged his conscience from all Bonds, but such only as
himself should think good to tie, he took liberty to commit such outrages and
violence upon Sacred things, as no age before him, nor since can parallel. For
first, viz. Anno 27. of His Reign he appoints the Secretary Cromwell, and Doctor
Leigh (as his Commissioners) to visit the Abbyes; and they, by virtue of their
said Commission, first take out all the Plate, chiefest Jewels and Relics
belonging to those houses, and seize them to the Kings use: Then they dismiss
all such persons Religious, as were under the age of Four and twenty years, and
had a desire to be at liberty in the world, Anno 28. All the smaller Religious
houses, of the value of Two hundred pounds per annum and under, were given to
the King by Parliament with all their Lands and Hereditaments; and of these the
number was not less then Three hundred seventy and six, who were able to
dispend per annum to the benefit of the poor and service of the Public, not
less then Three thousand two hundred pounds of old Rents of Assize, b^side
their Movables: Which b^ing undervalued and sold at mean rates, yet amounted
to above One hundred thousand pounds. The Religious themselves, and all people
depending on them, (which were not a few,) were on a sudden outed, and left
unprovided even of Habitation; above Ten thousand persons, for no particular
crimes charged or proved against them, turned out of their own doors, and
driven to seek their fortune, where they could. A thing which compassionated
the very common people themselves, (though not a little alienated in their
affections at that time, toward Monasticks, more then they were wont to be;)
to see so many persons compelled to Beg and live by Alms, who by their
bountiful and constant Hospitality had formerly releived many.

Anno 30. of His Reign some of the greater Abbeys, viz. Battle-Abby and the
Abbey of Lewis in Sussex, Martin Abbey in Surry, Stratford in Essex were
suppressed, and all things belonging to them converted to the Kings use. For
indeed they were forced in some sort to proceed thus politickly in their work
of desolation, and to carry it on by degrees, by reason of the Commonalty; who,
though they stirred not, yet they stood amazed, as it were, murmuring as loud
as they durst, and were not a little unsatisfied at such doings. But in the
years 32. and 33. generally all the Monasteries of England, of what value
soever, went to wrack, and were destroyed; The Lands belonging to Saint John's
of Jerusalem were likewise given to the King, and the Corporation of those
Knights quite dissolved: Though to turn out these with some kind of
contentment, there was, as some say, certain Pensions during life distributed
among them, to the value of Two thousand eight hundred and seventy pounds. In
Anno 37. was the last sweep, which King Harry made. For then all the Chauntries
in any part of the Kingdom (which were many and numerous,) All Churches and
places Collegiate, yea the very Hospitals (which were built and endowed by
their several Founders, only, and expressly for the relief of the poor,) were
yet given to the King, and permitted wholly to his order and disposing. The
value of Church Lands in England at this time amounted to above Three hundred
and twenty thousand one hundred and eighty pounds per annum; and of it the King
took into his own possession, and apropriated to the Crown to the value of One
hundred sixty one thousand one hundred pounds yearly rent: The rest, it seems,
was sold, or exchanged, or distributed among Favorites. Lastly, to abuse the
poor Commons perfectly, and more easily to wipe them of those great and
constant advantages, as well Temporal as Spiritual, which they received from
these Religious places while they stood, a proposition is made in Parliament by
the Projectors and Sharers in this work, and it is given out also to the people
abroad, That out of the Revenues of these Lands thus given to the King, a
standing Army, for defense of the Kingdom and all other Military occasions of
State should be maintained, of no less then Forty thousand men, besides Forty
Earls, Sixty Barons, and Three thousand Knights for the Command and Conduct of
this Army, where need should be: So that the Commons of England, by this means,
should never, hear of Tax or Subsidy any more. This indeed was as pleasing a
bait for the people, as could be devised, and it took accordingly: They bit
willingly at it; But the Hook sticks in their jaws to this day. Such a motion
as this (to note in a word by the way) was made in that Parliament of Henry the
fourth which they called the Laymens Parliament, by those which countenanced
Wicleff, and loved the Lands, far better then they did the Religion of the
Church: But their designs at that time were defeated by the Stout and Religious
opposition of Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Prelates
joining with him. Though now there were an unfortunate and unworthy Thomas
found, (yet siting in that Seat of Canterbury) ready to side with them for his
own carnal ends, and to countenance the Wicleffists of these times, that is,
those Lutheran and malicious Spirits, who by their Libels, ( The supplication
of Beggars well answered by Sir Thomas Moors Supplication of Souls) and other
wicked practices, went about to destroy the Church, and extripate true Religion.

could not dislike the motion, knowing what a rich Prey would fall to be
divided among them. Especially this pleased the principal Secretary of State
(afterward Lord Privy Seal, Lord High Chamberlain of England, and Earl of
Essex) who being a man of great experience, and of a deep reach in worldly
policies, knew full well, that such a confused Innovation as this, and so full
of Spoil, would be infinitely advantageous to him, and a Ladder, to clime at
ease unto what Wealth or Honor he could wish. He therefore instigates the King
with all might and main to go through with the Action, and to stand stoutly to
his Prerogative and profit, knowing his conscience was already buried in Anne
Bolens Tomb. To this end, and the better to pave the way to his evil designs,
(Sacrilege and Blood not seldom going along together,) Three of the principal
Abbots of the Kingdom, and Barons of Parliament, viz. the Abbots of
Glastenbury, Reading, and Bury, Stout, Virtuous, and Religious men, and
likeliest to oppose such practices, were taken away before hand, being
condemned and executed upon the Statute of Supremacy; as well to prevent the
Bishops mediating for them, as to terrify the other Relig^ous of the Kingdom
from opposing the Kings designs.

But may we ask, quo jure, quo titulo, by what color of Law or Right was this
suppression of the Abbeys made and done? I cannot tell, what it may do now, but
certainly to have moved such a question then, it would have cost a man his
head. It is certain, these Abbeys held their Lands in Frank Almoigne, and in
Fee, They were quietly possessed of them by the Donations and Gifts of many
Saxon, English, Norman Kings, Princes and other Subjects, who were their
Founders; continued legally by prescription in them; admitted, acknowledged and
established by all Laws; beside the accessory Charters of many succeeding
Princes, who confirmed them, and most commonly added to them. They held all
their Lands, Immunities and Estates by the same Laws, Authority, and Right, by
which the Temporal Lords held their Baronies, as Magna Charta 9. of Hen. 3. and
the confirmation thereof 28. Ed. 1. do abundantly testify: where it is
granted, that the Church of England shall be Free, and have all her Liberties
preserved to her inviolable. Chap. 2. any Judgment given against them is
declared to be Null and Void. And chap. 4. The Bishops are ordered to
Excomunicate all such, as shall seek to infring those Charters; as also they
did 30. Ed. 1. including all those, that should either make, or procure to be
made any Statutes contrary to those Liberties. Whence we may note Two things,
The First, that as Excommunication is the highest punishment, which can be
inflicted upon a man Spiritually; so the State cannot declare its detestation
and dislike of any crime more then by requiring or ordering such a punishment
for it. The Second, That as by one and the same Charter, both the Church and
the Temporalty held their Liberties; so that which gave, or pretended to give,
the King power to abrogate and destroy the one, could not, in point of reason
or justice, but make the other obnoxious. In the Leidger-book of Peterborrough
are to be seen all King John's Grants and Confirmations more fully and at large,
then they are set forth in any Printed Book. Let any man but read them
seriously and with attention, and he will wonder at the proceedings of later
times. What need I remember that same Law called Sententia lata super
confirmatione Chartarum by Ed. 1. or the 42. of Ed. 3. chap. 8. where it is
declared that any Statute whatsoever made contrary to Magna Charta, shall be
void. or the confirmation of all these in 1, 6, 7, 8. of Rich. 2. and in 4. of
Hen. 4. All which good Laws were intended surely to prevent Sacrilege and
Tyranny in succeeding times, and to secure both Church and people from the
encroachments of injustice.

The King knew very well he had no Title to any of these things, but by color
and concession of Parliament; (and how far a Parliament has power to give away
the Lands or Interests of a Third Person, neither heard nor convicted orderly
of any offense, that should deserve such sentence, is a thing to be considered:
Surely, is it not?) Therefore to make his Title appear stronger in the eye of
the World, Anno 31. of his Reign, he procures an Act to be made in Parliament,
expr^ssing, how that since the Act of Anno 27. the Religious Houses themselves
had voluntarity, and of their own good wills, without constraint, in due course
of Law, and by writings of Record under their Covent-Seals, giv^n and confirmed
to the King, their Lands, Houses, Rents, Revenues, and all Rights whatsoever;
yea, to this Statute they are said to consent, as to an Act of their own
seeking and suit; and you may see among the Records of the Augmentation Court,
a great Chest full of particular Surrenders, made by the Abbots and Covents
under their hands and seals to this purpose. But is it not a likely tale, that
out of their bounty and good will, they would renounce their Livings, and
become beggars? Indeed unto so gracious a Prince, as he was become toward them
at that time, it was ^he less marvail. I my self did once deliver my purse upon
Salisbury-plains; and though I could not commend the honesty of those that took
it, yet was I fain for a while to complement their humanity toward me, that
they used me no worse. You will say, how then came it to be done? why would the
Abbots, and other Religious give away their Lands, if they were not willing? I
answer, because they could hold them no longer: They saw themselves generally
deserted and forsaken by the Commons, and knew very well what the King was
resolved to do, by that which he had done already. And therefore to make some
petty accommodations for themselves, perhaps by granting or renewing of Leases,
or otherwise, (w^^ch the King for his own ends, viz. (...) the work more
plausible and (...), was content to connive at, and which, we may be sure, came
not to much) they thought best to give that which they were otherwise sure to
lose. And by doing so, rather then by using any kind of contestation, they
showed the simplicity of their obedience to be such, as became their Holy
Profession; and the King showed, how little he feared God, or regarded his
Honor in the censure of the World. Whosoever therefore considers the business
impartially, shall find this great conquest of Religious Persons to deserve
little Triumph; and that the augmentation of Revenue and Treasure by it, being
so palpably Sacrilegious, and contrary to all acknowledged Law, Divine and
Humane, proved to be Aurum Tholosanum, a curse to him that took it, and upon
which the judgment of God has visibly attended ever since.

Is it not a curse to him that devoureth sacred things, Prove. 20.25.
and after vows to make enquiry? And what says History, and the experience of
all Ages? Did ever Sacrilege go unpunished? Marcus Crassus robbed the Temple at
Jerusalem, but is not his sad and disastrous end noted by Josephus? Lib. 18.
C. 8.
Herod likewise opened the Sepulcher of King David, and took thence much spoil;
but into what great miseries and misfortunes he fell afterward, Lib. 16. C. 11.
the same Josephus relates. Vrraca, a Gothish King, going to rob but one
Chapel of St. Isidore in Spain, and that in a case of necessity too, as might
be pretended, viz. to defray the charge of war, and to pay his Army; yet his
very guts burst out of his belly in the Church Porch, Histor. genesis of Spain.
as the History says. Leo the Fourth, Emperor, taking a precious Gem out of
the Coronet of St. Sophia at Constantinople, which had been dedicated to it,
died himself not long after of a Carbuncle. Sigon. de regn. Italiae, Lib. 1. So
Gondericus King of the Vandals, when he took Sivill, took also the spoils of
the Churches, and seized upon all their riches; but, to revenge it, the Devil
seized and possessed him. Tarapha. in Honorio. What need I allege more? Julian
the Apostate was also a Church-robber, Tripart. Histor. lib. 6. c. 31.
most tyrannical and notorious, but his end is well known. And so it is, what
misery befell Heliodorus, the Treasurer of King Selencus, for the like crimes,
though but attempted, against the Sanctuary at Jerusalem, 2 Maccab. chap. 3.
Nicephorus Phocas the Emperor was the nearest parallel to King Henry that we
meet with in all the Ecclesiastical Story. For he resumed all donations that
had been made unto Monasteries and Churches in his time; but such afflictions
and furies haunted him for it ever after, that his Successor Basilius (though
himself none of the best Emperors that have reigned) was yet careful to
abrogate those Laws of Phocas, among the first Acts which he did, and as the
root of all public calamities of those times.

Henry himself find any better success to attend his impieties. Did he not,
(like that sacrilegious Herod mentioned before) live jealous of his Wives, and
not confident, even of those his Friends, which he had so much enriched with
the spoils of the Church? His exorbitant lusts, which were the original cause
of all the mischief, became at last his torments. For after his Divorce from
his first and lawful Queen Katharine, no wife could please him long; few of
them could get protection for their heads, and none of them all live long
either secure or joyful. Beside, did his Exchequer thrive any better for the
Augmentations? Was his Treasury any whit better furnished, then his Predecessors
before him, Catholic Princes, and Favorers of the Church? Nay, was there ever
King of England more necessitated then he was in point of Treasure, and that
immediately as it were, and in very few years after those great spoils? Did ever
King of England before him lie more heavy upon his subjects in matter of Taxes,
Subsidies, Loanes, then he did after that? Did ever any of them use more
ignoble and unprincely ways to raise money then he? Our own Chronicles, and
the much base money which he coined, do sufficiently show how things went with
him in that regard. But that which may seem most of all to be noted, as an
argument of Gods displeasure against him, was the frustrating of that, which
was pretended to be his chief project and design in all those frequent
marryings and unmarryings, viz. Succession and Issue. All his hopeful Stem and
Branches have been taken away one after another without Issue; and some of them
but unhappily too: And his Crown and Scepter translated, much contrary to his
intentions, unto another Name and Nation, God suffering him, as a blind man,
to err in his ends, and wander in all his courses. Yea all that great
Treasure, which he raked together upon the ruins of the Church; how was it
employed? How spent, but in the excess of vanity and evil? Neither to any
honor of the Realm, nor to the ease of his subjects, nor to the maintenance of
soldiers, nor to the relief of the poor, (all which were pretended mainly when
the business was to be done) but in Tiltings, Triumphs, Mummeries, Masquings,
in pleasing and enriching his Mistresses, and to satisfy the greedy appetites
and expectations of those sollicitors of his Lusts. In a word, Bolen, and
Prodigality consumed all. And touching those who were thought to be the
occasion and chief instruments of these disorders, that is to say, Cardinal
Wolsey, and the Lord Gromwel, when they had served his turn sufficiently, and
were grown rich, they were themselves, upon pretended, and but light occasions,
taken, with disgrace and misfortune turned out of the World, leaving their
Estates at his mercy. And for himself, when he had wearied his subjects with a
long, chargeable, and ingloricus Reign, and that he found his soul, as much
oppressed with the guilt of innumerable heinous sins, as his body was become
unweildy and troublesome to others, through his excessive intemperance, he
died, as some good Authors say, Thuan.
desirous to repent, and to be reconciled to the Church; but what effect his
desires had, (which we wish might be to the saving of his soul) is only known
to God.

Lutherans of Germany, the C^ns^storians of Genevah and France, the Brethren of
Scotland, have taken in this case? What would they have done, should they have
found themselves at any time oppressed, abused, robbed of their Rights and
Interests, and harrassed with injuries, as the Catholics of England were, by
such a Tyrant as this? Yet the Catholics took all patiently, made no mutinies,
raised no tumults, no insurrections that were considerable, or generally owned.
It is acknowledged even by our adversaries, that these Abbyes and their
Dependants were almost the third part of the Realm, men of understanding, power
and interest, their Revenues great, their Tenants many and rich; They were not
a little favored also by the people, for their constant Hospitalities and good
Housekeeping among them, well esteemed likewise generally amongst the Nobility
and Gentry. Besides, the Knights of St. John's of Jerusalem (who found
themselves in the same predicament with the rest) by their Fraternities and
Interests abroad, might have procured great troubles to the King, especially by
the Pope and Emperors assistance; yet to show the world what they were, to give
an example of the patience of true Israelites, and due obedience of good
Subjects; yea, to imitate, in some sort, the Divine pattern of their Masters
meekness, they resolved rather to endure Gods just punishment upon them, in the
Kings great injustice, then to Arm themselves into the Field, like so many
Lutherans, Calvinists, or Geuses, against their lawful Sovereign, having no
lawful order or authority so to do. The Arms they took up, were not Zuinglius
his Sword, nor Beza's Pistols, but the ancient, and most proper Arms of true
Christians, Prayers and Tears, Submission, Resignation, Patience under the rod
of God, and of a wicked King. I shall add this only Argument more, of the
inconveniences which followed upon these proceedings of the King, and of the
provocation which Catholic people had under him, if it had been possible to be
put into disorder, viz. That although the number of Gentry were somewhat
increased by the suppression of Abbyes, and alienation of Church Lands, yet the
Rents of Lands were presently, and very much enhaunced thereupon, Enclosures
were set on foot, Depopulations generally made, the price of all things raised,
to the extreme detriment of the poorer sort of people ever since, as the
Protestants themselves complained; Ascham. Epist. ad. Protect.
and the Yeomanry infinitely decayed, who before this were accounted, and found
to be upon all occasions, the Honor and Strength of the Nation.

Titulus Secundus.
Edward, the very Church it self was entirely subverted, Religion absolutely
changed, Heresy introduced, and established in the full, open, and public
profession thereof: And we might say, the craft and malice of the Devil, whose
work it is to corrupt true Religion, and confound States, herein most perfectly
appeared. For though indeed the way to Heresy, and all public disorder, were
sufficiently levelled and made plain by King Henry the Eighth, (who only, by
reason of his greatness, and imperious cruelty, was fit to begin such a work)
yet Religion it self was suffered to stand a while longer, at least in the
general and more visible parts of it; he knowing well, that all could not be
effected at once, and that it was necessary for him to seduce States, as he
does souls, gradatim, by degrees, opportunity, and succession of time: And
being also confident, that if those forts of Piety, and true
Christian-Catholike Devo^^on, that is, the Religious Houses, were once-razed,
the Church in England brought under a Lay head, and by consequence the sheep
made Governors of their Shepherds, he should easily upon a second attempt
there, and by some other hand, overthrow Religion it self.

Henry at his death had appointed by will sixteen Executors, who, during the
minority of his Son, King Edward, should be, as it were, his Guardians and
Counselors, for the better governing of the Realm. Among these, one, (who made
himself afterward Principal) was the Lord Edward Seymour, Earl of Hartford: who
being the Kings Uncle by the Mother-side, procured himself in a short time to
be made Protector; and by that means gat, as he thought, a dispensation from
his Joint Executorship with the others, and demeaned himself now in all things
concerning the Affairs of the Realm, as their Superior. A thing which King
Henry least of all intended, rather he had provided, with as much caution as
was possible, against the encroaching of any one upon the rest, under any title
or pretense soever. But this was the way to bring about some furth^^ designs,
intended by that Party, which advanced the Protector to that dignity, and which
the other, and more honest part of the Council, did not, either so providently
foresee, or so faithfully resist, as they ought to have done. One of the first
things which the Protector set on foot, after the Protectorship was secured to
him, was Innovation of Religion, abolishing the Old Catholic, and introducing
a New, under the title of Reformation: Not so much out of any great preciseness
that was ever observed in him, or devotion that he was thought to have, more
one way then another, but because he was thirsty, and desired to drink to the
bottom of the Cup, which in King Harries time it seems he had but only tasted.
There was yet some Game in his eye, which he intend-to bring into Toyls, viz.
some few remains of Church Lands, Collegiate-Lands, and Hospitals, which he
could not compass, or draw into possession, by any Engine better then that
pretense of reforming Religion. Cranmer, that unworthy Archbishop of
Canterbury, was his Right Hand, and chief Assistant in the work, although but a
few months before he was of King Harries Religion, yea, a Patron and Prosecutor
of the Six Articles. To this end, viz. the more to amuze the people, and, as
they thought, to give some strength and countenance to what they meant to set
up, a couple of strangers, Religious men indeed by profession, but such as were
long since run from their Orders, that is, Peter Martyr, and Bucer must be sent
for as far as Germany, and placed in the Divinity Chairs at Cambridge and
Oxford: That the world might see, how contrary, not only the Pastors of the
Church and Clergy, but even all the learned men in both the Universities, and
of the whole Kingdom generally, were to his proceedings. By these two Apostate
Friars, together with Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, and some others, was a new
Liturgy framed, and the old abolished, together with that Religion, which had
been so many hundreds of years observed in this Nation with great happiness and
honor. The Protector, though powerful of himself, by abuse and pretense of the
Kings name, in all things which he did, (although the King were but a Child of
nine years old, was yet well seconded by the Duke of Northumberland, and by the
Admiral his only Brother, by the Marquis of Northampton, etc. all of them
persons (seemingly at least) much inclined to Reformation, and by them he
overbore all the rest that opposed him, or were any thing contrary to his
designs: As there were many, both eminent and wise men, and equally entrusted
in the public affairs with himself, could things have been carried rightly; In
particular, the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord St. John of Basing, Bishop Tonstall,
Sir Anthony Brown, and that wise Secretary Sir William Paget; but most
especially, the Noble Chancellor, the Lord Wriothsley, a man of singular
experience, knowledge, prudence, and who deserves to be a Pattern to his
Posterity, far to be preferred before any new Guides. But being made Earl of
Southampton, though it neither won him to the Faction, nor contented, nor
secured him, yet he stood the more quiet, and made no great opposition to their
doings.

England; and though there were great multitudes of men well affected to the
old Religion, and discontented, that the Church should be thus driven into the
Wilderness, and forced to lurk in Corners: Yet did they show loyalty,
obedience, and love to the public Peace notwithstanding. They took up no Arms,
they raised no Rebellion, not so much as against the shadow of a King, or the
usurper of his Royal name. The Protector in the mean time goes on with his
work, which is principally to enrich himself with the Remains of the Church,
having long before, as it is said, tasted the sweetness of such Morsels in the
Priory of Aumesbury. He now seizes two Bishops houses in the Strand, and of
them builds Sommerset house, which, as the world saw, quickly reverted and
slipped out of his hands. After this he procures an Act to be made, whereby all
Colleges remaining, all Chantries, Free Chapels and Fraternities were
suppressed and given to the King. And how greedily he entered into the Bishop
of Bath and Wells his Houses and Manors, that Church will never be able to
forget; Notwithstanding that Bishop Bourn afterward by his industry recovered
something, but nothing to the spoils and wast, which was made. Nor was he
satisfied with this; For shortly after contrary to all Law, to King Henry's
will, and against his own Covenants; (those I mean, which he entered to his
Advancers, when they made him Protector,) He committed the Lord Chancellor
Wriothsley to the Tower, deposed Bishop Tonstal both from the Counsel and from
his Bishopric, viz. of Durham, as thinking it a seignory too Stately for a man
of Religion. And therefore he dissolved it, and brought it within the Survey of
the Exchequer, that is, into his own power; but, as it was observed, he never
prospered after. However the Act it self was most inexcusably unjust and
tyrannical, being so directly contrary to Law; as appeared, beside what has
been alleged before, by 1. Ed. 3. chap. 2. where the King d^clareth, That the
Lands of Bishops ought not to be seized into the Kings hands, and that what had
been done in that kind in his Fathers days, was by advise of evil Counsel, and
hereafter should not be so. But his sins now grew toward ripeness. Therefore
having also deprived and committed Doctor Gardener the Bishop of Winchester,
dissolved the College of Stoke, fleeced all the Cathedral Churches in England,
and added unto the guilt of Sacrilege many other outrages, oppressions, and
crimes, under the Nonage of a Pupil King, without any check or opposition, save
only in the business of the Earldom of Oxford, which he was not able to
devour, as he desired; at last, in the midst of his carriere, and after he had
sentenced and put to death his own and only Brother, the Lord Admiral, chiefly
(as it is supposed) upon the instigations of an ambitious or malicious Wife, he
was himself arraigned for High Treason, and ill governing of the Realm, (as may
be seen by the Articles of his Attainder in Stow) and thereupon condemned and
executed on the twenty second day of January, in the year of our Lord, 1552.

viz. the Protector, and Admiral, Dudley, Duke of Northumberland comes upon the
Stage; a man, whose ambition and policy, though unperceived, had ruined both of
them, but especially the Protector, whose chief Adversary he was, and the
principal contriver of the Charge against him, which in brief referred unto
these Heads. 1. That he had subverted all Laws. 2. That he had broke the orders
appointed by King Henry the Eighth for his Sons good. 3. That he held a
Cabinet-Councel: and by it transacted the public and chief Affairs of State,
without the advice of his Fellow-Counsellors. 4. Lastly, That he observed not
the Conditions upon which he was made Protector, which were, to do nothing in
the Kings Affairs without consent of the rest of the Executors. Upon these
Rocks the Protector perished, not without the manifest judgment of God, for
much injustice, which he had committed in the time of his Government,
especially in the business of Religion, and of the Church: and Northumberland
for a while prevailed. This man (though he were all otherwise in his heart,
yet) thought fitting to seem a little more precisely religious, then the
Protector, intending thereby to assure himself of the affections of such
people, as were more Zealously affected to new Religion. The Protector, looking
only at present proffit, ca^^d to humor them in that point no further ^^en
might serve his own turn: But Northumberland had other designs in his head,
which were no less, then to advance his own Family to the Crown, and to ruin
the right Heirs. And therefore to ingratiate himself more with the Common
people, in the year 1552. he causes the Liturgy or book of Common prayer to be
the second time Reformed, and Purged of certain ceremonies and orders,
offensive to that sort of people, which he desired to please; and so to be
published. This project stood him in much stead: among others of the Nobility
it gained him the Duke of Suffolk, who from henceforward seemed wholly to be at
Northumberlands Devotion, and to steer his course after the others compass:
Being a Potent man, and the greatest Precisian of those times; unless perhaps
they dissembled (both of them) upon the same account. But because the Lord
Treasurer Paulet, Marquis of Winchester, was more like to cross, the^ ^^mply
with them, therefore it is resolved to remove him out of the way. And to that
end Northumberland observing, that it was the Treasurers custom, sitting at the
Counsel Table, if at any tim^ he were suddenly called up to the King, to make
such have, that he commonly left his Spectacles behind^ him, he procured them
once to be so sweetly anoint^d and perfumed before his return, that at his next
putting them on, they cost him his Nose, and escaped very narrowly with his
Life; which yet with much ado was saved, and the Treasurer lived to make the
Duke his good friend, some part of requital, as the event showed.

Edward falls sick, whereupon (designs growing now to maturity) the Duke
procures his Son Guildford Dudly to be married to the Lady Jane Gray Daughter
to the Duchess of Suffolk, one who had a remote title to the Crown: But they
meant to advance it by their power, The Lady her self being also studiously
affected to the Protestant Religion; and for that respect they doubted not to
find favors and assistants enough: But therein their count failed them. At the
same time the Earl of Pembrokes Son was married to the Lady Katharine, another
Daughter of the Duke of Suffolk; And the Earl of Huntingdons Son to one of
Northumberlands own Daughters: All which marriages were solemnized upon one day
at Durham House in the Strand; And after them King Edward lived not long. It is
said that the Apothecary who poisoned him, for the horror of the offense and
disquietness of his Conscience, drowned himself; and that he Laundress, which
washed his Shirt, lost the Skin of her Fingers: But this is certain, th^re are
some yet living in Court, who can tell, how many weeping Eyes they have seen
for the untimely and Treacherous loss of such a Prince. See Heyward. Hist. Edw.
6.
But the pretense and zeal of Religion, which these men showed, did so
overshadow all things for a time, that not many could discern their impiety.
The Oration which Nort^umberland made to the Lords in the Tower, when he was
upon his departure for Cambridge, to proclaim his Daughter in Law Lady Jane
Queen, does show, what a Fox he was, and how far he could both descend and
dissemble to compass his ends. Goodw. Annals.
Howbeit in his way the Justice of God met him. For the people (the Suffolk men
especially) sticking faithfully to the right Heir, and their lawful Sovereign
Queen Mary, he was quickly deserted by all men, apprehended, and received at
Tower-hil the due reward of his Treason, and other sins, with the loss of his
head. And so we see those two Lords of Misrule, or Reformation, if it must be
called so, that is to say, the Protector Duke of Sommerset, and this man Duke
of Northumberland, Born (both of them) for the Scourge and ruin of the
Catholic Church in England, by a just vengance of Heaven, proved at last, as
it were Butchers and Executioners of one another, undid their several Families,
and endangered the whole Realm: The ones Ambition, The others Avarice
destroying him. Yet of the two the calamity of the Protector must, in all
humane judgment, seem most disastrous. For it is certain, through his own
weakness and the importune instigations of his Wife, he was compelled to serve
the designs of his greatest Adversary in the world, by putting his own brother
to death. And after that living to see Bologne lost, and the Crown, through his
Misgovernment engaged in many debts, wants, and trouble, he last of all ended
his days fatally, and without any show of repentance for those sins, which
brought, him to that end. Whereas in this respect Northumberland was far more
happy. For having in all humble and penitent manner acknowledged his offenses to
the Bishop of Worcester Doctor Heath, his Ghostly Father, and thereby
reconciled himself to God, and to the Communion of his Church, at the place of
Execution, (not out of design, or hopes of life, as some would maliciously
asperse the action, but willingly, freely, of his own accord, and out of
conscience, as himself protests at his death) he made another most Christian
and public acknowledgment of his Faults, especially those which concerned
Heresy, Sacrilege and Treason: in all which he confessed himself to be most
guilty. And thereupon used much and vehement exhortation to the people, to
beware of those Preachers of New Doctrine, who had f^ ed the Kingdom with so
many false Opinions and much trouble: Assuring them plainly and openly
concerning himself, that whatsoever he had professed or done in that kind,
proceeded wholly from Covetousness, Ambition, and other evil Motives not worthy
to be named, and not from any persuasion of Judgment or Conscience, which he
ever had that way. And therefore adminished them, that they should willingly
return to the Communion of Gods Church, and keep themselves constant in the
Catholic Faith, and true Religion. Which for Conscience sake, says he, I
only tell you, and that I may thereby, in some sort acquit me of my duty, and
save my soul, and not for any humane or temporal motive, expectation, or hope
whatsoever. And so died. The Oration it self, out of which this is extracted,
may be seen at large in Schardus, Sim. Schard. Memor. Histor. in Maximil. 2.
a Protestant chronicler of note, in his historical collections; and elsewhere,
I suppose, without much difficulty.

England: after so many disorders committed (as God was pleased to suffer) by
their power and procurement, and that they had sufficiently scourged and
afflicted those, whose sins well deserved such punishment, they were (both of
them taken away by the hand of Justice, and met with their deserts Temporally;
and things were restored to some better pass. But what did the Catholics all
this while? How did they behave themselves? What Rebellions did they raise?
what commotions or tumults of the people did they procure? I mean the more
civil, religious, and ingenuous amongst them. It Is true, some Risings there
were in Devonshire, and the Western parts, of the rude multitude, exasperated
especially upon some temporal grievances, oppressions, and wants, which
followed the misgovernment of those times; Religion was either not at all, or
least of all pretended by them: They were vexed indeed to see the
encroachments, which the Protector and others made daily upon the Kings and
Peoples Interest; They were sensible of the Scarcity and Dearth of all kind of
necessary commodities for life, which came suddenly upon them, and was far
greater then it used to be; They could not endure well to be abridged, by
Enclosures, of some other Liberties which they pretended to; In brief, They
were sensible of all such inconveniences in the Government of the State, as
concerned the Outward Man; but for Religion, further then it served to ease
their Spleen, that is, to clamor, to asperse and rail upon those, whom they
conceived the Authors of their other, and more resented grievances, I conceive
they minded it not: and that there is scarce any good ground why a man should
think them, in that respect, more Catholics then Protestants. And if a Priest,
or some Ecclesiastical person were found amongst them, (as it were strange if
there should be none, considering how many there were then in the kingdom,
absolutely destitute, and discontented) yet certainly, they were not many, nor
in any other quality considerable. Whereas it is certain, that Kets camp in
Norfolk, (a business of far greater consequence and difficulty) were all of
them such as were fallen with the State from the profession of Catholic
Religion, and become Protestants. And this I would generally premise, desiring
the Reader to observe it, that where I affirm of Catholics, that they did not
conspire against their Princes, nor raise any tumults in the kingdom, for
matter of Religion, I mean such only as were Catholics indeed, and stood firm
in their Holy Recusancy, not complying in any sortwith those alterations, which
Henry the 8th. Edward the 6th. or Queen Elizabeth, in their several times
procured to be made, contrary to the integrity of Christian Religion. For such
as complied were not to be counted Catholics any longer, but Heretics,
Schismatics, Hypocrites, etc. And for such people, having corrupted their
faith to God, I would not be taken to apologize in any other point of duty. For
it is very possible they might still retain some notions of Catholic Religion
in their minds, which, afterward, and upon other occasions, running into terms
of disloyalty, they might pretend as matter of complaint against their Prince,
though themselves were neither Catholic; nor That, nor any other matter purely
Spiritual, the true original cause of their Disorder; but only those Temporal
Grievances by which they smarted (as is abovesaid) and which they saw well
enough to procceed, either wholly, or in part, from the several alterations
made.

There were the like in Lincolnshire, which our English Chronicles pass not
over in silence. But it suffices, that for the generality of Catholics, (I
mean still those of more ingenuous, civil, and better quality) notwithstanding
so great and violent provocations, as were used toward them; their patience
and submissive demeanor toward the State and civil Government was most
exemplary to the World: Neither Prelates, nor Priests, nor Lay People making
any resistance against those unworthy men, who so much oppressed them under the
Kings usurped Authority and Name, making such havoc in the Church, and spoil
of all things consecrate to the Service of God, and exercise of their True,
Ancient, Christian-Catholike Religion, as this Nation never saw the like, since
it had ^he happiness to be called Christian. It seemed, they had been bred in a
better School of Virtue, then that which Calvin opened at Genevah, and had
learnt to bear the cross of their Savior, that is to say, these temporal
afflictions, calamities, and injuries, with more Patience; and that the glory
of Martyrdom in sufferance was accounted far more honorable with them, and more
becoming good Christians, then the Sword and Fortune of a Conqueror in
comanding. In which most Christian posture I leave them to proceed.

Titulus Tertius.
English Catholics was raised by Queen Elizabeth. This not only shook the
foundations of the Church, which had been so lately repaired by the most
Catholic Princess Queen Mary, but proceeded, so far as humane policy and power
could, to extirpate the very name and memory of Catholic Religion in England.
Camd. in Elizab.
And this, as it were, in an instant, and without noise. For, as her own
Historian, Camdeu, reports, it was done, Sine sanguine and sudore, No man
(unless perhaps it were Master Secretary Cecil) did so much as sweat in the
bringing in of New Religion; nor was any man's blood, I mean at the first
beginning, drawn about it. The Christian world stood amazed at the first news
of such a sudden alteration: Both because Religion had been so lately, and so
solemnly restored by Parliament; as also because the Queen her self (that now
was) always professed her self so much Catholic, during the Reign of her
Sister. She constantly every day heared Mass, says the same Camden, and beside
that, ad Romanae Religionis normam soepius confiteretur, went often to
Confession, as other Roman Catholics did. Yea, says Sir Francis Ingleseild,
when she was upon other matters sometimes examined by Commissioners from the
Queen, she would her self take occasion to complain, that the Queen her Sister
should see me to have any doubt of her Religion, and would thereupon make
Protestation, and Swear that she was a Catholic. The Duke of Feria's Letter to
King Philip is yet extant to be seen; wherein is certified, that the Queen had
given him such assurance of her belief, and in particular concerning the point
of Real Presence, that for his part he could not believe, she intended any
great Alteration in Religion. The same profession also she made to Monsieur
Lansack, as many Honorable Persons have testified; and at her Coronation she
was Consecrated in all points according to the Catholic manner, and anointed at
Mass by the Bishop of Carlisle, taking the same Oath to maintain Catholic
Religion, the Church, and Liberties thereof, as all other her Catholic
Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England, had ever done.

Mary gave her great advantage and time, both to deliberate and draw all
platforms into debate, to prepare instruments in readiness for all designs, and
to make choice of the fittest and surest Counselors, such as were most likely
to advance her ends. Neither did she seem to value her Honor overmuch, in order
to the bringing about of her chief design. For in open Parliament, after her
intentions for a change began, to be discovered, she protested, that no trouble
should arise to the Roman Catholics, Horas Preface of Queen Elizab.
for any difference in Religion: Which did much abate the opposition, which
otherwise might probably have been made by the Catholic party, and put the
Clergy themselves in some hopes of Fair quarter under her Government. She knew
full well, that a Prince alone, how Sovereign soever, could not establish a new
Religions in his Kingdom; but that it must be the work of a Parliament to give
Authority and Countenance to a business of that nature. Therefore to win the
Bishops, and the rest of the Catholics in Parliament to silence at least, she
was content to use policy with them, and promise them fair; as Monsieur
Mauvissieir has well observed, Les memoir de Mons. Mich. Castelnau.
who was a long time Ambassador here from the French King, and curiously noted
the passages of those times. Add hereunto, That when the Act for Supremacy was
revived (which was always the great Wheel of these Motions,) whereas by King
Henry's Law both Bishops and Barons stood in danger thereof (as the examples of
Sir Thomas Moor Lord Chancellor of England, and Doctor Fisher Bishop of
Rochester had shown) in this Parliament the Queen was content to exempt the
Lords and Barons absolutely from the Oath, (as they in King Edward the Sixths
time had exempted themselves,) and to leave the Rigor of it only upon the
Clergy and Commons. She also thought good to qualify the Style somewhat, viz.
from Supreme Head, changing it into Supreme Governor; which, though it altered
not the sense, yet it abused some into a belief, that the Queen pretended not
unto so much in matters Ecclesiastical, as the King her Father had done. Beside
we are to remember, that King Henry, by pulling he Abbyes, had much weakened the
power of the Clergy in Parliament, having deprived them of the Votes of no less
then Five and twenty Abbots, who constantly sat in Parliament in the quality of
Barons. And lastly, it is well known, The Lower House of Parliament it self (as
they call it,) was so calmly spirited in those times, that they used not much
to oppose, what their good Lords of the upper House liked.

that, which they feared, they should not be able to hinder; therefore either
but faintly resist, or quietly absent themselves, who can wonder, if the whole
business were carried with ease, upon such promises of the Queen, and by the
industry and craft of Sinon (alias, Secretary Cecil,) who had the chief
Management of it in his hands. By his advise it was thought fitting, that the
Noble. Earl of Arundel should, for a time, be abused with some hopes of
marrying the Queen; who thereupon, by the interest which he had in the house of
Peers, ingrosed into his own hands the Proxies or voices of so many of them
(who thought good to be absent,) as when time came, served the Queens turn
exceedingly well. The duke of Norfolk, Son in law to Arundel, but now a
Widower, was already exasperated against the Pope, because he might not have
dispensation to marry his Kins-woman; and therefore it was no hard matter to
join him with Arundel. The Queen had also against this time, either made, or
advanced in dignity, and consequently in interest, certain new Lords, whom she
knew to be favorers of her design, viz. William Lord Parr was made Marquis of
Northampton, a good Speaker and a Politic man, Edward Seymour Son to the late
Duke of Sommerset, was made Viscount Beauchamp and Earl of Hartford, Sir Thomas
Howard was made Viscount Bindon, Sir Oliver Saint John Lord St. John of Bletso,
Sir Henry Carry Lord Hunsdon. She had also as much weakened the Catholics
party, by discharging from the Counsel-Table many of the old Counselors, such
as she thought would oppose themselves, viz. the Lord Chancellor Heath
Archbishop of York, the Lord Paget, Lord Privy Seal, the Secretary Boxhal, Sir
Francis Inglefeild and others; in whose rooms were placed Sir Nicholas Baecon,
The new Marquis of Northampton, The Earl of Bedford, Sir Anthony Cave, Sir
Francis Knolls, Rogers, Parry, and Secretary Cecil. She depo^ed many of the old
Judges, made new Justices of the Peace; and lastly, concerning the Election of
Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament ensuing, she took such order, by the
great diligence and cunning of her Instruments in all the Counties, that she
wanted not a competent party, ready to close with her design in that House.
Besides this, to remove all scruples, as much as might be, out of the peoples
heads, and to make them think, that the same Religion and Service continued
still, which was so lately before reestablished by Parliament, and that all the
alteration made, was but only the turning of the Leiturgy out of Latin into
English for their better understanding, she provided, that in the
Common Prayer Book there should be some part of the old frame still upheld,
some Collects, Prayers and Anthemes of the old Missal, some of the ancient
Ecclesiastical Habits for Divine Service, as Copes, Surplices, etc. some
Ceremonies, as the Sign of the Cross, Adoration and Bowing at the name of
Jesus: The Organs also and ancient manner of Singing their Matins and Even song
was retained, especially in her own Chapels, and in most of the Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches of the Kingdom. The Title, Authority, and Jurisdiction of
Bishops was also preserved with some considerable Grace and Dignity in the
State, together with most part of the Revenues, of which at that present the
Cathedral Churches were seized. By which dexterous management of affairs, the
Common people were instantly luld asleep, and complied to every thing; and it
became not so hard a matter for the Queen to excuse her self, even to those
foreign Princes, who expected otherwise at her hands: As she did particularly
to the Secretary D' Assonville, who was sent by King Philip out of Flanders to
Congratulate her advancement to the Crown.

Matthew Parker, after advanced to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, having
been formerly, as some say Chaplain to Her Highness: Edmund Grindal afterward
Bishop of London, Horn of Winchester, Whitehead, May, Bill, and Sir Thomas
Smith Dr. of the Civil Law. The Liturgy was framed according to the Model of
that, which the English strangers had used at Franckford in the year 1554. and
varied not much from that which Northumberland had caused to be published
toward the latter end of King Edward the Sixth. By the Nobility that were
merely English Protestants, as the Marquis of Northampton, Earl of Bedford,
Lord Gray of Pytgo, Secretary Cecil, and others, it was well approved, and the
estabishing thereof by Parliament very much urged: But those, who had tasted of
Genevah, and were more affected with Calvin's Model, both disliked and opposed
it, either not knowing, or not regarding the Queens reasons of State, in the
business. Sir William Cecil, as we said, was now Secretary of State, a Politic
man, and one that knew well enough, how much this alteration would advance him;
his industry carried all before him. Howbeit his fortunes were yet but low,
having only the Parsonage of Wimbledon, and some few Lands about Stamford to
subsist upon. Therefore in his Letter to the Lord Marquis of Northampton, who
was his Mecaen^s, in the year 1560. upon the birht of his son Sir Robert Cecil,
he desires the Marquis (being the Lord Treasurer) to move the Queen in his
behalf for some means and maintenance for his G. C. (as he called them) who were
so likely to be famous in England afterward. Sir Nicholas Bacon was his Brother
in Law, and another chief Engine of State; a man of somewhat a deeper judgment
in the knowledge of the Laws, and a more plausible Orator. I must not forget,
in this Catalogue of State-Engins, the Lord Robori (afterward famously known
by the name of Leicester) who, to possess the Queens favor solely, had already
discarded Sir William Pickening, though formerly, ( viz. in meaner fortune) a
favorite, and no uncourtly Gentleman. Nor yet Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, nor Sir
Francis Walsingham, nor Sir Thomas Smith, who were all, with the rest, prime
instruments of this Action, intimate Counselors in the business, and posse^ ng
wholly the ears and grace of the Queen, sat as chief Pilots at the Stor^,
guiding the the course both of Church and Commonwealth at their pleasure. All
of them at this instant big with hopes of Preferm^nt, Honor, and great Offices,
which they were sure to loose, who held them under Queen Mary; Though many men
wondered how Master S^cretary Cecil could so easily forget his Beads, and his
Breviary, wherewith with he so exquisitely counterfeited a Catholic in Queen
Mary's time, that Cardinal Poole himself was deceived by him, so far as to do
him many friendly Offices toward her Majesty, which, as by the event
appeared, he did not much deserve.

Reason of State, The Queens safety, Scilicet. This they had all of them, but
especially Secretary Cecil wrought strongly into her Majesty's apprehension,
Camd. in Elizab.
Actum esse de ea, si Pontificiam Authoritatem in quacunque re agnosceret, she
was but a lost Princess, say they, if she acknowledged the Popes authority in
any thing. For, Duo Pontifices; Two several Popes already had pronounced her
Mothers marriage with the King to be unlawful and Null. It may be thought, her
Mothers Conscience did likewise pronounce the same sentence in her own Breast;
otherwise why did she, being ready to go to the place of Execution; so solemnly
entreat and charge the Lady Kingst n, Speed. Chron.
to go to the Princess Mary, and upon her knees in her name to ask pardon of
her, for all the wrongs, she had done her, protesting, that until this were
done, she could not dye in peace? But upon this ground the Statesmen of those
times conclude it necessary, that the Queen should alter Religion, Invest her
self with the Sovereignty of all Power, and banish that Authority out of the
Realm, which had presumed to declare her Majesty Illegitimate. This Counsel,
how prosperous soever it proved in the event, (through Gods permission,) and
how speciously politic soever it might be made to seem, by the Arguments and
Rhetoric of those men, who for their own ends and interests desired a change,
yet Really it could not but be full o^ d^nger, both to the Queen and the Realm;
but esp^cially to the Queen: who, if she had pleas^d, might have secured her
self of her own particular fears by some better way. For hereby, the Sentence
of Excomunication in some sort necessarily issuing upon her proceedings, she
was not only left destitute of all her Allies and Confederates, and driven as
it were, to stand solely upon her own guard, against France, who was already an
Enemy; and against Spain, who was a friend not very well satisfied. But she was
forced, even at first, and at the entrance of her Reign, to run upon a Rock;
which might have Shipwrackt her whole State; which was to assist the Rebels in
Scotland against their lawful Sovereign, under a pretense of expelling the
French, who were brought in thither by Authority of the Queen, only to
maintain the Government established. This might have taught her own people a
bad lesson at home, a man would think; though it did not, as it proved. And
being thus engaged in Scotland, she was obliged in pursuance of her design, to
succor the Admiral and those Rebellious Hugonots of France; by whose persuasion
she invaded Normandy, took possession of the Towns of Newhaven, Diep, and some
other places delivered to her by the Vidame of Charteres. But the disgrace in
ill-defending and loosing of them, especially of Newhaven, was one of the
greatest blemishes that ever the English, before that time, received upon
French ground; and far greater then it was Honor, to have them delivered, upon
such occasion, into the Queens possession. For certainly had either the cause
been just, or prudently managed, they might upon that advantage, have easily
brought home Calice again, or locked up the Gates of Roan and Paris. But they
did neither, nor brought home any thing, but a great Plague after them; in most
men's judgment, a scourge to the Realm for that offense. After this upon the
like necessity of self-preservation, and upon the Reason of State, which
Polybius prescribes, Vicini nim^um crescenti^ potentia quacunque ex causa
deprimenda, By all means keep thy Neighbor from growing too great, she made no
scruple to impede and give obstruction to the affairs of King Philip in the
Netherlands, who was her Neighbor, her Ally, her Confederate, yea upon more
occasions then one, and in matters of no small exigence, the best friend which
she had in the world. Yet by reason of those pernicious Counsels concerning
Religion, which she was fallen upon, she was, as it were, compelled to disown
his just interest, and profess her self Ungrateful in the face of the world.
Thereupon Orange and the States are assisted against their lawful Sovereign
King Philip. I must not deny, but even in doing this, she pretended respect
unto the Kings interest, professing in her Declaration concerning that
business, Stow.
That what she did, was to preserve the Ancient Amity and Leagues betwixt the
Crown of England, and the House of Burgundy, and to prevent the loss and utter
revolt of those Countries from the Kings obedience, which she knew otherwise
the States and Orange would deliver up to some other Prince more professedly
his Enemy. So true it is, that which Machiavel observed, I suppose, much about
those times, viz. That wise Princes seldom or never want pretenses for their
Actions. What a fair color is here given to a foul Cause? But where is
Conscience, Christianity and Truth, in the mean time? The world could see well
enough through the Vizard; and knew, at what mark both the Queen and the States
aimed.

Thucydides, Nullus Princeps a suis subditis just puniendis arcendus est, etc,
No Prince, says he, ought to be hindered from punishing his Subjects according
to the Laws; and whosoever goes about to do so, by his evil example parem in
se legem Statuit, etc. he makes a Law against himself, and inables his own
Subjects, in like case, to seek foreign protection against his jus^ice. And
this the Queen, with the whole Nation, might have found true by sad experience,
if that either Henry the Second, or Francis the Second, Kings of France had
lived; or that her own Subjects, I mean those, whom she had not a little
injured and alienated by her Misgovernment, had not been more loyally
respective of her dignity, and more inclined to obedience, and sufferance for a
good cause, then many other people in the world were. But Divine Providence
having decreed, for our much unworthiness and many sins, to remove the
Candlestick of this Nation, that is, to deprive us of the Light of the true
saving Faith, and of all public and free exercise of true Christian Religion,
and to deliver us up to the darkness and many old delusions of Heresy, and to
follow our own ways in those things, wherein it most of all concerned us to
have been ruled by good Authority, (which is the greatest judgment, that can
befall a Nation, or any people in this wo^ld) all things cooperated to the
accomplishment of his just displeasure against us; And the Queen with he^
party, were perm^tted to go on with their work, without any interruption; Even
before her Coronation, or that any debate or resolution had been taken in
Parliament de novo concerning Religion, she, being her self but a Sheep of the
Flock (as Constantine, Thedosius, and many others her Christian Predecessors in
Princely Dignity have not blushed to acknowledge) yet presumed to put all the
Shepherds of the Kingdom to silence; commanding, that none of the Bishops or
other Prelates should preach, till her pleasure was further known. And after
the Parliament all of them, that refused the new revived Oath of Supremacy,
were deprived of all Honors, Dignities; and Employments which they had in
Church or Commonwealth; and committed to several Prisons. Of this sort there
are reckoned no less then Fourteen Bishops of England, all Virtuous and Learned
Prelates, that were instantly deposed, and Ten of Ireland, Twelve Deans,
Fifteen Heads or Masters of Colleges, Six Abbots, besides inferior dignitaries
of the clergy, viz. Archdeacons, and other Priests without number, together
with Master Shelley, Prior of Saint John's of Jerusalem. All these as to their
demeanor toward the Queen were blameless; there was not the least exception
taken against them in that respect. The Bishops themselves were all sitting in
Parliament at the time of Queen Mary's death, and acknowledged by diverse
Proclamations Queen Elizabeth's Right and Title to the Crown. The Archbishop of
York, Doctor Heath, was then Chancellor of England, and labored by all means
possible to do her Majesty service, and to settle the Hearts of her people in
obedience and loyalty toward her, as to their natural and lawful Sovereign;
especially in that grave Oration, which he made to the Nobility and Commons of
Parliament, upon the first report of Queen Mary's death. The Bishops jointly
did their Homage and Fealty to her in all dutiful manner; and though they were
not without some suspicion, that she intended to change Religion, yet did they
practice neither Scotizing nor Genevating toward her: Never did they incense
the people against her, though they were generally Catholic, and they might
(probably) have done it, to her no little trouble. No, they never attempted any
kind, or any show of violent resistance at all, either by Domestic or
Foreign help; but always, from first to last, most submissively behaved
themselves toward her, tendering her safety and the Peace of the Realm, far
above their own Lives, Liberties, and Estates. It Is true, it was once debated
among them, whither they ought not to proceed to Excommunication against her,
both for the preservation of Catholics, and discharge of their Office: Yet
considering the great trouble and inconveniences that might arise thereby, both
to her Majesty and the State, in case the people should fall into any
disorders thereupon, or take Arms in defense of Religion, They concluded
(notwithstanding her case and proceedings were very much liable to censure)
yet, for their parts to leave her to Gods Judgment, and referred the whole
business to his Holiness.

Philip, (as they had always done) did stand her in no small stead. For he,
knowing the practices of France upon this occasion, and how much they labored
at Rome, that sentence of Excommunication might pass against Queen Elizabeth;
only out of design, and hoping to invest themselves of England thereupon,
under the Title and pretensions of Queen Mary of Scotland, who was the next
Heir, and at that time married to their King; Was the more willing to hinder
it: least by this means, England and Ireland both, together with Scotland,
should come to be Incorporate, as it were, into the Crown of France, and so
become an enemy too potent for him to deal with; out of which respect also,
even in Queen Mary's time, more then once he had kept of proceedings against
her, which otherwise would have concerned her very nearly. Therefore so long as
there was any hope, that the Queen might be capable of better Counsels, he
ceased not by his Ministers to do all good Offices here betwixt the Queen and
the Clergy; and at Rome, hindered the passing of the censures for no small
time, notwithstanding all the endeavors and instances thereunto made by the
French. But the Prelates all this while, as I said, chose rather a Durate then
Armate, ever professing with their mouths, and making it good, no less with
their examples and practices, that Preces and Lachrimae indeed, Prayers and
Tears were the only weapons which they had, to fight against the Queen. Though
the world knows, how little these prevailed with her; whose severity toward
them continued, in the same extremity from first to last, not relenting, nor
affording the least remission, in any degree of Liberty or Estate, unto their
dying day. Doctor Scot Bishop of Chester died at Lovain in Exile, Goldwel of
Asaph died at Rome, Pate Bishop of Worcester was indeed at the Council of
Trent, and subscribed there for the Clergy of England, but never returned.
Doctor Oglethorpe Bishop of Carlisle, who had Crowned the Queen, was yet
deprived with the rest, dying suddenly, and very shortly after; so did also
Doctor Tonstal, that Learned and Famous Prelate, Bishop of Durham, while he was
Prisoner at Lambeth: Yet not before he had personally given the Queen a sound
and Godly Admonition, concerning her strange proceedings, with that liberty and
freedom of zeal, which became so venerable a Prelate, and true Pastor of Gods
Church, as he was, and (as some have said) Godfather to the Queen. Bourn Bishop
of Bath and Wells was prisoner to Carry, Dean of the Chapel, and there dyed.
Doctor Thirlby, Bishop of Ely, was first committed to the Tower; afterward He
and Secretary Boxhal were sent to Lambeth, and there ended their days. Bishop
Bonner of London, Watson of Lincoln with the Abbot of Westminster, Fecknam,
died all prisoners, and, as some say, in the Marshalsey. Prior Shelly was
banished, and died in Exile.

of England; chief Pastors of the Church of God in our nation. Thus was a
third, and the most venerable State of the Realm, who, like the Cedars of
Li^^anus, ever since King Etheldreds time, for so many years together had
stood, flourishing in great Dignity and Power in this Land, on a sudden cast
down, disgraced, put in prison, or banished the Realm. The chief and immediate
cause of which hard procedings against them was the refusing the Oath of
Supremacy; for no other crime, no other fault could be charged upon them. This
indeed they refused, as a thing which concerned their Conscience very much. And
although, perhaps, some of the Prelates now living, had either for fear, or
upon surprizal, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, (when it was first
enacted) given more consent, or connivence to it, then became Prelates of the
Church to do; yet they had now better considered themselves, and resolved to be
constant, not only to the Doctrine of Catholic Faith in that point, but also
to the judgment of the whole Kingdom, which so lately in full Parliament had
desired the Abrogation of that Law: and acknowledged the Supremacy of
Ecclesiastical Authority to be, where Christ placed it, viz. in the Sea
Apostolic. Nor did the English Prelates refusing to acknowledge the Queen Head
of the Church, any thing more, then what the Protestants themselves, at least
no mean ones among them, would likewise do. For it is manifest, that setting
aside some few English at home, they do generally abroad dislike the Princes
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes, as much as any. Not to mention Gilby, who
in his Book called Admonitio ad Anglos calls King Henry the Eighth
reproachfully Monstrum Libidinosum and Aprum, qui Christi locum invasit, etc. A
libidinous Monster, a Wild Bore broken into Christ's Vineyard, and making
himself Head of the Church, which belongs only to Christ. Calvin himself in
his Commentary upon O see is very angry at those, who attribute so much to
Secular Princes, as to give them such absolute power in the affairs of
Religion; and in plain terms confesses, Qui initio tantopere extulerunt
Henricum Regem Angliae, certe fuerunt inconsiderati homines, etc. They, says
he, who first advanced the Authority of King Henry of England to such a height,
did not well consider, what they did, when they gave him that Supreme Power in
all Causes: it was a matter, which always greeved me very much, says he, For
indeed they did no less then blaspheme, when they called him Supreme Head of
the Church under Christ. Sir Thomas Moor, Bishop Fisher, Abbot Whiteing of
Glastenbury and those many other Holy Abbots and Religious men of all sorts,
who suffe^ed in the case of Supremacy under Henry the Eighth, never said more.
And Luther himself says no less, but more scurrilously, as his humor was. Quid
ad nos Mandatum Electoris Saxoniae? What has the Prince Elector of Saxony to
do to command me? Let him look to his Sword, and see, how well he manageth
that; and leave matters of Preaching to the Clergy, such as himself was.
Scilicet, Tom. 2. Fol. 259. and Tom. 1. Lat. Fol. 540. he tells them plainly,
Non est regum aut Principum, etc. It belongs not to Kings and Princes to take
upon them, to establish Doctrine, no not the true Doctrine; but to be subject
and obedient themselves in that case. And Chemnitius in his Epistle to the
Elector of Brandenburgh, speaking of Queen Elizabeth, after he had taxed her
sufficiently in other particulars, he falls at last upon her Title of Supremacy
in these words, Et quod foemineo, and a saeculis inaudito fastu se Papissam,
and caput Ecclesiae facit, saying, by a strange Womanish and unheard of kind
of Arrogance, she makes her self, as it were, a She-Pope in her own dominions,
and Head of the Church. What the doctrine and practice of those in Scotland is,
and has ever bin since their pretended Reformation, is too well known, to be
disputed. Cartwright teaches the same in all his Books, but especially in his
last: And so do all the Presbyterians generally both here and beyond Seas. They
of Amsterdam in their Confess. Fid. 1607. go somewhat further, Page 50. Art. 2.
when they resolve, That Vnicuique Ecclesiae particulari est par and plenum jus
etc. That every particular Church has full and equal power, (with any other
Church or Churches) to use exercise and enjoy, whats^ever ordinances of
Perpetuity Christ has committed to his Church; and therefore it is clear, upon
that supposition, That no one Person is left Supreme Governor over many. Dr.
Whitacre in his answer to Reinolds speaking upon this subject, Page 4.
has a passage not easy to be understood. The Title, says he, of Supreme
Head of the Church has been disliked by diverse Godly Learned men, and of
right it belongs to the Son of God* and therefore, says he, never did our
Church give that Title unto the Prince, nor did the Prince ever challenge it.
By saying that many Godly Learned men disliked it, meaning Calvin, Gilby, Knox,
Luther, etc. mentioned before; and upon this ground, viz. that of right it
belongs to the Son of God, he shows sufficiently, what his own judgment
therein is. But when he says, never did our Church give the Title of Supreme
Head of the Church to the Prince, nor the Prince challenge it, who can tell,
what he means? For admit, that what was done by King Henry the Eighth were
not rightly said to be done by their Church; yet I hope they will own the
Church in King Edward the Sixths time, who challenged the Supremacy notoriously
enough; as appears in the first Parliament which he held, wherein it was
Enacted, That whosoever, after the Fifth of March nex ensuing, should deny,
that the Kings Heirs and Successors were not, or ought not to be, Supreme Head
in Earth of the Church of England and Ireland immediately under God, for the
third assertion, should be guilty of Treason. And that Queen Elizabeth after
him declined the Title, and chose rather to be called Supreme Governess, mended
the matter not a whit. For it was not the Title only, but the power pretended
unto, and exercised by and under that Title, at which men made scruple; and
that power Queen Elizabeth claimed and exercised all her Reign, as much as ever
King Edward her Brother had done. So that the refusing of this Oath being the
only or chief matter alleged for the deprivation of the Catholic Bishops,
seeing Protestants themselves were no better agreed about it, they might in all
reason, have expected, if not a milder sentence, yet at least a more favorable
Execution thereof, from the Queen; whom they had so lately and so unanimously
acknowledged, and no less willingly then any other persons of the Realm. Who
always bear themselves obsequiously toward her in temporal matters; never made
complaint, never writ Libels, Invectives, or Books against her, as the
Reformers in other parts perpetually did against their Princes, and as too many
of her Subjects at home, that is to say, Ministers of her own making, and
others, in short time set themselves to do. No Homilies of sedition were
dispersed among the people; No Wyat, No Oldcastle appeared in the Field by
their instigation, notwithstanding all the Adversity, Disgrace, Wants, which
they suffered. In a word, such was their behavior constantly toward her, even
to the very last of their lives, that noe indifferent man will attribute it to
any thing else, but to the most excellent and right Christian resolution of
those worthy men, to suffer perfectly for such a good cause; and unto that
Patience, Humility, Obedience, Aequanimity, and Resigned Temper of Spirit,
which, (as it was exemplary in them) so, is it indeed Innate, (as I may say,)
and most natural unto all Virtuous and Religious men, that are truly Catholic.

English Catholics, toward their Sovereign Prince, both within and without
the Realm; as the experience of their quiet behavior, for so many years
together of hard times, have clearly shown. When I speak of Catholics within
the Realm, I mean, Recusants in general, (as we are called) men and women of
all Estates and Conditions; who have had our shares, and tasted of the Cup of
affliction, (as God was pleased to administer it unto us,) at this present not
much less then a Hundred of years. When I speak of those without the Realm, I
mean the Seminaries of Priests, Religious Persons and Students that be
Catholic beyond the Seas. Concerning which Seminaries we are to know, that
when the old Clergy of England, Bishops and Priests, were some languishing in
Prison, other in Exile, many dead, and all in disfavor. The Secretary and such
other Politic Protestants as then sat at the Stearn of Government in England,
did confidently imagine, that in a short time both Priest and Priesthood would
be worn out and extingished in this Nation. And truly it was observed, that
about the year 1576. there were not above Thirty of the old Priests remaining
in the Realm. Hereupon Doctor Allen, a man even raised by God to do his Country
good in a time of greatest necessity, together with some others of the English
Clergy, begun the Seminary at Doway, about the year 1569. merely out of
spiritual charity toward their poor Country, and a Christian Providence to
prevent the utter decay of Religious Professors, Priests and others: who might
serve in time to come, to uphold true Religion in England, and to preserve a
Continuation of the Catholic Church there, (as it had ever been from the
Apostles times to that present) unto succeeding Generations: And as by the
great blessing of God we see, their pious Counsels have had an happy effect
unto this day; notwithstanding the many oppositions, adversities and
difficulties, which they have met with, as well from England, as from other
places. They intended also the Instruction and training up of young Scholars,
viz. of the Catholic Nobility, Gentry and others of our Nation in the studies
of Learning, Virtue, and all kind of honest and christian Education; which, as
the case stood, they could not possibly have in their own Country, without
Ship-wracking of their consciences, and great peril of their souls. This, I
say, was the first and only design of the Seminaries, viz. to be a Nursery of
young and tender plants, as should be committed to them, to be fitted for the
Service of God, and the leading of a true Christian, Virtuous life afterward;
and not to be Seedplots or Forges of Treason, and seditious practices against
their Country, as their Adversaries cease not to accuse them. That Is a calumny
black and palpable, as shall appear more hereafter. At present I shall only
take notice of what that great Protonotary of England brings in charge against
them, in his Book called Justitia Britannica, which are three things. First,
That they are a company of base fugitive persons. Secondly, that they corrupt
the Land with false Doctrine: and Thirdly, That they practice with foreign
States to disturb the Kingdom, raise rebellion, and withdraw Subjects from
their obedience. As touching the First I am very well assured that there be
Gentlemen of our Nation at Doway, both in the College and Monasteries, of as
good Families, as well Bred, and as Eminent Scholars, as any I have known of
all these sorts in the Universities of England, wherein I am not altogether a
stranger. I will not make Comparisons, for that were but to make them more
odious; neither am I willing to detract any thing from the honor of our English
Academies, which I am bound to maintain. It must be confessed, there be many
excellent wits, and men of great learning bred in them; yet this I may truly
say, That those beyond Sea are of no base quality: neither is their education
in those places such, as should render them liable to that Character in time to
come. Yea rather they are so orderly governed, and their times of study,
devotion, exercise both Scholastical and Spiritual, recreation, yea even of
their most necessary repast and rest, are all so exactly measured out to them,
all occasions of idleness, excess, and ill company, so prudently and carefully
prevented, that it is indeed no wonder, they appear so civil, so devout, so
religious, temperate, sober and well governed, in all outward deportment, as,
through the grace of God, they do. They are, as I said, by their Superiors
strictly kept to their tasks; yet rather won, then forced unto good. They are
bridled with a hard bit, but it is carried with such a gentle hand, as it does
not pinch, but guide them: So that, as their studies, blessed be God, are not
altogether unhappy; so neither is their life unpleasant, but sweet, agreeable to
virtuous minds, and full of the Noblest contents. And that they should be
counted Fugitives is most injurious. For do they live there as Outlaws in a
foreign Province? have they fled for any crime? does Justice enquire after
them, or wait for them in their own Country? what Felonies, what Treasons have
driven them thence? but such as a very few years before, were, not only in the
same place, where they are now so hardly censured, but in all places of
Christendom, and by all people of sound judgment, counted the greatest
virtues? Again, they live not there out of any factiousness of spirit, or ill
affection toward his Majesty or the State of England, but for conscience sake
only, and to avoid the severity of Laws enacted here against Catholics and
the profession of Catholic Religion. It is necessity that compels them to take
this course. In England Catholics have no Churches, wherein to serve God
publicly, nor liberty to serve him privately any where else. The Sacraments
are never, or but very seldom Administered to them, in comparison of what they
should be. They can have no privilege, or benefit of the Universities for
education and study, without Oaths, going to Church, and hearing and doing many
other things, contrary to a good conscience. Beside all this, did not Barty,
Knolls, and Hales, did not Jewel, Horn, Cox, Pilkington, Poynet and many others
in Queen Mary's time, take the same course, for conscience as they pretended?
They would not willingly have been called Fugitives, when they were abroad. Why
then should those Gentlemen at Doway, Saint Omars, and elsewhere, Exiled, as it
were, at present from their native Country upon the same common pretense and
reason, viz. reason of conscience, be called Fugitives, or stigmatized with any
such Characters of ignominy? Let those Laws be repealed first, which threaten
present death to them upon their return, and which were all procured against
them, unduly, and by misprizion, viz. of their supposed practisings against the
State, which (as they complain) were never proved, nor are true. Let it be
permitted to them to enjoy Liberty of Conscience, and to serve God, as all good
Catholics and Christians ought to do, without molestation and danger to their
persons, prejudice to their estates, further then they shall give just offense
to the State, and the world would quickly see, where their truest affections
lay: Neither Doway, nor St. Omars, nor Rhemes, nor Rome it self would hold
them, from returning with all thankfulness and speed, to express their humblest
obedience to his Majesty, and fidelity to their native Country. And as for
their Parents Kinsfolks and Friends, from whom they are now unhappily separated
(and from many of them, perhaps, against their wills,) they should plainly
find, that natural affection was not extinguished in them, neither would
kindness creep, where it might safely go.

They corrupt the Land with false Doctrine. This objection supposes, that
Calvinism, and the present Religion by Law established in England, is the true;
which England it self denied but a few years since: and the whole Christian
world does at this day. I do not except the Protesttants themselves. For there
is not any one of their pretended Churches abroad, that agrees with this
present Church of England in all points of Doctrine and Discipline established.
But to wave that qu^stion at present, as no part of my undertaking, it must be
considered, there are learned and virtuous men on both sides, one whereof will
not, it seems, veil Bonnet to the other, in point of understanding the
Scriptures. How then should the diff^r^nce be decided (even in reason) but by
some Authority distinct from them both, yet indifferent and superior to both?
which can be no other but the judgment and tradition of the Catholic Church
precedent unto both. Besides this, the Bishops in the first Parliament offered
to defend their Religion by disputation, which the Protestants would not
accept, but upon an unequal condition, that is, (as Master Camden himself
reports) Nisi Baconus in studiis Theologicis parum Versatus, etc. Unless Sir
Nicholas Bacon might be President and Moderator of the business, who was a man,
neither of competent Dignity to preside in such an action (though he were newly
put into an high office) nor yet of suffici^nt abilities to judge of such
matters, being a man of the other Robe, but a Sergeant at law a few days
before; and beside all this a Partialist, and open favorer of the Adversaries
of the Church. Therefore the Bishops refused him, as an incompetent person; as
well they might, Though for doing so they endured a great deal of calumny. But
indifferent men will judge best. And certainly had the Queen at all desired the
Disputation, as some pretend, or that it should have had any just and fair
issue, she would have provided Judges (as easily she might,) more agreeable to
the Dignity of the action, and the Qualities of the Disputants, both for
Ability, Indifferency, and Honor. Since their time F. Robte Parsons, Campian,
and diverse others have made the same request to the State, being desirous to
bring truth to the Trial and Touchstone in some public manner: which cannot but
be some argument, that at least they do believe, in sincerity and good
conscience, that themselves are in the right; and therefore should not be so
hastily condemn^d, or prejudg^d of their cause. If it be said, that such
demands as these have been answered, disputations have been permitt^d, as for
example, that of Doctor Reinolds with Master Heart, that of Doctor Goad with F.
Campian; and that in both these and some other, truth has appeared so
manifestly on the Prot^stants side, that both Catholics and Priests ought to
be convinced: I reply, There was not fair play used in those actions? it was
iniquissima conditio, the most unequal dealing that ever was used; for a man
armed to set upon a Captive, a man at Liberty upon one in Fetters, d^stitute of
Books, having no warning, nor liberty given him to prepare him self; but which
is wo^st of all, and the greatest inhumanity that ever was heard of,) in the
sight and view of the rack, whereon he had, a very little while before, been
posed with most cruel questions: which was the case of that excellent and
blessed man F. Edmund Campian, afterward Martyr. And as for Doctor Reinolds
(although he pretends something to the contrary, yet) it is certain, he framed
that Combat, which he published between himself and Master Heart, at his own
pleasure. Lastly the Clergy, and other Priests of the Catholic Church in
England do pretend, and have not seldom offered to prove, that the chief Basis
of Protestant Doctrine in general is either Fallacy or Forgery; and that the
chief builders of this Babel, by name Bp. Jewel (the grand Apologist of the
English Church, Luther himself, Calvin, Melancthon, Du Plessis, the Hugonots,
Saint Augustine in France, Doctor Morton their Achilles in England, both the
Whites, not excepting Laud himself the late Patriarch of English Protestants,
nor Andrews, nor Mountague, but generally all other Proctors of that cause, do
defend th^msel^^^, and endeavor to bear down Catholics, not with sincere and
plain dealing becoming Christians, but with calumny and fal^hood; that is to
say, by false Quotations, Corruptions, Falsifying, and misreciting of Authors,
untrue reporting of Doctrines, false and unjust criminations of m^ns persons,
and of whole Orders of men, and by many other indirect ways, unseemly and
unworthy of the cause of truth. They humbly therefore implore and hope from the
justice of his Maj^stie and the State, that they shall not be condemned without
hearing: But as the charges, which they bring against their Adversaries, are of
a foul nature, tending much to the dishonor of God, and disparagement of
Christian faith, which God will not have to be upheld by ungodly and evil
m^ans; so they shall before sentence be permitted to plead for themselves, and
to prove the charge against their Adversaries: for whom it is not to purpose to
recriminate in the business, and say that Catholics are guilty of the same
faults. For we maintain the contrary. And desire to know, what one Doctrine it
is that we charge them with, as odious and offensive to Christian ears, but
the Reader, if he please, may find it expressly and undeniably verified upon
them by our Authors, and perticularly in that exact Treatise of the Bishop of
Chalcedon, called Collatio doctrinae Protestantium, etc. extant both in Latin
and English. what crime do we lay to their charge, but we prove it by Authors
and Testimonies of good credit, and most commonly from among themselves? What
do we bring out of Antiquity in behalf of Catholic Religion, or against them,
which they themselves confess not upon some other occasion? The Protestants
Apology is a Magazine of Evidences in this kind. And as concerning the Index
Expurgatorius, whereby they pretend, that we Corrupt Authors, it is only a
specious calumny to catch those, who are willing to be deceived. For first the
very manner of proceeding does exempt it from all imputation and suspicion of
Fraud with indifferent men; it being ab origin a thing intended and made for
public view, and to be openly exposed and avowed to the world, as it was:
which matters of Fraud Forgery and false play use not to be. Secondly, the
Expurgators, appointed to the oversight of that business, meant not to corrupt
Authors, but to correct former and less perfect Editions by better Copies and
more exactly compared; especially such Editions, as they found corruptly and
partially published by Heretics. And where they observed, that any late writer
had been bold by way of Annotations, or otherwise, to deliver any thing, out of
his private judgment, less consonant unto Catholic Doctrine or Truth, then was
requisite, they spared not to admonish the Reader of it by their censure. In
all which doing, what is there, we pray, that can be blamed? Yea suppose it
should happen, that the reasons, which moved them to Correct in this or that
place, and to vary from some other reading, were not sufficient; and that they
inserted their Delea^ur and other censures, where they ought not; yet, I say,
the Index of their Expurgations being faithfully published to the world, and so
easily procureable by all men, it was impossible, that any prejudice should
arise to truth by it; every man being left free either to follow or refuse the
said corrected Reading, as he judged best. Beside when we say, Catholics are
not guilty of misalledging Authors, or of any other abuse of that nature, we
would be understood to speak, not only of wilful and culpable misalledging,
(of which only we accuse our Adversaries) but also of such writers especially,
as being themselves publikly Authorized to handle the controversies of Religion
in the Schools, Their works are afterward, upon mature examination, published
to the view and judgment of the world; or else of such Prelates and Persons of
Dignity in the Church, as have had leisure, and set themselves to combat the
Heresies of the time. For otherwise, as we do not charge them here with any
mistakes of Ames, Bucanus, Daneus, or any other of those Niblers at Bellarmine
(as Master Normington of Cambridge once called them in a Sermon at Saint
Mary's) much less with the impudencies of the Minister Crashaw, nor with the
mistakes of Chark, Fenner, Beard, Burton, or any other Triobolary
Controvertists at home, either of former or present times, but, as you see,
only with faults of their Prime Leaders, Classical men, Prelates and
Dignitaries of their Church; so, if it should happen, that any private man of
our own, writing only by private Authority and judgment, should either
through oversight, or indiligence be found chargeable with some kind of
mistake, we would not have it stood upon, as if it were the common practice of
all to write so negligently; or that the defense of Catholic Religion did any
wit depend upon such mistakes: As we say the defense of Protestancy does very
much upon those mistakes, which we are ready to bring in charge against them,
and without which there were not half the color for defense of it.

viz. That the Priests and Students in the English Seminaries beyond Sea are
Practicers against the State, and do stir, or endeavor to stir the People to
Rebellion, it is indeed an odious and heavy charge, which the Book called, The
execution of Justice, etc. lays roundly upon them; and is seconded therein by
a Proclamation in the year 1580. which does directly charge those Priests and
others, as Accessories, and privy to the Counsels of Philip King of Spain, the
Pope, and some other Catholic Princes, which (as it is said,) had combined
together about that time to invade England, to depose the Queen, and subdue the
Nation to the Spaniard. But for answer I say, that jealousy is a kind of
Argus, (full of eyes; (and so she is painted,) but they are all purblinde:
which is the cause, that she mistakes so often, starts at her own shadow, and is
always trembling, and doubting the worst of every body. We cannot deny, but
there were great Statesmen, that governed England in those days under the
Queen; yet howsoever it happened, with all their Optics they seemed not to
have any particular foresight of the dangers which threatened them, till they
were at their doors: yea having by error of Government provoked and drawn them
upon themselves, yet they took a course more proper to kindle the flame, then
to quench the fire. But this is not a business to be discussed now. That which
we are to do is to justify the Priests and other Good men of the Seminaries,
that they are not Traitors, are not Enemies of the State, do not practice,
consult, cooperate, where they live, to any thing prejudicial to their Prince
and Country. First, if any such Confederation had been betwixt his Holiness,
the King of Spain, and other Princes against England, as is pretended, but was
never yet proved; (and it is well known, that what the Catholic King did
afterward, as it was upon great provocations given, so was it also upon his own
score only; and with no other assistance, but what was his own, and ordinary
in such cases.) Yet, I say, suppose there had been such Confederation or League
betwixt them, is it probable, that so great and wise Princes, as they were,
would acquaint a few poor Contemplative men, Students at Rhemes and Doway, with
their designs? Men so inconsiderable every way in relation to such service, so
useless, and unable, in respect of their manner, condition and place of living,
to contribute any thing to the work? Is it credible, they would manage such
high matters, and of so great importance, so weakly? Let no man say, That
Priests might serve them by preparing a party here, and by their reconciling of
men to the Pope. For it is not the Priests work to reconcile men to the Pope,
but unto God, and to the Communion of the true Catholic Church: whereof,
although the Pope, as successor to Saint Peter, be Supreme and chief Pastor;
yet Catholics, by returning to the Church, and consequently acknowledging that
Supremacy of Spiritual Authority in his Holiness, are not obliged so much as to
take notice of any Temporal designs that he has; no, though they were,
perhaps, for advancement of Religion: much less to consent, concur, or
cooperate with them contrary to the Law of nature, their Duty of Allegience,
and the interest of their native Country. Secondly, among so many Priests, as
by that time there were, both in England and beyond the Seas, and in so long a
time, that this pretended Confederacy was in framing, when Spies and
Intelligencers were many, and well paid by the State, was there so much as one
Priest nominated or accused to have been so corrupted, or induced any way by
those Princes, or their Ministers, to practice ought to the prejudice of their
Country? was there ever any one apprehended or convicted of such a trea^on? was
there ever any Subject of England called in question, for entertaining Priests,
that were sought after upon that account? In a word, when the Spanish Armado
was under Sail for England, was there so much as one Priest, or Seminary-man
found or known to be in it? or at any time since discovered to have been used,
or employed in that service? It Is confessed, the Proclamation spoken of before,
being framed on purpose to put people into a fright, and to make honest men
odious, does traduce them sufficiently, as persons suborned to prepare the way,
and procure safe landing for the Navy. But Si accusasse sufficit, quis erit
innocens? Such general charges prove nothing but passion, or some undue,
biased, and distempered judgment. They that know such men well, know it to be
a business far out of their way, to spy Countries, to observe, how Ports are
guarded, and what Havens lie upon the Goast. However it is evidence of fact, and
the conviction, at least questioning of some one person for such crime, that
would be given in the case: Which seeing there never was, Indifferent men
cannot but think such Accusations to have been very injurious; and that the
great fears and jealousies shown, had more of the Chimaera and fiction in
them, then of real danger. It was otherwise with the poor English themselves in
Spain not long after, both Religious and others. For when the English Armado,
in the year 1589. made an attempt upon Lisbon, and invaded some parts of
Portugal, the King of Spain took them to be so little either his Friends, or
Enemies to their Prince and Country, as they are traduced, that he laid them
all fast by the Heels, and kept them close prisoners, (during the whole time,
that the Action lasted,) as many of them, as were found at Val^adolid, Burgos,
and some other places in Spain. Nor was there in those many Actual attempts of
Treason, supposed to be made against Queen Elizabeth, so much as one Priest,
Monk or Friar ever attainted or impeached about them; Nor in the whole Five and
forty years of her Reign any more then two secular Priests attainted, or
convinced of Actual Treason against her Majesty, viz. Ballard for knowing, and
yet concealing the attempts of Babington in the business of the Queen of Scots;
and old Parson Plomtree of the North, who said Mass once at a rising in those
parts. And yet how greevously are they charged with such crimes, all along the
Queens Reign? And how much was the people incensed against them upon that
persuasion? What Sermons, Proclamations, Laws, were made in Thunder, and
Lightening, and Blood against these poor men, Soldiers of our Savior Christ,
and fighting only with Spiritual Arms under his Banner, The Cross, in that
part of the Catholic Church, which is Militant in England? What calamities,
afflictions, miseries have they not endured, by persecution hereupon? The only
Colleges of Rhemes and Doway, beside other Religious Orders from other places,
have sent out into our Lords Harvest no less then One hundred persons, who have
all suffered for Things purely Spiritual, that is, either for being Priests, or
for doing the Office of Priesthood, viz. Saying Mass, Reconciling of Sinners
unto God, etc.

Elizabeth it was made Felony to harbor a Priest; and to be a Priest, Treason.
And the Act looked so cruelly back to primo Elizab. that whosoever was made
Priest since that time might very easily be drawn within compass of the charge.
The Law was made upon occasion of those Treasons of Parry, Francis Throgmorton,
Anthony Babington, and his accomplices; as also upon occasion of F. Campian, and
those Priests arraigned with him. For a general apprehension was taken, that
these had combined with some foreign Princes, and other persons of power
within England, to restore Religion, and deliver the Queen of Scots out of
prison; which was a business then fresh in memory. Hereupon the Priests in
England frame a supplication by common consent, and find means to present the
same to the Queen at Greenwich, by the hands of Master Shelley. Wherein, after
they have first condemned and renounced the practices of Parry, etc. They
profess and declare their own judgment in these words. First, we utterly deny
that the Pope has power to command or give License to any man to consent unto
Mortal sin, or to commit, or intend to commit any thing contrary to the Law of
God. Secondly, whatsoever person he be, that maintains such opinion, we
renounce him, and his opinion as devilish and abominable. Thirdly, we protest
before God, That all Priests, who ever conversed with us, have acknowledged
your Majesty their lawful Queen, tam de jure, quam de facto, as well of right,
as for your actual possession of the Crown; that they pray for you, and exhort
your Subjects to obey you. Fourthly, and lastly, they profess, that it is
heresy, and contrary to Cotholike faith to think, that any man may lift up his
hand against Gods Anointed. It Is true, the Petition had no other success with
her Majesty then this, viz. that Master Shelley, who presumed to commit such a
Treason, as to present it, was suffered to be sent to the Marshalsea, by order
of Secretary Walsingham, and there to be kept prisoner to his dying day; only
upon this pretense, Scilicet, because the Council had not been first acquainted
with the business. Howbeit, by this supplication the world may clearly see,
They answer the Six Articles, which in those times used to be so commonly and
captiously propounded to such men, framed by Doctor Hammon, viz. Whither the
Queen were lawful Queen, notwithstanding the sentence Decleratory of Pope Pius
Quintus against her? whither that sentence were to be obeyed in althings?
Whither the Pope by such sentence could give her Subjects any lawful Authority
to rebel, or depose her, etc. For if she be their lawful Sovereign,
notwithstanding that sentence; and that obedience and loyalty be due unto all
lawful Princes by the Law of God, and of nature, it is easy to see, what must
be said to such questions. According also as Bishop Watson, Abbot Fecknam,
Doctor John Harpsfeild, Doctor Nicholas Harpsfeild, with others, (who were very
often and rigidly examined upon them, yet) professed perpetually obedience to
her Majesty, tanquam verae Reginae, as unto their true and lawful Sovereign.
Yea says Doctor Nicholas Harpsfeild (reported by Goldastus a Protestant) Ego
regalem ejus Authoritatem, Goldast. de Monar. Sac. Imp. Romans
etc. I do acknowledge, says he, her Royal Authority in all Temporal and Civil
affair without exception. They presented the like humble supplication to his
Majesty that now reigns, some while after the discovery of that wicked and
desperate Plot of the Gun-powder-treason; another to the Parliament then
sitting; and another to the Earl of Salisbury: in all of them professing the
same things. And though it hindered not the passing of some severe Acts against
Catholics in that Parliament, occasioned (as I suppose) by that foul and
horrid attempt, yet the King himself in his Proclamation published upon that
subject, graciously professes his opinion of the generality of his Catholic
Subjects, viz. That they did abhor such a detestable Conspiracy, no less then
himself. True it is, F. Garnet suffered for concealing that Treason; and Sir
Everard Digby, for contributing in some sort to the security, or rather flight
of some of the Conspirators. But as the one, viz. Sir Everard Digby, much
lamented his ill fortune, that he should leave behind him the memory of so
great a stain; protesting always, that he was never made privy to their design
and drift: So the other, viz. F. Garnet, knowing it only (as he did) in the
way of confession; and the Seal of that Sacrament (which is Secrecy,) being, by
the Doctrine of Catholic Religion, and that not without most just and
necessary cause, esteemed so inviolable, it may abate something, even in the
judgment of man, of that Heynousness of guilt and blame, whereof all good
Christians otherwise must necessarily condemn him. In a word how much
Catholics in general, and especially Priests do detest rebellion and Treason,
even in times of greatest affliction and pressure; and what Religious observers
they are of all just loyalty and obedience to their lawful Princes, appears
clearly, not only by a book written in those times by the learned Bishop of
Chichester, Doctor Christopherson against rebellion; but also by the
Annotations of the Divines at Rhemes upon the New Testament; where Page 301. we
read thus. Subjects, say they, are bound in Temporal things to obey even the
Heathen, being their lawful Kings, and to be subject to them for Conscience, to
observe their Temporal Laws, to pay them Tribute, to pray for them, and to
perform, all other duties of Natural Allegiance. Doctor Kellison in his Survey
goes further, giving the reason of this. Because, says he, Faith is not
necessarily required to jurisdiction, neither is any Authority lost by the loss
of Faith. Which is also the Doctrine of Saint Thomas, who in his Book, Cap. 6.
de Regim. Princip. denies utterly Posse Tyrannum a quoquam, etc. That a
Prince, though Tyrant, can be put to death by any private Authority. And at a
Council held at Oxford under Steven Langton Archbishop of Canterbury about the
year 1228. Excommunication is decreed against all such as violate the Kings
Peace, or disturb the State of the Kingdom. Yea the Council of Constance Sess
15. declares it to be an error in Faith to hold otherwise. Nuper accepit sancta
synodus, etc. This Holy Synod, say the Fathers of it, has been lately
informed, that certain erroneous opinions are holden, contrary to Peace and
good Estate of the Commonwealth, viz. That a Tyrant may be lawfully and
meritoriously taken away and killed by any Subject or Vassal of his, etc. Non
obs^ante quocunque juramento, etc. Notwithstanding whatsoever Oath of Fidelity
or Allegiance, that he has made to him. Such Doctrine, says the Council, is
contrary both to Faith and Manners, and whosoever shall hold it pertinaciously,
are Heretics, and as such to be proceeded against, according to the Canons.

Henry the Fourth, King of France, the Parliament of Paris, a Court ever most
studious of their Princes safety, and extremely vigilant against the
encroaching of any foreign power contrary to his just Authority in Temporal
causes, yet thought it sufficient to publish this decree of the Church against
the Assassinates of Princes, both to show the heinousness of the crime, as
also, how much the Catholic Doctrine does condemn such practices. So that
hereby, as in a Glass, the world might see the integrity of Catholic Loyalty;
if men would judge of them, not by the private, and perhaps misinterpret^table
assertions of some particular Doctors, but by these public and avowed
principles of their belief. This is the Basis on which they build, the rule by
which they walk and govern themselves, in point of obedience toward their
Sovereign Princes. Or if they would judge of them by their proceedings and
addresses to their Superiors, their frequent petitions, professions,
protestations of all just obedience, will sufficiently clear them; If by their
practice and manner of life; their quiet deportment, their peaceable manner of
living and conversing with all men, yea their prayers (which they daily make
unto Allmighty God in the behalf of their Prince, and for the happiness of
their Country) do show, how innocent they are, and how little they deserve
those black aspersions and calumnies of Treason, Rebellion, Disloyalty, Et quid
non? which some men are so diligent to cast upon them. Yea, (to speak with no
greater confidence, then we justly may) they show, how much more secure Princes
may be, and how much better Tie and assurance they have of Catholics Loyalty,
then either of Lutherans or Calvinists. For although Protestants do seem
sometimes to teach obedience to the Civil Magistrate very freely, and that it
is sin for private Subjects to resist them; as for Example Melancthon in his
Epitome of Moral Philosophy makes it Peccatum Mortale, No less matter then
Mortal Sin, (I use his own words,) To violate the Temp^ral Laws of the
Magistrates: Yet is their Doctrine so clogged with exceptions, so many
limitations and Proviso's, as it were, are commonly added to it, that Princes,
especially such as differ from them in Religion, cannot find, (I say not full
and plenary, but not so much as) probable or competent security from them.
Melancthon, in the place before mentioned, limiteth himself thus, Debet autem
haec sententia, etc. But this which I have delivered, says he, concerning
obedience to the Civil Magistrates must be rightly understood, viz. of such
Magistrates as command nothing contrary to the Law of God; as all Catholic
Princes do in his opinion. What security therefore have they from his Doctrine?
Lib. de Consens. Evang.
Beside we have shown before according to his doctrine, the people or inferior
Magistrates may reform Religion, and overthrow Idolatry, as they call it,
without any public Authority or Commission. So that if the Justices of the
Peace in some County, or but the Petty Constables in Towns, do believe the
Religion professed by the Prince, or State to be Idolatrous, and not according
to Gods word, they are discharged of obedience by Melancthon, and may fall to
reforming solely of themselves. And what his Master Luthers opinions were
concerning this matter, has been sufficiently shown already; there need be no
repetition of them here. Danaeus teaches the same or worse. Lib. 6. Polit. c.
3.
So does Peter Martyr on Judges Cap. 11. and in his Common places. And
Althusius Politic. Cap. 35. P. 37. where among other causes of a Just War
maintained by Subjects against their Sovereigns, Purae Religionis defensio,
defense of True Religion has the Second place. Yea it is well known, that
Sureau a Protestant Minister in France, otherwise called Ros^eres, wrote a Book
expressly on this subject, That it was lawful to kill Charles the Ninth, Belfor.
lib. 6. cap. 103.
his natural Sovereign, and the Queen Mother, if they would not obey the
Gospel. But to conclude with one instance for all. The Hugonots of France
having in the Nine and thirtieth Article of their Confession professed* That
men ought to be obedient to the Laws, to pay Tributes, and to bear the Yoke of
subjection quietly, even under unbeleeving Magistrates, They add a limitation,
which corrupts and nullifies all that they had said, viz. Dummodo Dei summum
imperium integrum maneat, So long only as Gods Supreme Authority is entirely
acknowledged; which under the Government of an Infidel Magistrate, cannot be
easily conceived. Therefore upon the matter they profess nothing, but abuse
their Prince and the world with bare words; as it is usual with them to do.
Which is yet more evident, by the Declaration, which their Synod at Bearn in
the year 1572. purposely made of this Article and of the Limitation of it. Dei
imperium dicitur manner illibatum, Poplon. nier. lib. 34.
cum Rex exterminata Catholica Religione, etc. Gods Sovereign Authority, say
they, is then understood to be entirely acknowledged, when the King abolishing
or rooting out Catholic Religion, shall set himself to advance only the true
and pure worship of God, that is to say, that which is so in their sense and
opinion. But to do this is it a thing to be supposed of an Infidel Prince, to
whom they pretend to profess subjection? or is it to be expected of a
Catholic? Therefore I say, they contradict themselves apparenly in their
profession and do indeed profess nothing really, but that they are Impostors;
and deserve to be branded with Characters of jealousy and distrust by all the
Princes and States of Christendom. The book called Comment. de Statu Relig. ^c.
a Protestant piece, is full of such stuff, but especially, P^. 2. Lib. 12. Cap.
1. where he affirms expressly, That in all Oaths of Allegiance and Duty there
is this condition always employed at least, and necessarily to be understood,
viz. we shall obey, so long as you g^vern lawfully, and not longer. And hence
it was, that the Prince of Conde protested, Anno 1577. that the oath which some
Hugon^ts had taken not to bear arms or fight against their King anymore, etc.
was factum contra Deum and bonos mores, Poplonneir. lib. 41.
contrary to the law of God, and their duty, and therefore could not oblige
any. He had it from Calvin, who Lib. 4. Institut. c. 13. Sect. 21. teaches,
Quibuscunque hujus Evangeliis lux affulget, etc. When men come once to be
Illuminated with the light of his Gospel, they are presently absolved from all
former Snares and Oaths whatsoever, that should entangle their Conscience, that
is oblige them to the performance of any good work, or duty, more, then they
have a mind to. Sic dixit Calvinus.

viz. That there is nothing in Catholic Religion inconsistent with Loyalty;
and that Catholics are de facto, in the truth of their practice, better
Subjects, generally speaking, then Protestants have shown themselves to be, or
indeed can well be, standing to their principles. These objections are but few,
and therefore I shall dispatch them briefly. The first is brought against
Doctor Allen, for teaching to murder Princes, in a certain Apology, which he
wrote of the Seminaries, and citing Number. 25. to that purpose. I answer, The
mistake is very great; it was not Doctor Allen, but Doctor Goodman (if we may
call him so) that cites that Text of Numbers to that purpose. Goodm. Obedien.
His words are these. Factum illud quod memoratur Number. 25. perpetuumest
exemplum in omnem aeternitatem, etc. That which is reported, says he, in Number.
25. viz. of taking the Heads of the people that had committed Idolatry, and
hanging them up before the Lord, is an example upon record to all posterity,
and a duty for ever lying upon the people, that in the like case they deal with
their Governors in like manner, that is, that they take them and Hang them up
against the Sun, when they withdraw the people from the true worship of God.
And although, says he, it may seem a great disorder, that Common people should
take so much Authority upon them, yet when the inferior Magistrate neglects
his office, the Common people must be looked upon, as having no Magistrate at
all to direct them: and in such case God puts the Sword immediately into their
hand^, and is their Captain and guide in the work. This I say, is all Goodmans
Doctrine, and not Doctor Allens; into whose thoughts it never came to conceive,
much less to publish such Paradoxes of sedition. All that he teaches tends
rather to the contrary, viz. to keep people in their due bounds, and to exhort
them not to be transported by any unadvised or evil passions against their
governors under a pretense of zeal. He confesses indeed, it is a thing
commendable, when men are zealous for true Religion; but he advises, that they
act modo and Tempore, in due manner, that is, no otherwise then lawfully they
may, and with regard unto all other acknowledged rules of a good conscience;
and in due season, that is, not until they be called thereto by lawful
Authority: as in the case of the Idolatrous Israelites: Number. 25.45.
and the place alleged is plain; The people acted nothing but by command of
Moses, who was Supreme Magistrate: Neither did he command any thing to be done,
but from the mouth of God, and according to the express Law, Deuteronomy. 13. This is
not to put the Sword into the peoples hand, and to permit them to execute their
fiery zeal upon whom they please, under a pretense of punishing Idolatry, and
rooting out Superstition; especially such, as no man judges to be so but
themselves. The Second objection is made by Doctor Sutcliff in his
Turcopapismus against Father Parsons, viz. that he suborned or hired Roderick
Lopez, a Portughess, and some others to kill the Queen: Which Treason, says
he, was discovered by the Earl of Essex. I answer, it is like the Tale of Peter
Panny, that was reported to be hired by Mavaraeus a Doctor of Doway and
Provincial of the Jesuits, to kill Count Maurice; which upon examination
proved but a Fable, and so will this. For first, was there any person named in
that Action but Lopez and his Countrymen, that is, some Portughesses and
Spaniards? I have seen and read all the Examinations taken in that business,
wherein all the circumstances thereof are declared, The Ayders, Movers, Actors,
all nominated: There is not the least mention of Father Parsons in the whole
business, from first to last. Secondly, when Master Egerton at Guild Hall so
largely and eloquently urged all he could, did he so much as once name Father
Parsons? Or was he a man likely to forget him, if he had found or thought him
any way Accessory? Beside all this, F. Parsons himself was known to be a man
not of that weakness (whatsoever men will think of his honesty) as to venture
his reputation, life, interest and all so unadvisedly in a foreign bottom, and
subject to so many leaks, as that was. This therefore may pass for a scandalous
Fiction and Hearsay, but no more. A Third objection is made against Parry, and
sounded aloud in all men's ears, as a reproach and stain indelible to Catholic
Religion. The sum of the charge is, that Parry was incited by the Popes Letters
to kill the Queen. I answer, The Acts or process it self of his Examination and
Trial do show, that having conference with Master Wats a Seminary Priest about
this business, the said Master Wats disliked both his motion and attempt, and
told him, that it was a thing unlawful that he went about: As likewise did some
other Priests also, when they understood the business. Secondly, at Lions
coming to F. Creighton a Jesuit, and after Confession discovering his
intention to him, out of some Confidence, it seems, that the good man would
bite at such a bait, he found himself as much mistaken here, as before. For the
Father resolves him, That it was utterly unlawful, and uses diverse reasons to
diswade him from any further proceeding, as Parry himself confesses to the
Queen, and Holinshead in his Chronicle does acknowledge: So that already both
the Priest and Jesuits are acquitted. There remains only the Letter of
Cardinal Como to be considered. Touching which we are to know, this Parry had
lived in Italy, as a Spy, a long time, and being upon his return, was desirous
to furnish himself with a project, that might serve his turn in England both
ways, that is, both to abuse Catholics, (as he did, by pretense of the Popes
Letters,) and to deceive the Queen. Therefore having found so little
encouragement at Lions, as we have said, he travels to Paris, and endeavors to
insinuate himself with Father Parsons, (who was there at that time, with the
Lord Paget) but with no better success to his designs, then he had found before
with F. Creighton and Master Wats. Howbeit by some means he procured himself
access to the Popes Nuncio then resident in the City, to whom he presents a
Letter written in Italian by himself, which he desires might be recommended by
the said Nuncio to his Holiness; which was done. In this Letter he confesses
first, what great wrongs he had done to the English Catholics in former time;
but was now returning into England, intending to make them some satisfaction by
his service there: And to that end desired the Approbation and Benediction of
his Holiness; not specifying any thing in particular, what he intended; as may
be seen by his Letter, which is upon Record. To this Letter of Parry, Cardinal
Como answers in the Popes name, in such manner as every man knows. For the
Cardinals Letter is common to be seen. Let any man read and examine it, if
there be any particular service intimated, or any Treasonable or seditious
directions given; but only a general encouragement to a good work (as least
that might be presumed so by those who wrote, knowing nothing to the contrary)
which was only in general offered. And what reasonable man can think, that his
Holiness could do less in such a case, then he did, viz. then to command a
Complement to be returned unto a kindness, which for ought appeared, was
offered only in Complement? To have denied that, His Holiness must have seemed
to slight too much the opinion of his Nuncio; by whose recommendation the
Letter of Parry was presented at Rome: And who indeed (if any) was the man
surprised in the business, by giving so much credit to a person not
sufficiently known to him. The truth is, Parry's designs were malicious every
way; both in respect of the Catholics, with whom he intended, by means of the
said Letters, to insinuate himself so far (if he could) and to gain such
confidence with them, as to be able at least, when time should be, to do some
of them mischief: and in respect of the Queen, whom he abused along time,
pretending, by color of the self same Letters, that he was really suborned and
sent by the Pope to attempt some violence upon her Majesty. Being therefore
furnished some thing to his mind, (as abovesaid) he departs privately from
Paris, without so much as taking leave of F. Parsons, as by whom he found
neither himself nor his business to be much regarded) and procures a Pass to be
sent him from the Lord Burleigh to come into England, upon pretense that he had
some great matters to impart to the Queen. So he came; the Queen heard him: and
he informed, That the Jesuits had moved him to kill her. But not being able to
name any in England, he was dismissed, on purpose to be a Spy here at home, and
to discover such Catholics to the Counsel, as perhaps, might be found less
affectionate toward her person. And to gain him the better credit with them,
viz. the Catholics, it was ordered so, that he was once very formally
convented in Parliament, where he so boldly defended Catholic Religion, and
the Catholics of England; that the Parliament it self, not knowing, that all
was but out of design by the Queen and her Counsel, committed him to the Tower:
Which did indeed very much increase his reputation with the Priests and Fathers
here. But his liberty was soon procured, and himself had such continual access
to the Queen, such favor with the Treasurer and others, that once he had no
small hopes to have been made Master of Saint Katharines. Howbeit the Counsel
perceiving him but to faulter, and fail in the main business, viz. of betraying
Catholics, and especially in the business of the Lord Latimor, (whom the
Treasurer would fain have caught in Parries net) himself at last became
suspected, and entangled by degrees in such Snares, as he could never wind
himself out, but perished in that manner, which he had justly deserved, and for
which no man lamented him.

F. ^ichard Walpoole of the Society; who was accused by one Squire upon the
Rack, to have encouraged him to poison the Queen. The Story is thus. The said
Squire, and one Rolls, being in a Pinnace of Sir Francis Drakes in the year
1596. were taken by Don Pe^o Tellio, and brought prisoners to Sivil: where F.
Parsons, (happening to be there at that time) procured for them liberty, and
also necessary apparel, and so sent them home. At Saint Lucars, through their
own indiscretion, they fall into the Inquisition, and are thereupon remanded
back again to Sivil; where this said Father Walpoole then being, was as ready
to do them charitable offices in their necessity, as Father Parsons had been
before. So he procured them liberty the Second time, not indeed to depart
without leave, but to be forthcoming, when they should be called to appear: and
to this he engaged his credit, having first made provision of necessary
subsistence for Rolls in the Jesuits College, and for Squire in a Monastery.
But they both fled away secretly, and left Father Walpoole in the Lurch to
answer for them: yet afterward sending him Letters to excuse their sudden
departure; which he also produced for his discharge. So they came into England.
And as it happens sometimes with Travelers, especially of such quality as they
were, to talk of much more then is true, and to pretend acquaintance abroad
with those, which perhaps they scarce ever saw; so it seems this Squire in his
discourses of the intimacy and familiarity which he had with Jesuits, and such
men abroad, did overshoot himself so far, as to let fall something capable of
misconstruction, and which an Adversary of his, one Stallenge, catching up at
the second hand, made shift to improve unto an accusation of Treason against
the said Squire, viz. That he had been Counseled by a Jesuit to poison the
Queen, and concealed it. But let the Reader consider circumstances well, and
then weigh the Endictment. Squire is accused, that Father Walpoole moved and
instructed him to poison the Queen, and preached to him at his departure to
that purpose. Is this probable? For first they fled both of them away secretly
from Sivil, Squire and Rolls together, without Father Walpooles knowledge, and
as it is generally known to be true. Secondly, Squire was a man, that always
professed himself a Protestant, in Spain as well as in England; and so died.
Who can dream that Father Walpoole knowing this, as well as himself, should
make such a proposition to him? Thirdly, both at his arraignment and death he
constantly denied any such matter to have been propounded to him by any person
on earth. And though having bin upon the Rack no less then five times, the
torture made him at last to speak something against himself, yet he afterward
constantly denied it, even to his death. And all men know, an argument from the
Rack, especially when it is afterward disavowed, is reckoned elsewhere but a
mean evidence or proof. Fourthly he was a man that had a Wife and Children in
England, and therefore not likely to be drawn into such a plot, but upon some
great and present temptation; which how unable a man Father Walpoole was to
undertake, the world knows being only a Priest of the Society, a poor Religious
man, and under superiors. Fifthly, Rolls, his companion, wh^ came along with
him, never heard of any such thing, nor was ever questioned about it. Lastly,
the device it self was as ridiculous and improbable, as any thing could be. It
was to be done ( Scilicet this Treason) by poisoning the Queens Saddle. But how
is it possible to imagine such a thing should be done by a stranger, and
neither the Grooms of the Stable, nor the Querries (which are continually
attending upon the Queens Horse) discover the business; none of which were ever
questioned about it. Mariana's Problematicall opinion is a Fifth objection; as
it happens. But I shall not stand long about it. First, because it was but a
private opinion, not any general Doctrine of Catholics. Secondly because it
was only propounded by him problematically, viz. in way of disputation, not
positively taught, as his own words show. Thirdly, because his whole Order
disavowed it, viz. in a Congregation held at Pari^ Anno 1606. confirmed by
their General Claudius Aquaviva. Cardinal Tolet Categorically determines the
contrary, Summa. Lib. 5. Cap. 6. as likewise does Gregor. Valent. Part. 2. Q.
64. Card. Bellarm. Apolog. Cap. 13. Salmeron in Cap. 13. ad Romans Less. de
Justit. and Ju^e, Lib. 2. Cap. 9. Dub. 4. Serrar. in Cap. 13. Judic. Azorius
Institut. Moral. Becanus ad Aphorism. 9. Gretser in his Vespertilio, or
Heretico-Politicus. Richeome in his Apology. Lastly, the Doctors of the Sorbor,
as they had done formerly, viz. Anno 1413. so now again Anno 1606 they declare
it to be an unlawful and wicked P sition. As for Simanch, he may seem rather a
Lawyer then a Divine, and must be understood to speak according to particular
Laws or Constitutions of some Nations, and Kingdoms; and whosoever will but
read Heisius his Respons. ad Aphorismos, especially Page 85. and 91. shall
easily perceive, that neither Simancha nor Becanus were guilty of that error.
Master Cuthbert Mayn's bringing of a Bull, or Breve of the Pope into England is
a Sixth. And for such a pretended Treason he was executed at Launston, upon
Saint Andrews day, 1577. as Stow says in his Chronicles, for preferring of
Roman power. His Indictment was for bringing in the said Bull; and for
reconciling of Master Tregion. But as for Master Tregion it is answered
already, That he was reconciled unto God and to the Communion of his Church;
and not obliged to any particular service in behalf of the Pope in one kind or
other. And concerning the Bull, whereas the Law intends it in clear words, that
the party accused should procure it immediately from Rome, it was answered in
behalf of Master Main, that he never sought nor procured any Bull from Rome.
That which he had was only the Copy of a Bull printed, which he bought at
Doway, only to peruse and see the manner of it; neither was it a Bull for
reconciling any man, or for doing any thing prejudicial to the Queen, or State;
but only a Bull of the Jubily that was passed. Which as it is a thing granted
of course by the Pope every Five and twenty years, and not at the Suit or
instance of any particular person; so was it also out of date and force when he
bought it, being expired with the year 1575. and so upon the matter was no more
then a Scroll, or an Almanac of the last year. And yet notwithstanding,
because such a Paper as this was found about him, and that he refused to come
to Church, Judge Manwood told the Jury, That where manifest proofs could not be
had, presumptions must be allowed: So the Jury quickly found him guilty upon
such direction, and he suffered. Master Tregion lay a long time in prison among
Felons, and in a Dungeon most noisome, fed with bread and water; although he
were a Gentleman of One thousand pound per annum of old Rent: But being
condemned in a Praemunire, for harboring a Priest, his Lands were seized by
Writ into the Exchequer; and though they were Entailed, yet could the Knight
Marshal find means to avoid that, and so begd them of the Queen. Lastly, the
whole business rested upon the accusation of one Twiggs, a Parish Clerk; which
was also false; for he deposed against Master Main for Christmas 1575. when
it was certainly known, that he was at that time at Doway.

Babington in the business of the Queen of Scots, were mixed Actions, not for
Religion only, nor State only; but for both: Nor were they procured by the
suit or solicitation of Priests or Religious men, but out of their own zeal
who were engaged in those Attempts. And. Philop.
The first, as some have said, was but the effect of a resolution, which many
of the Lords of the Council had taken to pull down Cecil, who, being but
Secretary, and a very new man at Court, over-acted his part, and had given no
small matter of offense to some of the greatest Lords; but by a timely
submission he made means to qualify them: and so the business was not owned,
so far as otherwise it might have been. The other, viz. of Babington and his
Associates, was only to deliver out of an unjust prison, the person of an
absolute Princess, and one who was no way a subject of England, further, say
they, then she was by fraud procured so to be; nor an enemy, further then she
was forced by injuries, and a desire to see her self at liberty. Howbeit for
this rsspect they are not within compass of my undertaking. Nor am I to say any
more concerning the Sentence Declaratory of Pius Quintus against the Queen. The
grounds and reasons thereof are alleged in the Bull it self; to which may be
added many unseemly and scandalous provocations daily given by the New
Ministers out of the Pulpits, calling him Antichrist, the Man of Sin, the Son
of Perdition, and what not? which the Queen and State were content publicly to
connive at, and countenance. Others attribute it to misinformation, and that
his Holiness was not made rightly to understand the Queens case, and of the
Catholics of England. And this is certain, that many godly, wise, and
judicious Catholics, both of the Clergy and others, were not a little grieved
at the manner of proceeding, and wished rather (Cardinal Allen himself, Bishop
Watson, and others) that it had been wholly left to the judgment of God; As we
see well enough, it had been in other cases of this Nature; Neither in King
Edward the Sixths time, nor against the Kings of Scotland, Denmark, Sweden,
Duke of Saxony, Marquis of Brandenburgh, or any other Protestant Prince, was
there ever any such sentence issued to this day. Whereupon Father Persons, and
Father Campian procured some kind of mitigation concerning it, presently after
the publishing; and Pope Gregory following declared, That the Subjects of
England ought to perform all duties to Queen Elizabeth, notwithstanding the
censures. So little reason is there in truth, that Protestants should clamor
so loud as they do, and cry out nothing but Treason, Treason, against religious
and good men; who, as they have no other business, so come they hither for no
other end, but to do them good, and, so far as lies in their power and office,
to save their souls. They tell the world, that no less then two hundred Priests
have been executed in England for Treason, since the times of Reformation;
which is certainly a very heavy report, and sufficient to make them odious to
all the world, if it were true, or that there were any thing in it but fallacy
and aequivocation of words; whiles they call that Treason in England, which in
all parts of Christendom besides is both called and counted Religion and the
highest Virtue. For we beseech them to tell us of what Treason do they convict
us at any time, but the Treason of being a Priest? the Treason to say Mass? the
Treason to refuse the Oath? the Treason to absolve Penitents confessing their
sins? the Treason to restore men to the Communion of the Church? the Treason to
Preach and Administer Christ's Sacraments? the Treason to be bred up in the
Seminaries, that is, in such places, where only, (as things now stand in
England) they can be Catholikely bred, and fitted for such Christian
employment? What actual and real. Treason is in England, according to the true
s^nse and notion of that crime (^dious both to God and man) the Statute of 25
Edw. 3. will inform us better then any other, being enacted when the whole
Kingdom was of one mind and of one judgment (as all Christian Kingdoms and
Societies ought to be) not rent, nor overborn by factions and parties,
undermining and supplanting one another by indirect and undue means, as it was
when these new Statutes of Treason were made. By that Statute, and by the
opinions of the most learned Judges in England, Ploydon, Stamford, etc. Treason
must always be some Action, or Intention actually discovered; not an opinion
only, or a profession of Religion. And this is the reason why Sir John
Oldcastle, Stow.
(one of Mr. Fox his Martyrs, in the Reign of Henry the Fifth mentioned before)
though he were both Traitor and Heretic; yet for his Treason he was condemned
in one Court, and for his Heresy in another: as also were Cranmer and Ridley
in Queen Mary's time. Secondly, it must be some Act, or Intention discovered of
a subject prejudicial to his Sovereign, or to the State where he lives. But
what hurt had ever (I say not Queen Mary, Henry the Eighth (while he stood
right) Henry the Seventh, or any other Catholic Prince, but even) Queen
Elizabeth her self, King James, or any other Protestant Prince, by a Priests
saying Mass, absolving of Penitents, preaching of sound Doctrine to them, and
particularly of all due and just obedience to Civil Magistrates, as they have
ever constantly done? Therefore by the common Laws of England, and in it self
it is not, it cannot be Treason or criminous to be a Priest, to say Mass,
Absolve, etc. But only by Statute Laws it is made so upon temporary and
present occasions, and for certain politic ends, which men have projected of
themselves, and which they are resolved to follow. And therefore also it is by
the very Statutes themselves provided 22. and 27. Elizab. That if a Priest
conforms, be content to go to Church, to renounce the Pope or his Orders, etc.
he becomes ipso facto without more ado, Rectus in Curia, and is actually
discharged of all imputation of Treason; no further proceedings lie against
him. Yea even at the very place of Execution, and when the instruments of death
are upon him, yet still it is in his own power, if he please, in three words to
pardon himself, and frustrate the expectation of so many eyes, as are commonly
waiting to see his last Exit. Let him but, say, I will conform, or I will
swear, etc. There Is no man living dares meddle with him further. Which is far
otherwise where the offense is judged to be Tre^son indeed, and really
prejudicial to the Prince or State. But the fatal resolution being taken to
change Relig^on, upon a principle or pretended reason of State, as false as the
Counsel it self was evil, vi^. That otherwise the Queen could not be secure
either of her Kingdom or Life, it was necessary to take a severe course with
those men, whose Function obliged them to maintain True Religion, and to
endeavor to reduce things again into the old State. From this root also sprang
their extreme jealousy and hatred of the Queen of Scots. For she being Heir
Apparent to the Crown after Queen Elizabeth, and a Princess zealously affected
unto Catholic Religion, and so strongly Allied in France, Those Statesmen, who
had contrived and wrought all the alterations here, could never think
themselves secure, so long as her head stood upon her shoulders. Therefore was
she first invited into England, upon pretense of Friendship, and for Safety:
But when she was here used with so much unkindness, and kept under restraint
for little less then twenty years together, that at last, in order to procure
her Liberty, she was indeed provoked to do something, which it was easy for
them who loved her not, to interpret to be Treason: and so they cut off her
head. From hence also sprung those continual injuries and practices of much
ingratitude against the King of Spain, The intercepting of his Treasure, The
holding of his Towns, The ayding of Orange and the States, as has been said.
Lastly, from this only Source and Fountain of unjust Policy sprung all those
laws of severity and blood against Recusants, as we are commonly called, viz.
of Twenty pound a month, of Two third parts of Estate, against Hearing Mass,
against Harboring a Priest, against Being reconciled, etc. It is well known,
the Recusants of England, against whom those Laws were made, were generally
persons, in all degrees, of the Noblest quality in this Nation, Virtuous,
Grave, Wise, Charitable, Just, and Good men, of fair and friendly Conversation
toward all: I shall not say, Loyal to their Prince, because the contrary is so
commonly believed; Stow.
yet our own Chronicles will not altogether deny them right in that regard,
while they testifi^ how diligent and forward they were to offer their service
to the Queen and State, even in that great Action of Eighty eight. Neither were
they altogether refused by her Majesty. They were also generally men of
plentiful Fortunes and good Estates; and are so still, except such as the Laws
and hard times have impoverished. Yet because for Conscience sake they refuse
to hear Common Prayer and Sermons, to receive the Communion according to the
new order of the Church of England, they stand by Law, as it were, marked out
for destruction, and branded with all the Characters of ignominy, suspicion,
and prejudice, which the people of any State, even for the greatest crimes
actually committed, Sir. Edw. Cook.
can justly suffer. It is reported by a great Lawyer of this Nation, that from
primo Elizab. till the Bull of Pius Quintus was published, which was about half
a score or a dozen years after, No person in England refused to come to Church;
as if perchance that Bull had be^^ the sole occasion which Catholics took to
disobey the Queens Injunctions. But it is a great error. For not to speak any
thing of Puritans (many of whom before that time refused the Church Service)
how many Bishops and Priests were there in England, known and professed
Recusants from the first beginning? How many Noblemen and Gentlemen of account
did openly and absolutely refuse to join with their New Church? It is true, and
to be lamented, The revolt of the English under Queen Elizabeth from the true
Catholic Religion, so lately restored, was too general; and too many there
were, who suffered themselves to be carried away with the stream of Authority,
and with the evil example of their Neighbors, and especially of Great Ones.
But what is this but a general infirmity and weakness commonly observed in the
people? What Form soever of Religious Profession a State sets up, it proves an
Idol to them, and they are apt to fall down before it; yea, though the Figure,
which they worship, (as it happens sometimes) has much more of the Calf, then
of the Man in it. And for this respect it cannot but be matter of much
consideration to all wise Statesmen, and States, to be well advised how far
they proceed in this kind, viz. of establishing or setting up any outward form
or profession of Religion whatsoever, especially by any compulsory Acts or
Penalties; lest the blood of Souls lie upon their account another day. As most
certainly it shall, whenever people are misled into any corrupt way of
Religion, merely upon the Authority and Resolution of the State. And yet
notwithstanding there were in many places of the Kingdom, not a few of worthy
and constant Catholics, who never bowed theer knees unto Baal, that is, never
consented, nor made profession of Heresy one way or other; as Lanhearne, Ashby
de la Zouch, Grafton, Dingley, Cowdrey, and many other places can witness: by
whose integrity the Catholic Church in England, (viz. that Remnant according
to the election of Grace, which God was pleased to preserve here from the
general contagion, to glorify his name by suffering, and to give Testimony
unto Truth) have subsisted and stood by the great mercy of God, unto this day;
though indeed suffering grievously for their Conscience, (as God was pleased
from time to time to exercise them) by confiscation of their Estates, vexations
by Pursivants and Promoters, restraint and imprisonment of their persons, at
Wisbich, Ely, Banbury, York, Ludlow, Bury, the Fleet, Gatehouse, etc. Not to
speak any thing of the spoil of their Woods, leasing their Lands, exaction of
Fines, nor yet of their disarming by Law; because this last, (though it were as
unjust and undeserved as the rest, yet) it had more of disgrace and ignominy in
it, then of real damage; arguing only suspicion or jealousy, which the State
would seem to have of them, and nothing more. But the Twenty pounds a month
was a burden insupportable, especially to the meaner sort: Although it must be
confessed, the rigor and extremity thereof was many times moderated by the
Lord Treasurer Burleigh.

England, (for such, we must know, there are, more then a good many in all
Countries: All Recusants are not Popish) if it were not too odious, it might be
very necessary; and the world could not but see much better, and acknowledge
the patience, humility, and obsequious deportment of Catholics, compared with
the others insolency and stoutness. For it is very well seen already, that this
growing Sect of Protestant Recusants are not men likely to bear such burdens,
should the State find it necessary to impose them. They discover a far
different Spirit, even now, while they are but in their shell, as we may say,
and without any visible power or interest within the Nation, save that of their
number. Compare them with the Recusant F^ugonots of France (who are Brethren,
and of the same principles with ^urs in England) you would think our Catholic
Gentlemen here to be all Priests, in respect of their sober, humble, and
Christian carriage of themselves, whenever they fall under question for
Religion; Their very Ministers there, you would take to be all Swordmen,
Captains, Sons of Mars, so much fury and rage breaths out in every word or
action of theirs, which relates to the public. Catholics here are persons of
all other most unwilling to offend; Recusants there most unwilling to obey.
These defend their Religion with their Swords, and by resistance of the Civil
Magistrate; ours only with their Pen and with their prayers. Ours endure, and
a Scio cui credidi with St. Paul, is all their comfort: These endure nothing,
will trust no body with their cause, but themselves and their Cautionary towns;
They have their Bezas, Their Marlorates, Chamiers, and other Boutefeux swarming
thick in all parts of the Kingdom, ready to incense and set on fire the
distempered multitude against their lawful governors; they have their
Montaubans, their Rochels, Saumurs, Montpelliers, places of refuge and retreat,
strong and well fortified to shelter themselves, when they cannot make good
their designs in the field. Catholics here have none of all these; They have
no Preachers, but Preachers of Penance and Mortification: They hear no Sermons
at any time, but such as teach them Obedience, Patience, Resignation to the
will of God, and to be willing to suffer whatsoever the will of God is, They
have no places of security but their own unarmed houses; which if they change,
it is always for the Fleet, Gatehouse, Newgate or some other prison and place of
restraint. Much talk there is among Protestants, of the Inquisition, its
severity, cruelty, partiality (and what not?) to make it odious and terrible to
the people; but verily if a man do well consider it, in comparison of the
troubles, vexation, and manifold danger both for life, liberty and estate,
whereto the Catholics of England, Priests and Religious persons especially,
are subject, it may seem rather a Scarecrow, then any thing else. Charles the
Fifth Emperor in the year 1521. at Worms decreed only Exile against Luther,
notwithstanding his obstinacy, and all the mischief, which he had brought upon
Germany; and that his Books should be burned. In the year 1526. at Machlin he
enacted a Penalty against Heretics, and all such as disputed the Controversies
of Religion Heretically, or that kept prohibited Books, viz. for the first
offense Forty shillings, for the Second Four pound, for the Third Eight pound,
and Banishment; as the best remedy he could think of to preserve others from
infection. In the year 1529. if they repented not of their error, he adjudged
Viris ignem, Mulieribus fossam, That men should be burned, and women buried
alive; which was no more then anciently the Laws prescribed, nor then what
Calvin himself exercised upon Servetus at Genevah. In the year 1531. he
confirmed these former Acts, with something additional against such as pulled
down Images, or defaced them with any malicious intention, viz. that such
persons should loose their goods. This is the sum of all those Laws of the
Emperor Charl^ the Fifth, concerning Religion, so much complained of in the
Low Countries: and concerning the Execution whereof there were also many
exceptions, qualifications and limitations procured by the Regent in the year
1555. upon advise of Viglius President of the Counsel at Brussels; and to take
away all occasions that might po^^^bly hinder Traffic, or be a means of
oppression to innocent and quiet people. And for King Philip, he always
professed (particularly in his answer to Montigny in Spain) that he intended no
addition of severity to his Fathers Laws, nor to create any new offenses, but
only to punish those, which were of old censured for offenses both by the
Church and State. Let us look then upon England, and consider, if the penalties
upon Catholics here be not far more in number, and much more severe. To
acknowledge the Popes Supremacy in Spiritualibus is Treason; To be reconcil^d
is Treason; To refuse the Oath, upon the first offense is a Praemunire, the
second Treason. For Priests to come over into England is Treason; if any that
were made Priests since Primo Elizab. shall stay Forty days in England after
the Parliament 1585. it is Treason. To Harbor a Priest is Felony and Death. If
young Students beyond Sea return not, and abjure their Religion it is Treason.
To bring in an Agnus Dei, Beads, or Crosses is a Praemunire; To bring a Bull,
or any Sentence of Excommunication from Rome, that may concern the Queen is
Treason. To absolve or reconcile a man is Treason; Not coming to Church was at
first Twelve pence every Sunday, and to be liable to further censure;
afterward, viz. Twenty seven Elizab. it was made Twenty pound a month, where
it could be had: otherwise their bodies were to fine for it in prison. To
depart out of the Realm without License, and not to return within Six months
after the Proclamation is a forfeiture of all Goods and Lands during life. To
hear Mass is an offense fined at One hundred Marks. If a man's Son or Servant
(not Merchant) goes beyond Sea with his consent, he forfeits One hundred
pounds. I speak nothing of their loss of goods, imprisonments, reproaches,
chains, fetters, which upon many other pretended and feigned occasions they are
frequently made subject unto: nor of banishment; which would be counted many
times matter of great favor. Nor yet of the rigorous and vexatious Execution of
all these Laws; which makes the Tower full of such Patients, and new prisons to
be erected for the entertainment of them: nor of the hard usage, which they
frequently find in those prisons. The sad examples of Master Tregion at
Launston, of Master Rigby, of Master Christopher Watson, (who perished at Yo^k,
with Eighteen persons more, in the year 1581. with the very infection of the
prison) do show sufficiently what they suffer. Add hereunto the strict
examination of the Justices, the proceedings of the High Commission against
them, (that inquisition of England not altogether untruly so called) the
multitude of Promoters in all the Temporal Courts of the Kingdom informing
against them, of Pursuivants searching and rifling their houses upon every
light suspicion, and not seldom without any at all, but only to make them
Fine, and to purchase their quiet with money. Lastly, the Racks and Torturings,
which Father Campian, Father Southwel, with many others tasted in their times,
how can they be forgotten? concerning whose case, (I mean of Father Campian and
his Associates especially) beside that the whole matter of their Accusation
seemed upon Trial rather to be grounded upon words and some verbal discourse,
then upon any Actual design or attempt really projected against the Queen or
the State; and beside, that at the time of their Trial (as I have been credibly
informed) there were persons of very Honest Quality, who offered to depose,
that sundry of the Parties accu^ed were, at the times specified in their
several charges, many hundreds of miles distant, from the places, where their
supposed Treasons and Conspiracies were said to be: I say, b^side all this, the
Queens unwillingness to have them dye, (testifi^d by her own Historian) is
argument sufficient with indifferent m^n, what great Traitors she conceived
them to be. For their Arraignment and Trial having been in November 1581. Stow.
they suffered not till the first of September 1582. and then it was aegre
consentiente Regina, as Camden himself conf^sseth. They who sought their lives,
had much ado to procure the Queens consent, that the Sentence of death should
be executed upon them. Surely there is no man so extremely partial or purblinde
but will easily observe, how much greater affliction and pressures the
Catholics of England have endured by the Laws of this Realm, then the Geuses
of Holland ever did, or could do by the inquisition among them. And how much
more their state and condition might be justly commiserated; especially, when
not only Anabaptists, and those other more innocent and harmless Sects, but
Puritans, great and stubborn enemies of the State, Arians, Socinians, yea even
Professed Atheists, and men of far more violent passions and destructive
principles, then Catholics can with any reason be supposed to hold, are scarce
searched after, or punished. And yet notwithstanding all this, to preserve the
Queens reputation for Humanity and fair dealing with her Subjects, the Book
called the Execution of English Justice will make the world believe, That no
man in England is punished for Religion, no man's Conscience is meddled withal,
no man is examined upon matters of Faith. But is it possible that such a
pretense should be sust^ined by man, so notoriously contrary to truth, so
easily, so manifestly disprovable even by sight, and the evidence of their own
daily proceedings? In the year 1581. there was a general Pardon granted by the
Queen, but with a strict Caution and Proviso, That no person in Prison, nor
Recusant for Religion, should have benefit thereby; which Malefactors of all
sorts had. Was this no punishment? The Recusants pay Twenty pound a month for
their Recusancy? is this no punishment? The Turk himself lays not any greater
upon the Christians under him. All, or most of the old Catholic Bishops and
Clergy of England died in prisons, Antipath. of Prelat.
(as Master Prinn himself confesses of the chiefest of them) am^ng Rogues,
Murderers and Felons in the Marshalsea; The rest in Exile for Religion; is
this no punishment? Or was there any other Crime laid to their charge, but
only matter of Religion? Not to speak of many others, Master William Anderson
in 45. Elizab. was executed upon no other charge, but that he was a Priest, and
then found to be in England; so was Master Barckworth in the year 1600. was
this no punishment? Anno 35. Elizab. Master Barwis a Citizen of London was
executed, for being reconciled to to the Church: and Master Pormort attainted
(at least) for reconciling him; was this no punishment? In the year 1575. (as
Holinshead himself records it for a matter to be noted) The Lady Morley, the
Lady Brown, the Lady Guildford were committed all of them to prison, only for
hearing Mass, and Leases presently made of two Third parts of their Lands; was
this no punishment? I might be infinite in examples of this kind, but it is
needless; The case is manifest, and the sense of the whole Kingdom proclaims
the contrary, to what that Author pretends, convincing his assertion of not a
little imposture and calumny.

Elizabeth's Reign; by their Protestation made at Ely in the year 1588. where a
great many of them were prisoners; by some other offers which they made to the
Lord North, the Queens Lieutenant there, and by their justification of them
afterward; by their subm^ssions sent up to the Lords of the Privy Council, and
their profession of all due acknowledgement toward her Majesty,
notwithstanding the sentence of Excommunication; by their readiness to serve
her Majesty and the State even in that Action of 88. for which they are so
calumniated; Lastly, by the very Irish Recusants joining their Forces with the
Queens at Kinsale, in the year 1600. All which Arguments do indeed show them to
be ^ubjects absolute, and not ex condition, or by leave of some other, as
their adversaries pretend. Let the Read^r therefore now judge, if he please, by
what has been said, whether to be a Protestant and a loyal ^ubject, or a
Catholic and a loyal subject, be more incompatible things. This was the
question propounded in the beginning to be declared; and it has been declared,
I suppose, at large, both from their doctrinal assertions, and constant
practices in all parts of Germany, France, Holland, Scotland, Genevah, and many
other Countries of Christendom, what kind of people both Lutherans, Calvinist,
and other sectaries generally are toward their Sovereign Princes. It has bin
shown, that the chief scope and end of their endeavors, where they come, is to
set up their several professions by the Sword, and viol^nt resistance of the
Civil Magistrate, doing but his Office in restraining them according to Law;
yea with the ruin of the Church and State (both) that shall oppose them. This,
I say, both the Lutheran s n Germany, the Hugonets of France, the G^uses of
H^l^and, the Protestants and Puritans in all other places where they could,
have so apparently done, or attempted to do, that there is neither color of
excuse for it, nor liberty to deny it. The World knows what was endeavored in
Germany against the Emperor; in France how long continued they in Arms against
their Sovereign Prince? viz. till they had by force (not to say contrary to his
Oath) extorted from him such Edicts of Pacification, as themselves liked. And
that in Holland and Scotland (where they had the fortune to become Masters)
they renounced and deposed their Princes absolutely. On the other side let us
consider, how far it is from being true, that wherewith so many Books in
England have abused the people, viz. That to be a Priest, or a Roman Catholic,
and a good Subject withal, is impossible: They are things inconsistent with
one another. For if we look back to former times, we shall easily find, that
from the Saxons to King Henry the Eighth, it was never made so much as a
qu^stion; To be a Catholic was never held any bar to Loyalty; and yet the
Princes had their differences sometimes with the Pope, even then. And in the
grounds of Catholic Faith there is certainly nothing contrary unto civil
obedience, and duty toward the temporal Magistrate. Witness the Government of
the Sacred Roman Empire, of the Kingdoms of Spain, France, Poland, and many
other Christian Principalities and States; All which differing in their several
constitutions, or particular forms of Governing, yet do generally and
unanimously account him the b^st Subject, and least dangerous to the State, who
is most of all devoted to Catholic Religion. It is not therefore malum in se
and simpliciter, whatsoever Doctor Morton, or Parson White say, it is not an
evil intrinsecal to Priesthood, nor essentially follo^ing the profession of
Catholic Religion to be an evil subject. If it happens to prove so at any
time, it is ex accidente, and from the voluntary wickedness of particular men;
if not (as too often it does) from some evil constitution of State, in which
the profession of Catholic Religion has been unduly subverted, and is as
unjustly prohibited and punished. Neither can it be verified of Catholic
Religion (...), or universally, as sedition and troubling the Civil Government
is apparently chargeable upon Calvinism, and the other several professions of
Protestancy. Therefore surely it was an error both uncivil and indiscreet in
those Doctors, to frame their proposition so general, only to make us odious
and suspected with his Majesty, who yet, we hope, understands us better then
so, and knows, that the imputation is groundless and merely passionate. We deal
not so with them. We are ready to acknowledge, that, as to particular persons,
there are many, especially among the Protestants of England, of more calm and
moderate dispositions, of no such fiery zeal, as works in many other of their
Brethren abroad; Boni viri, boni cives, such as we confess to be both good men,
and good Subjects, of sociable nature, obsequious, not inclined to Sedition,
nor desirous to persecute. And the like good Testimony does even the Author of
the Execution of English Justice give unto Catholics, acknowledging their
obedience and loyalty toward the late Queen, and that in a time, when they
wanted not matter of complaint, for the manifold oppressions and afflictions,
which were heavy upon them. It Is true; every man may be supposed to wish the
advancement of his own Religion, as believing it to be right, or the best:
neither are Catholics to be excepted in that point: They must be permitted to
desire at least, and wish for the restoring of Catholic Religion, as it ought
to be. But surely as to the means whereby they procure it, and the course and
manner of their proceeding that seek and endeavor it, This treatise has
already shown, what great odds and difference there is betwixt the proceedings
of Catholics, and that of Protestants. And that what the one, viz. Catholics,
seek ^^ely by way of Petition, Supplication, Prayer, and humble Remonstrating
of their Sufferances; The other, viz. Protestants, seek chiefly by fire and
Sword and Cannon Bullet, and by Thundering of Ordnances, rather then Apologies,
in their Princes ears. Beside, (to proceed a little further in this Parallel)
the Catholics generally, and for a long time, both in Germany and France were
Passive, as in England they are still to this day; The Protestants were A^tive,
and the offenders. Catholics only defend their own, maintain the possession
of that, which they have quietly held, out of all memory of Men and Ages;
Protestants invade, and usurp by force. Priests desire only to keep that which
they once de jure had; Ministers seek to get that which they had not.
Catholics obey ex conscientia, out of an inflexible principle of Conscience,
and absolutely submit unto all lawful and established Government; Protestants
generally speaking but upon condition, and with such limitations and
restrictions of their obedience, as they themselves think good to prescribe.
Priests are punished, not for any formal wickedness, or that which is a crime
in its own nature, but for something that is so, only by interpretation, or in
the judgment of the present State; which perhaps a few days ago did not judge
so, but the quite contrary. Calvinists, when they suffer, suffer for real and
foul crimes; for Sedition, Rebellion, Murder, Treason, not imputative only,
fictitious, or made such of late by the prevailing of some particular faction
in the State, but truly and properly so, and adjudged for such by all Laws
Divine and Humane, of their own Countries and of all Christendom beside, long
before they or their Grandsires were born. Witness the examples of this last
year in France, of Lescun, President of the Assemblies at Rochel,
Haute-Fountain, Chamier, P. Gomboult and some others, who all suffered for real
and actual Treasons; and by virtue of such Laws, not as the Parliament at
Paris, or some party there had procured to be enacted a few years, or a few
months before, on purpose to entrap them; but by the anc^^nt known Law^ of
^ranc^, b wh ch they themselves knew the Kingdom was governed, and had been
ever governed time out of mind: and therefore could not in any reason but
expect the execution of them upon themselves, in case they would persist to
offend. Witness the Treasons of their Brother Bischarcy in Poland, who
attempted to kill the King; and did indeed wound him very dangerously, as he
was going to Church. They object to us the positions of some private and
disavowed persons, and words only: We object to them the resolutions of whole
general Assemblies held by them, and those rebellions, which have followed
thereupon, not in word only, but in deed and in act, their real and actual
Conspiracies, their many Battles really and actually fought in the Field,
without lawful Authority, or any public Call, against their Sovereign Princes;
with other manifold injuries and insolences committed. Lastly, Protestants
reform commonly per populum, and by Tumults; Catholics do nothing of this
kind but by Law, Order, and their proper Superiors. So that the difference
betwixt them is manif^st; and the integrity of the professions of Catholic, in
point of obedience and loyalty toward their Prince, beyond that of Calvinists,
or Protestants, generally speaking, is visible to every eye.

England be fettered with so many Shacles of Interpretative, and Temporary
Treason, to the prejudice of many innocent persons, and to the scandal of the
Government? Admit, that for some worldly respect they were indeed n^cessary, in
State Policy, for the times wherein they were enacted; yet the times changing
so much as they have done, and those causes entirely ceasing, which made them
seem necessary then, it may be thought now, not only safe, (as undoubtedly it
is) but honorable and just to repeal them. May it not with great reason be
wondered at, that a Nation so Just, so Honorable, so Wise, as this of England
has ever been acknowledged by the Nations abroad; and settled by Extraordinary
Dispensations of Divine Providence upon such Equitable, fair and just
principles of government, as be constantly held forth by the Supreme Authority
of the Nation, should permit any thing to be counted Treason by an Act of
Parliament, which is so generally over all Christendom at this day, and has
been so anciently, and even till of late times in this our own Nation, so much
honored, maintained, and reverenced by all men; especially I say, when there is
no cause of suspicion remaining, when there is no cause nor color of jealousy
from any persons, that desire this liberty: at least none, but what may be
easily removed by the wisdom of the State; and plenary satisfaction given in
that behalf, both to themselves and to all the good people of the Nation. How
much Religious men and persons Ecclesiastical (now called Traitors by the Law)
were wont to be esteemed in this Nation, is not necessary now to speak; our own
Chronicles and the Constitutions of our very Laws themselves do abundantly
declare it. If a bondsman entered a Cloysture, he could not be commanded out by
any power whatsoever; The Law it self anciently holding it more reasonable,
that even the King should loose his interest in such a body, then that he
should be taken out from the Order, which he had chosen. The like was judged,
if the Kings Wards entered Religion. An Alien by Law can hold no Lands in
England; yet if he be a Priest, he may by Law be a Bishop here, and enjoy his
Temporalties, as Lanfranck, Anselme, and some others did, who were never
Denizens. It is well known, The Six Clearks of the Chancery were anciently
Clearks of the Church. The Master of the Rolls, Master of Requests, Lord Privy
Seal, yea the Lord Chancellors and Treasurers of the Realm not only commonly,
but in a manner constantly, till of late times, were Bishops and Clergymen.
How strange therefore may it seem, that the Laws of England should make a
Function so ancient and honorable in England to be Treason? which certainly is
the same function now, that it was then, when it was most honored; and has
suffered no more change, from what it first was, then Saint Paul's Church has
suffered change, since the time it was first built by King Ethelbert; that is,
it is grown old indeed, and by the iniquity of the times, has lost some part
of that outward Glory, Magnificence, and Splendour, which it once had. And for
Papists, if men go about to make them a Sect, and endeavor to suppress them
under that notion, truly we shall be found a very ancient Sect; and I b^leeve
it will trouble the best Doctor in En^land, to assign us any other Sect-Master,
any other Author and Founder of our profession, then our Savior Christ, and
Saint P ter. But most men know, it is to little purpose to attempt any thing
against us that way. All other Sects have their particular Authors, and many
other circumstances of their beginning a^^^gnable, easily, clearly, notoriously:
I mean, not only Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists, and such others of
yesterday, but those more ancient, Arians, Eunomians, Pelagians, Nestorians,
Manichees, etc. only Catholics have not; nor can any man show when their
profession began, or from whom it came, but from our Savior and his Apostles.
What therefore should hinder a reconciliation, and a readmission of this
Ancient and Universal profession of Christianity into England again? I mean,
unto such an equal and avowed liberty of private exercise, as other people of
the Nation do enjoy in the profession of theirs. On his Majesty's part, I
humbly suppose there can be little d^ubt made, who has been ever of himself*
constantly inclined to show mercy, if there had been no crooked and unhappy
instruments about him to hinder it. My mind, says the King, was ever free
from persecution, or thralling my Subjects in matters of Conscience; And again,
Fateor me non libenter suspendere Presbyterum, etc. I confess, says he, it g
eth much against my mind, to put a Priest to death only for his Religion, or
for saying of Mass. He who judged, that it could no way become him, though a
Prince of so great Learning and Judgment, to pronounce sentence lightly in so
old a controversy, what Priest or Religious man can appeal to a better Judge?
or from whom should they expect a sentence of more favorable compassion? He
who sent into France to mediate for the peace of Strangers, what man can doubt,
but of his own Royal inclination he is as willing to show favor to his
Subjects at home? Though we differ in Religion, yet in obedience to our Prince,
and the State that protects us, we agree; neither will we be preceded in this
part of our duty by any profession under Heaven. Our bodies are at the Kings
service, and at the States to command; may they be pleased to leave our souls
to God. Let our actions be tried; and if they find not cause, let them not
trust us. It has bin long since observed by wise men, That too much severity
does but make men desperate; and it is an ancient Aphorism of State punire
raro. What an honorable addition was it to Augustus Caesar his other Titles,
that of the Historian, Sueton.
Nunquam civ^lem sanguinem fudisse, That never any subject suffered by him in
cold blood: And it is as infallibly true in all generous Spirits, fidelem, si
putaveris, facies, that confidence gains much security from them; as counting
it the greatest of disgraces to be distrusted. Malus custos diuturn^tatis
metus. Fear is not always the best Guardian. Seneca, who lived under a Tyrant,
and knew what tyranny was, gives this counsel, Vl^ima supplicia suppliciis
ultimis ponat. Let, says he, a Prince always observe this rule in the
administration of justice, viz. That capital punishments be the last
punishments which he inflicteth, and never used, but where no other remedy will
serve. And Tacitus observes it among other marks of Tiberius his cruelty,
Delatorum Authoritas magna, frequens accusatio, and in quovis crimine adjuncta
de laesa Majestate Principis, That Sycophants, Informers, and such fellows were
the only men about him, and every offense was made Treason. And certainly
there can be no greater Symptom, that Government declines to tyranny, then the
multitude of such people attending the Courts; and that such proceedings are
used. I confess the Law was once strict at Rome, Deos peregrinos ne colunto.
Yet Marcus Aurelius, a wise and gallant Emperor, tolerated the Christians; yea,
Theodosius, and Great an, Emperors, though most most Christian and Catholic
themselves, yet for some time were contented to tolerate the Arians, enemies of
Christ. The Venetians, and many other Christian States permit the Jews to live
among them; as Spain did the Moors, till necessity at last forced the King to
expel them.

thing more visible, and in your eyes every day, then that the contrary is
true? Do we not live among you here in England? Have we not ever done so since
the first unhappy difference and change made, peaceably, neighbourly, friendly?
Do me not buy and sell with you, and you with us? are we not ready to perform
all offices of civility and good neighborhood, where we live? Do we refuse
any kind of temporal duties or payments? Even of our Tiths to the Ministers,
which yet are in themselves a kind of religious Salary; and if in any, surely
we should boggle and show unwillingness in them? Besides, it is a false
surmise, that we hold all Protestants generally for Heretics, and
Excommunicate persons; (as some spare not to urge both in the pulpit and press,
to make us odious) or that thereby we should think our selves at liberty, when
we have opportunity, to deal less faithfully, justly, and truly with them, then
becomes honest men, and Christians. For that they are not Excommunicate, I
mean specially, by name, or by any such sentence of the Judge Ecclesiastical,
as does relax or debar either all or any civil duty toward them, is out of
question. And to make a man Heretic, formally speaking and in the proper
notion of that crime, obstinacy in opinion is by all confess d to be
requisite, and that he persisteth deliberately therein, notwithstanding that he
knows the opinion which he holds, to be contrary to the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church, and to the general, unanimous, or known consent of those
Pastors, which as Saint Paul teaches us, ought to have the oversight and
government of him in our Lord: Acts 20.28, Heb. 13.7.17. Tit. 3.10.
which, I su^po^e, cannot be the case of all the Protestants in England. Indeed
of the Doctrine of Protestancy, as it is considered in it self, abstract^dly
from the persons that profess it we say, it is Heresy, that is to say, ^ false
Doctrine, a condemned Doctrine, a Doctrine, (so far as Doctrine can barely be)
not only of dangerous, but of damnable malignity, being contrary to the
Doctrine and Institutions of true Christian Religion, which our Savior by his
Apostles left unto the Church, to be profess^d and observed for ever; and
therefore in it self of such nature, that it ought to be deposed by all men, who
desire to be saved; and in profession whereof no man living may securely rest.
This we say of their Doctrine. But as to the persons of Protestants themselves,
viz. how far their personal error in the profession thereof is voluntary and
affectate; what means of better information they do neglect; against how much
light, that is, inward knowledge and persuasion of mind, that Catholic
Religion is true, they do sin; or what secret doubtings they have that it may
be true; what inward stirrings and checks of conscience they do stifle in
themselves, and persist in a way which their own hearts suspect, merely for
temporal ends, and because it stands better with their designs of this world,
that is, the present interests of their honou^s, reputation, ease, pleasure,
profit, etc. or lastly, how far their ignorance of the truth may be, perhaps
invinc ble; (which where it is so, excuses much) of all this we say nothing.
God only knows how things are with them in these respects, not man; no, not
the men themselves: and therefore, as concerning their persons, to his
judgem^nt only we must leave them. This business therefore, viz. of
Protestants being counted Heretics by us, is but a Bugbear, a Scar-crow set
up on purpose by those our Adversaries, who would have the difference and
aversions which they have bred betwixt us, to be immortal. Rather it were to be
wished by all honest men, of what persuasion soever, that a just and equitable
liberty in matters of conscience were granted unto all, if but for this only
respect, viz. That so by a free, confident, and friendly conversing one with
another, void of suspicion, void of jealousy, fear, danger to one party or
other, and by amicable discourse and debating of things, truth might come to be
more clearly discoverded, and we might be able, through Gods grace, mutually to
give and receive good one of another. But this is a work, which has so much of
God and goodness in it, that we cannot but expect many adversaries should
appear against it. However, those Doctors Boutefeux should do well to
remember, if they pleased, that even by the Law of Seniority Catholics might
expect some little favor. For we beseech them to tell us, upon what Patrimony
do themselves and families now live, but that which the right Heirs of the
Church, dis-inherited indeed, or disseized by the power of the State, have left
them? What Privileges, Immunities, Honors have they, but what the old Church
gave them? What Churches have they, either Cathedral, Collegiate, or Parochial,
which She built not? What Colleges which She founded or endowed not; Nay,
whence have they their Bible, the Creed, the Ceremonies, or any thing else that
is good and commendable among them, but from Her? If She had not preserved them
faithfully to their hands, they had never found them. Shall Charity then be for
ever so buried in England, that the posterity of those, from whom they must
confess to have received these great advantages, shall never be remembered by
them? never be used with equity and common justice? It were too great a shame,
surely, to lie long upon such a Nation as this; and a defect of Government,
which all N^tions about us would observe. Beside, let our Adversaries remember
what the French commonly say, Chacum a son tour; and we in England, A dog has
a day. Religion here with us, since King Henry the Eighth wore the Crown, has
had many changes and exchanges, as the world knows: and the principles, on
which it now stands, are not thought to be so fixed and unmovable, but that
it may take one turn more. All things are in the hands of God; and whatsoever
he has determined in the Counsel of his Divine wisdom must stand, and take
effect in its appointed due time: say we, or do we to the contrary, what we
can. And therefore let our hot Brethren the Calvinists, who can themselves so
little endure the severity of Bishops, let them not further promote, nor hold
up persecution against any body else; least in an hour when they think lest of
it, the mischief, which they wish to others, fall upon their own heads; and
that they find themselves, not only out of the Saddle (where they would be)
but in the Mire, under the Horse belly, and so obnoxious, as they may have need
of favor themselves. They desire nothing more then Liberty of Conscience in
their own way, fullness of liberty to themselves; let them be persuaded also to
grant the same unto others. That this is but equal, reason it self will tell
us: And that persecution for matter of Religion is not always the best means to
advance religion, is the judgment of as wise and learned men, even of their
own profession, as any they can show for the contrary. What Luthers opinion was
in the point I value no much, because the world did not take him for a man very
learned or very wise; although, by Gods permission, he did much mischief in it
for his time: as a simple Conjurer, though he be neither Mathematician, nor
Philosopher himself, yet, by the help of the Devil, may raise a storm able to
confound all the Sciences. Nevertheless what he thought appears in his
Assertions, Art. 33. de non comburendis Haereticis. Vrbanus Rhegius, Wolfgangus
Musculus, famous men and Protestants, both of them in their Common places are
much against persecution for Religion. So is Osiander, Epitom. Centur. 7.
Chytraeus in Chron. 1593. Castalio, and others. But above all Acontius in his
Book de Stratagemat. Satan. is most earnest. Dominus non permittit haereticorum
supplicium, imo definite declaravit, and interdixit, etc. God, says he, does
not permit nor allow, that Heretics should be thus punished; yea he has
expressly declared his mind to the contrary, and forbidden the Magistrate to
exercise any such Authority upon them. Calvin once, that is, till he had settled
himself in power at Genevah, held the same opinion, and was much for Liberty of
Conscience, Hen. 2.
when Annas Burges died for Heresy in France. Of the same judgment also is
Monsieur Lanou in his Discourses. Sturmius in his Epistles, B^lloy, Melancthon,
and many other professed and earnest Protestants. Not to mention Erasmus,
Cassander, Grotius, or any other of that middle temper. And as for matter of
example, or practice, do not the Cantons in Switzerland agree well enough in
Temporal things, notwithstanding their difference in Religion? is mutual
Toleration of one another in their several judgments that way, any prejudice
to the public peace? Are there any people under Heaven, more happy and free
then they? or more likely to continue such, so long as they keep under some few
fiery zealots, that would still be blowing the coals of dissension among them?
Not to speak of Sweden, Denmark, etc. does not that famous Kingdom of Poland
Tolerate diversity of Religions? does not the great Emperor of Mosko the same?
and is not the general Unity of their Subjects, which arises thereupon, and
would certainly be otherwise, if the Government were otherwise, is it not a
Wall of Brass to both of them against their great enemy the Turk? Let Germany
also be our example, that vast Nation, and people no less Magnanimous and
Stout; is not Toleration judged expedient among them? could any thing else cure
their troubles? Let us consider, how peacably and happily Catholics and
Lutherans have conversed and lived there together, for no less then an Hundred
years and upwards, without any dissension, without any trouble upon the account
of Religion; save only what Ambition, and the factious Spiritedness of some
particular Princes have bred, and brought upon the Country, much against the
will of the people, under that pretense? No man doubts, but Charles the Fifth,
Emperor, and Ferdinand his Brother were in their times great and wise Princes;
yet found they no better means to redress the troubles of State, then by
commanding, Vt utraque pars caveret, etc. That special care should be had on
both sides to compel no man, to make profession of Religion, otherwise then in
his own Conscience he should be persuaded was best: As Dresserus a Protestant
relates it, rejecting with much disdain the contrary opinion of some, who, as
he says, would have but one Religion only professed in the Empire. And for
France the case and condition of affairs there is notorious to all the world.
Nor could that Kingdom ever be brought to quiet, till the Calvinists therein
were brought upon their knees, that is, to such pass, as to be glad of, and to
b^gge for that favorable Toleration of their profession from the King, which
themselves in no parts of the world beside will grant to others. What reason
can be given by indifferent men, why the policy of England should be so
singular, and so differing from that of all other Christian Kingdoms and
Nations about her? Why should our Government be more severe in this point, and
more Sanguinary then that of our Neighbors? It may seem to reflect something
upon the honor of our Nation, to mention the Turk in this case: Yet certainly
it cannot be denied, but that Christians live quietly in his Dominions; and
upon conditions so easy, that I am persuaded, the Catholics of England would
be well contented with the like. If only it be determined, that we must
purchase that with our money, which all other our fellow subjects the people of
this Nation, do enjoy freely, and count it their natural right. In a word
therefore to conclude, seeing that both in the judgment of Protestant Divines,
and in the practice of Protestant Princes, and States, Toleration of diverse
Religions is held neither unlawful, nor unexpedient in Government; and seeing,
that for so long a time of afflictions, persecution of our Priests, and other
manifold pressures upon us for matters of Conscience, Catholics have yet,
through the grace of God, demeaned themselves so loyally and obsequiously in
all points, as they have not done, or attempted to do, upon their own account,
or for the interest and advancment of their own profession, any thing offensive
to the State, or prejudicial to the public peace: seeing that nothing can be
fastened upon them in that kind with any color of truth, but only the
business of the Gun-Powder-Treason; and seeing that was a devise, though acted
by the hands of some desperate and wicked Catholics, yet contrived rather by
the Devil, and some crafty Enemies which we had in the State, (to make us
eternally odious and suspected in the Nation and to disoblige some great person
of his promises in favor of us;) as it may be justly thought, considering, what
kind of Statesmen sat at the Helm in those times, what knowing men, D'
Ossat. Lettres. liur. 2. ep. 43. Pryns. Antip. of Prelat. P. 151.
strangers abroad, have writ, and what Protestants themselves at home have
discovered since upon that subject. Seeing that Catholics always wished well
to his Majesty's Title, and prayed for his happy succession to these Kingdoms;
seeing we were not of Counsel with those, who sent Beal into foreign parts to
promote the Titie of Suffolk; nor that set Hales on work at home, as he did,
with law and little art to make it good; nor that procured Sir N. B. to make a
nest for the Phaenix, by such a great volum, as he wrote to that purpose:
Seeing that we were ever Champions to his Majesty's just claim; Especially Sir
Anthony Brown, that wise and noble Author of the Book against Leicester; and
that Ajax of the Law, (whom no man ever durst encounter in this cause) Master
Pl^ydon: We hope so long and so tried fidelity will, by the Kings gracious
favor, procure us at last some liberty and refreshment; and that our humble
supplication shall be considered, wherein casting our selves down at the feet
of our Sovereign, and of the State, we beg only of them in those words of the
Poet.

Hanc animam concede mihi:
Tua caetera sunto.
Let our souls be left free unto God: and as for our Bodies or Estates, take
them, dispose of them freely, (as Justice requires, and in due proportion with
our Neighbors, and other the good people of the Nation) for the service of the
Kingdom, and of the public.

AN APPENDIX, Concerning LUTHERS Mission.
I Was now going out of the field; but behold an Ambush appears, which is laid
to surprise me: it pretends at one charge to rout all the forces of my
arguments, and to bereave me of my hopes of Victory, by eluding, rather then
disproving, of what I have said. It is a reply, which some men are pleased to
make in behalf of Luther; whose heat and irregular vehemence, which I call
sedition, was nothing but zeal, say they, of Gods honor and truth, which
burning within his own breast, happened to kindle some lively sparks also in
others. They say, that Luther was Elias, a Prophet sent immediately and
extraordinarily by God, to reform the errors and corruptions of the world, to
restore virtue and good life, to detect Antichrist, (who had for so many ages
bewitched the whole Church with his impostures, and seduced her into Idolatry
and Heresy) And that therefore such a Prophet was not to be tedder'd, as it
were, and bound up to the rules of ordinary professors. But if he neglected
Authority, despised the Laws, abused and insulted upon the Majesty of Princes,
disturbed the peace and tranquillity of their States, we are not to wonder, nor
lay it to his charge: It was no more then a Prophet might do. Tune es, qui
conturbas Israel, did not Ahab say to Elias, Art not thou he, which troublest
Israel? The world was in a Lethargy of superstition and ignorance at that time,
and could not be recovered by gentle means. Such an inveterate disease, as that
was, required strong and violent purgation. Thus they Plead. But it is
answered, The foulest Face may have a fair Vizard put upon it: and these
pretenses, howsoever men may be amused at them at first hearing, are but like
the Apples of Sodom; specious and seeming fair at the first sight; but if you
touch them, they turn to ashes. I confess, Luther perceiving, how apt the world
was at that time to Believe lies, and to swallow whatsoever baits of Novelty
and unsound Doctrine he offered them, was not ashamed to arrogate all those
things to himself, that were above mentioned; and to pretend an extraordinary
calling from God for all that alteration and stir which he made in the Church.
Witness himself in one place, Lib. de falls. stat.
Ego Lutherus sum, Alter Elias and Currus Israel, etc. I am Luther, says he, a
second Elias and the Chariot of Israel. And in another, Lib. cont. Reg.
Angliae.
Tanta est dignitas mea, and Ministerium mihi Dio^nitus datum, etc. This
Ministry, says he, which I profess, and this Calling, which I have from God,
is of that Excellency, that it is in vain for Princes or any Persons on Earth
to expect submission, or forbearance from me: They must, whither they will or
no, acknowledge me at length for an Holy instrument chosen of God, etc. and yet
again, Certus sum, etc. I am sure, says he, that I have my Doctrine from
Heaven; Ibid.
and therefore why should he regard any thing objected against it on Earth?
Comment. 1. Cor. 1. he blusheth not to glory, that by him and through his means
the Gospel was more clearly and plentifully preached, then it was ipsis
temporibus Apostolorum, even in the times of the Apostles themselves. Which he
avoucheth again, Sermon. de destruct. Jerusalem. Nor do his followers forbear any
thing to flatter him in this humor. The Collecutors at Altimbergh call him The
Angel of God, Elias, Colloq. Altegh. P. 80.587.
and the Last Trumpet, alluding as I suppose, to that of the Apocalypse, Chap.
11.15. Aretius affirms expressly, that he was sent by an immediate call from God
to reform the world, bewitched, as he says, with many impious and ungodly
opinions in Religion. But let us pawse a while. We must distinguish, as I said,
betwixt pretenses, and proofs; They are not all one: And they do but deceive
themselves, who think, that men will always accept the one for the other. All
that these men say, comes up to this; That Luther was extraordinarily sent by
God to preach Reformation, and such other Doctrine as he did. But we reply,
Extraordinary Mission has always Extraordinary Signs and Arguments going along
with it, to evidence and make clear the truth thereof to the people, unto whom
such an Extraordinary Messenger is sent. Thus was it with Moses, Exodus 4. who
being sent upon an extraordinary Message from God to the Children of Israel,
viz. to bring them out of Egypt, where they lived in bondage; and the case
being such, as they might probably not believe him, but make doubt of his
calling, and say unto him, The Lord has not sent thee; to remedy this
inconvenience, and to give the Israel^tes reasonable assurance, that he was
indeed sent to them by God for that purpose, The Divine wisdom does not think
it sufficient to bid Moses stand to it, affirm it stoutly, not to blush, nor
give over saying so (which were all the Extraordinary Arguments that ever
Luther, or any of his Reforming Brethren could give of their Extraordinary
Calling) But what does he say? Cast thy Rod upon the ground: So it becomes a
Serpent. Put forth thine hand, and take it: So it becomes a Rod again; that is
to say, God Allmighty enabled him to do this, and many other wonderful and
supernatural works before them, and before the King of Egypt, sufficient to
convince them, that he came in truth upon the Lords Message, and not of his own
head. Thus was it also with the true Elias, Elizaeus, Daniel, and many other of
the Prophets. Thus was it lastly with the Apostles of Christ, and all
Apostolical men succeeding them in that privilege of Extraordinary Mission.
Yea such and so absolutely necessary is the condition of miracles (or at least
of something else equivalent thereto in the way of supernatural Extraordinary
assistance and testimony) in all those, which pretend unto Extraordinary
Calling, That our blessed Savior says, even of himself John 15.24. That if he
had not done among the Jews works, which never any man did, that is wonderful
works, supernatural, and stupendous works, They had not sinned, in refusing
his Doctrine. And in another place, If I do not the works of my F^ther, Chap.
10.37.
believe me not. But this is a stone too hard for Luthers Teeth; we must never
expect that he, or any of his followers will answer punctually upon this
subject. They do many of them, beside Luther, pretend to Extraordinary Calling;
as Beza for example, publicly insisted upon it, or rather fled to it, in the
Conference at Poisey: But if you demand miracles of them to evidence it to us,
(that is such arguments as reason requires, and the experience of all ages has
afforded in like cases) they are instantly silent; or use only such cavelling
pretenses and pleas, as may serve the turn of any Heretics whatsoever, as well
as theirs. For we entreat them to tell us, what can Luther pretend for his
presumption in this kind, Which Calvin and the Sacramentaries cannot? And yet
it is well known, he counted them all for Heretics of the deepest stain. Cont.
Artic. Lovan.
Yea (to use his own words) seriously, and in very good earnest, he counted
them so, and that they did not belong to the Communion of the Church. De Cana.
Domini.
And for Zuinglius himself he held him for scarce a Christian. What can Calvin
or his followers pretend more, then the new Arians, Antitrinitarians,
Socinians, and others plead for themselves? And yet it is known Calvin burnt the
principal of them, viz. Michael Servetus, at Genevah. Beside how perilous a
thing is it, and how many dangerous inconveniences may follow upon it, if only
upon pretense of Extraordinary Calling, (not made out and evidenced in due
manner to be such) men should be permitted to seduce people into new and by-ways
of Religion, at their pleasure? Did not Mahomet first abuse the world, upon
like pretenses to this? What other thing means the Story of the Angel Gabriel
so familiarly acquainted with him? And of the Pigeon, that so often visited him
with Revelations? And did not Thekel, another imposture of that Sect, persuade
the Persian to reform Mahomets Law, upon pretense that God had appeared to him
and commanded it so, upon the top of Anti-Taurus. Does not the Scripture tell
us, how far Theodas blinded so many of the Jews to their destruction, upon this
account? Does not the History of the Jews tell us of another fellow like him,
one Bar-Cosba, who had prevailed so far upon the people, not long before
Jerusalem was beseidged, Galat. lib. 4. c. 21.
that Akiba, and some others of the chiefest Scribes and Elders, took him
verily for the Messiah, and interpreted all the Prophesies of Scripture
concerning Christ in favor of this impostor? Neither could they see their
error, till they saw Titus come before the City with his Army, and found
themselves blockt up on all hands. Then indeed at last, they could examine his
pretenses; and finding him neither able to help himself or them (as they
expected, their Messiah should) when it was too late they fell upon him, and
put him to death. Did not Muncer possess the Boors of Germany, upon this very
account; of Extraordinary Calling, that God had given him the Sword of Gideon,
that is, power to reform and destroy at pleasure? Did not David George play all
his prancks in Holland and the Low Countries upon this score? Lastly, to come
nearer home, what other pretense had Hacket, Arthington, Coppinger, Henry
Nichols, and others, for those horrible Blasphemies which they vented, and
their preaching themselves to be Christ, in Queen Elizabeth's days? Were they
not all of them inspi^ed men? Were they not all, I mean in their own opinion,
Extraord^narily sent? We must therefore, in such cases as these, stand well
upon our guard, and not believe every man upon his bare word, in a matter that
concerns us so much. If Lu^her, Calvin, Beza pretend Extraordinary Mission to
teach us, contrary to what the Catholic Church, and the lawful Pastors thereof
have always taught us, (although in such case we ought not to believe even an
Angel from Heaven) yet at least let them give us some competent argument and
sign thereof; Gal. 1.
or be content, if we do not believe them.

Beza himself, when he is out of Controversy, and pursuing some other subject,
can acknowledge, That God sends not Prophets now Extraordinarily; and that we
are to keep watch of our souls, when any man thinks, that he is Inspired of
God to any work. Vindic. cont. Tyran.
Let such a man sound himself well, says he, and take heed, that he be not
inspired with Pride, and make an Idol of himself. Very good! And may not other
men also take heed, as well as himself, that they do not Idolize such a
pretender? We desire to do no more, but to examine the pretentions of all men
justly, yea with some favor. And therefore, seeing that in respect of power,
and the working of miracles, Luthers Plea fails him; let us see how far it will
hold in point of virtue, and good conversation; that is, how near he comes
unto the Spirit of Elias, whose second he would be. Elias was a man of retired
life, sequestered, so much as could be, from all worldly conversation, and
dedicated wholly unto Prayer, Contemplation and Conversing with God, and
Meditating of Divine things; a great Faster, and one, that mortified his
Natural Appetites and passions with much Austerity, Rigor and Penance: As also
did Esdras, Eli^aeus, Daniel* Saint John Baptist, and all other Servants of
God, employed in such Office as Elias was. But Luther did not so; he did the
clean contrary. No sooner did he apprehend himself Called with this
Extraordinary Call we speak of, but off goes his Cowle immediately, that is to
say, the Ensign of Obedience, Humility, Modesty: Never shall we know him guilty
of those virtues again. Out of his Cloysture he runs, where for many years
together (by his own Confession and other good Testimony) Cochlae. in vita ejus.
he had through Gods grace, lived a good, regular, and virtuous life, in all
Chastity, Piety, and Penance. Neither does he run alone; many run with him of
both Sexes. His Breviary is laid aside; his Vows forgotten, or rather
sacrilegiously violated, trampled upon, despised: No more watching, fasting,
praying now, then will please the flesh; But a Companion must be had, whom he
calls Wife; and one every way as bad as himself, and only fit for such a
Husband. All these things are much different from the spirit and practice of
Elias. And than we may see further, how much his mind was corrupted by his
Apostasy, and how little he could endure those pristine virtues of his former
profession, after he had commenced his new Ministry upon his pretended
Extraordinary C^ll, see how licentiously and strangely he writes. Among the
Fathers Saint Hierome is one observed to be much in the praise of Virginity,
Chastity, Penance, etc. For this Luther cannot abide him, but expungeth him
out of the Catalogue of the Doctors of the Church. Nullum scio, etc. There is
no man living, says he, whom I hate more, Colloque Conviv.
then I do this Hierome, he so magnifieth Virginity, Chastity, Fasting and
Penance. Vows of Chastity, says he in another place, are worse then Adultery.
Tom. 6. Germ. ad Dom. Teuton. P. 252. It Is with him matter of necessity, a
precept, Ibid.
yea and more then a precept, that every Man have his Woman, and every Woman
her Man. Yea, to show the brutishness of his disposition perfectly, and that he
might degrade all men, and bring them as much under the perfection of a beast,
as, it seems, himself was, in the point of governing their passions, These
things, says he, Ibid. P. 171.
meaning, To have company with a Woman, can be no more forborne, then we can
forbear to eat and drink, to sleep, and wake. Yea, says he, Page 505.
it is no more in our power to live without a Woman, then it is to choose, whither
a man should be a man or no. No more in our power to live Chaste, then it is to
work miracles. Neither was his Counsel to others any better, then what he
speaks of himself. For measuring other men by his own humor, in his Book de
vita conjugali, (a subject certainly which required some discretion, and
modesty at least) yet see what wholesome Counsel he gives to married folk. Si
cui Mulieri maritus frigidus, Page 147.
etc. If, says he, it happens at any time, that a Woman takes a Husband who
proves Impotent, that is, less able to perform Conjugal duty, in such case the
Woman may lawfully demand of him, to lie with his Brother, or some near
Kinsman: Yea, says he, the Horn-headed piteous fellow, her Husband, band, is
bound by Law to suffer her so to do. And so on the other side, if the Wife
prove peevish, froward, or unfitting on her part, Si Vxor nolit aut non possit,
veniat Ancilla, A man is at liberty to make use of his Maid. In Cap. 16.
Genes. Page 95.
Elsewhere he maintains Pylogamy to be lawful. Non est prohibitum, etc. it is
no where forbidden, says he, for a man to have more Wives then one; nor would
I be he, that should now prohibit it, although I persuade it not. And concludes
generally, that whatsoever the ancient Patriarks are reported to have done in
this kind, is free in it self to be done, and ought not to be prohibited at
this day. Thus did not Elias preach, nor Saint John Baptist, nor any of the
Prophets. But of all his Doctrine concerning grace and good life is most
scandalous and detestable. In Philip. Fol. 345. Tom. 1. lat.
Si vera Gratia est, etc. would you be sure, says he, that the grace of God is
true grace in you? (And that with him is only Remission or Pardon of sin) See
then that you be truly sinners, sin lustily, and with a witness; only trust as
much, and be confident in Christ. For it is not sin, that can divide you from
him, (no, nothing but unbeleeving) though you should commit Murder, Adultery,
or Fornication a Thousand times in a day. As for his Pride it was so
intolerable, that even those complained of it, who were his followers in most
things, and of his excessive scurrility even in matters most sacred. Now to
speak of Galvin, who was little less then a professed Adversary, and taxed him
frequently, not only in point of Doctrine, but of manners and good life; Cont.
Melanch.
nor of Tossanus, and others of that side, Bucer himself who was his Friend,
Disciple and Follower, confesses plainly, That Luther was blamed of all men
for an immoderate insolency, and contumeliousness of Spirit, which he
manifested in all his writings. Resp. ad Luth.
Oecolampadius tells him, he begins and ends his work commonly with the Devil.
But Zuinglius, and his Brethren of Zurick are hottest of all, Nullum unquam
Mortalium, etc. We believe, says they, that never Mortal man handled the
mysteries of Christian Religion more unworthily and filthily, then Luther has
done, not observing the bounds even of common modesty and good manners.
Another calls him Divelish Liar, Campanus.
and maintains, that he never had any true Light or understanding of the Gospel
in him. No? what then is become of Elias, their Prophet, the man sent so
Extraordinarily (they say) by God to reform the world? Does such a Seer see
nothing now but Phantasmes, and the immaginations of his own vain heart? This
were very strange indeed, and the poor Country of Germany in an unhappy
condition, to have followed a seducing Epicure so far? But who can they blame
but themselves? It was too much confidence, even in the judgment of their own
Brethren. For not only Galvin is very angry, Admon. ultim. ad Westphal.
that the world should have such opinion of him, saying directly, Qui volunt de
Luthero intel^igi, etc. They that apply the Prophesies of Elias unto Luther, do
in my opinion very unadvisedly, and commit as great a sin, as those Egyptians
did, who adored the Body and Sepulcher of the Prophet Jeremy: But to call him
The last Elias is unpardonable, Sacrilege temeritatis est, etc. It is a
Sacrilegious rashnest, says he, to do so; as if the Lords hand were shortened,
and that he could not find a better, or his equal to send forth, for the
reforming of the Church; which was much contrary to the opinion he had of
himself. I say not only Calvin, but many other more moderately affected, more
Allied in point of opinion unto Luther, do yet find fault with those Exotic
Titles and pretentions of his to Elias, and Extraordinary Mission. Vrbanus
Rhegius both for Quality and clear confession may serve for all, Admon. Cap. 6.
Scimus istos Magnis clamoribus regerere, Lutherum esse Prophetam etc. I know,
says he, very well, what some men will reply with no little confidence, That
Luther was a Prophet immediately raised by God to reform the Church, etc. but,
Manifestum est illos pessime de tota Christi Ecclesia mereri, etc. They, says
he, who think so, or say so, deserve very little thanks of the Church of God;
neither do they well by such extravagant and undue Titles to exempt any man
from the Censure and Judgment of the Churches* much less to make his writings
(as it were) a Rule of Faith and Believing unto all men.

Extraordinary Mission (a thing only given out to amaze the ignorant world,
and to countenance irregular courses) I suppose it will hardly stand in the
judgment of indifferent and wise men; there is so little evidence, or argument
for it: Either extraordinary, as was most requisite to have been shown; or
ordinary, that is, of but virtuous and commendable Conversation. Shall we
consider a little the fruits of it, and what good it wrought in the world? Our
Savior ( Matthew. 7.15.) speaking generally of false Prophets and such
Pretenders as Luther was, tells us, By their fruits you shall know them. And
it is certain, the experience of all Nations and Ages does confirm it, That
when a Country has the happiness to be converted from Heresy, Infidelity, or
any other false and corrupt way of Worshipping God, by Preachers lawfully and
in truth sent unto them from God, some extraordinary and singular Reformation
of manners does follow thereupon, and their Conversion works in them a great
and eminent degree of Holiness, Virtue, Piety, Devotion, and purity of
Conversation, answerable to the means, which God uses toward them, and to the
Spirit which works in them. But in the Reformation of Luther it was nothing
so. The change of the world, which followed upon his preaching, was notoriously
seen not to be to the better, but to the worse, both in respect of the Public
Affairs of State, and of the private manners of men. Men grew upon it much more
lewd, much more vicious, unchristian, and godless in their conversation, then
they were before: And this so evidently; that it is, not without much regret
and shame acknowledged, even by those, who were a principal cause of it. Let
Luther himself speak in the first place. The world, Sermon. in 1. Dom. Advent.
says he, grows every day worse and worse; it is apparent, men are now much
more covetous, much more malicious, and given to revenge, much more unruly,
shameless, and full of all vice, then they were in time of Popery. In vita*
ejus.
Aurifaber pronounces as from Luthers own Mouth, Post exortum Evangelium, etc.
That since the appearance of this Gospel, virtue seems to be utterly extinct,
and devotion, as it were, driven out of the world. Smidelin confesses of the
Lutherans, That the world may easily see they are no Papists, and trust not to
good works. For, says he, they do not any: The greatest part of our people,
says Bucer, Bucer. de Regn. Christi. lib. 1. c. 4.
seems to have embraced the Gospel only out of intent to shake of the Yoke of
Discipline, which lay upon them, and the obligation of Fasting, Penance, etc.
which they were forced to observe in the time of Popery, and to live at
pleasure, enjoying the full swinge of their Lust and Lawless Appetites without
control. Lastly Erasmus, who was a man of intimate acquaintance with them,
and knew their ways as well as themselves, and beside, one that never writ
partially in favor of Catholics, as the world well knows, what a Testimony
gives he of them in his Spongia advers. Hutten. Lutheranos video multos, etc. I
meet, says he, with many Lutherans abroad, but with such as live according to
the rule, which they pretend, very few or none. Consider well, says he, all
this sort of people, which call themselves Gospellers, and tell me, if you can,
where in the world is there more Luxury, Prodigality and Excess used; where
Lust and Debauchery on the one side, or Covetousness on the other rages more.
Are those people (meaning the Catholics) whom ye have forsaken, and seem to
detest so much, in any respect so blamable as they? Give me one example, if you
can, of any one man whom this Doctrine of the Gospel, (as you call it) has at
all bettered in his manners, has made of a drunkard or intemperate person,
sober and well governed, of shameless or licentious, modest and chaste. I can
give you many, says he, who by turning Lutherans, are become Ten times worse
then they were. What man living ever saw a Lutheran shed a Tear, out of any
sense or dislike of sin? or so much as to breath out a sigh, or knock his
breast, in sign of sorrow and detestation of himself, that he had offended God?
No verily; Contrition is not any necessary part of their Penance, it is a
thing altogether unknown among them, I mean, as to the practice and true
exercise of it. Their opinion or principle of only Faith, viz. That Christ
has done all for them, and that they have nothing to do in order to Salvation,
but to believe this, is a sufficient Antidote against all such kind of
sadness; with which they like not to be troubled. Yea it is most lamentable to
consider, how generally men live and dye without any other sense or feeling of
their sins at all, save what the shame, prejudce or some other Temporal
inconvenience (which commonly attends the doing of evil) may, perhaps, cause
in them; in relation to God they persuade themselves, that nothing is required
of them, but only to believe that all is forgiven, That Christ has done all
that is to be done by them, and suffered all that is necessary to be suffered;
so they take no further care, but dye accordingly, that is, in a most unhappy
security.

viz. that Luther should be sent thus Extraordinarily, as they say, to detect
Antichrist, unless they mean by giving some example or pattern of him in his
own person and practices, (which in many respects were indeed very
Antichristian) I know not, how it can be understood. For if they mean, he
should discover the P^pe to be Antichrist, it is a stale, I had almost said, an
exploded pretense, no less vain then any of the rest; discovering more
inconsideration and spleen in the pretenders, then any thing else. The
Characters, which Holy Scripture does give of that great Antichrist, who is to
come, and make War upon the Church toward the latter end of the world, are
many and clear; yet so little applyable to the Pope, as not any thing can be
less. The sum of them all is expressed in those Titles, which Saint Paul gives
him, 2 Thessalonians. 2. (...), and (...); by which is understood, That Antichrist must
be a professed and open Enemy of our Savior Christ, holding and maintaining
all things diametrically contrary, and in opposition to him. He must be the
head of a people openly and expressly at defiance with the Kingdom of Christ,
which is the Church; and not only supposed to be so in the opinion of some few
men, by interpre^ation, and some strained consequence of misgovernment in that
society, which is professedly Christ's own Kingdom. No, the people, and
followers of Antichrists Kingdom must oppose and persecute the people and
followers of Christ to the death. He must be an Enemy in all points, unto
Christ's law, to Christ's Testament, to Christ's Priesthood. All which he must,
for some short time, Universally abolish and put down. It is not vice alone,
nor some supposed superstition, nor error in opinion only, which shall erect
and constitute that accursed State, but it must be a general Apostasy and
departure from the Law of Christ, (as both Melancthon in his Common places,
Basil. 1562. Page 34. Tom. 7. P. 875.
and Zanchius a famous Protestant in his answer to the Arians do acknowledge)
it must be an opposition public and professed to the same Law, (...), as they
say, and a persecution of the Professors thereof general all the world over.
But does Saint Peter's Successor thus? are these things applyable to the State
of the Church under his government? What face of Brass can maintain it without
blushing? Does he persecute any man for professing Christ? Or does he punish or
censure any, but according to his office, and as the Canons of the universal
Church enacted, acknowledged and exercised by all Christian Princes and good
Prelates before him, do prescribe? Does not Luther himself confess, Contra.
Anabap.
that in the Papacy true Christianity, is still retained? Does he not confess,
that the Popes Church (as he calls it) is the Church of God? That there is true
Baptism, true Absolution or Remi^sion of sins among them, the true office of
Preaching, yea the true Catechism, that is, the Summary of all Doctrines
necessary to be preached? Are these things to be maintained by Antichrist? Or
to be found and professed in that rabble of Miscreants, which shall follow him?
Does not Whitacre, Junius, Saravia, Zanchius, and almost all Protestants
generally acknowledge as much, that we hold at least, the principal Articles of
faith, That we agree in Fundamentals, That the Roman Church is a true Church of
God, yea our Mother Church, in whom is yet remaining, and from whom English
Protestants at least, pretend to have received True Ordination, True Calling
and Authority to preach? Lastly, is there any Prince or Person on Earth that
professes greater reverence and observance to the Law of Christ, then the Pope
does? How then can he be Antichrist? is there any Power or Authority known in
the world more vigilant, active, zealous, and continually attent to preserve
this Law in its full Honor, Estimation and Integrity with all men, then the Sea
Apostolic has always been, and is? Nay (to speak ingenuously and seriously)
in what condition, think we, had Christianity been at this day, if that
Authority had not been established and acknowledged in the world; but that all
things had been left to those Arbitrary and dividing Principles on which
Protestancy pretends to build, viz. Sole Scripture, and every man's private
Interpretation, or Reasoning: The destructive inconvenience whereof are
apparently seen at this day; may it please the Divine Goodness to give us grace
to lay them to heart, as is meet. It Is true, in their opinion, and as they have
confidence to say, Filia devoravit Matrem, The Daughter, (that is the
Protestant Congregations) have overreached the Mother Church in perfection of
wisdom, and has been able to reform Her in some parts; yet certainly they
ought not to pretend Her to be so foulely apostatized, as that Antichrist
should govern there, Institut. lib. 4. c. 2. Sec. 11.
where Calvin himself confesses, even in the deepest of her supposed Errors,
there has ever remained inviolabile Foedus Dei, The Covenant of God inviolate.
Beside, the Apostasy of that great Antichrist must be a public thing,
notorious and visible to all men, not secret, nor creeping on by degrees, and
unperceived till after some long tract of time. He is Stella cadens de Calo,
and drawing a third part of the Stars with him; so strangely, as it shall
astonish and amaze the world to observe it. Whereas (to suppose the worst that
can be) The departure of the Roman Church from the purity of Christian Faith,
and that Apostacy, which should make her become of the Church of Christ the
Synagogue of Antichrist, was so obscure, so invisible, such a long time of
drawing on; that as the greater and better part of Christendom do not perceive
it unto this day, so of them which pretend they do, there is scarce any one
couple among them can agree upon the time of his Appearance. Many Ages ago,
says Calvin, but when, he dares not speak. Napier a Scot, and a great
Traveller in this pretended search of Antichrist, is of opinion, that he has
reigned ever since the time of Pope Sylvester, and the year 313. and so very
wisely makes all the Christian Emperors, Kings, Queens, etc. that succeeded
Constantine, yea and Constantine himself (who dyed not till the year 340.) in
stead of being Nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers of the Church, and
Defenders of the Faith of Christ, (as by the Prophesies of Scripture concerning
them they were to be, Psalm. 72.11. Isa. 49.23.) to have been the supporters of
Antichrist, and advancers of his Superstitions. Beza assigns Pope Leo, and
the year 440. Doctor Fulk, Willet, and Dounham seem to name Boniface, and the
year 607. Bullinger, and some other with him are content to stay longer, and
expect some hundred of years more, viz. until the time of Hildebrand, that is,
Pope Gregory the seventh, and the year 763. yet Doctor Whitaker says Pope
Gregory the first was the last true Bishop of Rome, and all that followed after
him Antichrists. Perkins thinks Antichrist appeared about 900 years since,
Hospinian 1200. Danaeus, about the year 574. It were infinite to relate their
jarring and contradicting of one another in diverse other very material
circumstances touching this question; as whosoever please to see, may find in
such Catholic Writers as have handled this controversy; but especially in
cardinal Bellarmin.

Luthe^s pretended Calling proves so unjustifiable, and hard to be made good,
we must of necessity take some liberty to look further into the business, and
to examine what his True Calling was, and who it was indeed that set him on
work to play such odd pranks in the Church of God. Of this there goes a black
Story, which diverse men labor to palliate and disguise (as well as they can)
diverse ways: but Luther himself tells the plain truth, viz: that it was the
Devil that first set him on work to write against the Mass; which all men know
is the Principal and most Divine Office of Christian Religion, and whereunto
whatsoever else is done in Religion, in one way or other relates. In his Book
de ^broganda Missa, thus he writes. Contigit me sub mediam noctem subito
expergefieri; ibi Satan mecum cepit hujusmodi disputationem. At midnight, such
a time, says Luther, I happened to be suddenly awaked out of sleep; and
presently the Devil fell a disputing with me: and so he proceeds in his
Narrative; wherein all all those Arguments are formally produc^d and urged by
the Devil, upon which Luther afterward resolved to abrogate Mass; as any man
may see in the Book it self above cited, which is commonly extant with the rest
of his Works. This with Doctor Fulk, Charke, and some others, is only a
spiritual combat in mind, which, they suppose, Luther* might have with the
Devil, as many other good men have had in spirit; but not any real or personal
conflict. But we reply, whether those reasons came from the Devil by bodily and
outward conference, or only by way of inward suggestion, it is not so
material; that they came from the D^vil, in the opinion and apprehension even
of Luther himself, is confessed. But Secondly, Luther in that Narrative,
describes the very voice and accent of the Devil in the disputation; which he
says was a great, yet a base and hollow voice; and which so affrighted him,
that he sweat again; although, as himself confesses against the Swenkfeldians,
upon other occasions, such encounters were not unusual with him, but rather
familiar. Thirdly, the Devil (knowing his humor) flatters him with Titles, and
calls Doctor, very learned Doctor, up and down the disputation. Fourthly,
Luther affirming elsewhere, that Empser, and Oec^lampadius (two Preachers of
Reformation, but not of his strain) were strangled by the Devil, confesses
here, that this encounter was like theirs: though he had the good hap to come
off alive; perhaps because he yielded: as neither Job, Saint Paul, nor ever any
good man ever did. See Hospinian also, a Calvinist, in his Historia
Sacramentaria. Fifthly, Jo. Manliu^, a great Lutheran Preacher, and Luther
himself Epist. ad Pat^em. T^n. 2. Witteb. fol. 269. confesses, that he was
frequently haunted by Spirits, and that Satan used personally to affright and
molest him; he maintains that Zuingliys, ^arolstadius, etc. had their several
Expositions of the words, Hoc est corpus meum from the instruction of the
Devil, why may it not then be as probable, that they had all one Master?
Sixthly, Baldwinus, another Lutheran, writes a Book purposedly upon this
Subject, and confesses in plain terms, That it was a real Truth, no fiction
or dream, but a matter of fact, and a true Story. His only excuse of it is
this. It happened, says he after Luther had abandoned the Mass; and thinks
the Devils intent was only to bring to Luthers remembrance his old errors,
that he had been a Priest, and said Mass fifteen years together, and so to
drive him to despair. But truly, if that were all the design, The Devil was but
an Ass. To attempt such a tried soldier as he was, armed cap a pe with a
confidence invincible, and the Doctrine of only Faith, with such a blunt and
feeble weapon as despair? Luther was a man out of his reach for that. He that
teaches, nothing can hurt a Christian but only unbelief; Supr. Sec. 2. med.
That if a man should commit adultery or murder a thousand times a day, it
could not divide him from Christ; That the greater sinner a man is, the nearer
he is to Gods grace; could such a man, think we, be brought to despair, only
by being told that he had said Mass in his time? and this too, as himself
confesses somewhere, with a very pious intention, and thinking that he had
pleased God, and done very well in so doing? Neither is there any passage in
the whole disputation to insinuate such a purpose. The Devil only plies his
arguments against Mass, against Priesthood, and nothing else. And therefore if
it must needs be granted, that the disputation happened after that Luther had
abrogated the Mass, it may be much better thought, that he began to stagger in
his enterprise, and to repent, perhaps, of what he he had done; and that the
Devil saw it necessary to reinforce his former, and but private suggestions
(which yet had misled him) by a second and more solemn encounter. However it is
clear, he was so far from pretending to make Luther despair, that he apparently
tempts him to presumption, while he blames him and the Papists for not having
more confidence, for making as if Christ were unmerciful, by their flying to
the Mediation of Saints and Angels. And this by the way is another argument,
that the business fell out before Luther had abandoned Mass, and not after, as
this Author pretends. For that it is now only related, viz. when Luther
wrote his Book de Abroganda Missa, Sur. Chron.
(which was abo^t the year 1521. and perhaps after he had abolished Mass) yet
it proves not but the Conference might be some years before. For it is well
known, (and himself professes it often) that Luther fell by degrees into
Heresy, and not into all at once; and that he maintained Paradoxes at the
last, which at the first he did not so much as think of. So that, having out of
the vanity and pride of his heart given the Devil advantage over him, by his
contesting in the business of Indulgences in the year 1517. he lay open to any
further temptation afterward. Add hereunto that in the procedure of the
dispute, the Devil says thus to Luther, Haec Vnctio tua vanior est, quam
Baptizatio saxi. This thy Anointing (says he, meaning that of his Priesthood)
is a vainer thing, then if thou should baptize a stone. Which plainly
insinuates, that Luther was looked upon by his Adversary at that time as a
Priest, and one that used to say Mass; and therefore it was before he had
renounced either the one or the other.

Master Chillingworth in his answer to his own Motives, has a conceit beyond
all these. He denies not, but that the Story is true, the disputation real,
nor but that it was while Luther was a Priest, and said Mass; But supposing
Mass to be evil, he thinks the Devils design was thereby indirectly to keep
him closer to it, viz. to saying Mass: as knowing that any man, and
consequently Luther, would be shye of embracing that which the Devil should so
apparently tempt him unto. But doubtless it were to engage our selves in a
wilderness of uncertain thoughts, if leaving the certain Rule of Faith, and the
no less clear evidence of fact (which in all cases of this nature are the best
grounds to frame a right judgment upon) we should give our selves liberty to
conjecture and suppose whatsoever may come in our minds. It is far better, and
more safe to stick to the Rule; such arbitrary conjectures having commonly more
of prejudice and private Interest (not to say passion) in them, then of sound
and unbyassed reason. Now does not the Scripture tell us, that the Devil is the
Father of lies, a liar from the beginning? Is he not the Enemy of God, and the
great enemy and deceiver of Souls? Are we not commanded to resist his
Temptations? to beware of his wiles? not to hearken to his suggestions? why do
we not so? why will we deceive our selves, by pretending, even in our
compliance to his suggestions, as it were to overreach him; who is a Spirit,
yea the quintessence of deceit, and infinitely more crafty (I say not, then we
can be, but) then we can imagine? You will say, shall we not hearken to him,
when he persuades us to good? I an were, He is a Spirit, tantum non Ess^ntially
malicious, that is, immutably and unchangeably so; he is confirm^d in evil,
through the act and demerit of his own perverse will, as the Blessed Spirits
are in all good by Grace. And therefore, though by the permission of God he can
sometimes depose his own natural and ugly shape of Evil, and Transform himself,
as the Apostle speaks, into an Angel of Light, yet he can never persuade us
to good, but out of some evil design: and that obliges us to stand well upon
our Guard, whenever we perceive him, to suspend our consent, to deliberate,
to take all good advise, and to beware, though the thing which he persuades
were never so apparently good and honest; lest, I say, we be caught by his
wiles, which are many, and so intricately woven many times, that they are not
easily perceived at first. As in this very case and combat with Luther, surely
he was not so dull, as to think that Luther should be directly persuaded by him
to any thing, or that he would take any thing directly upon his word, argument,
or persuasion only; who can imagine this in reason? But this, I suppose, we
may, viz. That he might think, Luther upon this disputation, and seeing the
Devil so earnest against Mass, might be apt to have many apprehensions in
himself, and cast in his mind This and That, and probably enough that very
thing in particular which Master Chillingworth pitched upon, viz. That he
should think The Devil does but prevaricate with me all this while, and
seemingly tempts me from that, to which he would have me stick close: which
apprehension alone, considering how much wavering and unsettled in his mind he
was already, the Devil knew well enough would be able to carry him clearly to
the point whither he most of all desired to bring him, which was to renounce
his Orders, and to abrogate Mass. As the event most unhappily showed to be
true; yea and as Luther himself in the sequel of the Discourse does seem more
then to intimate, answering an objection which some body made in these words,
An ignoras Diabolum esse Mendacem, etc. Know you not that the Devil is a Liar?
why then would you be persuaded by him? why would you believe him? Thereupon he
enters a discourse of the various fetches and stratagems which Satan uses to
deceive souls; and sufficiently shows how much he deceived himself, by
thinking to be too cunning for the Devil. Lib. 2. Part. 2.
Doctor Morton in his Apology has the last Plea, but it is the most
impertinent of all. For by telling a Story out of Delrio his Magia. lib. 4. c.
1. of the Devil appearing to an Abbot, and persuading him to say Mass, he would
conclude ad hominem, that we especially ought not to hold it always to be
evil, which the Devil tempts a man unto; nor consequently good, because he
disswades us from it. But the case is so unlike, and there are so many mistakes
in the report of it, that it might well have been spared, had it not been, that
the Doctor would seem to say something more then had been said before him. For
first it was not an Abbot, but a Monk, whom the Devil tempted to say Mass.
Secondly, That Monk was not yet Priest; and so it was against the Canons, yea
it had been a grievous sin in him to have said Mass: This was fit matter indeed
for the Devil to tempt a man unto; but, it seems, it was not so fit for the
Doctors purpose to mention this circumstance, and therefore he leaves it out,
as he uses to do sometimes in other like cases. Thirdly, neither did Satan
enter any disputation with the Monk either to prove, or disprove Mass.
Fourthly, nor did the party tempted consent. Fifthly and lastly, neither did
Mass then first begin, which is a thing principally to be regarded: It was not
(in the substance of the thing) a Novelty, which the Devil tempted unto, but an
office of Religion generally acknowledged, professed, observed in all
Christendom over. That which Luther was tempted unto (to say the lest of it)
was a Novelty, and therefore ex natura rei, necessarily and in all reason to
have been suspected; and which he would have suspected, had he not been blinded
with self-conceit, and preferred his own single opinion and fancy above the
sense of the whole Church; which to do is an argument of most insolent Madness,
Epist. 118. cap. 5.
as Saint Austin speaks.

Luthers Vocation or Calling, as well that which he pretended, as that which
was true; I should now give you his Character; but that he has done himself to
the life, in his writings and practices mentioned already: Yet, if you please,
for a taste of his modesty I shall add a word or two, (not more) out of his
own writings; and first concerning the Fathers Colloque Convival. cap. de
patrib. he rejects them all. Saint Hierome has not a syllable in all his
writings of faith or true Religion. Chrysostom was a mere babbler. Basil a Monk
all over, and otherwise not worth a Button. Tertullian was a Dunce, a mere
Carolstadius among the Doctors. Cyprian a poor Divine. Austin him self, has
nothing singular concerning faith. And for Saint Ambrose he wrote most drily
and impertinently upon Genesis. Saint Bernard indeed is the best Preacher of
them all; but where he disputes, he is all for Free Will. And so concludes at
last, that Melancthons Apology has more true Divinity in it, then all the
Doctors of the Church. Secondly, in respect of the Saints. Sermon. de Nativit.
Fol. 442.
Mariae. We are all Equal to the Mother of God, and as great Saints as she. In
Ep. 1. Pet. 1. When we are once regenerate, says he, and made the Children and
Heirs of God by Faith, we are all Equal in dignity to Saint Peter, Saint Paul,
yea unto the Blessed Virgin her self Mother of God. We have the same treasure
in us, which they have; and all the graces of God as largly bestowed upon us,
as they. Which may seem not a little strange, considering what he says of
himself elsewhere. Nihil singular in vita mea eminet, etc. Colloq. Fanckford.
Fol. 445.
There is not any thing, says he, very singular or extraordinary, in the
manner of my life. I can jest, I can play, I am a merry companion with men; yea
(to Gods glory be it spoken) not seldom I love to take a lusty Cup also, etc.
But by his leave where did the Saints of God thus? Elias was no such Boon, no
such Jovial Companion; it was not the Language, much less the Exercise of Gods
Prophets to Carowse and Quaff in this manner. Saint Paul chastized his Body, and
held it in subjection by Fasting, Watching, and Penance; did not pamper it,
nor study to please his Appetite with Drink and Belly-cheer, as Luthers fashion
was; Who both lived and died an Epicure, beside all his other crimes; and his
too much Indulgence toward his Genius in that kind shortened his own days: as
may be more then probably collected from the reports of good Authors; Sur.
Chron. Vlember. vita Luth.
not excepting some of his own, Justus Jonas, Aurifaber, and others.

Vocation of Calvin to his Ministry; but it was much the same with that of
Luther. For he finding France a Country too hot for him, ever since the Iron
was set to his Shoulder, takes a Voyage first into Germany, then afterward into
Italy; where getting entertainment in the house of the Duchess of Ferrara, a
Lady inclined to new opinions, in time he creates himself a preacher of the
Reformation: Extraordinarily too, you may be sure; For no man living gave him
Authority, but himself. From thence he goes to Genevah, with intent to set up
and exercise: but, as we have said, his first attempt falled him; and he was
constrained to retire for a while to Strasburgh. Yet his party at last
prevailing at Genevah, he returned, and settled his Chair of Pestilence there,
which he held unto his death. But I have not obliged my self to write the
Character or life of any persons. My Task was only to show, That Catholics in
general were as good Subjects, both in respect of their principles and
practice, as Protestants in general; and better then the most: And this I
conceive is already done; And therefore I shall trouble the Reader no further.

The Jesuits special Vow.
THe society of the Blessed name of Jesus endures much prejudice with many
men, by reason of a certain Special Vow (as they call it) which they are said
to make to his Holiness, over and above the Three Common Vows of Chastity,
Poverty, and Obedience. It is generally conceived by Protestants, that by
virtue thereof they stand obliged, upon command, and at the pleasure of his
said Holiness, to attempt the life of Kings, especially those, which he has
declared to be Heretics, or Excommunicated, to murder Princes, to embroyl and
trouble States, and in a word, to plot and execute any Treasonable design
whatsoever, that may advance the Popes Interest. But that the world may see how
much they are wronged herein, and know, both what the substance of that Special
Vow is, and what the Intent, Matter, and End of such Mission or Command from
his H^liness ought to be, which they promise so presently to obey, it is here
Transcribed out of the Bull or Constitution of Pope Paul the Third, by which
their Order was Confirmed in the year 1540. and runs thus.

ANd further we judge it expedient for our greater Devotion to the Sea
Apostolik, and more full Abnegation of our own wills and pleasures, That the
Professed of this Society, beside the Common band of the Three Vows, (viz. of
Chastity, Poverty and Obedience) be further tied by special Vow: So as that
whatsoever the Roman Bishop for the time being, shall command, pertaining to
the Salvation of Souls, and propagation of the Faith, they shall be bound to
execute the same, without Tergiversation or Excuse; whether they shall be sent
unto Turks, or unto Infidels yea even unto those that are commonly called the
Indies, or unto any other Heretics or Schismatics whatsoever.

Now what danger can arise unto Princes from such a vow as this, further then
the Preaching of true Christian Catholic Faith, and the advancement of
Religion is counted dangerous to their worldly Interest, unhappily settled in
opposition to it, The indifferent Reader may judge.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 7. in margin. r. lib. 51. P. 8. in margin. l. 2. r. lib. 120. l. 3. 4.
ibid. deleatur Thuanus lib. P. 53. deleatur all that is in the margin. P. 132.
l. 3. r. deny. P. 268. l. 18. r. condemned. P. 287. l. 5. r. deserve. P. 309.
l. 4. r. principal. 388. l. 20. r. Thirty Thousand. P. 435. l. 24. r. seem. P.
439. l. 9. r. pulling down. P. 440. l. 3. r. did therefore. ibid. l. 4. r.
amuzed. P. 453. l. 26. r. manifold. P. 487. l. 9. r whit. P. 564. l. 7. r.
Catholics. P. 578. l. 24. r. Chacun. P. 573. l. 8. r. we. P. 606. l. 3. r.
not. P. 618. l. ult. r. inconveniences. P. 624. l. 10. r. calls him.


