The Deplorable Condition of the Reduced and Discharged Men out of his
Majesty's several Regiments of Horse, Foot and Dragoons, that have Served his
Majesty in the Reducing of Ireland, and in the Wars in the Low Countries.
Most Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Right Honorable the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
in Parliament Assembled.
Shows,
THAT with Hearts full of Thankfulness, they Acknowledge the great Care and
Readiness of this Honorable House, in hearing the many Complaints have been
made to your Honors on their behalf; And with what Zeal and Love of Justice to
relieve the oppressed, there was the last Session of Parliament, an Act made
which gave them great hopes that there would be no more need of troubling your
Honors therein. -- But the United Resolutions of the Officers, not to Comply
with the same, or give any Account or Satisfaction to the oppressed in any Matter
whatsoever, unless compelled by Severity of Law (which they are not able to
prosecute) Necessitates them to become your daily Supplicants for your further
protection and relief, they having spent their little all on their attendance
thereon already, and are become Objects of Pity Worthy your Honors
Consideration and Speedy Resolution; therefore with all Submission they humbly
presume to lay before your Honors: 1. That although his Majesty by his most
Gracious Orders on the Reducement of the Army, since the happy Conclusion of
the Peace, directed that each Trooper and Dragoon, reduced out of his several
Regiments, and Troops of Horse and Dragoons, and had served in the same a
Twelve Month, as of his Majesty's bounty, should have his Horse and
Accoutrements, or value, yet their Respective Officers have detained many of
their Horses without giving them any Satisfaction for the same; Although several
brought their Horses into the Service at their own charge. 2. That as it has
been the Wisdom of the Government on the Establishment of the Army, to settle
the pay of each Member in the Army; It has been the Care of the Parliament by
Act of the 4th and 5th of his present Majesty, and the late Queen Mary of happy
Memory (which Act was yearly renewed during the Wars) to limit a certain part
of the pay allowed all Private Centinells and Soldiers as their Immediate
Sub^stance, and that they should have an Account of their pay without any
Deduction or Abatements whatsoever, other then the usual Deductions from the
Soldiers for Clothing, 12 d. per l. to be disposed of as their Majesty's
shall direct, and one days pay in the Year to Chelsey College: And with all
Submission they Presume their faithful services during the War has given
sufficient Testimony of their Loyalty, and the just discharge of their duty to
their Country, and may Justly Entitle them to their pay according to the
Establishment, and the several Acts of Parliament therein. But to their great
grief they have found that their Officers have stopped out of their immediate
Subsistence, by Unwarrantable Deductions, and contrary to Acts of Parliament,
between 8 or 10 l. a Man per Annum, from all Troopers, 4 or 6 l. a Man from
Dragoons, and 2 l. and 3 l. 10 s. from Foot Soldiers, Sergeants, Corporalls,
and Drummers, proportionably according to their pay, during the Wars in
Flanders. And that the Private Centinells were compelled to Subscribe the
Accounts, and admit of these Deductions under the Threats and Terrors of their
Officers, to be sent Prisoners to the Provost Marshal, where many have been
committed at the will of their Officers, and kept on Bread and Water till they
Complied with their Peremptory Commands others been discharged the service for
their Non Compliance, and some have been tried by a Court Marshal, and received
Punishment because they would not submit and sign general discharges. 3. That
those that served in Ireland, have not had plenary Accounts of their
Subsistence due there, or any Account of their off-Reckonings since they have
been in the Army, although it has been directed by his Majesty's Particular
Orders therein. And that all Colonels and Commanding Officers of each Regiment,
have long since had an Account of their Irish Arrears stated to the last of
March, 1^92. and clearance to a small Sum, which they pretend lies in the
Kings Hand. -- But it is to much to be feared, it is a design of the Officers
on purpose to avoid a full Account with the Soldiers, who have Arrears yet due
to them for their service in Ireland. 4. That in the Year 1692. each Trooper
that was in Ireland received 2 l. 5 s. Corporals and Trumpeters 2 l 10 s. per
man, and Dragoons proportionably, as a Bounty from her late Majesty of happy
Memory, which is since charged as so much paid in part of their Subsistence in
Ireland. 5. That many of the Colonels and Officers concerned in the Irish
Arrears, and Flanders Stoppages, are now in Ireland, and will not come into
England, on purpose to defraud the Soldiers that were under their particular
Commands, and are now discharged and reduced out of their respective Regiments.


That with all Submission, it is presumed it may not be unworthy the
Consideration of this Honorable House, to observe how remiss and unwilling the
Officers are to show Obedience to Acts of Parliament already made, or comply
with his Majesty's Orders made for the good and benefit of the Soldiers, in the
distribution of his Royal Favors, by their Confederating to oppose the same by
an United Resolution (a thing Commendable in Civil Communities, for the
suppressing of Vice, but rarely found to oppose the Established Laws of the
Kingdom, and his Majesty's Royal Acts of Bounty): And what Methods they have
used to stop Large Sums of Money out of the Immediate Subsistence of the
Soldiers, to their great Impoverishing; whilst the Officers grow Rich, and
possess and claim all Moneys due no Dead, Absent or Discharged Men, and the
Widows, Orphans and Relations of many, and such who have power to receive the
same, are reduced to great Penury and Want; and are likely so to continue,
unless Relieved by your Honors, in the disanulling the Extorted Receipts have
been given by the Soldiers, and by such other ways and means as to the Wisdom
of this Honorable House shall be thought most fit and expedient; The Officers
declaring, they are resolved to pay no Money but what they are compelled by
Law, or ordered by this Honorable House.

All which is most, Humbly Submitted, etc.

THE CASE OF THE Reduced and Disbanded Soldiers


