LICENSED.

July 24. 1677. Roger L'Estrange.

THE DISORDERS OF LOVE.

Truly expressed In the unfortunate Amors of GIVRY with MADEMOISELLE de Guise.

Made English from the French.

LONDON, Printed for James Magnes and Richard Bentley, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden near the Piazza's, 1677.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE Courteous Reader.
THE Gentleman that translated this Novel, for his Diversion, would not be
persuaded to write a Dedication, nor a Preface to it; and I being unwilling so
excellent a Piece should go into the world without a Commendation, have taken
upon me to tell you, that this Book was reckoned in France as the best piece of
that great Wit M. D. V. D. and has had the same reception abroad, as in
Holland, and in other Parts, where it has been several times Printed. I am
very confident it has lost nothing by the translating, which makes me hope it
shall have as good Fortune here. I could say much in the commendation of the
Intrigue and Wit of it, but I leave you to find that diversion in reading it;
which is all that is aimed at by

Yours R. Bentley.

Some Books Printed for James Magnes and Richard Bentley.
PLato's Apology of Socrates, or Phedo, two Dialogues concerning the
immortality of Man's Soul. A Natural History of the Passions. Country Wit.
Sophonisba. Nero. Augustus Caesar. Abdellazar. Sir Timothy Taudery. Madam
Fickle. All Mistaken. English Monsieur. Tartuff. Andromache. Calista. Forced
Marriage. The Fool turned Critic. Fond Husband. Plain-Dealer. Moral Essays,
the second Part. Zelinda. Count Brion. The Happy Slave. 1. and 2. Parts. The
Happy Slave. Part. 3. in the Press, which makes the Story complete. The
Education of a Prince, in the Press. The Triumphs of Love over Fortune, in the
Press.
French Novels.
L'Heureux Esclave complet, en trois Voll. Princess Monferrat. Grand Visiers.
Galand Escroc, ou Comte Brion. Memoires de Suede, 3. Voll. The Differences
betwixt Don John and Cardinal Nitard, in French 2. Voll. Mercure Galand, 2.
Voll. Le Triomphe de l'Amour sur la Destinee. Le Viceroy de Catalogne, in the
Press.
THE Disorders of LOVE.
THE famous Givry was descended of the House of Anglure: And till the Factions
that threatened the ruin of France, divided that Kingdom against it self, the
Duke of Guise (who headed the League against Henry the Third) and the Marquess
d'Anglure, Givry's Father, were intimate Friends: Their Business, their
Designs, their Pleasures were the same. Their Children were educated under the
same Masters; and though of unequal birth, and designed for Dignities of
different degrees, it was the Dukes pleasure the Princes his Children should
use Givry as their Brother: Givry's Conversation was so charming that it gained
him a general affection, and particularly inclined the young Princes to a ready
obedience to their Father's Command. And Givry was so discreet, that the more
familiar the Princes were with him, the greater respect he paid them, and
seemed to have laid the foundation of an inseparable Union between the Families
of Guise and Anglure. But private Friendships are seldom proof against that
violence that breaks asunder the most sacred bonds. The League separated the
Duke of Guise from the Royal Interest, which the Marquess d' Anglure resolved
to adhere to. This sense of duty to the King, the Duke looked upon as an effect
of lightness and ingratitude. And the fatal Close of the Assembly of the
Estates at Blois having kindled a War in all the Provinces of France, Givry
became the open and declared Enemy of those persons, for whom he had once had
the highest love and esteem.

Givry was so deeply affected with the agreeable Conversation of the young
Princes of Guise, and so much admired the Charms of the Princess their Sister,
that this sudden change gave him infinite trouble. But besides the favors and
hopes the King made use of to secure his allegiance, the beauty of Madam
Maugiron was no small attractive to win him to the Court, and fix his
resolutions to be of the Royal Party.

This Lady was a young Widow, though her Husbands Children by a former Marriage
would not allow her that quality; and those of their Family deny her a place
among their lawful Alliances. Count Maugiron the Kings Lieutenant of the
Province of Dauphine having married her for love; and it was pretended they had
taken one another words without further Ceremony to consummate the Marriage.
But whether the Lady had placed too great a confidence in the promises of the
Count, or was deceived by the imposture of a personated Priest instead of a
real one, she had the good fortune by the credit of her Kinswoman, Madam de la
Noue, to obtain protection from the King at Tours, where she was esteemed a
principal Ornament of the Court.

Givry was much taken with this Lady, nor was she insensible of his Charms. He
was but one and twenty years old, an age too tender to adventure into the
intrigues and mysteries of Love, had not Nature by extraordinary favors
exempted Givry from the common Rule of things, and given him a privilege above
the ordinary rate of men. He had before the age of eighteen performed the
course of his Studies, and finished his Exercises; was Master of the
Mathematiques, and all other Learning requisite to the accomplishment of a
Gentleman: He spoke Greek, Latin, and all the modern Languages of Europe, as
well as his Mother Tongue; and in the process of my Story I shall have occasion
to observe, he was made Captain of the Light Horse of France at two and twenty
years of age.

You may believe a Lover so considerable, easily made a more than ordinary
progress in his Amor with a Lady, who had for him a violent inclination. She
took no longer delight in the sight of any other: she did open incivilities and
affronts to his Rivals: they spent whole days together in pleasant discourses
and endearing Conversation. And when interrupted by the necessity of his
attending the discharge of his duty, the lovely Widow writ him Letters so kind,
that they supplied in a manner the pleasure of her company.

These Letters he always carried with him, or put them up in a little Box,
wherein he kept what he most valued. He read them over and over as often as he
had leisure, and took more care for the safety of that Box, than for his own
life. But at a skirmish wherein the Enemy had the better of those of the Kings
Party commanded by Givry, among the rest of his Equipage the Box was taken. To
know the deep sense he had of this loss, you must be as deeply in love as he
was; and, the truth is, he had more than one reason to be troubled at it.

The Children of Count Maugiron, by the former Wife, were in Arms for the
League against the King, and Givry was afraid the Letters might come to their
hands, who thinking themselves concerned to asperse the reputation of their
Mother-in-Law, would be easily induced to publish the Letters. He was extremely
troubled he had exposed his Mistress to that danger; and had he believed it
would have taken effect, he had certainly made some rash attempt for the
recovery of the Box. But being as witty as he was amorous, he came to a
resolution to think no more of that accident, when News was brought him that a
Trumpet from the Duke of Mayenne desired to speak with him, and brought with
him a Box very like his.

The Box indeed was in truth the very same he had lost; and when the Trumpeter
delivered it him, he told him, That the Holy League intended not to manage any
intrigue of Gallantry: that they had without scruple made use of such pieces of
his Equipage as might be serviceable for Religion and the Public Good. But
conceiving Love Letters useless for advancement of those ends, they had
faithfully sent him back all those that belonged to him.

Givry smiled at the irony of the Complement, and having told the Trumpet that
the hearts of Heroes were large enough, to entertain at once the thoughts of
love and of War, he dismissed him with a present, and locked himself up to peruse
his Letters again; but was extremely surpised to find on a fold of the first
Letter he looked upon, Verses written in an unknown Character, a Copy whereof
follows.

Although the tenderness of love
Insensibly the sense improve,
And lovers need a quick and tender sense,
To raise their love above indifference.
Yet often poor Lovers ravishing sweets do prove
Effects of humor, not of love.
Givry very desirous to know what to apply this Maxim to, opened the Letter,
which was to this effect.

Madam de Maugiron's Letter to Givry.
NO, Givry, I shall never be pleased with you, while I find you fully persuaded
I am so. You are diligent, faithful, and passionate: But an entire confidence
agrees not with the fineness and delicacy of my affection; and perfect love
expects so much duty, that he is a stranger to it who thinks he has fully
performed it. It must be your part to render your self a little more capable of
fear, it shall be my care to revive your courage, and settle your confidence.
It is not my desire you should be ignorant of your happiness, but that I should
by degrees convince you of it, as I please; and not find you convinced of it
already.


When Givry opened this Letter, he did did it rather of curiosity to see
whether the Verses had been written there by chance, than out of any suspicion
they contained a censure of the Letter. He loved Madam Maugiron too well to
impute her affection to mere humor or fancy, or to think her humor
predominant over her love; but comparing the sense of the Verses with that of
the Letter, he thought it not so altogether exempt from being subject to blame,
as he had formerly believed it. He asked himself whether it savoured not more
of humor than love, to declare ones self unsatisfied with a person, who in the
same period is acknowledged constant, diligent, faithful and passionately in
love? He did not yet give sentence in favor of the Verses, but the defense he
made for his Mistress against them was very weak. And tumbling over the rest of
the Papers in the Box, he found on another Letter these Verses.

Think not by long Discourses to express
Your passions height, or tenderness:
That love, that grief the greater is,
Which in the heart close Prisoner lies.
Givry reproached himself as guilty of unfaithfulness to his Mistress, for
passing so favorable a judgment of these Maxims as he did: but notwithstanding
this reproaah, he searched for more of them, and was glad when he found them.
Upon a Letter, where Madam Maugiron applauded her self for the choice of her
love, he found written Such is love's mighty influence,
It spoils the judgment, and corrupts the sense;
That often we enamored are,
Indifferently of foul and fair.
Happy the man who by that power moved,
Loves only what is worthy to be loved:
And is reputed wise for loving that
Which the strong impulse of his fate,
Not his discretion, did incline him to:
It Is not by Choice, but Chance we woe.


To another Letter, containing many fantastical reproaches, there was added,
When the kind fates for Lovers choose
The hour, each other to enjoy,
Who would the precious minutes loose,
In fruitless railing them t'imploy?


The Verses on the former Letters had only persuaded Givry, that Madam
Maugiron's Letters were liable to censure; but these last carried his
reflections a little further: he fancied he had discovered a Lady in love, who
made her advantages of all the innocent pleasures of it, and reduced all the
mysteries and intrigues of it under the severity of rules, and exactness of
Laws. And representing to himself the good fortune of a man who could affect a
heart of that Character, he could hardly forbear envying his happiness, and
permitting himself that moment to be persuaded that Madam Maugiron was not the
sole person in the world capable to make him happy.

Givry was then at Amboise, where part of the Troops under his Command were
quartered. The Marquess de Bellegard, Master of the Horse to the King, in his
return from the Army at Soulogne, past through that Town partly to see Givry:
They were intimate friends, and had no reserve for each other. Givry acquainted
him with the adventure of the Box; which they sent for, that they might view it
together; the Marquess de Bellegard had scarce cast his Eye on the Character of
the Verses, but he thought he knew it, and told his Friend he was very much
mistaken if it was not the hand of Mademoiselle de Guise. Of Mademoiselle de
Guise, says Givry! Yes, replies the Master of the Horse, I knew at Piemont
where I was bred with my Unele, a Daughter of the Baron de Vins, whom he
married, and to whom Mademoiselle de Guise writ very often: I have seen some of
those Letters, and dare swear the Verses you have showed me were written by the
same hand. Givry was a great admirer of Mademoiselle de Guise, when a Child,
and easily imagined what a height of perfection her Charms were by this time
arrived to. And what sweeter temptation for a man of one and twenty years of
age, than to see a great and beautiful Princess begin to him in Gallantry, and
encourage him to come on, by advancing first toward him. He asked the Marquess
what he thought of the meaning of those Verses, whether without vanity he might
not look on them as a favor, and expect a good issue? What good can you expest
from them, answered the Marquess? a person engaged as you are, should rather
fear than wish for good fortune in this kind; there is nothing more trouble
some; nor can the pleasure be great which is derived from a happiness that
reaches not the heart. Do you think then, replied Givry, that favorable
prevention from Mademoiselle de Guise cannot reach my heart? I believe you in
love with Madam Maugiron, answered the Marquess, and were I so, another Lady's
favor would be but a trouble to me. I own my self in love with Madam Maugiron,
says Givry, and unwilling to sacrifice my passion to a few Verses, the design
whereof I know not: but if Mademoiselle de Guise intended them as a favor, it
is not Madam Maugiron shall hinder me from being sensible of it. I am young and
ambitious, and Mademoiselle de Guise is one of the most beautiful Princesses of
the world. You would much question my wit, if having it in my power to be
engaged in an intrigue of love with her, I should let slip the opportunity. I
do not say the occasion is offered me, for you may be mistaken in the Character
of the Verses; and though she had writ them, it cannot be doubted but she did
it in merriment. But supposing she intended to make me disgust my Mistress, and
show me that another might render me more happy, I should be loath to give her
the displeasure of finding her self mistaken. Nor am I of opinion, that because
at 21 years old I have had kind thoughts for Madam Maugiron, I must therefore
look upon all other Ladies with the Eyes of an Hermit. Ah! poor Madam
Maugiron, says the Marquess smiling, what a condition are you in? if you love
Givry in earnest, you are to be pityed.

Though Givry thought her not yet in any such danger, yet he fancied the Verses
he had read expressed as much tenderness as gallantry, and could readily
remember, that Mademoiselle de Guise was one of the finest Children in the
world. He pleasantly flattered himself with a conceit, that she had vouchsafed
to correct the Love Letters that belonged to him, and had sent him the
amendments under her hand. But all this was dubious; and if it had not been so,
yet he received from Madam Maugiron those marks of tenderness, and expressions
of kindness, he durst not once hope for from Mademoiselle de Guise: He had not
yet resolved to quit a real happiness for a chimerical hope; and therefore
returned to Court with Monsieur de Bellegard, to seek, said Givry, in Madam
Maugiron's Eyes a preservative from the Evils that threaten her.

They found the King full of joy at News he had lately received: The King of
Navarre as he was putting his Army into quarters, met a flying Camp of the
Leaguers Army, he fought them and gave them a total rout: many considerable
Prisoners were taken, and among the rest the Baron of Vins, whose Daughter the
Marquess de Bellegard mentioned in his discourse of the Verses in the Box. This
Baron was one of the faithfullest Creatures of the House of Guise, and one of
the ablest Counselors of the League. The King of Navarre sent him to the King,
that he might by good usage endeavor to win him to his Party; and he came to
Court the very moment that Bellegard and Givry arrived there. Givry was
strangely moved at the sight and name of the Prisoner, and was more impatiently
desirous to speak with him, than to see Madam Maugiron; and as soon as he found
the opportunity to speak freely to him, Will you not suspect me, Monsieur le
Baron, says Givry, or may I hope that the memory of my infancy will distinguish
me in your affection from the rest of the Royallists? You have distinguished
your self hitherto, by actions so mischievous to our Party, answered Vins, that
I should do you wrong to mix you with the multitude: This is not the way to
express a remembrance of that infancy you put me in mind of; and I assure my
self when the late Duke of Guise so highly commended your courage and address,
he never thought you would one day employ them against the Princes his
Children. I am engaged to it in duty ( replies Givry) which the Duke of Guise
would never have advised me to be wanting to. I was born a subject of the King
I serve, and before I was of years of discretion, care was taken to inspire me
with a blind submission to the Law of Allegiance I owe him. But, Sir, let
others less engaged than you and I judge of these things, and tell me, I
beseeeh you, some News of the young Princes and Princess their Sister: Do they
perform at age, what their infancy promised? and is Mademoiselle de Guise so
beautiful at eighteen, as she gave us hope for when she was ten or twelve years
of Age. The Princes, answered Vins, are worthy Heirs of the bravery and
magnificence of their Family: He whom in your time they called the Duke de
Joyease, who did since make his escape from the Castle of Loches, where he was
Prisoner, is wise, stayed, and every way fit to bear the title of the eldest
Son of his Father. The Prince of Joinville will be one of the handsomest Men on
Earth: And the young Chevalier de Guise has that height of Wit and Courage
that add Luster to the least of his actions. But the Princess their Sister is
infinitely beyond any thing can be said of her, she has a thousand Charms
proper to her self, not to be found elsewhere, and parts so far excelling those
of her Sex, that it may be affirmed, the most accomplished beauty under Heaven
is the least of her good qualities. You have seen, adds he smiling, an Essay
of her parts, in some Verses that were brought you by the Duke of Mayenne's
Trumpeter, which I am persuaded raised in you no less curiosity than
admiration: What, cries Givry, was it Mademoiselle de Guise made those Verses?
is it possible she should take care to play the Critic on my Letters and send
me them? It was she did it, I assure you, and charged me to deliver the Box to
you, said the Baron, it fell into the hands of young Maugiron, who with great
diligence makes his Court to our Princes. He showed them the Letters written to
you, not knowing how far he was concerned in them: And when his Governor knew
the Character, and would have paraphrased upon the intrigue, Mademoiselle de
Guise (whom the Princes her Brothers had acquainted with the business) forbad
him, and said, she reserved too much kindness for the memory of your Infancy,
to permit a Lady you loved to be evil spoken of. It was generously done,
replied Givry, and like a Princess of the House of Guise. But, Sir, have not
the Verses something in them extraordinary? cannot you tell me what induced her
to write them? and whether they were made in private, or in company? I cannot
well inform you of that particular, said Vins, I was not present when the
Verses were made; and when Mademoiselle de Guise showed them me, she told me
only, she would let the Court Ladies see, that those of the league exceeded
them both in delicacy of affection, and in fineness of wit. But dear Givry,
added the Baron, fixing his Eye on him, you have been bred among us, and may go
your self to ask the Princess what she thought when she wrote them. Do not you
blush to think you should learn it by a third hand? Or can you imagine the
Princes of the holy Union are not able to offer you as good Employments as
those you aspire to with the King of Navarr? For it is he is the soul of your
Party, and the Kings name is but the color you make use of to authorize your
protecting of Heresy. I have told you already, replied Givry, rising up, we
are too far engaged in contrary Parties to expect belief from one another, of
what we can say to the advantage of the several Interests we have espoused: A
Peace, or an absolute Victory, will unite us better than our discourses: if in
the mean time you are permitted to write to the Princes and Mademoiselle de
Guise, I conjure you to assure them, that all the good offices a Man can do in
their favor, without rendering himself unworthy of their esteem, they may
always expect and promise themselves from Givry.

With that he went out, and passing to the Kings Lodgings met there the
Marquess de Bellegard, and went with him to take a turn in the Malle at Tours,
where he told his Friend the discourse newly had with the Baron de Vins. I
could have sufficiently assured you, said the Marquess, that these Verses were
Mademoiselle de Guise's; and I believe I am not much more mistaken in the
Judgment I past on the Adventure. You will withdraw your love from Madam
Maugiron, and feed your self with fancies about Mademoiselle de Guise; and I
know by the air of your Countenance in speaking to me, that part of my Prophecy
is already fulfilled. But, my dear Friend, yield not at the first onset, rally
your Forces if you find them disordered; remember that Mademoiselle de Guise is
among a party not ready to be vanquished: it is possible you may not see her
while you live. But could you flatter your self with the hopes of a peace, or
such an absolute victory that might gain you the convenience of seeing her, she
is the Daughter of an imperious House, and will have a Sovereign stranger, or a
Prince of the Blood to her Husband. Never think she will forego these hopes in
complaisance to you; and consider what a miserable case it is for a Person
accustomed to the kindest endearments of his Mistress, to tire himself out with
making love to one who only feeds him with fancies.

Givry had reflected on all these particulars before he heard them from his
Friend; but by a fate he could not avoid, he mused incessantly of Mademoiselle
de Guise, and scarce thought any more of Madam de Maugiron: He resolved,
without the least scruple, to conceal from her the recovery of the Box; and no
longer thought her Conversation charming as formerly. When she spoke kindly to
him, he remembered the Maxim in Verse, where Mademoiselle de Guise found fault
with expressions that are strong, and became clearly of opinion he should have
had more love for his Mistress, had she not too much assured him of his
happiness: he was displeased to find it so publicly known, and fancied that a
more private intrigue would have been more pleasant. And when to all this he
added the conceit of being allowed, by a great and beautiful Princess, to
pretend a right grounded on what had already past from her, to entertain her
with the discourses of Love, and perhaps make her forget that Tyranny her high
Blood seemed to oblige her to, against inferior Lovers, he gave himself up to
be entirely possessed with fancies and illusions he could never get rid of.

It was long e're Madam Maugiron apprehended the mischief that threatened her.
Givry made constant visits to no other Lady, and if at any time she found him
melancholy and discomposed, she imputed it to his ambition of Glory and Renown.
But the season being come for opening the Campaign; and Givry at parting
entertaining his Mistress with no other discourse than of clearing the Loyre,
and reducing to the obedience of the King all the Towns the League possessed upon
that River. Have you no other discourse to entertain me with, Givry, says she?
or can you think me no otherwise concerned at your departure, than to be told
only what Conquests you design for the King? He blushed at this reproach, but
not being able to confess he deserved it, he excused himself by telling her,
his discourse proceeded from his earnest desire to render himself more worthy
of her. It Is not enough for so charming a beauty as yours, says he, that your
Servant be deeply in Love, but his Love must be such you need not be ashamed
of, and that his reputation of being a great Captain may countenance and
support his pretensions of Love. Ah, Givry, cries Madam Maugiron, it is a noble
ambition, but unseasonable here: it may afford a Lover some comfort against
troubles absence produces, but is not a fit subject of discourse at parting, if
there be true Love in the case: the Love you have had for me I see is at an
end; and whether any displeasure you have taken against me, or your immoderate
desire of glory has possessed your heart, I find my self now wholly excluded it.

Givry was not yet fully assured, whether Madam Maugiron were in the right:
Love at the beginning appears in disguise, and though his thoughts for
Mademoiselle de Guise might well be called Love, his mind could not yet yield
them that Character. He did all in his power to persuade Madam Maugiron her
suspicions were ill-grounded, and having great power over her, left her
somewhat better satisfied.

Having left Madam Maugiron, he went to the Baron de Vins, whom by the advice
of Bellegard he visited seldomer than he could have wished. The Baron
passionately devoted to the service of the House of Guise, incessantly pressed
Givry to join again with that Family. The Marquess de Bellegard from whom he
concealed nothing, observing the great progress Mademoiselle de Guise made in
Givry's affections, was not a little afraid lest Vins should debauch Givry from
his allegiance; but not thinking it fit to make the discovery of so offensive a
doubt, he told him that his frequent enterviews with the Prisoner gave those
who envied him great advantage against him, that he would do well to forbear
them. Givry had for some time followed the advice; but being ready to take the
Field, and not knowing but an exchange of Prisoners, or some fatal blow might
deprive him for ever of an opportunity to see the Baron aagain, he resolved to
take leave of him.

I am going, says Givry smiling to the Baron, to add new Crimes to those you
have reproached me with; and if I dye not in the first rencounter, there shall
few Actions pass this Campaign but I will have a small share in them; but I
hope this part of my duty may be consistent with the rest of it; and that if
upon the general occasion I am forced to bear the Character of an Enemy to the
League, I may in particular occurrences assume that of a faithful Servant of
the House of Guise. I know not whether fare will permit you to assure them thus
much, but if it be in your power I conjure you to do it; and particularly to
tell Mademoiselle de Guise, that the duty which retains me on the Kings side is
no small Chain upon my affection, that all I do is more liable to complaint
than blame; and that if she could read what is written in my heart, she should
discover there more respect, and more zeal for her, than the Troops of the
League shall find contrary appearances in my Actions. Though the Baron had used
all his endeavors to seduce Givry, and in the first transports of his
affection for the League, was displeased with him for being so firm to the
royal interest, he could not forbear esteeming him the more for it. He embraced
him with a great deal of kindness, and promised to do him all the good Offices
he could. Givry having thanked him, took his leave and went to take possession
of the Charge the King had given him, of Camp-master General of the Light Horse
of France.

The Kings Army made great progress this Campaign; the King of Navarre, in whom
the King began to place the confidence he ought, had inspired him with a desire
to fight in the head of his Troops, and the two Kings having joined Forces at
Soulogne, the place of general Rendezvous, led them along the Loire, where they
found not one Town in Rebellion but it submitted to them. The King took
Gergeau, Gien, La Chaute, and made himself Master of all the Bridges above and
below Ordeaus; Piviers, Estampes, and Dourdan had the like fate: And the Kings
having past the Seyne at Poissybridge, were met there by the Duke de
Montpensier, who led their Forces from Normandy, and by the Sieur de
Harlay-sancy, who had made brave Levies in Switzerland. The Kings Army being
thus put into the condition he wished it, for besieging of Paris, he laid Siege
to it in July, 1589.

Givry in former Sieges had given signal proof of his Courage and good Conduct.
Not a Sally had been made but he bravely repulsed: he had cut of all succors,
and got the advantage in all Skirmishes that happened; the safety of the Army
depended on his care. The King of Navarr charmed by so many brave Actions, and
seeing Givry's Person as amiable as his name was illustrious, honored him with
a particular kindness; and till a more considerable Government should fall
procured him that of Brie.

Givry was scarce in possession of it, when he surpised six thousand Bushels
of Corn which they endeavored to convey into Paris, by the help of a
counterfeit Pass. Givry caused it to be seized at Pont de Samois, and was
giving orders for carrying it to Corbeil where the Kings Magazin was; but
having cast his Eyes on the Man who had the Convoy in charge, he thought he
knew him, an Officer of the late Duke de Guise.

He was not mistaken. The Man being a principal Officer of the Dukes Household,
and knowing Givry. Is it possible, says he, that you should hinder the carrying
this Corn into Paris, and that a Person so dear to the late Duke my Master
should reduce the Princess his Wife, and the Princess his Daughter to the
danger of being in want? How in want, says Givry in great heat, are those
Ladies exposed to share the miseries of the people? Yes doubtless, says the
Master of the Convoy; and the Duke de Mayenne to let the besieged see they
suffer no more than he does, has made so small a reserve of Corn for himself,
that all his House, and particularly that of Madam de Guise, was upon the point
of being in want when I left them. They shall not want it, reply's Givry; and
you may assure Madam and Mademoiselle de Guise, that they shall never receive
from me any Personal displeasure. With that, consulting only his growing
passion, he made him a good Pass, and gave him a Guard to bring him without
danger to the first Retrenchments.

This Action was too public not to be discovered: The King was informed of it.
And those who envied the merit of Givry represented it as much to his
disadvantage as possible: it was really of great importance. Upon the reducing
or resistance of Paris depended absolutely the Peace, or the War: That Town was
the seat and support of the Rebellion. To take Paris from the League, was to
blow up the very Foundations of the League; and to send in thither the least
refreshment could not but appear a Crime highly punishable. And some Prisoners
taken at a Sally informed, that if that Convoy had been staid one day longer,
the Citizens were resolved to open their Gates; that it was not in the Duke of
Mayenne's power to keep them longer from doing it; and that nothing but the
sight of that Corn, and promises of more to be brought in the same way, could
have appeased the people. This Circumstance so highly aggravated Givry's fault,
that the King was in extreme wrath against him, which the credit of all his
Friends could not appease; so that the King of Navarr was forced to send for
him to come in Person to justify himself. His excuse had been excellent, had
he been to clear himself before the King of Navarre, from whom all faults of
Love had their pardon of course. But besides that the King was not of that
temper, Givry could not resolve to lay open his folly, and made so pitiful a
defense, that his best Friends and Protectors were ready to condemn him. The
King of Navarre sent him word of it, and having told him from the King, That he
must justify himself better, or stand convicted of Intelligence with the
Enemy; he let him know there was no mean to be found betwixt these extremes; so
that Givry was forced to make the King of Navarre a clear confession of the
secret motive of his Fault.

This Prince who feared to find Givry more criminal, was mightily pleased with
the Relation, and running to inform the King of the truth, persuaded him the
fault was pardonable in a young Man, and that in case he could be more
circumspect for the future, this first fault deserved only a reprimand. The
King gave him a very severe one, and it was the last from the Mouth of that
poor Prince, who was traitorously assassainated on the morrow. On this
lamentable occasion Givry expressed his real ackowledgements of those marks of
esteem he had received from the King of Navarre: He was the first that saluted
him King of France, and persuaded the Marquess de Bellegard, and several
others, to do the like; and expressed so much constancy and resolution against
those who would not join with him, that it may be truly affirmed, the new King
received from him the establishment and tranquillity of the beginning of his
Reign. Not but that the Crown did of right belong to him, but that the Law had
declared him incapable, upon the account of his Religion. There was then so
great a Force in arms against him, that had certainly taken the Crown from him,
if those foreign oppositions had been seconded by any domestic disorders.
Givry alone appeased the Seditious and encouraged the Fearful. The new King
being sensible of it, thanked him in expressions so tender and kind, that the
Court looked upon Givry as a declared Favorite.

The first troubles occasioned by the change, being somewhat appeased, the King
took his Quarters at Meudon, where he received the Deputies of his Parliament
and Uuniversity of Paris, who conjured him to render his Religion consistent
with his Rights. A Conference was agreed to be held for that purpose; and that
things might be debated with the greater freedom, he granted a Cestation of
Arms for fifteen days.

Givry received the news from the King's mouth, as he came out of the Council;
the King added, smiling, That, during the Truce, he might go and receive thanks
for the succors he had sent Mademoiselle de Guise: This was license enough for
a young Man of his Curiosity; a curiosity that well might be called a
passionate Love.

He went from Meudon the same instant with his Friend Rellegard, who would not
let him go alone, and mingling themselves with the Guard appointed the
Deputies; they were received together with them into the Town. They went
immediately to the Hostel de Guise, to discover where the young Princess
usually walked, that they might see her without being taken notice of. They
were told she was at the Tuilleries, with the rest of the Princesses of of the
Family, to know the success of the Deputies journey, who were to have Audience
there.

The two Adventurers got thither, and were so fortunate to learn from the first
Livery-men they asked, That Mademoiselle de Guise, being apparently too young
to enter into deliberations of State, was walking alone in the Garden: Thither
they went, and had not walked thirthy paces, but they perceived her coming
toward them; they drew off at some distance, that they might look upon her
with more liberty. Givry thought her then a thousand times more charming than
the Baron de Vins had described her. The Marquess de Bellegarde had never seen
her before. He had met his Uncle at the Expedition of the Marquisate of
Saluces, followed him to his death, and came not to Court till after the death
of the late Duke of Guise, who had removed all his Family thence. He was
surprised at the Beauty and Majesty of this Princess, and confessed that Madam
de Maugiron was not to be compared to her.

Givry was but too much confirmed in the same opinion; the sight of the
Princess had now persected, what the Verses and the Descriptions of Vins had
but begun. Givry was seized with a strange heat of affection: he looked on
Princess with so much attention that he could not hear Monsieur Bellegarde. And
both advancing to see her at a nearer distance, they were observed, and gave
her the curiosity to enquire who they were that appeared so handsome and of so
haughty a mien. She sent a Gentleman to ask them if they came to engage in a
Party? and whether they wanted one to present them to the General, the Duke of
Mayenne her Uncle?

We are not now to engage in a Party for the War, Mademoiselle, (says Givry
approaching her) but should esteem our selves happy, if protection were offered
us to engage here in a Party of Love: Whatever we see at Paris invites us to
such an Engagement: The Ladies here are admirable, and the Conjuncture of the
Siege furnishes frequent occasions to do them service: But there are so many
Competitors ambitious of this Honor, that as for me I fear I have spoken too
late, and am not likely to find any place void.

Mademoiselle de Guise knew Givry as soon as he spoke, but resolved for her
diversion, to use him as an Adventurer unknown. Those of your Age (says she)
are seldom exposed to want of Employment: they engage and disengage with so
much ease, that Love never fails to find them business: at the worst they may
list themselves Volunteers, which is not the worst Employment in the Militia of
Love. The Employment of a Volunteer has not business enough for a Soul like
mine, Mademoiselle, (replied Givry) I have more experience than my age
promises, and I must take it as an injury, if Love allow me not a place among
his tried Soldiers. The experience you may have gained elsewhere, says
Mademoiselle, will perhaps not be valued among the Ladies of the League: they
possibly may be afraid the mysteries of Love are altered among you, as those of
Religion; and that being accustomed to maintain the Party of Heresy, they may
not find in you a Faith so pure as they expect in their Servants.

The Marquess de Bellegarde had hitherto been silent, having given his Friend
the honor of speaking first. But hearing the Lovers of the Royal Party taxed
of Heresy, he thought himself obliged to defend them. We are very willing to
make proof of our faithfulness against the Lovers of the League, Mademoiselle,
said he; and this kind of Combat would be more advantageous for us than Combats
of War: it being more easy to be perfectly in Love with the Ladies of the
League, than to conquer the Princes of that Party.

As Monsieur de Bellegarde was saying that word, Madam de Guise came to them;
and with her, Madam de Nemours, her Mother in-Law, Madam the Duchess of
Mayenne, the Lady Marchioness Villars, her Daughter by a former Husband; Madam
d'Aumale, formerly Mademoiselle d'Elhoeuf, and several other Ladies, who came
from the Audience of the Deputies to take the Air in the Garden.

They all knew Givry, and Madam de Guise having the Story of the Convoy, and
Givry's Complement fresh in her memory, ran to him with open Arms, and embraced
him, as if he had been then (as formerly he was) her Childrens Companion in the
Exercises of their Youth. She beckned to Mademoiselle, her Daughter, to do the
like; and the young Princess not expecting a second Command, Think not, (said
she saluting him,) that I knew you not till my Mothers arrival, you were not so
much out of my memory: But, adds she, leaning toward his Ear, you serve a
Mistress so delicate, that I held my self obliged to be cautious.

Givry could not answer these obliging expressions, being prevented by the
Questions and Caresses of the other Ladies. One asked him if he came to render
himself up to his old Friends, another reproached him for having forsaken them.
He returned his Answer in deep Reverences made to them, or in ambiguous terms;
and letting them know that his Friend there present was the Marquess de
Bellegarde, Master of the Horse to the King, they acquainted the Ladies that
their Visit was a Fruit of the Truce; and that it should not be their fault, if
they should not be allowed by a good Peace to wait on them oftener.

These Discourses held till Sunset. Givry had a desire to continue them longer,
and to lie that night at Paris: but Bellegarde, though charmed with the sight
and Conversation of Mademoiselle de Guise, thought it not fit to hazard so long
a stay, without particular leave from his Majesty. He drew his Friend as it
were from the Garden, where he staid above an hour after the Ladies were gone;
and taking the way to the Kings Quarters, they had no other Discourse as they
went, but of the Beauty and Charms of Mademoiselle de Guise. Givry had till
this time observed some measure of civility toward Madam de Maugiron: He was
sensible he loved her not as he had formerly done; yet he made some scruple of
betraying the hopes of a Lady in Love with him, who never gave him any cause of
complaint: She staid at Chinon with Queen Louise, and writ to Givry by every
Courier; and he as punctually answered her Letters. He had gained her the
protection of the new King, and loved her still as an obliging acquaintance;
but with so much indifference, the Love he retained for her could not disturb
the peace of his spirits. Yet the sight of Mademoiselle de Guise had utterly
destroyed those small Relics of Kindness for Madam de Maugiron. At his return
from Paris he found at his Quarters a Letter from Madam Maugiron, and forgot to
read it; two or three more had the same fortune. Mademoiselle de Guise had so
entirely possessed both his affection and fancy. What Charms she has! says he to
the Marquess de Belleogarde, what a mixture of Majesty and sweetness appears in
her? How quick, yet how pleasing and agreeable she is! Did you ever see a
Physiognomy so witty, and so open and clear as hers is? Her Eyes have a Luster
ours can hardly endure to behold it. Smiles seem to dwell on her Lips; and what
can be more delicate and easy, than her Conversation? She is, I fear, answers
Bellegarde, every way too perfect for your repose; and your Friends could have
wished the Baron of Vins had not drawn her Picture so much to the Life.

Givry stirred not out of his Quarters the night he returned from Paris. His
spirits were in disorder, and his affections in too great a heat to be
adventured into the company of Persons unconcerned; and one nights reflection
was little enough to put him into a condition to appear at Court. The King no
sooner saw him but he took him aside, and with the familiarity which gained him
so many hearts; Well, Givry, says he, have you seen Mademoiselle de Guise, and
do you find her worthy of what she made you do against the interests of your
Party? Mademoiselle de Guise, Sir, replies Grvry, is a Person of so admirable
perfections, that your Majesty shall permit me, if you please, to forbear the
description. I know your heart susceptible of amorous impressions; and mine is
so inflamed, I should certainly dye, should any accident cross my desire. Fear
no such accident from me, says the King; you are more than one way sufficiently
Guarded on that side. I have kindness for you, and understand very well what
Love can do in a Man of your temper. As for me, I am so prepossest with another
Object, that all other Beauties in the World cannot reach my affection. With
that, as a new evidence of his favor, he trusted him with the secret of his
passion for Gabrielle d'Estree, afterward Duchess of Beaufort. This Amor of
the Kings was then in its first heat, and he spoke of his Mistress to Givry
with such transport, that Givry could no longer suspect danger on that side;
but made the King a faithful relation of all the passages at Paris: To which he
added an humble Petition, that the King would allow him the liberty to make his
advantage of the conveniences of the Truce. The King left him absolute Master
of his actions, so that he went back the same day to Paris, where Mademoiselle
de Guise expressed a desire to see the Kings Camp; which they agreed should be
done on the morrow. Mademoiselle de Guise came in company of the Princess her
Mother; and Givry, having received them at the foot of the Retrenchments,
conducted them under certain Tents adorned with Flowers, and with Greens. He
treated them there at a magnificent Collation, served in by Boys in the habits
of Slaves: The Collation being over, Givry brought the Ladies to a little
Plain, where, with the Kings leave, he had caused some Troops to be drawn up in
Battalia, and Exercised them before the Ladies. The Princesses were very much
delighted with the sight, and in their return to Paris were attended by a
Company of German Trumpeters, who made an excellent Consort of Military Music,
and led them as triumphant to the Walls of the City.

The Marquess de Bellegarde, who, under pretense of seconding the intentions of
his Friend, was glad of the occasion to make his Court to Mademoiselle de
Guise, entertained the Ladies of the League with a false attack of a Fort.

The King was not displeased at these Entertainments, in hopes they might
conduce to sweetning and mollifying the spirits exasperated, and improve the
Truce into a lasting Peace: But these hopes soon vanished, for the Duke of
Mayenne had proposed the Truce for no other end, than to give the Duke of Parma
(who had promised him aid) the convenience of advancing to the relief of Paris;
and as soon as he knew the Duke of Parma was on his March, he briskly broke off
all further Conference, and the War became more obstinate than ever.

The King was extremely incensed at this Juggle, and Givry was no less
afflicted. He had discoursed several times, to his great satisfaction, with
Mademoiselle de Guise, but had not declared to her his passion. He had the
sense to think more time and more services necessary, to make way for so high
an attempt; but conceived he had observed in the young Princess, that freedom
of spirit that gave cause to believe she would be more taken with beight of
merit, supported with excess of affection, than with height of birth void of
qualities suitable: They had often spoken of Madam Maugiron; Givry assured the
young Princess, that the Verses she had sent him, had dissipated those mists of
affection that blinded him; and that ever since, he looked on that Lady with a
great deal of indifference. Mademoiselle de Guise took pleasure in making him
repeat this protestation; and the day before the Conferrences were broken of,
she carried on this discourse so far, as to tell Givry he deserved better
Fortune, than to be the Knight Errant of a Provincial Dame. Had he desired her
to explain her self, it is possible, he had found she spoke this at random. But
he was so willing to be deceived, that he found matter in her general and
ambiguous expressions, to flatter himself into hopes his reason declared
groundless; however he thought he could never be angry enough with the Duke of
mayenne, for hindering him to clear his doubts, by so sudden and unexpected a
Rupture.

He hoped to have done it at parting with the Princess, and ran toward Paris
to take his leave of her, but found all further Communication already
prohibited by Proclamation, and returned much troubled to the Kings Quarters;
and after a few days marched away with the King to meet the Duke of Parma. This
March set Paris at liberty, and no less troubled than angered the Royalists,
thus forced to raise the Siege: But there was no remedy, and it was of
importance to fight the Enemy before he should have taken his advantage: the
King advanced for that purpose to Cheles, where the Armies lay six days in
sight of each other, and the Kings not able to force the other to fight. The
Duke of Parma was made believe that the Kings Troops were but few, and not in
good order: but when the Duke had from a little Hill taken a view of them in
Battalia, he found himself not in a condition to hazard a Battle; and drawing
off in a thick Fog that rose one of those mornings, he contented himself with
surprising Lagny, within a League of his Camp. The King did what he could to
succor the Town; but the design of taking it was so closely laid, that his
Majesty perceived it not until it was too late to prevent it.

This exploit of the Duke of Parma, having assured to the Parifians the
freedom of the River Marne, set their City at full liberty from the
inconveniences of the Siege: but this relief came so late, it did them little
good. The bodies of the Citizens had been so dried up in the Dearth, that they
could not bear a plentiful feed: The change of Food became as mortal as the
Famine at Paris; and the Kings Army was now as necessitous as the Leagues had
been. The taking of Lagny had blocked up the River Marne, the Garrisons of the
League in several Towns in the heart of France intercepted his Convoys; and
during the Siege of Paris, the Country about it was laid so desolate it had
neither Corn nor Forage: This forced the King to send the greatest part of his
Soldiers to refresh themselves at their respective homes. The Duke of Parma
having had the glory of setting Paris at liberty, was willing to secure it by
besieging Gorbeil: The Town held out a month, and was not taken but by a
General assault.

The brave Givry still deeply resenting the Duke of Parma's arrival, which
broke off the Conferences and removed the hopes of Peace, could not with
patience see him enjoy that Conquest. He got together the Garrisons of his
Government of Brie, andegg'd on by a courage which seemed more than Natural,
retook in one night by Scalado, a Town before which one of the greatest
Captains of his time laid Siege a whole Month.

The Duke of Parma had so little foresight of this Action, that part of his
baggage was at Corbeil when retaken; and particularly many rare Essences,
whereof some were necessary for his health, and others excellent for delicate
smells. Givry sent them all to Mademoiselle de Guise to dispose of at her
pleasure, and sent her word by the Gentleman who had the Passport for
conveying them, That he esteemed himself so happy, in having been once able to
give passage to the Corn designed for her service, that he was extremely
desirous to improve that advantage; that the Convoys she should be concerned in
should no more be staid at Corbeil than they had been at Pont Samois, but that
he was too jealous of the opportunities of doing her service, to permit that
this liberty should depend upon the Duke of Parma.

The Complement was civil, and the freedom Mademoiselle de Guise used toward
Givry during the Truce, might have encouraged him to some higher piece of
Gallantry. But the Answer she gave Givry's Messenger was, That she would
receive neither Message nor Present from his Master; that he should carry him
back the Essences he had sent, and tell him, the familiarity she had vouchsafed
to use toward him hindered, her not to be Mademoiselle de Guise, nor him from
being, as he was, Givry.

He was so much surpised at this Answer, that he made the Gentleman repeat
what he had said to her; and finding nothing in his expressions that might
occasion a return of so much scorn and contempt, would have put all at stake to
know the meaning. But the King gave him no leisure for it, having commanded him
to attend him presently with his Forces, to fall upon the Duke of Parma in his
retreat for Flanders. The King gaul'd him in his March, and having pursued him
as far as the Tree of Guise, came to refresh himself at St. Quentin. There he
received News that the Marquess d'Humieres had taken Corby from the League. The
King expressed his satisfaction at this News by public rejoicings, wherein he
was pleased the Ladies at St. Quentin, and the Parts thereabouts, should have
their share. He ordered several divertisements to be given them, and expected
that Givry who was no less gallant than brave, should according to his custom,
bear a principal part there; but he was so fretted and vexed at the usage he
had received from Mademoiselle de Guise, that occasions of joy became a very
torment to him.

He begged the King's leave to return to his Government, where he used many
endeavors to appease the wrath of Mademoiselle de Guise; and to discover the
cause of it. He made inroads to the very Gates of Paris, took several
Prisoners, and sending them to the Princess, acquainted her by them, that he
would not submit to the prohibitions he had received, till she would make known
to him by what Crime he had occasioned them. But notwithstanding all the
evidences he could give her of respect and zeal, she persisted in a scornful
silence; or if at any time she broke it, it was to return him harsher Answers
than those his Gentleman had brought him. He past a whole Winter in this
grievous condition; and to increase his vexsation and sorrow, every day
produced new reproaches from Madam Maugiron.

She called him perjured, light, inconstant, ingrate; and threatened a thousand
extravagances he thought himself obliged, in civility, to prevent. He had for
some time neglected answering her Letters, in hopes by this means to discourage
her from writing: But finding to the contrary, that this did but make her more
prolix and impetuous in her style, he sent her word plainly he had no more love
for her, that he was sorry for it, and wished he could have loved her all his
Life; but that Man is not Master of his affections; and he prayed her to forget
an ungrateful Person unworthy to possess a place in her thoughts. This terrible
Letter was so far from wakening her anger, and effecting her cure by a generous
disdain, that it produced only solemn protestations of an unalterable Constancy.

There needs but an ordinary Love, writes she to him, to make us love him that
loves us. My Affection being a great deal more perfect, can produce greater
effects; and I will love you scornful and ingrate, as I loved you when I
thought you faithful and kind.

Givry had the honesty to reproach himself for the ingratitude he was forced
to, and would have given all he was worth to see Madam Maugirons affection cool
to an indifference. But when he reflected on the rigors of Mademoiselle de
Guise, it heightened his sense of them, and the right he conceived he had to
complain of the strangeness of his Fortune.

In the mean time the season was come for taking the Field, and the hopes of
Peace appearing every day more remore; the King designed to besiege Roan, as a
place whose situation and importance appeared of moment toward the reduction
of Paris. This Siege is mentioned in History as one of the hottest during these
Wars. Queen Elizabeth of England had sent the King a powerful Fleet, which
blocked up the City toward the Sea: His Majesty's Troops, which he commanded in
Person, begirt it on the Land side: And the Marquess Villars, Son-in-Law to the
Duchess of Mayenne, defended it. He possessed himself of the Fort St. Katherine,
where he had Batteries which fired continually. The besieged made furious
Sallies, and scarce a day past without Skirmishes which deserved the name of
bloody Fights. In one of these Givry was dangerously wounded in the Shoulder;
and the sorrow he lay under on the account of Mademoiselle de Guise, increasing
the dang^^ (...) his Wound, the Chyr^rg^^^ (...) thought him at the (...)
death. The King had a (...) affection for this young Man (...) doubted whether
he had in his Army a Person capable to supply his place; and declared this
doubt so publicly, that many were displeased at it: but he slighted their
murmurs, and being informed of some expressions Givry had let fall, that he
hated his Life, and was glad to see himself in danger to lose it; his Majesty
went to the Village they had carried him to, and earnestly conjured him to tell
him what cast him into this despair.

Givry was too much charmed with the goodness of his Master, to hide from him a
secret he had expressed so great a curiosity to know: He told him what had happened
at Corbeil, and the relation having so disturbed him, that he thought his life
at an end: I perceive, says he, I shall dye without knowing the cause of my
misfortune. I confess I might look on my rashness as cause sufficient, but
having never declared it but by my looks, which Mademoiselle de Guise has no
reason to pretend she understood, I cannot fancy it is she has cast me into
this calamity. I beseech your Majesty, by that goodness whereof I have received
so many evidences, and which makes you bear so tender a part in the
extravagances of an unfortunate Lover, that you will cause a request to be made
to Mademoiselle de Guise, when I am dead, not to abhor my memory as she appears
to do my Person; but to believe this Petition had not come so late, could I
have justly roproach'd my self with the least desire might justly offend her.

The King was so affected with Givry's discourse, that he could not forbear
letting fall some tears. He prayed him to do all in his power to help the
Chyrurgeons in the Cure; and having communicated to him a design, he thought
proper to give him some comfort; as soon as he left him he put it in execution.

The Chevalier d'Oise, Brother to the Marquess Villars, had been taken Prisoner
at a Sally; and being allied to an Uncle of Mademoiselle de Guise, was very
well acquainted with her: the King gave him his liberty, on condition he should
know of the Princess wherein Givry had displeased her, and should give him an
account of it.

The Prisoner acquitted himself faithfully of his Charge, and hastening to
Paris, did as hastily inform his Majesty, that Mademoiselle de Guise complained
of a Letter which Givry had written, and discoursed in it of Love to her; that
she was highly offended at the liberty he had taken, and would have punished
him with immortal scorn, but that his Majesty's generosity to the Chevalier
d'Oise merited her gratitude and thankful acknowledgments, which moved her to
promise his Majesty she would forget this fault of Givry's.

This promise gave him a little comfort, but withal troubled him with new
doubts and perplexities. He had not written to Mademoiselle de Guise, and could
not imagine who had forged the Letter. He knew not whether he was to grieve or
rejoice, that his secret was thus revealed; but all things considered, as it is
of greater advantage for a Lover to be known such, than to burn unperceived; he
took heart again, and recovered his courage by degrees, which added to his good
temper, quickly dissipated the fears conceived of his Life.

His Life became every day more necessary for the Progress of the King's Arms,
which his sickness had visibly retarded. The Officers of the Cavalry, who had
an entire confidence in the Bravery of Givry, who had gained their hearts by
his civility and kindness, did that under his Conduct they did not under any
other. Ever since his hurt they were always defeated; the King durst not put
them on any vigorous Enterprise under any other Chief. And the Duke of Parma,
coming the second time in aid of the Leaguers, forced his Majesty to raise his
Siege from before Roan, as he had forced him to raise that from before Paris.

The Second Part.
THE King used his utmost endeavors to repair the disadvantages the Duke of
Parma's first Expedition had put him to: he advanced to encounter him by the
way; he long kept the Duke of Mayenne (who had taken the Field) from joining
him. And when at length they were joined, he invested them at Yvetot, and at
Caudebec; and had there finished the War, had not some of his Generals
preferred their particular interests before the public tranquillity. The Duke
of Parma was dangerously wounded at Caudebec, and in few months after dyed of
that wound. The death of so formidable an Enemy made the King some amends for
the miscarriage of his Enterprise against Roan. He sent his Army into Winter
Quarters, and taking his own at Gisors, sent for the fair Gabrielle, for whom
his Passion was now grown so violent, he could no longer conceal it.

Givry had not been at any of these Expeditions, having continued at his
Government of Brie, where he endeavored to put himself in a condition to clear
the Mysteries of his Adventure. The more he thought upon it, the more perplexed
it appeared. In the midst of these reflections, when he began to look abroad,
with design to take the Field, as he was entering Melun, they brought him a
Gentleman belonging to Madam de Guise, who conjured him by that Messenger to
grant her a Pass to go visit the Duchess, her Mother-in-Law, who was fallen
sick at Nemours in her return from Bourhon, where she had been taking the
Waters.

Givry staid not for the Kings leave to satisfy her request, but presuming on
his Masters goodness, and confidently undertaking for it, he sent Madam de
Guise a Passport as large and effectual as she could wish; and went to receive
her at the entry of his Government, and Conucted her to Melun, where she lodged
one night. Mademoiselle de Guise accompanied her Mother this Journey; and as
soon as Givry had a sight of her, he endeavored to gather from her looks his
good, or bad fortune; but discovered only a civility so very indifferent, he
could not ground any judgment upon it.

Madam de Guise that evening dispatched a Courrier to Nemours, to inform the
old Duchess of the hour she thought to arrive there. And while she was writing
in a Closet, near her Chamber, Mademoiselle de Guise having taken her station
before a Glass, to mend something she disliked in her dress, Givry followed her,
and with a tone that sufficiently evidenced his fear and his trouble, said,
Mademoiselle, may the Letter of my Lady Duchess, your Mother, be as favorable
to me as another was unfortunate? and will it afford me the occasion and means
to know the particulars of my mishap? Let Us talk no more of it, answers
Mademoiselle de Guise interupting him, I declare my self guilty of having
occasioned your rashness. I thought we had not yet past the time of our
Infancy, when the greatest familiarities are innocent; but you were not of that
opinion, but looked on that as a favor which was only an effect of gayety and
mirth, and thought you were allowed to write a Love-Letter to one who had been
so free with you as to send you Verses of Love: I have sacrificed the
resentment of that injury to the liberty of the Chevalier d'Oyse, and promised
the King to think no more of it. Why should you mind me of it? But,
Mademoiselle, replys Givry, if I never had the presumption to write to you, and
truth may merit from you what you have already granted due to the liberty of
the Chevalier d'Oyse, ought you not to hear my defense? or will you deny me the
justice of pleading for my self? How? did not you write to me? says
Madedemoiselle de Guise; the Letter was delivered me as yours, has your Name
subscribed to it, and two or three messages have confirmed the boldness whereof
it is full. Having never seen it, answers Givry coldly, I know not what
boldness you condemn in it; but know very well Inever writ it: and thought I
had a desire to do it, yet I mastered it; and it is impossible that the Letter
you mention should have my Name in it of my writeing.

This Adventure appeared so strange to Mademoiselle de Guise, that she resolved
to know the bottom of it; she remembered that as she was going to fling that
Letter in the Fire, one of her Maids for whom she had no reserve, having seen
that Declaration of Love, and found it handsomely written, had hept her from
burning it: she called for the Maid, and having asked what was become of that
Paper, the Maid answered she had it in a Box they had brought with them to
Nemours. Mademoiselle de Guise promised Givry a sight of it that evening; and
when the Duchess, her Mother, was withdrawn, Givry having waited the young
Princess to her Apartment, she kept her word with him. But how was he surpised
to find this Declaration of Love of the hand-wrighting of the Marquess de
Bellegard?

It Is true he might have writ it, says Givry, having read it, but he should
have asked my leave; and this doubtless conceals a Mystery I am afraid to
discover. Whence comes the Mystery, answers Mademoiselle de Guise, who could
have imposed on you sentiments of such extravagant presumption? It Is not that I
complain of Mademoiseelle, says Givry, the passion the Marquess de Bellegard
attributes to me is too glorious to be denied: But it is he has written to you
in my Name; and though it be true it was impossible for me to see you without
adoring you, yet I would have dyed rather than have told you so: and the
Marquess has been false to the friendship between us, in discovering a secret
I gave him no leave to reveal. But alas, adds he with a sight, is this all the
falsehood he is guilty of? did he not write to you in my Name, to sound your
thoughts for himself?

Love is full of fancies and capricious extravagances. mademoiselle de Guise
was highly incensed at the presumption she charged uon Givry; and what
displeased her from him, she had equal reason to be displeased with from any
Gentleman of his Quality in the Kingdom. There was not a comlier Person in
France, nor any in so fair a way for the highest Preferments. Not to mention
those grounds and reasons Mademoiselle de Guise had to own an esteem and some
kindness for him. However, following an humor not to be paralleled but in the
extravagances of Love, she looked on this Action of the Marquess as singular,
and entertained a more than ordinary curiosity to know what could move him to
it. She asked Givry several Questions, to discover whether Bellegard had only
spoken for his Friend, or wrote with an intention to know whether she would
receive the Love of any but a Prince. This last surmise pleased her better than
the first; and though she appeared haughty, and feigned her self willing to
find out Bellegard's Crime, for no other end but to punish it, it is certain the
rarity of the Adventure made her look upon it with a more favorable Eye, than
she had done the Letter at first.

Givry preceiv'd nothing of this, scarce daring to cast his Eyes on the
Princess; and though her looks might have given him some cause of suspicion,
the sense he had of her haughtiness obliged him to believe the contrary.
Sometimes she appeared highly provoked at his presumption, and sometimes did
but laugh at it. Though she equally mortified Givry's hopes either way; yet the
thoughts of his having made a Personal discovery of his Love to Mademoiselle de
Guise gave him some comfort; and the night after this discourse was the
pleasantest he had since the Adventure of Corbeil.

Madam de Guise parted on the morrow betimes; and Givry having accompanied her
as far as he could, left the care of his Government to his Lieutenant de Roy,
and went to Gisors, where he was sure to find the Marquess de Bellegard. He had
not seen him since the business of Corbeil; and at that time he was gone to
meet the succors sent the King by the Protestant Princes of Almain, under the
Conduct of Prince Casimir, who was already come into France with the Prince of
Conde. The King fearing the Forces of the League might lay an Ambush for them,
had sent the Marquess de Bellegard to scowr the ways; and at his return Givry
was wounded, and gone to Brie. He was impatient for a sight of him, to ask him
the meaning of the Letter; and found him honored with a new Dignity, the King
having made him Duke and Peer, for which he was receiving the Complements of
his Friends, as Givry arrived.

The new Duke ran to him with open Arms; and though Givry was not satisfied
with his proceedings, he forbore not to make his Caresses an obliging return.
They fell in discourse. The Duke told his Friend, that they expected at Gisors
the Princess Katherine, the Kings Sister, who having been under his Majesty's
displeasure, for having designed a marriage with Count Soissons, contrary to
his Majesty's Command, had newly received pardon for her disobedience, and
came, as was reported, to give her consent to another marriage: All the
discourse at Court was of the reception prepared for her. But after this
general Conversation, Givry finding himself alone with the new Duke, I have
News to tell you too, says he to the Duke, Madam and Mademoiselle de Guise
coming within my Province, the latter charged me with an Answer to a a Letter
you had written to her. The Duke de Bellegard redden'd, and Givry having
observed it; I did not think, says he, I had so considerable a Person as you to
my Secretary, and should have done my utmost to avoid giving you that trouble,
had it been in my power to fancy you would have vouchsafed to have taken it
upon you.

Do you find my Letter did you any harm, answered the Duke, or think you it was
not the Office of a Friend to put you in condition of speakiag to Mademoiselle
de Guise as a declared Lover? I am not yet satisfied, replied Givry coldly,
whether that Declaration was to my advantage, or prejudice: But, my Lord Duke,
I know it the part of a true Friend, not to have done any thing of this nature
without my consent; and I have cause to believe you were willing to make me try
a dangerous Foord, rather than save me another kind of peril. This, in tuth, is
ingeniously turned, says the Duke de Bellegard ironically, how many Lovers have
you seen carry on their amors with the Ladies they Court, by acquainting them
with the passion of their Rivals? What then did you design by it, replys Givry
(confirmed in his suspicion by the trouble he saw the Duke in, being of a
temper too frank and open for disguise?) What right had you to discover my
secret, or what excuse can you make to the dearest of your Friends, for having
drawn upon him the indignation of a Person he had confessed to you he was in Love
with? When I considered, says the Duke de Bellegard, the Circumstances of your
Love, I was of opinion you might long languish without knowing your destiny;
and esteeming uncertainty the most miserable condition of a Lover, I was
willing to bring you out of it, and persuade you to desist or pursue your Amor
according to occasion: if Mademoiselle de Guise has favorably received the
Declaration of your flames, you are ungrateful to entertain my service with so
much coldness; if she be really angry with you, I have left you at liberty to
disavow the Letter; and you may either make use of your reason for your Cure,
or continue to love her without telling her of it, as if I had not written.

Givry was very good-natured, and a great lover of the Duke de Bellegard, he
was ready to beg his pardon for having suspected him; and had done it, but that
they were interrupted by a multitude of Courtiers who came pouring in upon
them, and that very Evening he became sensible that his friendship blinded him,
and that the Duke de Bellegard was really his Rival.

Madam de Maugiron faithfully executed the threats she had expressed of loving
Givry all her Life, whether he would or not. The slights of her Lover, and the
homage she received every day from several others, could not alter her
affection. She made so diligent inquiry among those that went to Moulins,
whither Queen Louise was retired upon the death of the late King, and had
placed so many spies about Givry, that she made discovery of his Love for
Mademoiselle de Guise: there was some discourse of it upon the setting at
liberty the Chevalier d'Oyse; and the story of the Letter, which Givry averred
he had not written, could not be kept so close but this jealous Lover knew
something of it: And in the journey the Duchess Dowager of Nemours made to
Bourbon, Madam de Maugiron, who saw her there, gained her Love so far that when
Queen Louise changed the Gloryes of the world for the Solitudes of a Cloister,
Madam de Nemours took Madam Maugiron into her family. She was there when Madam
and Mademoiselle de Guise came to Nemours. The young Princess and Madam de
Maugiron looked upon one another with a great deal of Earnestness and
attention, and this latter, being possessed with jealousy, was so diligent to
spy out an occasion to discover the sentiments of her Rival, that she learnt
them from her own mouth. The sickness of Madam de Nemours was rather tedious
than dangerous, and Mademoiselle de Guise being not obliged to any great
appearances of sorrow, took the liberty frequently to leave the Duchess her
Mother to take care of the sick Lady. Being retired timely one evening to her
Chamber, and going thence to take a walk in the Garden, without other company
but a Maid, who was her confident, Madam de Maugiron followed them, and having
slipped in behind the Pales, heard Mademoiselle de Guise say,

No, la Mothe, I do not think the Master of the Horse handsomer than Givry, and
I have confessed to you more than once, that I had retained such an Idea of this
latter as might have inclined me to much tenderness for him, had he been of
Quality suitable to mine. But whether this humor of mine were over when I saw
him again, or that his friend, being a newer Object to me, had the happiness to
discern better the weakness of our Sex, and make his attack with greater
success, I was more attentive to him than to Givry in the Tuilleries. What he
did during the Truce pleased me more than what Givry did, though I gave Givry
marks of kindenesses and familiarity, I durst not have given Bellegard, without
trouble and scruple. When I received the Letter you know of, I thought I had
seen him that brought it in Bellegard's Train; I believed it had come from him,
and was so vexed to find another Name subscribed, it angered me more against
Givry than the Crime he appeared guilty of. Not that I could have been willing
Bellegard should have spoken to me of Love, without resentment on my part, but
that (the Rules of Respect and Decency observed) it would have pleased me
better to discover Bellegard, than Givry, in Love with me: And I must confess I
found in my self a more than ordinary joy, when I thought at Melun I was
Mistress of his affection.

But, Mademoiselle, says la Mothe, what assurance have you of that? the Letter
was written in Givry's Name; and the Master of the Horse, being his particular
Friend, had perhaps no other intention, but to discover his Love to you,
without exposing him to your displeasure. Either thou have no wit, replys
Mademoiselle de Guise, or thou do not believe as thou say. Call to mind
the Actions of Bellegard during the Treaty: remember his looks, and the
Messages he sent me every day; and those Verses of the Unknown Lover every day
on my Toillette, or among my Clothes. It was not Givry that wrote them,
therefore it was Bellegard. There is not one of our Party pretends any
engagements, being all my Kindred or my inferiors; and either cannot, or dare
not love me. Bellegard and Givry are the sole Persons of the Kings Party have
declared themselves engaged, the one confessing he is in Love with me, the
other having written me a mysterious Letter. Whatever comes under the Character
of Passion, proceeds doubtless from one of them. It is not Givry has made the
Declaration of Love to me, therefore it must be Bellegard, who had the
dexterity to learn by another experience how I might be inclined to entertain
his affection.

Mademoiselle de Guise, as she was speaking these words, came into a Walk where
Madam Maugiron could not follow her without being perceived; but she had heard
enough, and was impatient to let Givry know on the morrow the fruit of his
unfaithfulness to her; and fearing her Letters not of force to persuade him,
she pretended business at Court, and arrived there as Givry was coming out of
the Duke de Bellegard's Lodgings.

Madam de Maugiron's thoughts being all fixed on Givry, she went in search of
him only and easily found him: He received a Billet from her to inform him of
her arrival, and desire the favor of seeing him presently. This News troubled
him, he dreaded the sight of her, and could have found in his heart to return
strait to his Government; but bethinking himself how uncivil it would appear to
use a Person thus, who had not given occasion for it, he mastered his
reluctance, and went to the place where Madam de Maugiron had assigned him.

Never did the appear so handsome and so fine, as that Evening; and Givry was
astonished that with so many Charms and so much Love, it had not been in her
power to retain him her Captive, and thinking she was come only to reproach him.

Save your self the trouble of telling me the occasion of your Journey, Madam,
says he, I partly guess at it, and know beforehand what your just resentment
may dictate to you. But, Madam, I am a Wretch that cannot enjoy favors of this
kind, nor cure my self of my Apostasy, though I blame my self for it. Slight me
as I deserve, Madam, and extend not your goodness so far as to reproach me for
my inconstancy, but give me over as lost to my lukewarmness and indifference. I
could really give you over to them, answered Madam de Maugiron, were they my
only Rivals. It Is possible my affection might carry me so far, as to rejoice at
your happiness, though attended with my misfortunes, and I might pardon you for
being in Love with Mademoiselle de Guise, did she vouchsafe to answer it on her
part; but I cannot give you up to her slights, and the treachery of your Friend
Bellegard. These are the Enemies you are to provide your defense against,
rather than the reproaches which the kindness I retain for you will not permit
me to trouble you with.

Givry was surpised at this discourse, and was within little of letting her
see the trouble he was in: But bethinking himself, that Madam Maugiron had
peradventure by some Spies discovered something of the Adventure, but knew not
the whole truth, he recovered himself, and answered coldly, I cannot wonder,
Madam, that a Lady of your merit should seek the cause of my indifference
elsewhere than in your self; and am sensible, that, suspecting the best of my
Friends has not sufficiently opposed the injustice I am guilty of toward you,
you would revenge your self of him by engaging us in a quarrel: But, Madam, I
am not susceptible of such ill impressions; and what I know of your mistakes as
to Mademoiselle de Guise, makes me think you no less mistaken as to the Duke de
Bellegard. No, no, says Madam de Maugiron, you need not affect these disguises
with me. I know what I say, and heard it from the Mouth of Mademoiselle de
Guise. And so telling him of what past at Bourbon and Nemours, she put him into
so furious a jealousy that he could not conceal it from her.

Pardon me, Madam, says he, confessing it, that I make you the Witness of a
transport, which cannot but be troublesome to you. Had I power enough over my
self to moderate it, I should have had power enough to master the cause of it;
and I should love you again as ardently as formerly. If swear to you, by that
which I hold most sacred, that I wish at the cost of the best part of my blood
I had continued constant to my first Passion. But, Madam, Love goes not by
choice, the humors of affection tyranize over Reason: And since it is in vain
to deny my inconstancy, I must declare I love Mademoiselle de Guise, even to
madness; and am capable of the worst effects of despair, if I see her prefer
before me a Rival of my Quality. Perhaps I should not grudge to see her marry
some great Prince, but it will be certain death to me to see her pleased with
the addresses of another Man of my Quality: if it be true she is pleased with
them, you will not be long unrevenged, but shall see the effects of the unhappy
News you have brought me so far.

As he said this he went out, and having tormented himself all night, went in
the morning to the Duke de Bellegard before he was awake. You have reason, says
he, opening the Curtain, to sleep quietly, you may enjoy the pleasure of sound
rest and repose; I must bid it farewell. But, perfideous Friend, why did you not
deprive me of it the ordinary way? or what have I done to make you so
treacherous as to render me the Instrument of my own torment? 'Twas by the
blindness of my confidence, you had the opportunity to see the first effects of
the Excellencies of Mademoiselle de Guise. 'Twas I first brought you to Paris
during the Treaty: 'Twas by the permission I obtained of the King you had the
convenience of treating her in the Camp: It Is my Name you made use of for
declaring your Love: 'Twas by the mistake you engaged her in, you obliged me to
tell her first that Letter was yours. Was she the only Person you could affect?
or if it was impossible to see her without falling in Love with her, had you no
other way to discover your love but by using my name?

The Duke de Bellegard might, if he had pleased, have baffled longer with
Givry, the discoveries Madam Maugiron had made were not convincing. But his
conscience accused him, and he confessed ingeniously to Givry, that he was in
love with Mademoiselle de Guise, that he had been so from the first view he had
of her in the Tuilleries, that his love increased with the time, and that to
sound her affection he had written the Letter Givry had seen. Had she given you
an obliging answer, I had used such endeavors to master my affections, that
perhaps I should have conquered it. But since she is not pre-ingaged in favor
to you, give me leave to Court an affection you have no right to, and remember,
that if any engagement could have been proof against the charms of Mademoiselle
de Guise, Madam de Maugiron had saved you the trouble of another Amor.

They had much other discourse to this purpose, and began to fall into very
sharp language, which would not have permitted them to part as good friends as
formerly, had not the Duke de Montpensier interrupted them. He perceived them
in a heat, and observed indignation in their looks. And the transports of
jealousy are commonly impetuous, so that Givry was not long, but the Duke de
Montpensier from his looks and his actions might clearly conclude what he
guessed at first sight, Givry named no body, and the Duke de Montpensier
understood no more, but that they were fallen out about a matter of love. But
the King, who presently heard of the quarrel, being thoroughly acquainted with
Givry's affair, sent for him, and made so good use of the power he had over
him, that he quieted his spirits, and calmed the disorder they were in.

What success have you had in your addresses to Mademoiselle de Guise, says
the King, that you think you self concerned to make good your right to her
against a Rival. If either of you be one day so fortunate as to obtain any
favor from her, I may perhaps dispense with the others despair, but till then
what cause have you of dispute, or what is it you quarrel for.

Givry was ready to tell the King he had cause to envy his Rival; but forbore
out of the respect he had for Mademoiselle de Guise, and his unwillingness to
declare the happiness of the Duke de Bellegard; the secret knowledge whereof
sufficiently tormented him, without the addition of open publication. So that
he chose rather to say no more, than barely assure his Majesty, he would not
give the example of division among the Chiefs of his Party.

The better to keep his word, he returned to his Government, where the King was
to come shortly, and order was to be given for his Majesty's reception. Before
he left Court he saw the Princess Catherine arrived, and prevailed with his
Majesty that she should take Madam Maugiron to her, as Queen Louise had done,
and obtained a Pension for her, that she might maintain her self with more
splendor at Court. And could she have contented her self with friendship from
him, and a more than ordinary care for her fortune, she would have rested
satisfied with Givry's proceeding: But all was nothing to her if it fell short
of Love, and whatever she could do, it was impossible to kindle it again in his
heart.

They had several discourses on this subject, which deserve relation, to make
out the extravagances of Love. You will come again to me one day, says she to
him, and it is impossible but so much love and constancy as I have expressed for
you will affect you at last, you will learn the difference between a Love like
mine, and that of a young Lady that knows not what Love is. You will wonder you
have been so long in coming to the knowledge of it. You will then be ashamed of
your blindness, and willing to repair your fault, by loving again with greater
ardency than at first. Never fancy it, answers Givry, Love that dies of it
self, never comes to life again in a man of my age. I see clearly at this
instant, all that time could discover to me. I confess you deserve a heart more
faithful than mine, and that I am unjust to requite your kindness so ill. But
in Love, our understanding has no power over affection. And if I must declare
the height of indifference, I verily believe I should sooner love a third
person, than return again to you. This is a hard saying, yet I think it worse
to amuse you with vain hopes any longer. Proceed yet further, replies Madam
Maugiron with tears, and tell me thou hate me more than ever thou lovedst me.
I shall not love thee the less for it. My fatal passion can subsist without
hope, and seems long since to gather new strength without it. Thou art not
beholding to me for it. It Is no voluntary love, yet sure thou should have some
pity for me, whom my Stars use with such extremity of rigor.

He had done much, and would have done any thing to see this Lady disengaged.
But it is not so easy to be cured of this disease, as to fall into it. She
continued loving him in spite of him, and he returned to Melun as unjust and
ungrateful, as she had found him at Gisors.

The Voyage the King made into Brie, was a happy step toward the peace of the
Kingdom. The people grew weary of the wars, and the Duke of Main was
particularly concerned to put an end to it. The last Expedition the Duke of
Parma made into France, he highly caressed the young Duke of Guise. The
Spaniards said aloud, That a person of his age and activity was fitter to head
a Party against the King, than a General that grew old, and had not his health.
The Duchess of Main trembled at the apprehension these discourses might take
effect. She knew Madam de Guise a haughthy Princess, and one would use her
accordingly, if her Son became head of the League, and she thought it better
submit to the King, than see her husband commanded by a young man. She hung
constantly at the Dukes Ears, to incline him to an accommodation while he was
in power, and made him fear he could not make it so much to his advantage, when
divested of his Authority. He relished this advice well enough; but it could
not take effect, while the King continued Protestant: and his Majesty being, in
that particular, of the same opinion with his Enemies, had taken a resolution
to be instructed in the Popish Profession.

A Truce was agreed upon for three Months, during which his Majesty being
advanced as far as Melun, Conferences were held with more sincerity than
formerly on the Leagues part. The Conferences were no sooner opened, but Madam,
and Mademoiselle de Guise passed the second time into Brie, in their way to
Paris, and carried with them the Duchess Dowager of Nemours in a Litter. They
saw not the King: Madam de Guise fearing if she waited on his Majesty, the Duke
of Mayenne would reproach her with it. But the King complemented her by Givry,
who accompanying them to the Gates of Paris, found an opportunity as he came
from Dinner to speak a few words to Mademoiselle de Guise.

May I adventure, Mademoiselle, says he, to ask if you have at last done me the
justice my innocence deserves, and defaced out of your heart those impressions
of wrath a forged Letter exposed me to? You have not disowned any thing that
Letter contained, answered Mademoiselle coldly; it was not the Character
displeased me, but the Sense. I do, and must ever own, says Givry, I have a
love for you, that extends to adoration; but I disown the boldness taken to
discover it so soon. I would have kept it close with abundance of respect in my
heart, until some eminent service should have in some sort authorized me to own
it; and if my ill fortune would have denied me the happiness of ever being
useful to you, I would have waited for death to expiate my temerity. All this
might have been easily done, replies Mademoiselle, with like tone as before;
had you but denied the Love you were charged with, I should not have been at
any pains to convince you of it. But, Mademoiselle, says Givry, it was you
spoke to me, you who are my visible Goddess. I owe you the duty of a religious
sincerity, and had I endeavored to disguise it, my Eyes would have discovered
it. To what end is this discourse, says the Princess, with some frowardness, I
have promised the King, and promise you once more, not to think of what is
past. Let me desire you, once for all, not to speak of it while we live. I
thought, replys Givory, cut with grief to the heart, you gave me no such order
at Melun, Mademoiselle; give me leave to tell you, you had then some curiosity
which made this discourse relish better, or that you reflected on it since to
my disadvantage. Mademoiselle de Guise blushed at Givory's reproach, which
confirming the truth of Madam de Maugiron's report, Ha, cries he, transported
with jealousy, it is but too true that the rashness I am so much condemned for,
is excused in my Rival; and that I am the most unhappy of Lovers.

As he was saying this, word was brought mademoiselle de Guise she must come
away; and she took so little pleasure in Givry's discourse, she made not her
Company stay for her. Givry brought her to the Coach, and followed it two hours
after; but scarce in all that time could Madam de Guise draw four words from
him. He returned to the King so troubled and melancholy, that his Majesty
perceived it, and had the goodness to take him aside, and ask him what made him
so sad. Ah, Sir, replys Givry, almost with tears in his eyes, Mademoiselle de
Guise hates me; and if the respect I owe her may allow me to say more, she
loves the Duke de Bellegard. The King was willing to know what grounds he had
for this opinion, and the afflicted Lover was not able to forbear the
discovery. The fancies and humors of a young Person whose affection is not
fixed, says the King, are as changeable as they are wild. Bellegard is no more
in a condition to marry her than you are, nor can entertain any hopes but of
pleasing her: And since he has no other, I will find out so many occasions you
may make use of to that end, that you shall at last be the happier of the two.
But, for my sake, be at peace with him, and leave the rest to me.

This promise gave Givry some comfort, knowing it in his Majesty's power to put
him in a way, to do Mademoiselle de Guise so many services, that her gratitude
to him might one day overcome the favor she was prepossest with toward
Bellegard. This made him sacrifice the motions of his jealousy to the pleasure
of a Master so familiar and obliging; so that there happened nothing sharper
between these Lovers at Melun, than at Gisors.

In the mean time the general Peace of the Kingdom advanced, by the King's
embracing the Popish Profession; who having abjured the Protestant at St.
Denis, saw the obstacle of his reception removed, and Paris opening her Gates
to him as her lawful Prince.

The Duke of Mayenne, and other Princes of his House, retired to Soissons,
where they afterward made their peace. And there remained of them at Paris
only the Dowager of Nemours, being too weak for a remove; and Mademoiselle de
Guise, who would not leave her. The King, to keep his word with Givry, used him
his Instrument for the daily favors he did the Family of Guise; he gave him
the Command of the Forces ordered for the safe Conduct of the Duke of Mayenne.
And when his Majesty made his Triumphant Entry into Paris, he gave Givry leave,
with a Brigade of his Archers, to Guard the House of Madam de Nemours from
violence; not that there was any great cause to apprehend dangers, in a City
that had made a voluntary submission to its undoubted Sovereign, but that the
House of Guise having been the support of the League, it could not be expected
but there might be, among the People, some ill disposed persons, who under
pretense of zeal for his Majesty's interests, might endeavor to enrich
themselves by pillage of a house belonging to a family so eminently engaged
against the King; so that his Majesty thought it necessary to use this
precaution, and committed the care and management of it to Givry. He ran in all
haste to execute his orders, and acquit himself of his Charge, with all the
Offers of service and kindness that might be expected from a Lover. But was
extremely surpised, to see himself prevented by the Duke de Bellegard, whom he
found at the head of a great Body of Volunteers, ordering a Corpse de Guard to
be set at the Gate of the Hostel de Nemours.

Who gave you order for this, says Givry all in a rage; and how comes it you
presume of your own head to place Corpse de Guard in any part of the Town. I
will give the King an account of what I do, says Bellegarde coldly, it belongs
not to you to take notice of it. It so far belongs to me, replys Givry, that if
you give them not instantly orders to draw of, I will presently fall on, and we
shall see hereafter whose actions will be best approved by his Majesty. You
forget the rights of our ancient friendship, says the Duke, and will make me at
length forget what we have been, to mind you what we are. I will refresh your
memory, says Givry laying his hand on his Sword, and it is because we have been
too intimate friends, we are now become irreconcilable Enemies. With that, the
two Rivals, forgetting the Kings orders, fell upon one another with
unparalled fury, and had not long fought without leaving bloody marks of
their combat, if Mademoiselle de Guise (who spied from a window the beginning
of the quarrel) had not come in person to stop it. She rusht in courageously
between the two Rivals, and having calmed their fury by her presence, she had
no sooner commanded them to be quiet, but they laid their Swords at her feet.
What, says she harshly to Givry, are you he that opposes the care taken for our
safety? it was not enough for you to have fought against the children of the
late Duke of Guise, but you must expose his Mother and daughter to pillage, and
by this visible ingratitude hope to establish your self in my favor. I,
Mademoiselle, answers Givry passionately, am I guilty of ingratitude to you? or
would I expose you to pillage? What else would you have done? replys
Mademoiselle de Guise: what means what I have but now seen and heard? You have
seen me jealous any other but I should do you this small service, says Givry,
and to my desperate discomfort I see you angry at my hindering another to do it.
I will not admit ti to be done by the one or the other of you, answers
Mademoiselle de Guise; send back your men, and come not hither to give ill
people and Robbers an example of impunity; we shall guard our selves better
without you, than with the assistance of two persons who have so little respect
for us. This said, she imperiously commanded both Parties to draw off, and the
two Chiefs were forced to give them order accordingly, but made them keep
thereabouts, and staid in person with the Princesses to secure them from
outrage. They needed not this caution long, for the King was scarce entered
Paris but all was calmed, and a quiet established as if there had never been
any disorder there. His Majesty was safe at Nostre - Dame, and came thence to
dinner at the Louvre, where the most zealous of his Subjects paid him their
first homage: after dinner the King went to see March out a Garrison of
Spaniards the Leaguers had taken in, and provided by the Treaty they should
have a Passeport from his Majesty: in the mean time the Brigadier, who
accompanied Givry with the Archers of the Guard, gave his Majesty an account of
what past between the Lovers; the King sent from them, and charged them so
strictly not to quarrel for the future, that they never after had the
confidence to do it.

All the actions of Mademoiselle de Guise had confirmed Givry in the knowledge
of his misfortune. She admitted more easily the Duke de Bellegard's excuses
than his. All her sharp language was directed to Givry, all her good words
addressed to Bellegarde: when Bellegarde fixed his eyes upon hers, she appeared
pleased. Givry could meet nothing in her looks, but indignation and disorder.
The displeasure this caused him, robbed him of his good humor, and altered his
very countenance so far, that the King was afraid he would fall dangerously
ill. His Majesty who loved him entirely, and was not insensible of the torments
of Love, did all in his power to comfort him. He had the goodness to visit
Mademoiselle de Guise, and to speak to her in his favor. When the Duke of
Mayenne made any Propositions, the King would not receive them, but by the
mouth of Givry, and gave him full power to treat with the Duke of Guise, and
made him sole Mediator between his Majesty and those Princes.

But all these favors of his Majesty were ill interpreted. Mademoiselle de
Guise thought Givry had begged them, and was displeased with him, as having
made her the Subject of discourse for the King and the whole Court. But that
was not the sole cause of her discontent, the King had thought her handsome, and
she had ambition enough to carry her as high as the Throne: And they discoursed
already of the dissolution of the King's Marriage with Queen Margaret, as a
matter resolved. The Duke de Bellegard having many intrigues, and knowing how
to make use of all his advantages, let Mademoiselle de Guise know how
serviceable he might be to promote her designs, and dexterously dropped words
which might make her apprehend Givry's love as an obstacle; that the King had a
love for him, and probably his kindness for Givry might prevail more with him
than Mademoiselle's Charms: the Duke de Bellegarde carried on his affairs by
these devises so well, that Mademoiselle de Guise was scarce civil to Givry.
The Princess Catherine (as well as Madam Gabrielle, and the rest of the Court)
was now come to Paris, and had brought Madam Maugiron with her. This Lady used
all possible endeavors to make her advantage of the rigors of Mademoiselle de
Guise: But it was her fate, as well as the unfortunate Givry's, to love where
they were not beloved; and were so far from being cured by the slights put upon
them, that their passion was heightened thereby.

The first two Months after Paris was reduced, the King employed in
establishing the Parliament there, issuing gracious Declarations in favor of
his faithful Subjects, and receiving the Deputies of Roan, and several other
Towns, returning to the obedience of the Crown: But about the end of that time
the Spaniards, despairing of being able to raise more domestic broils in
France, attacked it from abroad. Count Mansfield besieged La Capelle, and his
Majesty foreseeing that if the Enemy made any progress in France, the rest of
the Leaguers would take courage afresh, went in Person to raise the Siege, but
understood by the way the Town was surrendered; and desirous to repair this loss
by some Conquest, he designed to besiege Laon, being as a Fort for the remnant
of the League. The Duke of Mayenne was then of the number; the Duke of Guise
had made his peace, and most of the Princes of his House followed his Example:
but the Duke of Mayenne had insuperable scruples, and would not acknowledge the
King, till he should have absolution from Rome; and keeping the Field under
that pretense, countenanced and supported the Enemies undertakings. The King
having advertisement that the Duke's Children were at Laon, with some other of
the most obstinate Leaguers, thought the taking that place would more easily
oblige the rest of the Party to implore his mercy. But to prevent the reproach
of not having tried fair means before force, he let the Princesses of the House
of Lorrain understand, that he was constrained to proceed with extremity
against the rest of the Leaguers; and should be very glad if they could
separate from the rest of the Princes of their blood. He loved Givry too well
to give this Commission to any other but him. The King gave him his orders, and
having commanded him to make haste, Givry was at the Hostel de Guise on the
morrow before Noon. There he found Mademoiselle de Guise alone, the Duchess
her Mother being gone upon a piece of service, wherein she was pleased to
dispense with the attendance of her Daughter. And Givry having sent the young
Princess word, he came from the King on business of importance, was admitted
into her Chamber before she was out of Bed. He found her so handsome in that
posture, that he was not able to master his Transport, but fell on his Knees at
her Bedside, and taking one of her hands kissed it, with that ardour, that he
had pressed somewhat further, if the the Princess had not thrust him back, saying
to him with an imperious tone; You insolent Fellow, do you make use of the
King's Name, to come hither to offend me; get you out of my Chamber, and
presume not to set foot there again, till you have learnt better how you ought
to demean your self toward a Princess of my Rank. These words struck Givry
into such astonishment, that he stood leaning against a Window like one in a
Trance; which Mademoiselle de Guise interpreting as a disobedience to her
Command, she renewed her orders, and accompanied them with expressions of so
much slight and contempt, that Givry could no longer endure them. Yes,
Mademoiselle, says he with an accent suitable to his despair, you shall be
obeyed; the presumptuous Givry shall never more enter your Chamber, and since
he cannot live without seeing you, his blood shall expiate the misfortune of
his having displeased you.

With that he went out. Had the officious La Mothe been believed he should have
been staid; but Mademoiselle de Guise, for reasons known to her self, would not
credit her, so that her Prayers and Remonstrances were all in vain; and all she
could obtain, was that she might seek him out, and say from her self what she
thought proper to comfort him.

She found him in the Garden at the Hostel de Guise, walking as one distracted;
and making up to him, What did you think on, says she, when you used toward
Mademoiselle de Guise liberties so condemnable, and altogether unfit? was that
your way to obtain the favor of a Princess so virtuous and haughty? or did you
look upon her as a Town you were resolved to take by assault? It was not well,
answers Givry faintly, I confess my transport consulted neither my respect nor
my reason; but one look of Mademoiselle de Guise would have minded me of my
duty, without adding that torrent of slighting expressions. A passionate action
in a Man desperately in Love, is not perhaps a Crime so unpardonable as
Mademoiselle de Guise has judged it; but the reason is, that every thing is
offensive that is done by a Lover disliked. It Is my Person, not my Love,
displeases Mademoiselle de Guise; and the attempt I committed would not have
been punished so severely in the Duke de Bellegard, as in me. You know it well
enough, and cannot forget what Mademoiselle de Guise said to you on that
account, in the Garden at the Castle of Nemours: That discourse was repeated to
me, word by word; and I look on it as the source of all the rigor I have since
met with. I will never speak of it to any but you, and shall turn all my
resentment against my self, and never expect, but from death, any ease of my
misfortunes: but, do me the favor to tell Mademoiselle de Guise, I am
perfectly informed of all my disasters; and that this which reduced me to the
despair I am in, could not have been so great, had not others preceded it.

La Mothe had a particular esteem for Givry, and was really concerned for the
condition he appeared in; she did all she could to give him some comfort.
Sometimes denying, and sometimes qualifying what was said concerning Bellegard,
so that it was not her fault he was not at better ease, but he was now become
utterly incapable of any. The thought of Mademoiselle de Guise slighting,
angry, and prepossest in favor of a Rival, inspired him with a thousand
desperate resolutions. He had much ado to force himself to speak to Madam de
Guise and Madam de Nemours, but was so far Master of Passion, that they
observed not in him any alteration. Yet that moment of constraint did but
render his fury after more violent: he returned to the King whom he found
encamped before Laon, and gave him a thousand thanks, from the Princesses for
the complement he had vouchsafed to send them. They would have made their
advantage of it, had their advice been taken, but the Duke of Mayenne was so
accustomed to Command in Chief, he resolved not to quit the Helm, but upon
utmost extremity. The Town of Laon was taken, and the desperate Givry sought
out so many occasions to be killed, that he succeeded in his design, he was
wounded upon a breach, and died of it three or four days after. He knew this
service would be hot, and being seriously resolved to dye, writ to Mademoiselle
de Guise, before he went to the assault, a Letter, the Original whereof I have
seen, and give you here the Copy verbatim.

YOu shall see, when you hear of my death, that I am a Man of my word, and that
it was true I would live no longer than while I had the honor of your favor,
for finding you changed, I have recourse to the sole remedy I can apply in the
case, going to dye unavoidably. Since heaven loves you too well to save those
you would destroy, and must be at the expense of a Miracle to preserve me from
the danger I am running into: that death I seek, and know waits for me, makes
me put an end to this Letter. Farewell then, fair Princess; and by the despair
my respect to you has reduced me to, Judge of the power of your slights, and
whether I deserved them.

This Letter was not delivered to Mademoiselle de Guise; the man who had it to
carry, having been taken prisoner by a Party of the Enemies, which is doubtless
the reason it came to our hands. But the Princess needed not a sight of it to
inform her what death the unfortunate Givry died. The King who was grieved at
the heart for the accident, and scarce stirred from his Pillow those two or
three days Givry lived after he was wounded, drew from his own mouth the
Confession of his despair, and being returned to Paris complained grievously of
it to Mademoiselle de Guise. You have killed me Givry, Mademoiselle, says he to
her, and have more weakened my Troops by that piece of your cruelty, than the
Duke of Mayenne with all the strength of his Arms. Had the favors I endeavored
to do your House made any impression of acknowledgement upon you, you would
have had more regard for a man so dear and so necessary to me, but you are
sufficiently punished by the loss you have of him. Nature produces not every
day men of Givry's character, and what beauty soever you may boast of, you will
hardly ever see at your devotion a person so considerable as he was:
Mademoiselle de Guise, who for some time past had not looked with any
favorable aspect on Givry, made not so much account of the loss of him. She
did but smile at his Majesty's reproaches, and endeavoring to make him
understand he was partly concerned in the exercise of that cruelty he blamed,
her obliging Confessions insensibly wiped away the thoughts of Givry's death,
out of his Majesty's mind. But nothing could have that power over the spirits
of the too constant Madam Maugiron, who fell sick upon the News; and while
Paris rung with joy for the absolution of the King, and union of the Parties,
this Lady dyed with the Name of Givry in her Mouth, Givry no less amiable than
inconstant and unfortunate.

What Example more proper to make out the malignity of Love, and inspire into
us that horror against it, it deserves? Givry was the most accomplished Person
of his time, saw himself loaded with honor at six and twenty years of age,
highly in favor with a great Monarch, his King; and in a fair way to obtain
all the Dignities a Gentleman is capable of. An amorous despair destroyed all
his hopes, and robbed the Kingdom of one of its Noblest Ornaments. The same
Passion disordered, and at last destroyed a Lady, whose constancy and sincerity
deserved better fortune. The like end commonly make all those, who absolutely
abandon themselves to this fatal folly: if it makes but light impression, it is
an in exhaustible sourse of perfideousness and ingratitude: if it be submitted
to in good earnest, it leads into an excess of disorder and despair.

FINIS.

