A Description of VIENNA, in its Ancient and Present State; With an exact and
complete Account of the SIEGE thereof: Began by the Ottoman Emperor on the
16th. of July, 1683. and Continued until the (...) of September following; at
which time the Siege was Raised, and a Total Defeat given to the Turkish Army,
by the Christians.
map of the city of Vienna and the enemy encampments Turks Lodgings

Tur. Lodgings

Viziers Tent

Armenias Tent

K. of Poland

Count Waldeck

Dk. of Lorrain

Empr of the Turks

Grand Vizier



VIENNA, hitherto looked upon to be the Bulwark of Germany, and consequently of
all Christendom, and for many years the Residence of the Emperor, is seated
upon the Right-hand-shoar of the great River Danow, where the River Vien, from
whence the City takes its Name, empties its self into the larger Stream, twenty
six German Miles from Lintz, and ten from Polon. It was first encompasled with
a Wall in the Year 1200. at a vast expense, though the Money was easily come
by; for Richard the First, King of England, being taken by Archduke Leopold,
in his Return from the Holy Land, he would not set the King at liberty till he
had paid the Ransom then demanded, which the Duke presently employed in the
Fortification of his Capital Seat.

It was made an Imperial City by the Emperor Frederick the Second; since which
time, as it has received many Additions of Beauty and Strength from its
friends, so has it felt the Fury of many a potent Enemy.

Among the rest, it was a great Eyesore to Solomon the Magnificent, who
desired in his Prayers that he might only live to perform three things, viz. to
repair the vast Aquaeduct in Constantinosle, that conveighs the Water for above
20 Miles into the City; to repair the two Bridges in both Bays of the Sea; and
to be Master of Vienna. To which purpose, in the Year 1529. he sat down before
it with an Army of 300000 Men: But not withstanding the haughty Mahumetan did
all that Art or Industry could do, notwithstanding that he stormed it no less
than twenty times, yet it was so well defended by the Prince Palatine Philip,
that the murmuring Tyrant was forced to raise his Siege, after three and twenty
days continual Battery, and make a hasty Retreat; never looking behind him till
he got under the Walls of Buda. Yet Story affirms that the City was neither
then so well fortified, nor the Garrison so numerous; which gave us a rational
ground to hope that the Turk may have as little reason to boast of his gains in
this his present Enterprise, as he had then. Solomon way called in by the
Waywod of Transylvania, John of Zapolia. Nor did the present Great Turk want an
Invitation in the same manner, as appears by the Confession of Count Serini;
who having traitorously revolted from the Emperor, and joined with a Body of
8000 Tartars, was set upon by General Dunwald, in the Woods not far from
Vienna, defeated, and himself taken Prisoner: which successful beginning, as it
was not a little advantageous to the Imperialists, and hundreds of poor
Captives there by delivered from unspeakable Distress, so it made the Discovery
of Serini's forementioned Treachery, as being the Person that had persuaded the
Grand Vizier to undertake the Siege, upon assurance that the Place was
unprovided. Whether He, or Teckly, or both were the Authors of it it seems the
Grand Vizier soon accepted the kind invitation; and so about the beginning of
July passed his numerous Army athis side the Raab; which the Duke of Lorain
observing, sent Count Starenberg and General Captiers to Command in chief in
the City, together with a Body of 10000 Men to reinforce the Garrison, which
consisted before of the same Number, and so posted himself near the Bridge of
Boats over the Danow, while Teckley lay encamped at Tyrnaw, upon the River
Wa^g, vexing Silesia with his Incursions. Nor was the Emperor less careful to
remove his Treasure out of Vienna to Lintz, for present Security.

Upon the 18th. of July, the Emperor received Advice that his Imperial Seat was
surrounded by the Enemy, and that the Grand Vizier had taken up his Quarters in
the Palace of the Empress Dowager, called La Favorita, Marked (...) with the
Letter A.

In three days time the Turks had so closely begirt the Town, that it was
impossible to pass in or out; which done, they made their three first Attacks
upon the Island of Tabor, and the Suburbs called Leopoldstadt, and that so
vigorously, that they became Masters of them for a time; but at length were
forced to quit those Posts again, not without great slaughter; insomuch that as
it is said, in one Sally of the Garrison, they lost no less than 8000 Men, and
some of principal Quality among them.

This occasioned the Grand Vizier to send to the Governor for a Truce for some
hours, that he might have time to bury his dead Soldiers, and withal, to let
the Governor understand, That if he did not surrender in time, but staid till
the Town were taken by Storm, he would put Man, Woman and Child to the Sword.
To which the Governor returned a suitable Answer; That he needed no Truce, his
Garrison being well; that the Vizier might well have spared his Menaces; and
that for his part, he knew better how to defend his Charge, than to think of
ever surrendering it: of the truth of which, he would soon convince him by his
Actions; of which he might well be the more confident, in regard the Burgers
and Students had given him their Oaths to defend the place to the last, and
never to hearken to any Propositions from the Enemy, though never so
advantageous. Nevertheless the Governor thought it but very necessary to take
several sums of Money out of the Religious Houses for the better payment and
encouragement of the Soldiers.

In the mean time, the Duke of Lorain receiving Intelligence that Count
Teckely, being joined with a great Body of Turks, was Marched toward Presburgh,
advanced toward them; but the Enemy, upon News of his Advance, thought it
convenient to retire. Whereupon the Duke sent 6000 Polish Horse under the
Command of the Chevalier Lubomirski, to fall upon the Enemies Rear, while he
followed after with his whole Army; which was by Lubomirski done with that
Valor and Success, that the Turks and Hungarian Rebels were forced to retire
with great loss of Men, all their Baggage, and a thousand Wagons laden with
Ammunition and Provisions.

The Besiegers all this while played upon the Town incessantly from seven
Batteries, and sprung two Mines; by the first of which, they lost many Men, as
being counter-min'd; by the latter they had better Success; for by the help of
it, they lodged themselves in the Ditch, but were beaten out again with great
loss. All this was signified by Letters of the 14th. of August from Passaw.

By Letters of the 27th. of Aug, came other Intelligence, that the Turks had
made a most fierce Assault upon the 16th instant, and had sprung several Mines,
by means whereof they had blown up part of a Ravelin between the Scotch Gate,
Marked C. and the Palace-Gate, Marked and lodged themselves upon the
Counterscarp, but the Besieged would not suffer them to continue long there;
for they presently sallied out 4000 strong, and with great slaughter of Men
beat them from the posts they had taken; nevertheless the Turks were resolved
not to part so; for being re-inforc'd with a fresh Body of Men, they
endeavored to recover their losses, which occasioned a very fierce Dispute,
that lasted for five or six hours; the Victory enclining sometimes to the one,
sometimes to the other side; but in conclusion the Turks were forced to retire,
with the loss of near 3000 Men. In this Dispute the Besieged lost 500 Men, and
several Officers; amongst the rest, Count Lesly, with the Barons Rottolinski,
and Walter, Lieutenant Colonels, with several inseriour Officers. The Governor
also himself was slightly hurt in the Shoulder; but Count Zouches desperate'y
wounded in the Head; of which he afterward died.

Of this Action the Governor failed not to give Advice by the help of two men,
whom he got to swim the River, to the D. of Lorain, to the end he might the
better understand the condition of the Place

In all these Attacks, as a Janizary, being taken Prisoner, confirmed to the
Governor, the Enemy lost 11000 Men, with the Basha's of Mesopotamia and
Albania. Soon after this the Turks sprang a Mine under the other part of the
same Ravelin, made an Attack no less than 11000 strong, and with that force an
inconsiderable Lodgment, with the loss of 300 Men; but the next Morning the
Governor sprang another Mine, which not only dislodged, but buried a great
number of the Enemy among the Ruins.

In the mean while, by Letters from Lints, comes Intelligence of more
Field-Action, how that upon the March of 15000 Turks and Tartars toward the
Imperial Army, to attack them before their conjunction with the King of Poland,
and the Troops of the Empire; the Duke of Lorain Ordered the Chevalier
Lubomirski with the Polish Horse to advance toward the Enemy; and in case he
found them too strong for him, to retire, and draw the Enemy after him. Which
Orders he accordingly executed with good Success; for the Enemy believing the
Poles had fled, followed them with great fury and eagerness so far, till the D.
of Lorain, who was prepared to receive them, easily surrounded them, and cut
the greatest part of them in pieces: The rest fled in so great confusion, that
they who escaped the Sword, were drowned in the River Mark. The Basha's of
Canisia and Erla commanded these Forces; of whom the one was drowned in
swimming the River, the other was killed.

In the heat of these Field-Transactions, the Grand Vizier was not idle; but
fuming to be repulsed so vigorously, and that his Mines took no better effect,
he resolved upon an Enterprise that might have proved fatal to the City, had
not Providence prevented it: To which purpose he set his Miners at work a
second time, to dig once more under the Court-Bastion, who went so low, that
they tapp'd under a water that ran beneath the Foundation of the Bastion.

The Besieged heard them at it, and briskly countermin'd them, but when they
had broke into the Mine, and saw the fatal Preparations of the Turk, there was
not one that would adventure to step into the Mine to prevent the dismal Blow,
till Count Starenburgh put himself at the Head of his dastardly Miners, and
undauntedly led them into the Train. Then Shame and a brave Example inspired
with re-inforcements of new Courage, that having besought the Governor to
retire, they entered the Enemies Mine, washed and swept away the Train, and
brought out of the Mine fifty Quintals of Gunpowder, every Quintal containing a
hundred weight.

But now this Siege must have an end; for the Confederates being all joined
together under the King of Poland, the Duke of Lorain, and the Duke of Bavaria,
etc. they presently advanced to the relief of a City that was almost ready to
drap into the Enemies handstand so upon the 12th. of this Month, the King of
Poland leading the Van, attacqu'd the Grand Vizier's Quarters, called La
Favorita, Marked A. The Duke of Lorain, assisted by the Dukes of Bavaria and
Saxory, and leading the Main Battle, fell upon the Trenches next the
Court-Bastion, Marked B. (...) Count Waldeck assisted by the Prince of Saumes,
Count Lewis^ of Baden, and the Marquis of Brandenburg, and leading the
Rear-guard, assaulted the Enemies Quarters next the Scotch Gate, Marked C.
(...) some small Parties Marching before to clear the way. In a short time the
Turkish Guards of their Trenches giving way, put all the rest into confusion:
Upon which the Grand Vizier fled with his Horse, leaving all his Foot, to the
number of 25000. to be cut in pieces, together with all his Artillery, Baggage,
and Treasure, with the Spoil of his own Pavilion, to reward the Courage of the
Victor.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Randolph Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1683.


