A DESCRIPTION OF Candia, In its Ancient and Modern State: With an Account of
the Siege thereof, Begun by the Ottoman Emperor, in the year 1666, continued
in 1667 and 1668, and surrendered the latter end of 1669.

The most part Collected from private Letters, during the Siege, sent by one in
the service of the Republique.

Licensed, Jan. 4. 1669/70.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for William Crook, at the Green-Dragon without
Temple Bar. 1670.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I should not have attempted to trouble you with this Preface, were it not to
comply with the Mode of the Times, and partly to fill up a vacant page. This
Treatise wherewith I present you, is a Collection methodiz'd and reduced to
Form and Order for the Readers advantage; containing an exact description of
Crete, known now by the general name of Candia; with a Relation of the various
names of the Place, according to the diversity of Masters it has been subject
unto; and the Situation thereof; the fertility and commodity of the Soil; the
Nature of the Inhabitants, and their Ancient and Modern both Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government; together with an account of the Original (though
pretended) Cause of the Siege; and the Transactions, and Military Exploits in
the year 1666, when this last Siege first began; which was continued in 1667
and 1668, and surrendered to the Turk in 1669. All that I shall add is only
this, that here you will find both variety to divert, and verity to satisfy
you; so that I presume there will be no cause for any person to repent of his
pains, in the perusal of this Compendious Relation, which has been so long and
so earnestly desired by all parties to be seen in public.

A DESCRIPTION OF Candia.
IT were altogether inconsistent with the truth of our intended Description of
Candia, and would swell it to a larger Volume then is designed, to acquaint you
with the various Poetical Fictions and Fabulous Stories of Doting Antiquity,
concerning the same; as, that it was the Kingdom of Saturn in the Infancy of
the World; the Birthplace and Nursery of his Son Jupiter; the Seat and
Residence of Minas, and Rhadamanthus, whose Laws were afterward imitated in
the Prime Cities of Greece; and the abode of the lustful Pasiphae; as also,
that here was the so much, celebrated Labyrinth made by Daedalus for the
enclosing and securing the Minotaure: nor must it be forgotten, says that
Learned Knight, Sir W. Rawleigh's History of the World.
that Strabo the Geographer, who flourished in the time of Tiberius Caesar, was
of Cretan Parents (though born in the City of Amasia in the Realm of Pontus)
which adds unto this Island as much true renown, as any of the Fictions or
Stories (be they what they will) of former times. Therefore we shall only
glance upon them where the nature of the Subject requires it, and endeavor to
give you an exact compendious account of the Names and Situation of the Place,
the fertility and Commodities of the Soil; the nature of the Inhabitants, and
their Ancient as well as Modern Civil and Ecclesiastical Government: and so
proceed to the original cause of the Siege, and the transactions in 1666, 1667,
1668, and part of 1669 till its surrender.

Candia has in several Ages, and in several Authors, obtained several names
(as Sir Walter Rawleigh has observed.) By Homer and Eustathius it is called
Hecatompolis, from the number of one hundred Cities it then contained; but in
process of time, and by the devastation of War, they are all so destroyed, that
the ruins of them are hardly visible. By Pliny and Solinus, Macaros, and
Macaroneses, the happy or fortunate Island, from the goodness of the Soil and
temper of the Air. By Stephanus, Idaea, from Ida a famous Mountain there. By
Giraldus, Telchinia, from the Telchini Priests of Cybele (the Wife of Saturn,
and Mother of the Gods) who was the principal Goddess of this Island. The
general Name which has prevailed most in all Writers, is that of Crete, called
Creta, quasi Cureta, by the Figure Syncope, from the Curetes the Inhabitants
hereof, and Priests of Cybele, so called, (...), from their tonsure or shaving
of the head: and this seems the best Etymology; though some derive it from
Cretes the Son of Jupiter, and others from Crete the Daughter of Hesperus. At
present it is known by the name of Candia, either a Candore from the whiteness
of the Rocks which encompass it, or from Candia the Metropolis thereof.

Candia is an Island, and according to Cluverius in his Geography, the largest
of all the Isles that are adjacent to Greece; being, as Munster and our late
Cosmographers write, in length 270, in breadth 50, and incompass 590 Miles; and
situated in the Mediterranean, at so equal, a distance from Europe, Asia and
Africa, according to Sir Walter Rawleigh, as if it were naturally designed to
be what Aristotle calls it, The Lady and Mistress of the Sea; for it is distant
from Peloponnesus, now called Morea, one hundred Miles; as many from Asia
minor, and not above one hundred and fifty from the shore of Africa; verifying
that of Virgil: Creta Jovis magni medio jacet insula Ponto. Jove's Birthplace
Crete, a fruitful Land,
In The middle of the Sea does stand.


As to the Heavenly Bodies, it is situated under the beginning of the fourth
Climate, so that the longest day in a manner is but fourteen hours and a
quarter. It has on the East the Carpathian, on the West the Ionian, on the
North the Aegean, and on the South the African or Lybian Sea. In form it
extends East and West with three Promontories; that toward the East, called
anciently Samonium, is now Capo di Salomone; that on the South-West looking
toward Africa, formerly Hermaea, is now name'd Capo Gabrasse; and that on the
North-West toward Peloponnesus, of old called Cunarus, is now Capo Chestin;
this last being opposite to Malta a Promontory of Laconia.

The Soil is very fruitful, especially of those Wines which we call Muscadels,
of which according to Sir Walter Rawleigh they transport yearly twelve thousand
Butts: this Wine Munster calls Vinum Malviticum, so named from the Mountain
Malva; he says it abounds herewith, and has store of Cypress-Trees. There is
also plenty of Gums, Honey, Sugar, Olives, Dates, Apples, Oranges, Lemons,
Raisins, Melons, Citrons and Pomgranates.

There are many other things at present worthy observation. First, that this
Island breeds no Serpent, Venomous, Ravenous, or hurtful Creature; so that
their Flocks graze securely without a Shepherd. Secondly, if a Woman bites a
man shrewdly, it is not cured without difficulty; which if true, says the
Noble Knight, then the last part of the forementioned privilege, that it
breeds no hurtful Creature, must be false. Thirdly, they have an Herb called
Alinios, which if chewed in the mouth will keep a man from hunger that day.
Fourthly, here is besides many other Physical herbs, that called Dictamnum or
Dictamnus, an excellent Antidote against Poison; which is only peculiar to
this Island. It affords also great store of Laudanum, a Juice or Gum forced
with incredible labor out of a Tree called Cistus, wherewith the Mountains
abound: it is a soporiferous Medicine, good to create Sheep, if prescribed
according to art.

The chiefest Mountain of note is Ida, now Psiloriti, situate in the midst of
the Island: here Jupiter is fabled to be privately nursed, and from hence he is
called Idaeus.

Rivers of eminency they have few or none; the principal are Nilopotamus,
Scasinus, Epicidnus and Vivotro, toward the North; Populiar toward the East,
and Liniens toward the West; but none of them are Navigable. The Island is
very populous, insomuch that it is thought the Signiory of Venice upon a sudden
occasion can raise in it sixty thousand men able to bear Arms.

As to the Nature of the people, they have always had the repute of able
Mariners; they being situated in the midst of the Sea, having very commodious
Harbors and a Fish-trade; so that when in those times they would tax any
person for relating an incredible story, they used to say, Cretensis nescit
pelagus; meaning thereby, that the thing was as improbable, as for one of Crete
to be no Sailer: yet this Virtue or Qualification of theirs was stained with
many notorious Vices, which they yet retain among them, as Malice, Envy and
Lying; to which last they are so addicted, that it grew proverbial to call a
horrid Lie Cretense mendacium; and this fault the Poet Epimenides did reprove
in them (who was Native of this Island) cited by St. Paul to Titus, Chapter 1. V.
12.

(...). The Cretans always liars are,
Unruly Beasts, of labor spare.
To which may be added the Latin Proverb, Cretizare cum Cretensibus, To
deceive the Deceiver, or to be false in word and deed: as also, that of the
Greeks, (...), i. e. there are three Nations whose names begin with the Greek
letter K worse then any other, viz. (...), the Cappadocians, Cretans and
Cilicians; though some apply it to the Cities of Corinth, Capua and Carthage,
beginning all with the same letter in that Language; all which were conceived
very dangerous to the State of Rome. Nor are the Candians at this day less sick
of their old Distemper; for they are as great liars, and as idle as ever they
were formerly, and avaricious withal, being very impatient of labor, not
caring to attain any Science perfectly; only they are good Archers, being
accustomed to shooting from their youth, and herein thought more dexterous and
expert then the Turks themselves.

As to their Civil Government, according to Cluverius and Munster, it was first
Monarchical; they being governed by Kings till Q. Metellus did reduce the Isle
(under his power) into a Province; and it remained under the Roman and
Constantinopolitan Emperors, until the Saracens did overrun it with the rest
of Greece: but Baldwinus Earl of Flanders, and Emperor of Constantinople, did
confer it upon Boniface Marquess of Montferrat; from whom it was purchased by
the Venetians, Anno 1144, at a vast rate, and continued ever since under the
Signiory of Venice, under the name of Candia, till in the year 1669 it was
surrendered to the Turk.

As to their Ecclesiastical Polity, they were first converted to the Christian
Faith by St. Paul; who having planted the Gospel there, left the watering of it
to Titus, who by him was Consecrated Bishop of this Isle, recompending the
Churches therein to his care, with power of Ordination and Ecclesiastical
Censure, as appears clearly by the Text, which proves it belonged to him as
their Bishop, and not as their Evangelist only: and this manifestly apparent,
not only in the Subscription of that Epistle (according to the mode of writing
in those days) where he is styled, (...), The first Bishop of the Cretan
Church; but also by the concurrent Testimony of Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 3 c.
4. S. Ambros. in Praesat. ad Titum, S. Hieron. in Titum, c. 1. v. 5. and in his
Treatise de Scriptor. Ecclesiast. Theodoret. quoted by Oecumenius in Praefat.
ad Ep. Tit-Oecumenius himself in Tit. 1. and lastly by Theophylact. in his
Preface to the same Epistle; all which do, in terminis, call him Bishop, and
the Bishop of Crete, agreeable to the usual sense of the word Episcopus in that
age, distinct from Presbyter. This Church whilst wholly under the Discipline of
the Greek Patriarchs, was governed by four Archbishops, and one and twenty
Bishops; but since their subjection to the Republique of Venice, there is but
one Archbishop, that is of Candia the chief City; and eight Bishops, besides
the titular Patriarch of Constantinople, who has his residence there; some
Prelate of the Latin Church having been always honored with that empty Title,
ever since the recovery of that City from the Western Christians.

The Language vulgarly and generally spoken here, is the Greek Tongue; though
Gentlemen and Merchants depending on the State of Venice, speak Italian also.
Both the Greek and Latin are used in their Divine Offices: the people
generally are of the Communion of the Grecian Church; yet the Latin Service;
is also used in many places of the Island.

The ground of this War between the Ottoman Emperor and the Venetian, I find
in an Epistolar address to his Majesty from Venice, by the hand of a Noble man
of this Nation then residing there, to be to this effect. It has been the
design of the Turk, ever since the Conquest of Rhodes and Cyprus, to gain the
Kingdom of Candia; and that for this reason, because then the Christians being
destitute of all Harbors in the East, he might with the greater security fall
upon them in the West.

Anno 1645 (when all Christendom was at variance) Ibraim the Father of the now
Turkish Monarch, in the depth of a long continued peace, when least expected,
began this War by setting upon the Venetians, and gave this out as the
pretended cause of this Quarrel.

In the former Agreement ratified and concluded between them, it seems, among
many other Articles that the Republic had tied themselves up to perform, this
was one, they did engage to deny the Knights of Malta shelter in any of their
Ports or Harbors.

Anno 1644, it fell out that the Galleys of that Order seized a Sultana, and
took her, who with three Millions of Crowns designed a Pilgrimage to Mecha.
They steering homewards laden with this rich booty, were compelled by the
unseasonableness of the Weather, or for want of fresh water, clancularly, and
by stealth, to strike into a by-Port of Candia, whence after some refreshment
they returned safely to their own Isle.

The next year the Turk furnishes out a Fleet of 460 Sail great and small,
solemnly protesting to the Senates Ambassadors, that these preparations were
for the Isle of Malta; but when they had past by them, and steered a course
almost as far as Sapienza, they suddenly tackt about, and landed sixty thousand
men, who immediately sat down before Canea without the least declaration of
War. The Venetian being thus so unexpectedly surpised, made all possible
provision to put themselves in a defensive posture; but before they could rouse
their ancient and accustomed courage, they lost the whole Kingdom, except
Candia, and Carabusa, Spina longa and Suda, three adjoining Insulets. The Grand
Signior being elated and puffed up with this success, gained by that happy crime
(in his opinion) prosperous treachery, owned the War openly, and publicly
declared the Senates sheltring of the Malteses to be the cause; though 'twas
privately decreed, that if they met with any considerable force or resistance
in the first assault, that the Captain Bassa should lose his head (to pacify
the Senate) for attempting it without Order, and so to persuade them it was
only a Capricio of his own brain, and a plot of his own contrivance.

Anno 1648, they soon were Masters of the Field, and began the Siege of Candia
with so furious an onset, that they made a breach and entered it, and for the
space of seven hours were within the Town; but the Defendants by their valor
beat them out with infinite loss and damage.

Anno 1649, they made a second attempt, which proving fruitless and
ineffectual, they then left it, never expecting to win it by storm. On a rising
ground about three Miles from the old, they have built another Town, called New
Candia, which is the Residence of the Turkish Bassa, where they have strongly
fortified themselves, blocking up the City; so that now there is no commerce at
all but by Sea, which furnishes the Candiots with plenty of provisions, and
all other necessaries whatsoever.

AN ACCOUNT Of the Siege of CANDIA.
HAving given you a Description of Candia, we will proceed to the last Siege
and Surrender thereof, which we have, no account of till about September 1666;
and then all hopes of peace being laid aside, the Turks made some attempts upon
Almissa, a strong place in Dalmatia, but with little or no success; and much
about the same time fell upon Marcasca, a Town upon the Seacoasts, which they
intended to attaque; but General Cornaro rallied up those Forces he had, and
could get together so suddenly, and marched toward the Enemy, manning out
several Barques and Galleys, that might play on them with their Cannon, and do
execution: yet before he appeared, the Turks had made an assault, but were so
warmly, received, that they were, beat off with the loss of nigh 150 of their
men which were left dead upon the place, besides a considerable number of
wounded persons which they brought off with them: and a few days after, made
another assault upon the Town; but General Cornaro drew out of the Garrison all
the men privately in the night, undermining the Fort, with an intent to blow up
the Turks: they came up furiously to the Walls, but finding no Enemy grew
jealous of the Stratagem and retreated, and in a short time saw the Mine fired,
which made them march farther into the Country; but the Venetian Forces
returned to Spalatto, and there continued to observe the Enemies motion

Little was done by them till toward the latter end of this instant September,
at which time some Turks were discovered before Candia Nuova; but they only
fired a few Guns and returned back to their Quarters; the Garrison being well
fortified, and furnished with men and provisions. At the same time they made an
attempt upon Gradan, a strong Fort near Marcasca; but they were so vigorously
entertained by the Besieged, that they were forced to quit their Posts with the
loss of four hundred men.

In October the Turks of Canea took the Field with their pieces of Cannon,
intending to leavy Contributions in the Country; and to prevent all
information, set strong Guards upon the adjoining Seacoasts.

Toward the latter end of this Month Signior Barbaro, Proveditor-General,
arrived in Candia; his Predecessor Signior Priuli being upon his departure to
Dalmatia in the quality of General.

The Morlacks (who are Croats or Dalmatians, so called from the Hills where
they formerly lived, being a sort of people that forsook the Turkish bondage,
and put themselves under the Senates Government) about this time made several
incursions into the Turkish Quarters with great success, taking a considerable
number of Slaves, and bringing several droves of Cattle along with them.

In November the Grand Signior declared his resolution to make War with the
Republique, by making preparations both by Sea and Land to attempt Candia the
next Spring; to which purpose he lays great Subsidies upon his people
throughout all his Dominions, and by his light Galleys has landed some Forces
in Canea. This month also the Grand Vizier arrived in Canea, and was received
with great joy, which the Turks manifested by many days feasting; who resolved
to take the Field as soon as the Season would permit, and to lay close Siege to
Candia: The Grand Signior himself giving all possible encouragement to the
Levies, and promising extraordinary pay to those that will list themselves
among the Janisaries, with an exemption from all Taxes and Subsidies. The Turks
preparations being now very considerable for some weighty design, the Senate
does strengthen the City again it all attempts; and though it be so well
fortified by Nature, yet they defended it with above 1700 pieces of Cannon,
being very well furnished with expert Veteran Officers and Soldiers.

In December the Grand Visiers intentions to besiege Candia are daily more and
more discovered, which occasioned General Cornaro and Marquess Villa to go to
Candia with a considerable number of choice men to its assistance. Toward the
latter end of this Month the Grand Vizier lay about Retimo, having a Body of
40000 Turks drawn together in the Field; and the Marquess Villa disposed all
things in good order, and raised several outworks which did very much
contribute to the strengthing of the City. About this time there was talk of a
Treaty, to make the Christians careless in their defense.

In January the Turks drew near Candia, and the Garrison made several brisk
Sallies with some loss to the Turks, in one of which Vertmiller was slightly
hurt. The Grand Vizier upon a general Muster of his Forces in the Isle of
Candia, found his Army consisted of 23000 men, and issued out Orders to all
parts adjoining in the Turks Dominions, to hasten recruits of Men and
Ammunition, in order to the speedy besieging of Candia, and to cast several
vast Guns of extraordinary business, to be employed in that service. The Chief
Vizier continued still at Retimo, making all necessary provisions for his
intended design; and sent several of his Officers to take a view of the City
and her Fortifications, which the Marquess did take daily care to strengthen,
and for the removal of all combustible matter out of the Houses, to avoid the
execution of their Morter-pieces. Toward the latter end of this Month, the
Venetian Convoy arrived at Candia, under the command of Semitecolo; and twelve
Galleys laden with Biscuit were sent into Candia by the Admiral of their Fleet
riding at Paros, whose Squadrons were continually cruising about the Sea to
intercept the Provisions designed for the Turks. The Grand Vizier was now
indisposed at Retimo, but ordered the strengthening of New Candia, intending to
raise a Battery near the Lazaretto, to hinder the passage of the Republique's
Vessels for the relief of the City; against which the Venetian Forces cast up a
strong Fort to beat them off, and prevent their nearer approaches. The Sultan
then sent fresh commands to the Vizier, to employ the utmost of his power and
endeavors for the gaining of the Metropolis. The Vizier being dissatisfied
with the former proceedings of the Bassa's of Canea and Candia Nuova, he
beheaded them both, and used the like serverity to several Officers, under
pretense that they were wanting in the performance of their Duties the last
Summer. He has always along with him the Aga of the Janisaries as Play Master
to the Army, whose advice sways extremely with him in all matters of
Importance. In the interim the Senate is studious to defend their Territories
against the common Enemy. Now the Treaty that was set on foot by the Prime
Vizier is wholly broken off, being resolved to prosecute the Siege vigorously.
The Vizier about the latter of January, or the beginning of February, departed
from Retimo to Candia Nuova, intending to go back to Canea. The Turks labored
hard at the Batteries before Candia, and chiefly that near Lazaretto, but with
little success; for the besieged plied them very closely from their new Fort,
and made a Sally, forcing the Turks from their Batteries, killing five hundred
upon the place, and taking forty six Prisoners, with the loss of forty men
only. The Prime Vizier now returned to Canea, as 'twas thought to continue
there, as a place of security during the Infection, the Plague raging so
violently in the Camp; and their Admiral Bassa to the Dardanellos with the
major part of the Fleet.

In February the Grand Vizier in person with a party of Turks took a view of
the Posts, the better to form his Leaguer against the City; but he was so
warmly entertained with Cannon, Morter-pieces, and Grenades, that they fell
into some disorder; which the Garrison perceiving, made a smart Sally upon him,
forcing him to quit the place and flee to Candia Nuova, leaving his Nephew
slain by a Cannon-shot from the Walls dead upon the place, with other
considerable persons. At Canea he remained in expectation of his Succors of
twenty thousand men from the Grand Signior: and in the mean time the Garrison
threw down all the Works cast up by the Turks against the Town, and levelled
all their Trenches.

The Turkish Army was now very much visited with the Plague, and destitute of
Victuals, so that the Vizier dispersed his Forces about the Island. And much
about this time, Signior Nicola Lion, Commander of one of the Venetian Ships,
met with a Turkish Vessel laden with Provisions, under the Conduct of six
Galleys, who after an hours dispute took her; at which the Vizier was so highly
incensed, that he took off the heads of six of the Captains, as being too
remiss, and wanting duty and courage to defend her. Toward the latter end of
this Month, the Turks with a considerable party Marched hear Candia, but were
repulsed with no inconsiderable loss; in which encounter two Renegadoes of note
were taken prisoners, and carried into Candia.

In the beginning of March, Signior Padavino, the Venetian Ambassador, arrived
at Canea; upon whose approach, the Turkish Forces by order from the Grand
Vizier, being about 40000 in number, were drawn together in his view: also a
Body of Turks a little after came up to the Walls of Candia in a bravado, but
were received so stoutly by a party that Sallied out against them, that they
were forced to quit their station in confusion and great disorder. In this
Month, about the middle thereof, a Turkish Gallie carried off by the Christian
Slaves aboard of her, was brought into the Fleet: the manner of the surprise
was as follows: There were 180 Turks and upwards aboard this Gally, with
their Officers, among whom there happened to be a Renegado Grecian, who proving a
penitent Apostate, contrived this plot, to free himself and the Christian
Slaves condemned to the Oars: He went down privately into the Hold, and made
several holes to let in the water; and having so done, came hastily upon the
Deck, crying out that the Vessel had sprung so many and so great Leaks, that it
was irrecoverably lost: hereupon the Turks made immediately to a Rock not far
off them, where they ran ashore: the Slaves laying hold of this opportunity,
rowing off the Gally, stopped the Leaks, brought her to Paros, and presented
her to the Captain General; who presently sent two Galleys well armed and manned
to the Rock, where they took all the Turks (who were old Soldiers and persons
of Eminency) five or six only excepted, who were drowned, endeavoring to save
themselves by swimming.

In March, some of the Venetian Ships successfully engaged with the Caravan or
Convoy from Alexandria; the Admiral whereof had 300 stout Soldiers aboard of
him brought out of Barbary; the Vessel belonging to Tunis, which was commanded
by the Sansack of Grand Cayro, or Viceroy of Egypt, who was by Orders from the
Grand Signior to go to the assistance of the Grand Vizier, and to take upon him
the command of the Bassa of Canea: he brought with him 2000 Soldiers raised
upon his own account to that purpose, with several Officers, who had made a
solemn vow to the Grand Signior to do their utmost in the War, and to lose
their lives rather then to quit the Siege. This Vessel during the dispute took
fire, and was consumed with its fraught, to the value of 200000 Reals, and
50000 Zecchins designed to pay the Grand Visiers Army, besides the private Gold
of the Officers. Many of the men seeking their safety in the Boat, were taken
and made slaves; and several other Vessels of that Convoy fell into the
Christians hands with a considerable Booty, and one among the rest laden with
noble Horses for service was taken by a Christian Privateer that commanded a
Pink. The Vizier hearing of this ill success, cut off the heads of three
Captains that arrived at Canea, and commanded ten fresh Galleys to rescue the
rest of the Convoy, and conduct them safe to Canea, upon pain of death.

About this time there was a Truce between them for a season, for the repair of
the Ruins on both sides occasioned by a dreadful Earthquake that happened on
Holy-Thursday, and several others since: in the former, a great part of Albania
suffered; it threw down many Houses in Cattaro, with a great part of the Wall
toward the Sea, destroying 600 persons at least; and Buda was wholly swallowed
up, in which there perished the like number of people, both these places being
subject to the Republique; and Dulcigno and Castle Nuova, two places belonging
to the Turks, were both sunk; which was the cause of this Truce between the
Venetian and the Turk.

General Cornaro and the Marquess Degl' Oddi were imyloyed to repair the
damages suffered at Cattaro by this Earthquake.

In the Month of April 1667, the Grand Vizier plained the Country for five
Miles together about the Port of Suda; cutting down the Trees and Vines, and
driving away all the Cattle, that the Garrison might not be supplied from those
parts: whilst in the mean time the people belonging to the Republique were very
industrious, and finished several Outworks which did very much strengthen
Candia; besides, Captain General Morosini sent large Supplies of Provisions and
Moneys into the City in several Vessels commanded by Captain Gio. Morosini. But
the Vizier finding his Army to consist of 50000 men, having received supplies
from the Ottoman Court, raised his Batteries against the Fort of St. Demetrius;
who was manfully withstood by the Defendants, with some loss to the Besiegers.
The Turks having found an opportunity to convoy forty Galleys with Soldiers
and Ammunition into Canea, were so much encouraged hereby, that they a little
after gave a busy assault to Suda, a considerable Fortress of the Venetians;
but were beaten off with much slaughter.

In May, the Turkish Saiques taking their way by the South Sea, arrived at Gira
Petra, and put ashore 5000 Janisaries; which so heartned the Army, that the
Vizier resolved upon the Siege of Candia: to this end he disarmed all the
Galleys, employing the Souldies in his Army, and the Slaves as Pioneers to work
in the Trenches; and speedily raised three Batteries against the three
principal Bulwarks of that City; which the Christians defended with
extraordinary valor. But the Vizier being sensible of the Grand Signior's high
displeasure, attempted them with all his force, and played upon their Forts
with his Batteries, intrenching 5000 men before the Fort St. Demetrius,
battering it with 100 of pieces of Cannon; he being then in expectation of the
recruit of 8000 men from Morea: And the Bassa of Bossina pressed one man out of
every House in all the Countries about him; excepting Licia and Corbaccia, who
denied it, pretending their inability to go to War, by reason of a Famine
lately among them. The Turks had now laid a close Siege to Candia, battering it
in four places; but the Vizier first demolished the Town of New Candia
(formerly built by the Turks) because that the materials thereof might be
useful in raising their Works, and to prevent his Soldiers retreating thither.
The Ports against which he made his Batteries, were Bethlem, Sabionera, Jesus
and St. Demetrius; the men employed against them were 40000 in number, besides
12000 Pioneers. But the Christians were much encouraged by the arrival of the
Convoy under the command of Guistiniano, Commissary of the Provisions, who had
sent 70000 Ducats into the Town, besides all other necessaries, and brought
with him 75000 more, which were conveyed to the Captain General for the use of
the Armata. The Siege was very industriously managed by the Grand Vizier,
their Forces well ordered, and their Cannons continually roaring; they gave a
stout assault, but were repulst with considerable damage. The Vizier being
obliged upon his own reputation to hazard his whole Army, made six furious
assaults upon the City, but was in all beaten off with the loss of 12000 men,
at least, in these attempts. For twenty days time that the Turks had spent in
the Siege of Candia, they gained not so much as one foot of ground; and their
great Batteries and Cannon did little injury, being at too great a distance,
and mounted too high, so that by falling upon the highest Houses they only
beat off some Tiles, and threvv down some Chimnies; which was all the
execution that was done. The Christian Privateers did do the Republique
excellent Service at Sea; among others one called the Notali, having seven
hundred men aboard, took in fevv days above twenty prizes.

General Villa made a lusty Sally out of Candia with 2000 choice men, who
fell upon one of the Turks Posts with such courage and resolution, that he
made a great slaughter among them, they being out of order; but at length
rallying together, pursued the General, who drevv them into a place prepared
for that purpose, and then ordered the Mines to be fired; which was so
successfully effected, that according to the information of a Renegado
afterward, near 3000 Turks were destroyed.

On the 28 of May, the Turks began some violent attaques upon the Fort near
Bethlem, and the Gate Panigra; and that morning they played upon the Bulwarks
with two pieces of Cannon, which were answered by the Guns from their
Counter-batteries and Courtines.

The 29 the Enemy made nearer approaches, and began with two Guns only to
batter the Bulwarks of Jesus; but the Christians with their Guns from the
Galleys, and those from the Works, played upon the Turks so warmly, that they
were disordered, and the Grand Vizier forced to change his Post.

On the 30 the Turks only wrought hard to raise a Battery against St. Andrews
Fort.

The 31 the Enemy assaulted the Fort with great fury; and in that days service
Captain Galeazzo, an Officer of Piedmont, was unfortunately slain by a Shot in
the Out-work of St. Mary's, and Colonel Castaneuf; but the Savoyards under his
command, to revenge his death, did fall that night upon the Turks with
Hand-Granadoes, Swords and Pistols, assisted by some other Forces, and made a
great confusion among them, compelling them to leave their Works with much
disorder. The Savoyards followed them into one of their Redoubts, and slew a
considerable number of them; the Guns from the Town in the mean time playing
upon the Enemy, to hinder their pursuit.

June the first, there was little or no action; only the Enemies Cannon
firing, dismounted a Gun in the Fort Martinengo.

June the second, they formed another Battery, and fired at the Besieged with
two other pieces of Cannon, bringing up a Galliot with another Vessel to
furnish them with Provisions, wherewith they were laden; and the Venetians sent
out two Galleys to engage them, but they were so stoutly defended by their
Batteries, that the Galleys were forced to betake themselves to their own Fort
for protection.

The same morning, the Turks laid an Ambush near the Out-work of Mocenigo, to
intercept the Venetians, and prevent the relief of their Guards; but they were
valiantly resisted and put to flight, leaving many of them dead upon the place,
besides those that were killed in the retreat, which were more in number.

June the third, the Turks spent this morning in interring their dead, and in
Funeral-Ceremonies; but that afternoon they fired very thick upon the Town,
with Bullets of 80, 90, and 120 pound weight.

June the fourth, they approached within a stones cast of the Walls; and that
night there was a resolute skirmish before Panigra, where they were received
with Volleys of Musket, and plenty of Cannon-shot.

June the fifth, in the morning, near the Works of St. Mary they raised a new
Battery, playing upon the Besieged with four great Guns; and wrought very hard
to cast up a Trench to secure a Passage for their Artillery, in which they were
defended by a great number of Musketeers, drawn thither for that design; but
they had such a peal of Ordnance, Small-shot and Grenades from the Town, that
they desisted from their enterprise, with an extraordinary loss of men; the
Besieged only had some few Soldiers wounded, but lost not one man that day.

June the sixth, the Guns only played on both sides.

The seventh, the Turks plied again their Works, and made their approaches with
greater preparation then formerly, working under ground.

The eighth instant they raised another Battery against St. Andrews Bulwark,
and endeavored the reparation of their old Battery at the Lazaretto; but the
Marquess Villa ordered a Counter-battery well planted with Guns to be made to
secure the place, and in his retreat by the Mole, received a slight hurt in his
hand by the flying of the Stones, occasioned from Cannon-short that struck upon
the Walls. That night they made a Sally from the Half Moon of Mocenigo; where
there was a sharp fight which continued for many hours, but concluded with
great slaughter of the Enemy by the Cannon and Morter-pieccs from the
City-works.

On the nineteenth of July Signior Baroni with two Galleys, and not long after
Signior Carenzo Pisani, who was chosen Proveditor for Candia, entered the Port
with Succors for the City: and the same Evening his Excellency Captain General
Morosini followed them Incognito with two Galleys more. He was at his landing
near the Arsenal, received by Signior Barbaro with great joy, and all the
Martial Ceremonies usual upon such occasions; who presented him with the Keys
of the City; and with a great Train of Officers and Soldiers, accompanied with
Signior Maro Proveditor to the Fleet; and the Proveditor of the Isle attended
him to his Coach, and the Lodgings prepared for him: He passed under a
Triumphal Arch erected in the great Street for him, being met also by the
Cavalry at the Gates of the City, and saluted by the great Guns; the whole City
testifying their extraordinary joy and satisfaction for his arrival, by their
loud Acclamations and rare Fireworks.

The next morning the Turks at break of day discharged a great Volley of
Muskets and Cannon against the City, which the Besieged scorning to be
indebted to them) returned from the Walls.

The same morning Colonel Chateauneuf attaqued a Redoubt cast up by the Enemy
near Panigra, to give the Captain General some signal testimony of the courage
and resolution of the Besieged, and very freely threw his Hand-granadoes among
them: but the Turks being prepared for their reception, issued out, and pressed
very hard and close upon them; yet they, being seconded by another party
commanded by the Captains Castelli, Bonefort, and a third whose name we have no
certain knowledge of, renewed their assault, and did considerable execution
upon the Turks: but the Alarm being by this time grown warm, and great numbers
coming to their assistance, the Candiots retired to the Covert way of, the Fort
Panigra, and the Enemy pursued them with great shouting; and notwithstanding
the Palisadoes, and a Guard of forty Musketeers that played upon them with
their Vollies, they were forced to leave their Colonel Chateauneuf behind them,
and shelter themselves in the Moat; but he with an inconsiderable number of
Officers valiantly beat off the Enemy twice or thrice together, and was at last
relieved by Sergeant Major Motta, who Sallying out of the Fort, beat back the
Turks into their Redoubt with a great slaughter; he himself receiving a shot in
the breast, but without hurt, his Armor being well tried, and of proof. In this
attaque the Christians came off with the loss of one Sergeant, two Souldies,
and two others wounded.

At the same time Colonel Martinom, Commander of Panigra, sent out twelve
Soldiers with Grenades, and forty Footmen commanded by Major Bricheras
Lieutenant, to assault another Redoubt cast up on the right hand of the Fort;
which they performed with great courage, beating out the Turks, and putting
many of them to the Sword: but the Enemy growing more numerous, they retreated,
their Lieutenant being shot dead under the Redoubt, but like true Soldiers,
resolving not to leave the Body of their Officer in the power of the Enemy,
they returned upon them, and with great valor forced them to give ground,
taking up the Body, and retiring to their Works with much glory and renown.

The Savoyards also, being but 60 Officers and Soldiers, with Grenades, under
the Command of Colonel Torre, Sallied out from the Ravelin of Bethlem, and fell
upon the Enemies Line, where a Body of Turks stood upon their Guard to defend
the Pioneers; and there happened a very hot dispute; but they sending out a
recruit of Savoyards so assist them, the Enemy was beaten from the Line, and
forced to seek their safety in some of their Redoubts, leaving 60 of their
party dead upon the place, four of whose heads the Candiots brought with them,
and presented to the Captain General, whose valor in this noble attempt was
rewarded with forty Reals; and in this Service they were so fortunate, as to
come off with the loss of a single Soldier. Colonel Arborio and Marino, with
the Count Brusano Captain of the Guard to Marquess Villa, sallied out of the
Post of St. Mary, with a party of fifty men; forced the Turks out of two
several Redoubts, killed a considerable number of them, and lost only one
Sergeant.

There was also great execution done upon the Enemy by a Squadron that issued
from the Fort of St. Demetrius, who slaughtred many of them.

The Turks being by this time sufficiently sensible of their successless
procedings by Batteries and open force, were wholly bent upon their Mines,
employing constantly night and day ten thousand Pioneers to work in them;
whereupon they advanced greatly in their approaches, the dryness of the Season
contributing very much to their designs; and labored extremely to meet with
the Mines from the Outworks; some whereof the Christians did spring and blow
up, which proved very fatal and destructive to the Turks. In the interim the
great shot fly very liberally on both sides, but with little damage to the
City, only beating down the tops of some Churches and high Houses, with the
loss of four or five persons. The Turks still plied the City very close with
their Guns from the Batteries; and throwing Morter-pieces into the Town, with
little loss to the Besieged, but great loss to the Besiegers. The Christian
Corsayres did very considerable service by cruising upon the Sea, and in the
Archipelago; by which means they did infinitely enrich themselves, having taken
several great Prizes, and intercepted the Enemies Vessels which were laden with
Provisions intended for their Armies supply.

Now the Turks began to be very sparing of their Cannon-shot, which was
supposed to be for want of Powder; who finding little or no success thereby,
they fell to their Mines, and sprung one made under the Out-work of the
Half Moon of Mocenigo, and entered the breach, took possession thereof; killing
fifty Soldiers placed there to defend it: The Enemy being elevated with this
success, sent 3000 men to make good the place, of which they continued Masters
for the space of one day and a half; but Marquess Villa knowing that it might
prove advantageous to them in attaquing the next Work, was resolved to
dispossess them; and therefore he nobly issued out with a Party of able
Soldiers, and at the same time gave fire to a Mine, formerly made under it,
though undiscovered by the Enemy, which blew up so successfully, that the Turks
persiht most miserably in the ruins; and then the Marquess falling in among
the rest, after a sharp and bloody fight of six hours continuance, beat them
off, and regained the place, with the loss of 300 of his own men, and above
2000 Turks.

The next day the Grand Vizier, having had so great a loss of his best
Soldiers, called a Council of his principal Bassa's; where it was resolved,
that they should send a Trumpeter to the Captain General, to desire that Signor
Giaverina might come and treat with them in order to an agreement: but Colonel
Vecchia went out in his stead, they not approving of sending out the former at
present; and he was courteously received by the whole Army, but especially by
the Vizier, who treated him with a costly Collation; telling him, That if his
General wanted Provisions, he would freely send him what his Camp did afford:
but the Colonel after thanks returned for his civil proffer, assured him that
the City was so plentifully supplied by the Fleet, that they could not stand in
need of any thing: he was safely sent back to the City, with much importunity
that Giaverina might be admitted to treat with them; which was at last
condescended unto, and he was received by the Turks with great joy, who
vvelcom'd him with all their Cannons, and saluted him with several
Musketeers; the general cry through the whole Camp being nothing but Peace,
Peace. At this time the Venetians received very certain intelligence, that the
Turks Army did not consist of above 25000 men, the Svvord and Sickness having
svvept away the one half of their Army; though succors were daily expected
from Morea. About this time the Captain Bassa was discovered near the Isle
Cerigo, where he had landed several of his men, but the Venetian Galleys
coming to engage him, he put off to Sea with such haste, that he left 200 of
his men behind him, which were taken by the Candiots and made slaves.

But this Treaty like the rest soon vanished, and came to nothing. The Turks
continuing still their Works underground, putting all their confidence in the
Mines, which the Besieged labored to frustrate by their Counter-Mines; yet
they applied their greatest force and Works against Panigra; laboring hard at
their Mines, which they often sprung on every side, and in the mean time plied
the Town and Fort, especially, with great and small shot: but the Besieged
are not backwards, either in the one or the other, so that the Enemies designs
prove unsuccessful.

Before Panigra the Turks raised one very large Battery that had nine great
Guns, from whence they played furiously for many days together, and were
ansvvered by the Besieged, with extraordinary loss to the Besiegers; for above
12000 Turks perished by the Candiots Sallies, Shot, Grenades and Mines, with
several Captains of Note, and experienced Officers among them. The Venetians
having lost since the beginning of the Siege about 1000 men, with some
Commanders; among whom Baron Baroni is one, who was killed by a Musket Shot
on the 26 of July. And the Ladies, and others of that tender Sex, did give as
signal testimonies of their courage and valor in the defense of the Town, as
the men; among whom the Wife of Colonel Motta, who was Coloness of the
Regiment of Women, behaved her self with incredible resolution and infinite
courage; whose death was much lamented, she being unhappily killed by the
fall of a Wall, beaten down by the Besiegers Cannon; who still are very
intent upon the Siege, and approach nearer and nearer the Town, by the daily
springing of their Mines, shaking the whole City with the force of them; and
are constantly assaulting, but as constantly repulsed and beaten off; and 300
of them lost their lives, besides a great many more buried in their own mines,
by the blowing up of one of the Venetians Counter-mines. But the Turks by
their frequently repeated and continued Batteries, had by this time made a
great breach in the left Horn of the Fort Panigra, and another in that of
Mocenigno; and on the eleventh of Angust they gave a violent assault to both;
and to divert the Candiots, did at the same time storm the Town at several
other places; but by the courage of the Besieged were every where repulsed
with great slaughter; the Besiegers leaving many of their dead behind them,
whose heads adorn the Houses of the Venetian Officers, vvherevvith they are
set round, as Trophies of their Valor, and rewards of their resolution. Yet
the Turks are no vvays discouraged, but are principally encouraged by a
Renegado Jesuit called La Grange, who is courteously entertained by the Vizier,
and wholly swayed by his advice.

The Turks now make use of several Gunners that are Christians, whom they have
compelled into their service by force, or drawn them in by flattery; and to
terrify the rest, they cut off the head of one of them, who was suspected not
to have fired his Gun to the best advange. They still continued springing of
their Mines; which occasions many daily sharp encounters; and the courage of
the Candiots is as frequently signalized by the great slaughter of the Turks:
which so incensed the Vizier, that he commanded a general assault, which was
performed with a noise as great as their fury, and for a considerable time
continued with much obstinacy; but they finding the greatest loss to be their
own, and the Defendants inconsiderable; the Vizier gave over the assault, whose
trouble and almost despair is increased by the great wants of necessary
Provisions in the Camp, and the difficulty of being supplied, by reason of the
indefatigable industry and diligence of the Venetian Squadrons, who so
continually. cruise before Canea, that they cannot steal in with their Vessels:
insomuch that the Turks grew full of despondencie, considering that in so long
a Siege, after so many men lost, so many assaults made, and so many Mines
sprung, they had not as yet made themselves masters of any one Out-work of the
Christians; and though the Turks were in great wants, yet the Venetians were
destitute of nothing that was necessary, either of men, money, Ammunition, or
any other Provisions whatsoever.

But the Turks still made daily assaults, springing fresh Mines; yet by the
prudence and conduct of the Besieged, their attempts have been frustrated. Now
the Turks Cannon had torn some houses, and beat down some part of their Walls;
but the great number of Grenades shot from the Enemies Morter-pieces, did the
greatest prejudice to the Town.

Now the Captain General, for prevention of all surprises, commanded all his
Soldiers to keep their Posts allotted them, by a very strict Proclamation; and
Ordered that all sorts of Victuals should be sold near the Walls of the Town,
to remove all pretenses for their absence.

Then the Turks raised a Battery near the Post, but to no purpose; and bent the
most considerable force they had against the Outworks of Mocenigo and Panigra,
and did them some damage by the often springing of Mines, and chiefly that of
Panigra. At this time Signior Giustiniano Commissary of the Victuals, with two
other Officers, were killed by the blowing up of one of them, which wholly
destroyed the Left-horn of Panigra: and another Mine blew up the Counterscarp.
Upon an exact view of all the Soldiers in the City, it was found that about
1500 had been killed since the Siege; but that there were still above 10000
able men left to defend the place.

Now the Grand Vizier being more intent then ever upon the taking of the City,
gave order that materials for building Huts and Lodges convenient for the
Soldiers, should be brought to the Leaguer, intending to lie before the Town
all the Winter; resolving not to raise the Seige till he had either taken the
Town, or lost his whole Army in the Attempt.

And the Turks having made their approaches proaches to the Half Moon of
Mocenigo and the Fort Panigra, lodged themselves in the Trenches thereof; and
in a small time sprung several Mines under each Work, which took so
effectually, that a wide breach was made in both places; and the same night
they immediately made a desperate assault, appearing in great numbers upon the
breaches, distinguished by some white upon their Arms: but the Besieged being
very well prepared to receive them, the Turks, after a smart fight, were forced
by the Garrison to give over the Attempt, with a great loss of men, and some
Colors. So that the Enemy being so constantly defeated in their designs upon
the Outworks, have given over those places, being much discouraged by their
great losses. The Vizier therefore commanded the Pioneers to undermine the
Town-ditch; which the Christian Officers observing, by their Counter-mines
within endeavored to defeat them, and with great good success met with one of
their Galleries, which they absolutely ruined, and buried the Turks therein
that were employed in that business. The Candiots about this time received a
recruit of 2000 Soldiers, and 200000 Crowns for their encouragement.

In September, the Grand Vizier finding that his Soldiers, especially the
Janisaries, were ready to break out into a mutiny, and threatened to leave the
Siege, being impatient at the tediousness thereof, resolved to put things to a
speedy issue; and therefore commanded a general assault to be made, which was
accordingly executed. The Turks did storm the Breaches very furiously; but were
resisted so valiantly by the Besieged, that after a fierce and bloody dispute,
they gave over with the loss of 7000 men: The Christians loss was also great,
who had 1500 of their men slain; among whom were five Noblemen of Venice, who
with great honor sold their lives in a defensive War against the Common Enemy
of Christianity. The Turks finding their labor fruitless, notwithstanding
their endeavors to lodge themselves in the breaches of Panigra and Mocenigo;
have since spent their time in filling the Trenches between the Bulwarks of
those two Forts, to hinder all communication between them; and to that purpose
they had brought thither a great quantity of earth, though with considerable
loss and danger; and were in hopes to make a passage to the left Angle of the
Fort Panigra, where they had made the widest breach; but the Besieged, to
frustrate their designs, appeared upon the breach with a party of select
Soldiers, and a certain number of Slaves taken out of the Galleys that rid
then in the Harbor, who behaved themselves so courageously, that the Enemy
retreated; and the Christians in the interim cast up so strong a defense in
that part of the breach, clearing all to the Trench, and throwing out the Earth
they cast in, that there was little encouragement for a second attempt:
besides, they placed a Machine over against the Breach, (which was the
invention of Captain General Morosini) which was Musquet-proof, and could
contain 20 Soldiers; where they might safely manage their Arms to defend the
Breach. Many Mines were daily sprung, and one of the Christians did notable
execution, where by blowing up twelve Barrels of Powder, there happened a great
slaughter among the Turks; and many of their bodies were thrown into the Trench.

The Besieged also made many successful Sallies, and to their great
encouragement had received a supply of two thousand men, with store of all
necessary Provisions, that arrived safe at Candia in their Convoy, which
consisted of twelve Ships: This made them resolve upon a general Sallie out of
the City, which was performed with great loss to the Turks. The Enemy being
almost tired out with the Siege (especially the Janisaries and Spahi) their
Army bring reduced from 60000 to 20000, were resolved to quit the Siege; yet
the Vizier by his great diligence and large promises persuades them still to
continue at the Siege, where they still beat the Town with their Ordnance.

But among other late adventures, in October, about four Gally-slaves,
belonging to the Venetian, being employed in one of the Out-vvorks, discovered
about 100 Turks dravving near them in a Body; vvhereupon one of them, whose
name was Bressano, making himself Captain, encouraging his Companions, and
taking such weapons as came next to hand, issued out upon the Turks with
great resolution; killed 30 of them in a very small time, vvounded many of the
rest, and put them all to flight for their safety: Bressano having in this
Sally given a sufficient testimony of his great courage, by killing 16 of them
with his own hand. The Captain General at this very instant standing upon the
Walls, and observing all passages, sent for him, and commending him his valor,
rewarded him with a Gold-Chain, and the Command of a Company of Foot; being
very liberal in bestowing moneys upon the rest of the Slaves, and enrolling
them into a Company. Much about this time an Aga with four Turks fled into
Candia, with a considerable sum of money; and ten or twelve thousand Turks had
quitted the service, being wearied with expectation, and tired out with the
Siege; which extremely incensed the Vizier; yet he gave order for the repair of
the Fort of New Candia, which he at his first setting down before the City had
demolished as altogether useless; being resolved to spend the whole Winter in
lying before the Town: and in order thereunto, sent out several dispatches into
Egypt, Barbary, and all other places in the Ottoman Empire; threatening the
Bassa's with severe and present punishment, if not absolutely and speedily
obeyed.

The Grand Signior was now arrived at Morea in person, to hasten the
transportation of fresh forces, intending to summon together the whole strength
of his Empire, rather then desert the Siege dishonourably. Yet notwithstanding
the great losses of men, the tediousness of the Siege, the frustrating of their
designs in their assaults above, and the successlessness of their Mines under
ground, the impatience of the Grand Signior, maugre all discouragement
whatsoever, they still engage in many warm disputes, and endeavor to fill up
the Trenches; but the Besieged still beat them off, and throw out what they
cast in: but the Christian Officers looked upon this as prejudicial, and time
ill spent, seeing the Enemy from one of his Batteries planted upon the
Counterscarp, destroyed their Blinds, and laid them open to their Small-shot;
therefore they resolved to destroy the Battery, and employed the Pioneers to
that purpose, who sprung a large Mine, which blew it up wholly, with a great
number of Turks, burying all their Cannons in its ruins, together with the
Mustapha Bassa, Beilerbeg of Anatolia, one of the most considerable persons
among them, and who chiefly advised the carrying on the Siege on that side of
the City. Several other Mines were sprung the day following on both sides, by
which the Panigra was totally destroyed, and reduced to a heap of rubbish,
though still defended with infinite valor; the Christians appearing in white
Armor, to the terror of the Enemy. After this, the Besieged made many Sallies,
and in their retreat drew the Enemy over Mines which were prepared for them;
and when the Christians saw their opportunity, fired them with great execution,
and in little time beat them to their second Redoubt, returning with Arms and
Baggage in all their Sallies. Yet the Turks by the approaches of their
Galleries made their advances with great obstinacy, springing diverse Mines upon
the Trenches of the City, with great damage to the Palisadoes of the Falsbray
near adjoining; but the Christians, by their industry, placed new Palisadoes on
the Falsbray: The Turks still working their Mines with all the subtilty
imaginable; one whereof they sprung, which was under the Half Moon at the
right hand of the Panigra, which almost filled a part of the Trench near the
Front of the Bulwark Bethlem with its ruins; of which the Turks were resolved
to make the best advantage they could, and that very night were making
preparations for a storm; but there fell such violent rain in the night, that
they were forced to desist. Afterward they sprung another Mine in the Graft,
which removed many Palisadoes, and endangered the person of the Marquess Villa.
Another Mine of the Enemies which was ready to spring, was happily discovered
by the Christians, and the Powder removed: the Enemy afterward, when they
thought it convenient, fired the Train, being big with expectation of the
issue; but they were set upon by a party of the Besieged, who also gave fire to
two Mines of their own near Mocenigo, and one of 35 Barrels of Powder, which
overwhelmed many Turks in the ruins, and disordered their Mines in those
places.

Now the Garrison having received a considerable supply of fresh Soldiers and
some Horse, they made a resolute Sally; and the Turks drawing up all their
forces, maintained the dispute two hours together; but they were at last beaten
into their own Trenches, with great loss of their chief Captains and
Commanders, besides private Soldiers; the Grand Vizier himself escaping not
without great hazard of his life, or imprisonment. The Turks Army being now
reduced to 18000, were resolved upon a dernier effort, and to make a general
Sally; but were repulsed with great slaughter.

Now since the Turk had made several experiments of the valor of the Candiots,
by Assaults and Skirmishes which proved unsuccessful, he endeavored to obtain
by stratagem what he could not do by force; to which end they shot several
Arrows into the City, to which they had fastened Letters, both in French and
Italian, which contained many Arguments to persuade the Christians to a
surrender, bragging of their Supplies they suddenly expected, resolving not to
quit the Siege; menacing them, upon their refusal, with all the extremities
used by an incensed Enemy.

On the fifteenth of November, in the Evening, the Grand Vizier discharged all
his Cannon, which were seconded with five Volleys of Musketeers, three of them
with Bullets, and two without; accompanied with great shouts, and setting up
many Lights about the Camp; which made the Christians jealous of some large
Succors sent them, or some extraordinary expectation from their Mines: but
they drew up their men, and commanded them to stand all night to their Arms;
and in the morning they found it only to be a Turkish Rodomontado, a mere
Artifice of the Grand Visiers, by throwing out reports of Succors and
Supplies, to raise the drooping spirits of the Soldiers.

The sixteenth of November, being the Anniversary of St. Giustina, on which in
the year 1570, the Christians gained a glorious Victory against the Turks, was
celebrated by the Besieged with as much true zeal and joy, as that of the Turks
the day before was counterfeit and feigned. Some few days after, the Grand
Signior sent the Vizier a Vest and Scimiter as a present; which he received,
with some Moneys for the Soldiers pay, which made them repeat the like
Triumphs throughout the whole Turkish Camp.

After this, the Christians made a large Mine without, the Raveline di Samo
Spirito, divided into three parts, which they sprung so prosperously, that it
ruined their Redoubts and Lines, blew up their Bodies in the Air, and entombed
others of them in its ruins; which was followed by a stout Sally, to the
destruction of many Turks, and some Commanders of Eminency. At which the
Vizier was so much enraged, that he resolved to win the Town, or lost his life
in the attempt; sending to all his Bassa's throughout the Grand Signiors
Dominions, for all supplies of Provisions they could possibly furnish him
withal.

The Turks having gained the ruined Outworks of Panigra, advanced with their
Mines and Galleries toward the great Trench; but a considerable slaughter
happened among the Turks, by the frequent springing of the Mines, and numerous
Sallies that were daily made: but Signior Lorenzo Pisani, the Proveditor of
Candia, was slain by one of their Morter-pieces; and that Noble Venetian
Bertolo Pisani unfortunately killed by a shot. Yet the rains falling so
excessively upon them, the Grand Vizier, withdrew, leaving about 6000 men
behind him to defend the Batteries, and other Works.

Much about this time, Secretary Giavarina, Minister of State to the Venetians,
who had continued some time in the Grand Visiers Camp, lodged in the Tents of
Caterzogolo, which was a place of bad air, died, and five or six of his Family;
which might be occasioned by the Contagion that raged so violently among the
Turks.

The City was now in a good condition, by reason of their constant supplies
from the Fleet; but the Turks endeavored to make good their Post in the ruins
of the Fort Panigra: and the Venetian General ordered a new Line to be drawn in
the old Works, to the end that the Besieged might be in a capacity to defend
every part of the Town sufficiently, if the Turks (according to their menaces)
should employ their whole power against Candia the next Summer.

The Grand Vizier being now retired with the major part of his Army into the
Vale of Giofiro, the 6000 men that he left, still employed themselves about the
defense of those Posts that they had in their possession; the Besieged minding,
during this vacancy, the prepration of their Works, and clearing their
Trenches: but the Vizier sent some additional Forces, and plenty of Provisions
from the Walls, where the gross of the Army retired, with express orders to
lose no opportunity of gaining upon Candia; which so encouraged them, that
about Christmas they made frequent assaults, and were as frequently beaten off;
but on St. Stephens day there was a great dispute; the Besieged issuing out in
white Arms, destroyed a great number of the Enemy.

In January the Turks quitted all their Batteries before Candia but two, and
sent most of their Cannon into Candia Nuova: and at this time there dyed among
them near 200 in a day of the Plague; which made the Vizier retire ino Canea,
sending his sick and wounded Soldiers into Napoli di Malvasia.

The Christian General resolving now upon a Sally, drew out a strong party,
fell upon the Enemies Redoubts, and put the Turks to their heels; with a great
loss of men on their part, and but forty of the Besieged. Now the Bassa of
Morea, had raised a Body of 8000 Turks, who were ready to be imbarqued for
Canea; but they in their way seeing 3000 Turks wounded; who were conveyed in
Carts to several Hospitals in Morea, prepared for their reception; this sight
made so deep an impression upon them, that they all quitted the service,
fleeing into the Mountains for safety, and leaving their Bag and Baggage behind
them; declaring their unwillingness to engage in such desperate service, where
an Army of 60000 that sat down before Candia at first, was already reduced to
16000. But the Grand Signior resolved to employ all his Forces, both by Sea and
Land, for the carrying on of the War against Candia; and therefore dispatched
two Chiauces to Tunis, and some other parts of Barbary, to command all
assistance of Shipping, that they could possibly afford him; but he received a
cold and dissatisfactory answer, by way of excuse.

In February the Turks having received some Supplies, renewed the Siege, and
cast up a large Fort at the Sabionera, and planted many pieces of Ordnance
thereon, wherewith they played very hard upon the Port and Town, but with very
inconsiderable damage.

Toward the latter end of this Month, a Renegado that commanded a Body of two
thousand Turks, endeavored to surprise the Fort St. Andre; but the Marquess
Villa having timely notice of their design, sent Colonel Motto with a
considerable number of able and resolute men, who assaulted the Enemy so
courageously, that they slew 500 of them upon the place, put the rest to the
rout, and with a very small loss returned with 50 heads to the Town. Now the
City had received a considerable supply of men; and Captain Molino having made
a discovery of five of the Turkish Galleys coming out of the Dardanelloes,
having aboard them men and Ammunition for the Grand Vizier, chased them with
his Squadron for some hours, and sunk two of them, the other three run aground
upon one of the Islands to avoid him, where they were broken in pieces, but the
men escaped.

The Turks about this time got many Ships together, with Supplies intended for
Canea; but they understanding that the Christians Fleet was cruising about
those Coasts, were forced to flee into Rhodes for shelter, and there expect the
opportunity of a safe passage. Yet notwithstanding all these discouragements,
they continued their Mines, and attempted to make a way through the Graft, that
they might assault the Town with the less difficulty; but by the vigilance of
the Defendants, at this very time, two of the Galleries made near one of the
Principal Bulwarks of the Town, were blown up by the Christians Countermines.

The Grand Signior appeared still more active in, and intent upon the business
of the Siege then ever, drawing up great numbers of men in all places,
intending to make them in all 100000 strong; and to employ 100 Galleys, and
fifty other Ships of force in the Service, with a great supply of all
necessaries to the effecting of such a work.

On the eighth of March, seven Venetian Galleys cruising in the Archipelago,
were set upon in the night by twelve under the command of Durach Bey, a famous
Corsaire; but some other Christian Vessels coming opportunely to their
assistance: the Admiral took seven of them, which he sent into the Port of
Candia, sunk three, so that there only escaped two, very much disabled. In
which Naval engagement the Christians lost 400 men, and among the rest Signior
Daniel Giustiniano the Play Master; Foscarini, one Captain of a Gally, and six
other Officers were wounded; but there fell of the Turks Durach Bey himself,
and some other persons of note, with a great number of men; four hundred and
ten Prisoners were taken, and 1100 Christians and upwards freed from Turkish
servitude.

About the beginning of April, 1668, Georgio Maria Vitali was by the Senate
made Knight of the Order of St. Mark, for his service against the Turks. Upon
this defeat, the Captain of the Armata sent a Tartan from Candia to Venice, who
arrived the 21 of April, S. N. being Sunday, and brought with him several
Flags, and other Trophies of Victory, as a present to the Grand Duke: and upon
the entry of these Prizes into the Port of Candia, where they had a very joyful
reception, and were welcomed with the discharge of the Towns great Guns;
General Villa observing the Turks idly gazing upon the Triumphs of the
Christians, sallied out upon them unexpectedly, forcing them to flee into their
Camp, and killing them on their own Redoubts; returning with 100 of their
heads, or thereabout; which with Durach Bey's, and several Turkish Captains
that were slain at Sea, were placed upon Poles round about the City-Walls, to
the terror of the Turks, and confusion of the Bassa, who was seen in a raging
humor to tear his Beard out of vexation, to see that he in his designs proved
so unfortunate. Upon the arrival of this Nevvs, the Senators attended the Duke
to congratulate for this success; who with the Popes Nuncio, and Spanish
Ambassador, that were then at Venice, with a numerous Train of the Nobility,
advanced to the Church of St. Mark, where they heard Te Deum sung; and then
went in procession, as is usual upon such solemn occasions. This very Evening
the Senate honored General Morosini with the dignity of Knighthood, and
conferred several honors upon his Relations, appointing rewards to be
distributed among such persons as had signalized themselves by their eminent
Service in this Engagement.

The Turks grevv now dead-hearted at the late defeat of their Galleys, and the
successful Sally made by the Marquess Villa; insomuch, that the Grand Vizier
took up a resolution to make no farther progress against Candia, till the
expected succors, promised him by the Ottoman Emperor, were safely arrived.
Signior Morosini being informed that the Turks had a great succor intended for
Canea, took the Sea with 25 of his best Galleys, some Galleasses and Fireships,
to engage them, whose Fleet consisted of 100 Galleys, 60 Saiques, and 25 great
round Ships laden with Provisions; but General Morosini, after a bloody sight
of ten hours continuance, burnt, sunk, and took a great many of them; and two
of their principal Bassa's became his Prisoners, with most of the chief
Commanders. About this time also several Privateers of the Republique, Malta,
and other places, met together; who joining their Forces in the Gulf of
Rhodes, took twelve Saiques belonging to the Turks, laden with Provisions for
Canea. The Senate having had information that a Greek discovered the Grand
Visiers design to surprise the Venetians Galleys, whereby they obtained so
signal a Victory, ordered him a Pension of fifty Ducats a Month, in lieu of a
reward.

On Saturday, May the second, S. N. General Villa arrived at Venice, who had
served the Republique in Candia about two years, in obedience to the Commands
of his Master the Duke of Savoy, and with the Senates permission; leaving the
Sieur des Marets to supply his place, till the arrival of Monsieur de St. Andre
Montbrun, who is to succeed him in the Generalship.

Captain Molino also met with five Turkish Vessels coming from Alexandria,
bound for Canea, with considerable supplies for the Vizier; but he sunk two of
them, and took the remaining three.

General Spaar, a German, who was employed by the Senate as General of the
Foreign Forces in Candia, with a Pension of 4000 Ducats, safely arrived at
Candia, with a Company of Ships well furnished with Men, Ammunition and Money;
so that the Town was in as good condition at this time, as when they first laid
Siege to her.

In this Month of May, the City made two Sallies more upon the Turks, wherein
they behaved themselves with incredible courage. And Signior Claudio Arassi a
Sergeant Major, with Signior Mutio Mattei Major General of the Ecclesiastical
Forces, dyed in Candia of the Wounds they received in that Engagement of the
Beiler-Gallies. Now the Turks endeavor to work with their Mines under ground,
but the Besieged still Counter-mine them.

The Grand Vizier lost two of his prime Engineers, and is in so bad a condition
for want of necessary Provisions, that his Soldiers daily flee from their
Colors; yet he still obstinately plays with his great Guns, and by mining,
attempts the eversion of the repaired, or new-raised Fort of Panigra, and the
Half Moon of Mocenigo, making his approaches toward the Port of St. Andrew,
but to little purpose; for the Besieged made a vigorous Sally upon them, as
they lay before that Fort, making them quit the Redoubt they had raised with
much prejudice, and carried with them many Prisoners into the Town; who upon
examination, confessed that the Turkish Army did not exceed 18000 in number,
and those ill commanded too; for most of their experienced Officers and
Soldiers had lost their lives; the Vizier still expecting the promised
Supplies from the Sultan, and the Bassa of Morea.

The Turks finding that they could no ways advance themselves by open Force,
endeavored to perform their designs by Treachery; which was thus attempted:
They had so far prevailed with two Christian Fugitives, with large promises of
larger rewards, that they did engage to give their utmost assistance: One of
them was to convey himself into the City (whilst the other remained as an
Hostage in the Turkish Camp for security) which he did, and was to nail up some
of the Cannons in one of the Forts, which the Turks were then immediately to
Storm, upon a signal given: but he was discovered before he could effect what
he intended; and being threatened, made a full confession of the whole matter:
whereupon the Venetian Forces being drawn up, the appointed signal was given,
and the Turks approach with cheerfulness, as to a certain Victory; but at
length they found themselves so briskly entertained, that they retired with a
great loss of men; whose deaths they revenged upon him they had in their Camp,
whom they cruelly put to death; and the other received the due reward of his
intended Treachery in the City.

Thirteen Turkish Vessels were met with by a Squadron of Malteses, that were
bound with succors for Candia, who took seven of them; but those of Malta
dismissed the Ships, finding they belonged to Christians, who were compelled to
that employment.

The Turks were now much disheartened, and grew very cold in their Assaults;
finding that their supplies came in slowly, contrary to their expectation;
which animated the Christians, who issued out, and engaged: them in their own
Works, bringing away several of their heads upon their Pikes: but the Vizier
being lately affronted, was resolved on a resolute attempt upon the Town; and
to that end, sent for 6000 Sacks from Canea, which were to be filled with
Earth, and other Materials, to fill up the Trenches, and make a passage for his
men, that he might thereby become. Master of some new Post: but this design
soon shrunk to nothing; their Forces daily decreasing, and relief no vvays
increasing as was hoped; insomuch, that above one hundred Turks fled lately to
Candia, begging Pass-ports to return into their own Country.

In June, the City was refurnished with store of all Provisions, by the
arrival of their Convoys; and the Fort Panigra, upon which the Turks, last
Summer, had done the notablest execution, was so repai'd, that it was better
to endure their attempts then formerly. The Vizier had a recruit of five
thousand Janisarics now arrived in a tempestuous Season, when Admiral
Morosini was in the Harbor, or else it is probable he had met with them, and
stopped their intended course; and some Saichs also, notvvithstanding the care
and vigilance of the Venetian Generals, have privily by night conveyed
themselves from Morea into Canea, being laden with Provisions and Forces,
which moved the Vizier to some speedy action; to which purpose he raised a
great Battery before the Fort St. Andre, and plied their Cannon closely, and
furiously assaulted the Outworks, but was bravely beaten off by the
Defendants: the Sieur des Marets gave eminent proof of his valor in this
Service; who though surrounded, and out-numbred by the Turks, made his way
through the midst of them, and regained the Town, with the loss of a Colonel,
another Officer, and most of his Followers; yet the Turks had no cause to
boast, their own loss being more considerable.

The Turks did now almost despair of reducing Candia; yet with all their
strength they assaulted it in several parts at once, with great cries setting
upon the Outworks of the Forts of St. Dennis, St. Andre, the Sabionera and
Panigra; but were beaten off the three first with great slaughter: their
chiefest and greatest assault was made upon Panigra; where coming on so
violently and numerously, they possessed themselves of a small Work without the
Fort, and kept it all night: But the next morning Signior Carbonaro, an expert
Soldier and Engineer, fell so vigorously upon them, with a party in white
Armor, sallying out by break of day, and so nobly engaged them, that after
three or four hours dispute, they were dislodged in spite of all assistance;
but the Enemy sprung a Mine at their departure under the Work, which destroyed
and hurt several of the Besieged, with Signior Carbonaro: But in this, and the
precedent days action, the Enemy lost above 1000 men; and since that, played
with such fury upon the Town, both with their Cannon and Small-shot, that the
General Bernardo Nani was wounded in the head by one of the latter, of which he
afterward dyed; and some Soldiers were shot upon the Walls.

In this Month the Captain Bassa being at Sea with forty Galleys, and five men
of War of Barbary, met with Cavalier Georgio Maria Vitali, a Privateer of great
renown; who not at all considering the vast disparity and disadvantage in the
number and strength both of Ships and Men, entertained them with infinite
courage, and defended himself for the space of thirty six hours against them;
shattering many of, the Enemies Galleys, and destroying a multitude of their
men; but in the end was himself unfortunately slain with a Cannon-shot, having
of 500 men but six remaining; his Ship being extremely torn, fell into the
hands of the Enemy, with Goods and Money, to the value of two hundred thousand
Reals. During this engagement, which was maintained by the Galleys, the Men of
War set upon Captain Sgara, who was in the Neptune, a Ship entertained upon the
Public Account, attended by a Pinck; the Ship after a resolute resistance was
taken, and the Captain too Prisoner; but the little Pinck being nimble, did
fortunately save her self.

June the twenty seventh, the Senate prefented Marquess Villa, who was then
making preparations in order to his return to Savoy, with a present valued at
6000 Ducats, in acknowledgement of the eminent services he did for the
Republique in this Siege.

And July the sixteenth, S. N. the Marquess Villa went to take his leave of the
College, and received a rich Basin of Gold as a present from the Republique, on
which was engraven a grateful acknowledgement of the signal Services he had
done them.

Now the Visiers Army was somewhat increased, but not so much as was expected:
the Captain Bassa being nearly related to him, is very zealous to afford him
all the assistance imaginable: they still continue the Siege; notwithstanding
the Venetian Fleet hinders their supplies, so that there was so great a dearth
among them, that a pound of salt-flesh was sold for 40 Aspres, a pound of
Biscuit, or Bread, for 20; but Candia had plenty of all sorts of Provisions, by
reason that the Christian Privateers, often resorted to their Port, to sell
their prizes. Besides, Monsieur de St. Andre Montbrun safely arrived at Candia
(to supply the place of Marquess Villa) with a great number of stout Soldiers;
who to render himself famous by some enterprise upon the Enemy, made a resolute
Sally with a party upon the Turks that lay before the Fort Sabionera, forcing
them out of their Trenches with great loss, and destroyed the Work they had
cast up against the Fort; and Admiral Morosini, the Proveditor Catarin Cornaro
(till the Senates farther order) in the place of Bernardo Nani, lately
deceased. Still the Turks obstinately continued the Siege, and spent much shot
upon Sabionera, Bethlem and Panigra; and the Vizier ordered a general assault
to be made, being informed by a Fugitive Greek, that the Venetians were too
slenderly provided in their Forts, to meet with any stout opposition; but he
found the contrary, for the Besieged beat them into their own Line, with the
loss of some hundreds of their men. Whereupon the Vizier caused the Greek to be
immediately impaled for his misinformation. The Christians lost some men in
this attaque, and among the rest Monsieur des Marets, a person of great courage
was killed outright; and Monsieur de St. Andre Montburn received a slight hurt
in the face by a stone.

On Saturday, July the twenty eighth, S.N. the Senate made choice of his
Excellency Girolome Battaja, a person of prodigious Valor, and great Conduct,
to succeed the late Bernardo Nani in his command, as General of the Forces in
Candia; who by Order from the Senate was then preparing to depart.

Signior Alessandro Molino was made by the Senate Captain of the Venetian Fleet
in the Levant, to succeed in the Dignity of Censor; and they also made choice
of Signior T^deo Morosini to succeed him in the Fleet.

The Turks had now given a furious assault to the City, which was continued a
whole night; the chiefest force being employed against the Fort of Sabioneca;
but were repulsed with incredible valor. In this attempt they were thought to
lose 1500 men at least; with several Officers of note: of the defendants, there
dyed about 200, with whom Colonel Aldobrandi, a person of an undaunted spirit,
lost his life.

In another Assault, soon after, the Enemy for some little time were possessed of
the Half Moon of St. Andre; but the Christians having before undermined it,
blew it up, with great destruction to the Turks.

In the Port of Gira Petra, ten Turks men of War, belonging to Barbary, met
with five of the Venetian Fleet; the Confidence, the three Kings, the Mary, the
Contarino, and the Golden Palm, commanded by the Sieur de Lionne; and after a
severe and smart fight, one of the Enemies Vessels being grappled with the
Contarino, they both sunk to the bottom; and the Captain of the Mary seeing
that he was altogether overpowered, closed with another Barbary Ship of great
strength; but firing his powder, they both blew up together: the noise and
roaring of the Cannon in this engagement, had called in three other Ships to
their assistance; at whose appearance, the Enemy made away with all the Sail
they had, though they were superior both in number and strength; yet they
departed not without some evident marks of this sharp encounter.

The Turks now for several days together played hard. upon the Fort Sabionera,
with Cannon and Morter-pieces; and then made a vigorous assault, but were
beaten off: and at this time, Monsieur St. Andre Montburn made a stout Sally
upon them, in which about 2000 Turks were slain. Now had the Turks received a
considerable succor, which spirited the Vizier, and made him resolve to hold
out the Siege. But 800 Janisaries that were become both unable and unwilling to
continue any longer in that service, mutinyed, and deserted the Siege; seeking
for an opportunity to imbark themselves for their own Country. As the
Captain General of the Christians Fleet was riding about Suda with 15 Galleys,
waiting the motion of the Turks Fleet, he received intelligence, that the Bassa
of Canea had for the supply of the Camp before Candia (not without the Grand
Visiers order) sent 200 select Turks out of that Garrison, to convoy some
Cattle, great and small, to their Army: Upon this information, the
Captain General landed a strong party of his, commanded by an experienced
Officer, who lay close in ambush somewhat beyond Picorna, where they were to
pass; and as they came marching, he fell suddenly in upon them, scattered them,
killed some upon the place, and returned to the Galleys with prisoners, and the
whole Booty; so that the Cattle were, by the Generals order, presently sent
into Candia for their supply.

Much about this time, Monsieur de St. Andre Montbrun observing that the Turks
began to confide in, and rely very much upon a small Work they had raised near
the Lazaretto, expecting thereby to annoy the Venetian Vessels, as they passed
to and fro in the Port; he with some hundreds in Boats fell upon the Turks by
night, and forced them to quit the same, which was immediately demolished,
according to his order.

The Turks did murmur, and were very much discontented at the proceedings of
the Vizier, having lost before Candia above 80000 able Soldiers, and trifled
away two years time without gaining any one considerable Post: they generally
affirming, that their Prophet could not be expected, in justice, to favor or
assist them in a War, that with so little cause, and so great circumvention and
treachery, was at first undertaken.

In August, the Grand Vizier continued his Batteries against the Town for
thirty six hours together, without the least intermission; in which assaults he
lost 8000 of his men; wherein the Besieged received some loss also, and a few
Officers. At Santa Vemerando, the Turks raised a new Fortification, which made
the Christians sally out, and repulse them with great damage, whereby they did
alarm the whole Camp; insomuch, that the Vizier himself came to their
assistance.

In this month, Vincenzo Rospigliosi General of the Popes Galleys arrived at
Candia, to the great satisfaction and joy of the Besieged; who was saluted at
his arrival with all the Artillery, with Volleys of Small-shot from the
Soldiers, and then treated very honorably by the Proveditor General:
Rospigliosi did distribute a very large sum of money among the Soldiers, as a
Donative, and gave several presents to the Officers. The Christians received
supplies again, which they stood in need of; and the Turks played constantly
upon the Port with their Batteries, and had lodged themselves upon the Walls of
Candia. The Turkish Fleet riding near Canea, consisted of 100 Galleys and
upwards; with thirteen Barbary men of War, having found 3000 men at Gira Petra,
and 6000 at Canea, to recruit the Visiers Army, which was very much impaired by
their frequent assaults, whereby the Besieged had received very considerable
damages; for they lost several eminent Officers, particularly Colonel Portario
a Siciliot, the Engineer Quadruplano, Serjeant-Major-General Motto, Colonel
Gamba, and the Marquess Carlotti. The Turks made several attempts upon the Fort
Sabionera, in which they lost in few days 6000 men and better; and afterward
turned the main Body of their Army against the Fort St. Andre; and at the same
time, to divert the Defendants, stormed three or four other parts of the Town;
but Monsieur St. Andre Montbrun was so vigilant, that after a long and sharp
conflict, the Turks were beaten off with great slaughter from all places.

The Venetians had landed 1000 able Foot about this time, expecting daily
greater succors. Now the Turks divided their Army into two Bodies; and at the
same time made two desperate assaults upon the Forts of Sabionera and St.
Andre, lying near the Sea; but herein they lost great numbers of their men, and
the Aga of the Janisaries was carried off by them with a mortal wound; but by
an unfortunate shot they killed Signior Andre Semitecolo and Grioni, belonging
to the Besieged. Now there arrived at Candia, the Convoy commanded by Giacomo
Cornaro with Men and Ammunition, and 500 able Soldiers from Terra Firma,
having in all put a supply of above 3000 fresh men into Candia.

The Venetians being highly encouraged by these supplies and recruits, made a
sally upon the Turks that were placed before the Fort St. Andre, and
counterfeiting a flight, drew them upon a Mine near the Fort Panigra, where
they made a halt, and blew up the Mine, destroying some hundreds of them.

The Turks having now lodged themselves in the Ditches of Sabionera,
endeavored by a Mine to blow up part of the Courtin; but the execution fell
upon their own people, doing little or no damage to the Works.

On Wednesday the twelfth of Septehiber, S.N. a Ship arrived at Venice from the
Armata, bringing in it the body of the lately deceased General Bernardo Nani.

The Besieged made a sally upon the Besiegers that lay before Sabionera, beat
them off of their Works, and carried away with them six of their great Guns:
upon which the Vizier drew off his Forces forty paces from their former Posts.
In one of the Turks assaults, Colonel Prosilio, the Governor Tadeo Morosini,
and Colonel Venturini, were all three killed with one Cannon-shot; and the
Besieged, in a sally made upon the Enemy, killed many of them, and retreated to
the Town with some of their Baggage, but lost about fifty men, and a Nephew to
the Marquess Villa, with three other persons of quality. The Turks made another
assault, being hightned with the former success; but were forced back with the
loss of 1200 men, which were left dead upon the place. Much about the same time
that the Enemy attempted the Fort St. Andre, the Besieged sallied out upon
them, and killed many upon the place, taking some Sacks of wool, which the
Enemy used to defend them from their shot, with some Swords and Arms, which
they carried into the Town. In these assaults, and the sally at the Sabionera,
the Christians lost about sixty men, among whom were the noble Marco Barbarigo,
Colonel Sala, one Engineer of Burgundy, and three Serjcants; among the wounded
were these persons of note, Lorenzo Dona, Francisco Balti, Santo Barbaro, and
some others, whose names we could not learn; also the General Cattarin Cornaro
was slightly bruised with a stone.

On the third, fourth, fifth and sixth instant, the Turks repeated their
Assaults upon the Fort Sabionera, being moved thereunto by a large Breach they
had made, of twenty Venetian paces in breadth; and though great numbers of them
fell, they with great obstinacy pursued their design, endeavoring to march
over their dead, and to advance their Standard on the breach; but they met with
such strong opposition, that the Standard was broke in pieces, and they driven
back with extraordinary, damage. In this action the prodigious valor of a
Gally-slave was very observable, who was found to have killed forty two of the
Enemy with his own hand in one day; which the Captain General taking notice of,
publicly rewarded him, and made him at that instant Sergeant to a Company.

On the thirteenth instant, the new General Battaja arrived at Candia with 2000
Soldiers, which he put into the Town, with a great sum of money and Ammunition.

About the latter end of his Month, the rains falling in such abundant showers,
destroyed many of their Mines and Pioneers, and did them much mischief.

On the fourth of October, the General St. Andre Montbrun made a notable brisk
sally upon the Enemy, from the Fort of St. Andre, beating the Turks out of
their own Line, and possessed themselves of one of their Batteries, drawings off
a Morter-piece, and intending to carry off their Cannon planted there; but the
Turks coming suddenly upon them with their whole strength, obstructed them in
that enterprise, so that it proved ineffectual; and they retreated into the
Town: Signior Francisco Battaglia, a Duke in Candia, and Brother to the General
of that name, as he was with his own hands drawing off one of the Turks Guns,
was killed unluckily by a Musket Shot; but his body was carried off in spite
of all opposition, by the valor of Carlo Dona, and Pietro Badoar; besides,
eighty men were lost in this service, and several wounded; among the rest,
Signior Matteo Semitecolo was shot in the Arm: since this, a Fugitive from the
Enemies Camp informed the Besieged, that the Turks lost in this action about
1200 Soldiers; and among them the Aga of the Janisaries, the Grand Visiers
Lieutenant, and two other eminent Commanders, and had 1500 wounded persons;
which so discouraged the Besiegers, that many of the Janisaries deserted the
service, and fled into the Mountains near adjoining: and farther, that 300
Janisaries besides had seized upon some small Barks, and were put to Sea, being
quite wearied with the length of the Siege, and the little success of their
enterprises, resolving to return home: and withal, that the Enemies Galleys had
landed about 1000 Janisaries, for the succor and reinforcement of their Army;
which upon the strictest and most exact inquiry then made, notwithstanding all
their supplies and recruits, did consist only of twenty thousand men; among
whom were judged to be at least seven thousand Pioneers.

On the fifth of October, the Turks made three several assaults upon the Fort
St. Andre; and that so furiously and obstinately, that the Town was in very
great danger of being utterly lost: but in the end, the Defendants forced them
off with the slaughter of three hundred men, and some Officers.

The Besieged, about this time, were very much dejected, at the sudden
departure of the Popes and Malta Squadron; by which means the Turks took an
opportunity to reinforce their Army with some thousands of men; but the
Marquess St. Andre Montbrun, upon the appearance of the French Succors, with a
party of resolute Germans that were lately arrived at Candia, made a stout
Sally, beat the Enemy from their Posts, and did great execution. In revenge of
this affront, the Turks the very next day made a general assault with 30000 men
at once, carrying Wool-sacks before them to keep off the Small-shot; which
being perceived by the Besieged, they immediately drew their great Guns to the
Breaches, leden with Case-shot, and pointed upon them; which so galled the
Turks, that they were forced to retire: whereupon the Besieged made another
Assault upon them with great slaughter; insomuch, that the Enemy lost in these
actions about 10000 men. Don Vincenzo Rospigliosi, General of the Popes
Galleys, being a little before returned from the service of Candia, which
highly incensed his Holiness, excused it by laying the fault upon the Duke De
Ferrandina; who being negligent, and not coming up with the Neapolitan and
Sicilian Squadrons, which he Commanded, he was unwilling alone to expose the
Popes Galleys to such imminent danger.

The Vizier at this time was very severe, having taken off the head of one of
his Bassa's, for making a fruitless assault without order: the Turks fleeing
daily from their Colors, and scattering themselves in several parts of the
Island, though he had used all means imaginable to induce them to return; but
his severity in putting them to death when returned, made the rest betake
themselves to the Mountains for security. The Grand Vizier despairing of
success, having received so many and so great losses by the repeated Sallies of
the Besieged, and being very much injured by the Autumnrains, took up a
resolution to withdraw his Forces to New Candia; but the Grand Signior being
very much incensed at his ill success, threatened him with the loss of his head,
if he gave him not a better account of the Siege then hitherto he had done. His
Holiness being very active to assist the Candiots against the Common Enemy of
the Christian World, gave the Senate his Bull to dispose of some Monasteries in
their Territories, to the value of one Million of Crowns, which the Republique
made use of.

At the latter end of this Month, the new Venetian General of the Fleet, Tadeo
Morosini arrived at Candia with store of Ammunition, Soldiers, Provisions and
Money; wherewith he discharged the Soldiers Arrears, to their. great
satisfaction. Whereupon they made frequent Sallies against the Turks to their
damage; in one of which, Monsieur St. Andre Montbrun had a slight. wound in the
shoulder by a Musket Shot. The Sister, an able Vessel, belonging to the
Venetian Fleet, was attaquet by five men of War of Tripoli in her Voyage
homewards from the Levant, who defended her self for many hours very
resolutely; but the Captain finding that he was overpowered and out-numbred,
and so much disabled that he could make no further opposition, blew up his
Ship, and destroyed great numbers of the Turks that were at that time boarding
of him.

In November, the Turks withdrew themselves from Sabionera; but stood still
with great obstinacy before the Fort St. Andre, intending to advance upon the
Shore, and shut up the entry into the Haven; but the French succors marching
out in four divisions, made a brisk Sally, being commanded by the Duke de
Roannez (who was owned there by his ancient Title of de la Feuillade) with
extraordinary slaughter of the Enemy. The Count Strafoldi, who arrived about
this time at Palma Nuova from Venice, intending to direct his course for
Candia, to Command a Regiment of the German Soldiers lately employed in that
service, was unfortunately drowned, as he embarked at Talia Vento, with
eighteen men, by the folly of the Seamen, the Bark being over-set. The Senate
ordered, that a present of Gold Plate, valued at thirty eight Marks, should be
sent to Cardinal Rospigliosi, as an acknowledgement of the sense they have of
his zeal to promote their interest. The Grand Vizier having received some
succors from the Captain Bassa, was very much encouraged to continue the
Siege, raising Terrasses about his own Tent, and had taken 2000 of his stoutest
Soldiers, as a Guard to his person.

General Morosini about this time dispatched Colonel Machierotti, a Candiot,
with Letters to the Vizier, desiring him to accept of an exchange for Signior
Lascaris General de Bataille, formerly taken Prisoner; who went in a Felucca
with a white Flag before Giofiro; but received this short answer from the
Vizier, That he came thither to take the City, and not to treat about
Prisoners: whereupon Cavalier Grimani was employed in the vacant charge.

The Turks continue the Siege with great eagerness, notwithstanding their
numerous and signal defeats, and the vast inconveniences of the Winter-Season;
and press very shrewdly upon the Bastion of St. Andre, playing upon it with
their Cannon; by one of which the Sieur du Prc, Major to the Brigade belonging
to the Count de St. Paul, had his head taken off; and the Sieur de Chamilly and
Lare, was hurt with the stones beaten out of the Parapet by the same shot; the
Sieur de Marianval of the same Brigade was slain; the Chevalier de Merinville
wounded by a Granado; and the Sieur de Sabloniere hurt with an Arrow. The Grand
Signior being willing to supply the Vizier, as much as was possible, commanded
6000 men to be levied out of the neighboring places, sending them to Salonica;
but before the Captains could ship them, they raised a mutiny, and betook
themselves to their heels, to avoid the service.

On the twenty-eighth of November, the succors from Malta arrived safe at
Candia, and were nobly received by the Generalissimo, and the Marquess St.
Andre Montbrun, who was then recovered of his hurt he lately received; but the
Duke de Roannez was somewhat displeased, he being disappointed of his hopes of
commanding them.

Now a party of 350 French Volunteers, with 50 more of the Garrison, sallied
out upon the Enemy; but the former lost thirteen of their number, and the
others three; but they killed some of the Enemy, brought off four of the Turks
heads: and the General made another Sally with sixty choice men, who cleared
the Trenches, killing fifty (...) time, with the assistance of two Christian
Privateers, took five Saiques off of Canea, laden with Provisions and
Ammunition, intending for that Port; and in the engagement sixty Turks were
slain, with their Captain a Renegado of Calabria, and fifty four Prisoners
taken, who were put to the Chain, and the Provisions sent into Candia.

The Pope now ordered preparations to be made by his Chamber, for the
honorable Interment of the Marquess Villa, Commander of the Popes Forces, in
the Church of St. Mary's the great, who was killed in a Sally by a Cannon-shot,
with the same Funeral State and Pomp that was made for Signior Mutio Mattei,
who had the same Charge, and dyed in the same Cause.

The Grand Vizier having intelligence that the French Forces were re-imbarqued,
and homewards bound, made a furious assault, in the night, upon the Bulwarks of
the Sabionera and St. Andre, at the same time, with 4000 men at each place, and
obstinately disputed with the Besieged for two hours space; but they were
forced to retreat to their Posts, leaving the ground covered with their dead,
and carrying off many that were wounded: the Christians losing not above forty
men in this service.

About the latter end of February, or beginning of March, Morosini the
Captain General or Admiral of the Armata landed at Candia with 2000 able
Souldies from Zante, 1700 Barrels of Powder, and a great quantity of Provisions
arid Ammunition.

The three Regiments of Lunenburghers, consisting of 2500 stout,
well-disciplin'd men, were in March imbarqued for Candia, being very well
satisfied with their noble reception at Venice; the Senate bestowing gold
Chains upon their Officers, and a Ducat apiece was given to the Soldiers as a
Donative. About this time, the Christians sprung a Mine, and fired it, by the
which was destroyed a great number of the Enemy, with a Turkish Engineer, who
was in great repute among them, and whose directions they observed in all their
attempts. The Vizier, to revenge his death, and the loss of his men, sprung a
Mine too; but it had not that effect which was expected: and then the Turks, by
his command, attempted the Bulwarks of St. Andre with Ladders; but they were
beaten off with great loss, and many of their Ladders were by force drawn up
from them into the Town. Upon the Popes request, his Imperial Majesty granted
him 3000 men for the succor of Candia, who were privately listed without beat
of Drum, out of the Imperial Hereditary Countries only.

On Saturday, March 30, 1669, S. N. the noble Giacomo Cornaro was chosen
Proveditor General of the Armata, and Signior Pietro Diedo an experienced
Senator, as Commander of a Convoy of many Ships laden with all manner of
Provisions, and wherein also were many Soldiers, Chyrurgeons, Gunners and
Laborers to be employed about the Works, and in the Mines. Colonel Giovanni
Battista Zano endeavoring to take a Gallery from the Turks near Santo Spirito,
was buried in one of their Mines; but the General sent out a strong party, who
beat off the Turks, and recovered his Body out of the ruins of the Mines, and
carried it into the Town: Signior Pietro Diedo by reason of his extraordinary
indisposition of Body, was upon his request excused from his Voyage into the
Levant; and the Senate made choice of Cavalier Zozzi Cornaro in his room.

In April 1669, the Turks made three desperate assaults upon the Town, but were
in all of them beaten off; and the Besieged by the successful firing of one of
their Mines, totally ruined the Enemies Mount and Battery raised before the
Fort St. Andre.

In this Month the Grand Signior sent a Bassa to the Vizier, who in his name
condemned the Vizier for the little advantage he had made in the Siege,
trifling away three years time, with an expense of so much Treasure, and the
loss of such numbers of men, as might suffice for the Conquest of entire
Kingdoms. The Vizier being very much disatisfied with this message, gave a
furious assault to the Bulwark of St. Andre, and Ravelin di Santo Spirito; but
the Turks after an hours hot dispute drew off; and about 5000 of them hoping to
pass over one of the Mines of the Besieged of 150 Barrels of Powder, it was
fired, and blew up 3000 of the Enemy, wounding and disordering them; and taking
hold of this advantage, made a sally upon the Besiegers, and returned to the
Town with 1000 Prisoners, or thereabouts.

On Saturday, May the twenty sixth, S.N. the Holy Sacrament was in St. Marks
Church in Venice, pablickly and solemnly exposed and on the Tuesday following,
the Duke, Senate, and the greatest part of the Nobility went in Procession;
public Prayers being made in all Churches, to crave a blessing upon the
succors and supplies intended to be sent to Candia by the Republique.

Now the Grand Vizier being very apprehensive of the Christian succors from
several parts, was resolved to make a general assault on the Forts of
Sabionera, St. Andre, and Santo Spirito, ordering his Army (which
notwithstanding his recruits, consisted but of 24000) into three Bodies, to be
employed against those three places; and for the better expedition of his
design, did from several Batteries play for several days upon the Town, and
principally upon the Jews quarter; upon which they had done some execution; but
he altered his mind, as to the general assault for the present, and called a
Council of War, being resolved, if possible, to oblige the Town to a surrender,
before the arrival of the Christian supplies: and in order hereunto,

On the tenth of May, two hours before break of day, the Turks, according to
their usual custom, fell upon the Bulwarks of Sabionera with great noise and
fury, but after a bloody dispute of three hours continuance, the Christians
springing several Mines, forced them to a rude and disorderly retreat, leaving
several scaling Ladders behind them; and they lost in 'this service three
Bassa's, with several other eminent Officers, besides a great number of men.

And about this time, the Venetian Captain General of the Armata, having
received intelligence, that there were eighteen men of War belonging to
Barbary, entered into the Grand Signiors Service for that Summer; and were set
out from several parts of Alexandria, Smyrna, and Soria, laden with Men,
Ammunition and Provisions, bound for Canea, divided twenty four Men of War,
under his Command, into three Squadrons, with orders to engage the Enemy, if
discovered. The Admiral himself sailing to the Eastward of Candia with ten
Ships, where he discovered them, making all the Sail imaginable for Canea, whom
he immediately fell upon, without any consideration of their number, and a
smart dispute was entertained for some time; but the noise of the Guns brought
in another Squadron of eight Venetian Ships to his assistance, so that in a
short time the Enemy was worsted, six Vessels sunk, and four taken, the rest
making away from him very much torn, and in great disorder: besides the number
killed in that engagement, they took 800 Turks Prisoners.

The Besiegers, notwithstanding all these ill successes, continued on Shore,
pressing the City on all parts, plying it with their Batteries and Grenades,
especially on the side of the Fort St. Andre, where his Excellency Signior
Cavalier Cattarin Cornaro, Proveditor extraordinary of the Armata, was killed
unhappily by a Granado, which wounded him in the flanck, who received the
Sacrament, and dyed an hour after.

On Monday, June the seventeenth, S. N. the Senate made Election of his
Excellency Signior Alvise Mocenigo, to succeed in the place of the deceased
Cavalier Cornaro, and conferred the Dignity of Knighthood upon his Brother
Signior Girolamo Cornaro, in testimony of the high esteem they had to the party
slain, ordering a solemn Funeral to be celebrated for him upon the public
account, and a stately Tomb to be erected to his memory.

On Saturday, June the twenty second, there arrived at Venice a Ship from
Candia, with the Body of the late deceased Proveditor extraordinary, Cavalier
Cattarin Cornaro.

The Venetians had now received several Recruits, under the Command of Signior
Priuli, as well as the Turks; who with so much assiduity continued their
Batteries, Storms and Mines, that they made themselves Masters of the most part
of the Fort, and planted there a Battery of ten pieces of Cannon, intending to
play upon the Retrenchment of the Christians, with the which they dismounted
several of the Defendants Cannon, and did great execution in the Town. In these
late actions, Signior Giacomo Contarini received a very dangerous wound in the
Arm; Colonel Pini, an experienced Officer was killed; and Monsieur de St. Andre
had a slight hurt in the Arm, by the breaking of a Granado.

The French Succors put to Sea in June, and arrived at Candia in his most
Christian Majesty's Fleet, commanded by the Duke de Beaufort; the Landforces
being under the Command of the Duke de Navailles. And the Duke de Beaufort went
in person to visit the City of Candia, who was received with the discharge of
all their Artillery, and with great acclamations; who taking a view of the
Enemies posture, received a slight wound by a Hand-Granado.

About this time one Andrea Borazzi fleeing to the Enemy, profer'd his service
to the Vizier, promising to inform him which were the weakest parts of the
Town; who was sent accordingly with some Turkish Officers; but he leading them
to an Eminency near the Walls, that they might the better survey the Town, the
besieged fired a Mine under him, which blew up the Officers, he only escaping:
but the Grand Vizier commanded him at his return to be put in Irons, suspecting
his design to be a mere piece of Treachery.

Still the Turks employed their whole strength against the Bulwark St. Andre,
and made a considerable Breach in the Retrenchment; but the Christians opposed
them undauntedly, and repaired by night what they beat down by day; and sprung
a Mine of 150 Barrels of Powder under the Enemies Battery upon the ruins of
the Bastion, which blew up a great number of the Turks, and four of their Guns:
but the Besieged lost a person of great Resolution and Conduct, the Noble
Pietro Querini, by a Bomb, which breaking, gave another Officer a mortal wound:
the Captain General (who flood between them, observing the Enemies) remaining
untoucht. The Sultan upon advice of the arrival of the French supplies,
proposed terms of peace, as he had formerly done oftentimes, only to amuse
them, he being absolutely averse to any such thing in reality, and to gain upon
them the better by such fair propositions.

The Turks now had by their frequent assaults and mines, made themselves
Masters of the ruined Bastion of St. Andre, except a part of an Orillon, which
was still in dispute. But the General with a party of flout men made a sally
upon the Turks; who not being able to stand in opposition with them, quitted
their Posts: This vacant time the Besieged spent in casting up a small Defense
there, which kept the Enemy at a farther distance.

Now that the French Forces were arrived, and the Duke de Navailles had
consulted with the Captain General; the Turks were advanced, and had taken up
their Posts upon the Bastions of St. Andre, and la Sabionera: upon this
Consultation with the French and Venetian Officers, it was thought very proper
to attaque them upon the Sabionera; and the Duke de Navailles, the General of
the Forces, desired to have those Soldiers out of the Garrison, that could be
well spared; which they condescended unto: and farther, order was, given for
five or six hundred Pioneers, to be employed in throwing down the Works made by
the Enemy; and a Sally to be made at the same time, to divert them from sending
relief to the other side. The Duke de Beaufort unwilling to be an unactive
spectator, offered them 1500 men out of the Fleet, and put himself in the head
of the French Forces, being ready to receive Orders from the General, though
very much urged to the contrary. And thus he entered upon action.

June the twenty fourth, first 400 commanded men marched out, and 50 others
with Grenades at the head of them; after them three Troops of Horse, under the
command of Monsieur Dampier; then the Regiments of Gaures, St. Valier, Lorrain
and Bretagne followed, with four Troops of Horse upon the Wings, besides a
party of the French Kings Musketeers, and 100 Reformed Officers placed between
the first and second Line, to be ready upon any occasion. The Forces that came
from the Fleet were at the same time to fall upon the left-side of the
Sabionera; and Monsieur Marshal of the Camp appointed to assist them. In this
Order they marched silently and undiscovered, and drew up in Battalia, in a
little plain near the Enemies Camp: the commanded men coming within
Musket Shot, were fired at by the Turks; and then Monsieur de Dampier was
commanded by the General to fall upon two Redoubts in the head of their
Quarters, being assisted by some of the Guards; which was so courageously and
successfully managed, that they took them immediately, and put every men to the
Sword; and then their Lines were entered, and the Regiments of St. Valier and
Lorrain possessed them: the commanded men with the Companies of Guards, beat the
Enemy out of their Trenches and Works. Thus far their designs prospered,
though they had but 300 of the 1500 expected from the Ships; nor were any
Venetian Forces nor Pioneers sent out to their assistance, as was promised.

The Turks having thus deserted the Camp, drew up into a Body, upon a rising,
on their right hand; which being observed by the General, he in the head of his
Forces marched toward them, and beat them twice from their Station; but he
charged them so home upon the third rally, that he gained the place whereon
they first drew up their men. Then happened a cross accident that ruined that
whole days designs; for some Powder, Morter-pieces and Grenades, taking fire
by chance upon a Battery which the Guards were possessed with, they forsook the
place in disorder and confusion, though Monsieur Castellan used all art
imaginable to bring them back; and the 300 men that came from the Navy, fell
into the same disorder, notwithstanding all the endeavors of the Commanders to
rally them. This made the Turks begin a fresh charge; whereupon the Admiral,
Monsieur Colbert, and the fifty Musketeers, joined with the first Battalion,
and manfully opposed them; but this accident had imprinted such a general
terror upon the Soldiers, that they were obliged to retreat; which was much
favored by a Courtin, made good by the General. The Body of Reserves was
invested by several Forces, which after a slight skirmish at the Bastion of St.
Andre, were sent to assist their Fellow Soldiers at the Sabionera; who also
retreated disorderly at last. The General gave signal testimonies of his
Courage and Conduct in this days disaster; and made good his Retreat, passing
through a party of the Enemy, with three or four Gentlemen only that assisted
him; but if all things had been performed as was intended, this day might, in
all probability, have put an end to the Siege. The Venetians had in all 600 men
which were killed and disabled. A Trooper escaped from the pursuit of the
Enemy, found the Duke de Beaufort so wounded, that he had not strength to get
up behind him; and he drew him a while by the Arm, thinking to bring him off;
but being so closely followed by the Turks, that he was compelled to flee, he
left him to the Enemy, who killed him presently upon the place.

Yet the next day, being the twenty fifth of June, about 200 of the French made
a Sally out of the Bastion of St. Andre, which gave such an Alarm to the Turks,
that they came to make good their Posts; but the Besieged firing three Mines,
blew up many of the Besiegers, with some Commanders of Quality; and destroyed a
very considerable Battery.

On July the fifth, S. N. the Count de Vivonne arrived at Candia with the
French Galleys, who took possession of the charge of Admiral, finding the Fleet
destitute of one. The same day also arrived the Squadron of Malta Galleys with
eight hundred Soldiers.

On the sixth, the Duke de Navailles, being overheated in the late engagement,
fell into a violent Fever.

On the twelfth of July, arrived a Convoy at Candia with 1600 Soldiers,
Ammunition and Moneys.

The Baron de St. Mar, Captain of the Guards to the Duke de Beaufort, hearing
as yet no news of his Master by Spies, or any other means whatsoever, went in
person to the Visier's Camp; where being admitted by him into the Tent, he gave
him a view of all the Heads that were cut off in the late fight; but he could
not find the Admirals among them; at which the Vizier was very much
dissatisfied, and afterward gave him liberty to discourse with several
Prisoners in the Camp, but he could learn no news of him that was satisfactory.

On the twenty fourth instant, all the French, Malta and Pope's Squadrons were
ordered to lie before the Turks Post at St. Andre, where they fired upon the
Enemies Camp, and did them great damage: but when the Generals had drawn out
their Forces, and were ready to fall upon the Besiegers, the Terese, which was
the French Vice Admiral, blew up by some unfortunate accident, or a shot from
the Enemy, with 400 men aboard, to the damage of several Vessels, the Admiral
particularly, that lay next her, and the Captains Gally that took fire also,
but was quenched; which made the whole Fleet put out to Sea, and hindered the
Generals design of making a Sally: but the Turks received great hurt by the
firing of the Fleet; and lost an Aga, the Visiers great favorite.

On the thirtieth instant, a Sally was made by Monsieur Colbert at the
Sabionera, with some execution upon the Enemy; but Monsieur Colbert was
slightly hurt in the head with a stone which fell from the Gate, broken by a
Morter-piece.

The General Girolamo Battaja was mortally wounded, in three places, by a
Morter-piece breaking near him, which was discharged from the Enemies
Batteries, he being then busied about the Sabionera, and giving Orders to his
Officers against some fresh approach intended by the Besiegers. The Turks
continue still employing their greatest force against St. Andre, having raised
a Battery, and planted eight Guns thereon, firing upon the Retrenchments made
by the Besieged, to supply the ruins of that Fort; but were valiantly opposed
and repulsed: however, the Enemy took an advantageous Post near the Scozzese;
which made Signior Navaglier, a Noble Venetian, sally out with a party of
Soldiers, intending to dislodge them; but he received a dangerous Musket Shot
in the neck. The Turks still plied the Town with showers of Stones,
Morter-pieces and Grenades; and Count Waldeck General of the Brunswick Forces,
was killed with one of them. The Besiegers then endeavoring to bend their
strength toward the Arsenal, on the side of the Sabionera, met with such
opposition, that they gave over that attempt, and converted their Forces to the
other side of the Town, where they made themselves Masters of the first
Retrenchment, not without great loss; and did attaque the second; but the
Besieged had cast up two other Works behind them, with large Trenches.

In Angust, the Duke of Mirandola arrived at Candia, and landed his Ammunition
with 1400 of his own men, and 600 others, and Moneys for the Soldiers.

The Turks had now cast up a great Mount upon the ruins of the Bastion of St.
Andre, and planted several Cannon upon it, with which they greatly annoyed the
Town; but to frustrate this design, the General caused the Church of St.
Frances to be filled with Earth, and drew twenty great Guns upon it, which
played hotly upon the Enemy, dismounted their Cannon, and made the place
altogether useless.

The Turks still labored hard to take in the second Retrenchment; but the
Defendants fired a Mine made under that Bulwark, which being divided into
several Branches, killed many of the Enemies, destroyed part of their Works,
whose ruins divided 400 Turks from the rest of the Body, so that they could
not possibly escape, but were all taken prisoners, and carried into the Town:
and the Besieged made another successful Sally, upon the firing of another
Mine, with an incredible slaughter to the Turks, and brought off with them a
considerable number of the Prisoners. Then the Turks on the other side of the
Town, endeavored to shut up a Sally-port near the Sabionera, that so they
might make a farther progress toward the Sea, and by degrees attempt the
Arsenal; but by a Sally in favor of several Mines, they left off that
enterprise with loss.

Now the Auxiliary Forces sent from France were imbarqued, being in all 88
Sail, in order to their return. Upon whose departure, the Turks took courage,
and immediately fell upon the Sabionera, and St. Andre, with two great parties,
thinking the Besieged were dispirited, and quite disanimated, the French Fleet
being gone; but they found the contrary to their detriment, losing 3000 men,
after three fierce assaults; and the Defendants but 200, with several that were
wounded; who by firing of a Mine of thirty Barrels of powder under the Bulwark,
where the Enemy had raised a Battery which much infested the second
Retrenchment, that was wholly destroyed, and the Turks in great numbers either
blown up, or buried in the rubbish of the Battery.

The Generalissimo at length, finding after all their Sallies, Assaults, Mines
and Skirmishes, that Candia was reduced to a mere heap of Rubbish, being so far
entered by the Turks, and the Garrison so lessened, that there remained in it no
more then 3600 men fit for Service, so that it was thought absolutely
impossible to preserve it any longer from the Enemy, called a Council, where it
was resolved nemine contradicente, that they should use their utmost endeavors
in order to a Treaty with the Vizier about a Surrender; and accordingly Colonel
Arnardi, and Signior Scordeli the Vice Chancellor, were employed to manage the
Treaty; and on the first of September, were sent out to the Post on the side of
Giofiro with a white Flag, whose business was communicated to the Grand Vizier:
The news was immediately spread throughout the whole Turkish Camp, and
entertained with excess of joy, and Commissioners appointed to treat on the
Turks behalf; between whom that whole day was spent, with no other issue, but
that the next conference should be in the open Field, before the Fort
Demetrius, where the Turks set up a large Tent for that purpose; where the
Treaty was continued till the fifth of September, and then the Articles were
concluded upon by both parties; for performance whereof they gave Hostages on
both sides, particularly Signior Calbo Commissary for Provisions, De Riva
Lieutenant of the General Guards, and Zaccaria Mocenigo, from the Venetians;
and the Beglerbey of Temiswar, Mahomet Bassa, the Aga of the Janisaries, and
Gassi Bey, the Tefferdat of Romilia, from the Turks.

The Turks Hostages were sent into Candia and the Venetians into the Turkish
Camp, where they had an extraordinary civil reception, there being a rich
Apartment prepared for them, a Guard of Janisaries ordered to attend them
whither they pleased, and a Table of thirty Dishes of meat allowed

(...) their Arms and Baggage. That he permit the Inhabitants, who have no
desire to continue there, to retire with their Families, Kings and Jewels,
whither they please. That he consent, that the Captain General may carry away
all the Republiques Sacred Vessels, and all Ornaments whatsoever belonging to
their Churches.

Seventhly, that the Captain General may take out of the City of Candia 320
Brass Guns, which are to be in the power, and at the free disposal of the most
Serene Republique of Venice.

Eighthly, that the Prisoners and Slaves taken on both sides, during the Siege
of Candia, be immediately restored; the Captain General and the Grand Vizier
having already given out their Orders required for the execution of this
Article.

Ninthly, that all these Articles agreed and faithfully executed, both parties
shall swear and promise to preserve the Peace reciprocally, and inviolably, for
the advantage of the Trade, and the mutual quiet of both their Subject.

On Friday, the twentieth of September, the Garrison marched out without the
least disturbance; the Vizier being resolved to be rendered as famous for his
justice in performing Articles, as for his vigilance and courage in War.

September the thirteenth, a stately Hearse was exposed to public view in St.
Marks Church, and the Church it self hung with Black, and filled with many
Lights, in celebration of the Funeral of his Excellency Signior Cavalier
Cornaro, where a solemn Mass, and variety of excellent Music, was performed by
several Quires; and in the close, Father Cosmi pronounced a Funeral-Oration,
wherein was an account of all the eminent Services of that Illustrious
Commander.

On the twenty second instant, the Senate resolving to confer the Dignity of
Procurator of St. Mark upon Signior Francisco Morosini, Captain General in
Candia; the great Council being assembled, the Election was made by a general
suffrage; and the favor was the greater, in that there being then no vacancy,
he was added a supernumerary.

On Friday, September the twenty seventh, the Forces were drawn out of the City
of Candia; and the same day, according to the Articles of Agreement, the Keys
were sent to the Vizier, who received them with many signs of joy, and
rewarded the person that brought them with a large sum of Money; whereupon he
immediately sent into the Town some of his people to cleanse it, and take the
dead bodies out of the four principal Churches, viz. of St. Francis, St. Titus,
St. Salvator, and St. Peter; about which work several days were spent. The
Grand Visier's civility was eminently manifested to all the Venetians Officers
of any note; but more remarkable to the Generalissimo Morosini, to whom he gave
several presents, with this Complement, That the Peace should be as long-lived
as his Command; to whom the General returned several presents likewise.

On the fourth of October, the Grand Vizier made his solemn entry into the City
of Candia, at the Breach of St. Andre, with all his Army, which consisted of
about 15000 Soldiers, and between ten and eleven thousand Pioneers; besides
other necessary Attendants. At his entrance, he found the City empty, without
People, Goods or Provisions; there being only left behind two Greeks, three
Jews, and eight more strangers, whom the Vizier would also have sent away; but
they were of opinion, it was more convenient to change their Religion then
City, and so turned Turk.

Since the Grand Visier's entering into the City, he has converted the four
principal Churches thereof into Mosques, for the worship of Mahomet; and the
other are turned into Stables, for his own, and the Horses of his Soldiers.

In this Month the Articles of Peace were ratified by the Grand Signior at
Larissa; and on Monday, October the twenty one, S.N 1669, the French Ambassador
made his address to the Venetian College, with Complements of Condolency for
the Surrender of Candia, and of Congratulation for the Honorable Articles of
Peace concluded between the most Serene Republique and the Ottoman Port; which
were, the same Evening they came to their hands, being the eighteenth instant,
ratified and confirmed by the Votes of the whole Senate, three only excepted;
and the Ratification immediately dispatched to their Captain General.

Since this, Signior Cavalier Molino was chosen Ambassador extraordinary to the
Grand Signior, with an ample and firm Ratification or the said Peace, together
with a noble and rich Present of Cloth of Gold to himself, and several
considerable sums of Moneys, as Presents to his Officers and Ministers.

Now the Generalissimo Morosini left the charge of the whole Army, with the
Conduct of the Fleet which is to transport the Venetians, with all things
necessary, to the care and management of Monsieur de St. Montbrun, who made
some stay at Standia, he himself being gone to Suda, with several persons of
Quality, the Natives, a Squadron of Ships, and a considerable quantity of
Provisions, and number of Men, to reinforce that, and the rest of the Garrisons
that continue still under the Jurisdiction of the Republique; and to furnish
them with all things convenient and necessary for their defense, upon all
occasions that should happen.

The Vizier was now resolved to remain at Candia, and to take up his
Winter Quarters there, notwithstanding the many solicitations to return to the
Ottoman Court, and the joyful entertainment and reception that he might
rationally promise himself from the success of this tedious and long Siege;
excusing his absence, by representing to the Sultan the necessity of his
continuance in that Island, to settle his Conquest; but it is thought by some,
that he was unwilling to intermeddle with the troubles of that Court, till he
could see the issue of the affairs of the Sultaness; who hitherto had preserved
the lives of the Grand Signiors Brethren, by the assistance and help of the
Janisaries, that had espoused her interest, and engaged in her concerns.

The Generalissimo Morosini still continued visiting the Forts and Garrisons in
St. Candia, and the Neighboring Islands. Whilst the Senate took all care
imaginable for the disposal of those distressed Families, who upon the
Surrender of Candia forsook their Habitations; and issued out Orders to provide
for their reception and maintenance in the Towns of Pola and Parenzo in Istria.
The Archbishop of Candia having lost his Benefice, obtained the Church of St.
Gregory, by his application to the Republique, in lieu thereof, and the
Revenues thereof were to be settled upon him toward his support, and the
maintenance of the Dignity of that Prelate; two of the Canons of which Church
were dispatched to Rome, to procure Power and Authority from his Holiness, for
the settlement thereof accordingly.

Having thus given you a description of Candia, in its Ancient and Modern
Capacity, with an account of the beginning of the Siege in 1666, its
continuance in the years 1667 and 1668, and Surrender in the latter end of
1669: We will close all with this Observation, That it is a most prodigious
thing, scarce to be paralleled in History, though it ought to be Registered to
the immortal honor of the Venetians, that an inconsiderable small handful of
men, notwithstandihg all Attempts, Assaults, Mines, Countermines, Batteries,
Martial-Stratagems, and opposition whatsoever, both by open force, and private
Treachery, should be able to defend one single City by Sea and Land, against
the whole strength of the Ottoman Empire, for the space of one and twenty years
together: which should incite all Christian Princes to imitate them in such
Noble and Heroic Actions, and unanimously to defend their Territories against
the Sanguinary Turk, who is, and ever has declared himself to be the Common
Enemy of Christendom.

FINIS.

