Licensed,

Sept. 8, 1668.

Roger L'Estrange.

THE HUSBAND Forced to be JEALOUS, OR THE GOOD FORTUNE OF THOSE WOMEN THAT HAVE
JEALOUS HUSBANDS.

A Translation by N. H.

LONDON, Printed for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor, in the
Lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1668.

THE HUSBAND Forced to be Jealous: OR, The Good Fortune of those Women that
have Jealous Husbands.
TImander and Clidimira having loved each other for some time, without any
accident happening in their Amors, considerable enough to be related, were at
last Married, to the great contentment of them both. The Ceremonies of their
Contract was performed in the house of Clidimira, where after a Magnificent
Supper, which lasted till the night was very far spent, the Company diverted
themselves very agreeably in attending the morning; which no sooner appeared,
but this Excellent Couple were conducted to the Church, where they were Married
with great Solemnity; which was no sooner past, but the Bride and Bridegroom
separated themselves, and every one returned to their own Houses, as well to
repose, as to prepare and adjust themselves for the great Ball which was that
night to be at one of the most Famous Treating-houses in that Town; it having
been the ancient custom for the Richest Gentlemen of that place to make their
Wedding-Feasts at those kind of Houses, when they Married their Children or
Relations publicly.

The afternoon of that same day, as Timander was dressing himself to go to that
great Supper, he received this note from a Woman he esteemed very much, and in
whom he absolutely confided.

Melasia to Timander.
I desire to see you as soon as you have received this Paper, and that you will
believe that had I not been persuaded that your Life and Honor both were
concerned in what I am to tell you, I should not trouble you with this request
upon a day wherein you cannot want Employment, and which you ought to dedicate
wholly to Love.

Melasia.


Timander had no sooner read this note, but resolved to go to Melasia's House,
imagining he might return home very quickly, and thought the excuse he had was
lawful enough to make him quit, without incivility, the best Company in the
world; yet because he had been formerly suspected to have more then an esteem
for Melasia, he was unwilling upon such a day as this, to give his Bride and
the rest of his Friends and Kindred any just cause of complaint against him;
and therefore he stole out alone through a back door of his Garden, which led
to a private Street, where he took a Chair which carried him to Melasia's
House, without meeting any by the way which could discover him. He found her
waiting for him in a low Parlour, where after some general discourse, she told
him that she was desired by Thersander, a Neighbor of hers (who was not
unacquainted with the particular Friendship she had had a long time with
himself) to procure for him the Honor of speaking with Timander at her House
that afternoon; which at first she had refused, telling him she could not
desire that favor for him, without rendering her self very ridiculous, in
sending for a man to discourse of business upon his Wedding day; but when
Thersander had at last assured her, that the meeting which he desired with
Timander, concerned the Life and Honor of them both, and that the deferring it
a moment longer would be fatal to them; She then resolved upon giving him the
trouble of that note, which he would soon pardon when he had received the
reason of it from Thersander, who waited for him in her Chamber; whither if he
pleased to go, they might discourse freely, without being heard or interrupted.
Timander had some suspicion of the occasion for which Thersander had sent for
him; yet he was unwilling to discover those thoughts which then possessed him, to
Melasia; but humbly thanking her for her charitable concern for him, he made
have to the Chamber, where Thersander who had impatiently waited for him, no
sooner saw him appear, but he went toward him, and saluting him with an Air
which clearly discovered the trouble of his Soul, in a loud voice said to him;
Sir, I thought my self obliged to use this Artifice in obtaining the
satisfaction of you this day which I expect; for although I know you generous
enough not to deny what I am come to demand, yet such a day as this would have
been excuse just enough to have refused any challenge I could send you; and
therefore I resolved to speak to you my self. Know then (said he) that I have
long loved Clidimira, and report spoke loud enough that I was not hated by her;
yet when some Domestic Affairs of mine carried me into the Country, you
cunningly made use of that time I was absent, to demand Clidimira of her
Father, and obtained his consent to Marry her; who being compelled to it by her
Father, yielded to your happiness rather by obedience then by inclination.
These proceedings of yours have so enraged me, that I am resolved upon a
revenge, and to deprive you of life, before you receive the satisfaction of
seeing Clidimira in your Arm^; for should you this night have that good
fortune, I should receive but an imperfect satisfaction in sacrificing you to
my just resentments to morrow; and your death would be but too happy in the
remembrance of having enjoyed the Fair Clidimira: And therefore my resolution
is, not to quit you this day, till you have satisfied my demand. And though I
were sure to dye in that Combat, replied Timander (coldly) I would nevertheless
defer it a few days longe^ because to the pleasing remembrance of having had
the Fair Clidimira in my Arms, I should add the blessing of leaving an Heir of
her blood, is well as mine, that should one day revenge my Death. You have
reason, said Thersander, that Son of yours perhaps may kill me, but I think he
will want strength to do it; for the spite of seeing a Son of yours caressed
by Clidimira, will destroy me before he can be old. enough to think of
revenging his Fathers Death. Well, let it be so, replied Timander (with an Air
much colder and disdainful then before) yet I have a desire to defer Fighting
two or three days longer; for I know my Victory over you this day will be too
cheap, because the thoughts that I am going presently to enjoy Clidimira, will
certainly press me on to hasten your Death. And the vexation to lose Clidimira,
said Thersander, will give me no less courage; and therefore let us go out
presently and try if Fortune will be your Friend. I am still unresolved,
answered Timander, whether I should satisfy you before I have seen Clidimira
in my arms; yet now I think on it, said he carelessly, I will fight with you to
day, since you tell me you are in a condition to defend your self so well;
though I had rather stay till I had enjoyed Clidimira, because your anger then
would be raised to such a height, that it would add to your courage, and so
heighten the glory of my Conquest in overcoming a Rival, whose just and violent
despite will then render the most Furious of Men. Well, well, said Thersander,
I pretned not to my own defense, but compel thee to defend thy self, and
therefore let us go presently. Timander replied not to these words, but went
out first, looking back upon Thersander with an Air that showed little fear to
all his threats. In going from Melasia's House, they both desired her to let
none know they had met there: So taking their several Chairs without any
Attendance, they caused themselves to be set down in a little Village hard by
that place, where they entered into a house, sending away their Chairs; who
being gone, these Rivals went into the Fields, where finding a place fit to
their design, they drew their Swords, fighting a great while without advantage
on either side; but as Fortune would have it, Thersander after he had fought as
valiantly as he had spoke audaciously, received a wound, of which he dyed a
minute after. Let us leave him to dye in peace, and also Timander to shift for
himself, whilst we return to see what passes in the Town.

The desire which these two Rivals had made to Melasia to conceal their having
been at her house, and their furious looks in going from her, gave her some
suspicion of their design; and having racked her imagination to find out the
ground of their Quarrel, she remembered that Thersander had been formerly in
Love with Clidimira; which confirmed her in the belief that they were gone to
fight; and knowing her fault in being the occasion, she resolved for her own
sake to conceal their having been at her house that day. In the mean time all
those who were invited to the Feast, prepared to appear there in all their
gallantry; the house of Clidimira was all joy, every one was busy in dressing
the Bride, and nothing was forgot that might set off her natural Charms; yet
when she was dressed she had the misfortune to attend very long the coming of the
Bridgroom, who was expected to conduct her to the Treating-house, where all the
Company staid for her: But Clidaris, Father to Clidimira, growing weary of
staying so long, and believing that his Son-in-Law came not thither because his
Lodging was so near to that house where they were all to meet, waited upon his
Daughter thither himself; where he was no sooner entered but he asked the
Company if the Bridegroom were come; they answered, No. He waited yet a great
while longer, and then went himself to seek him at his Lodging, but was
strangely surprised to find that none there knew what was become of him: So
this good Old Man returned back again to entertain the Company, which was
already very great, and waited impatiently the hour of Supper, but were forced
to stay longer yet, still hoping the Bridegroom would come at last; but every
hour receiving a new disappointment to those hopes, they began to fret, and
then to grow very angry, and that anger at last gave way to a fear that some
misfortune had happened to him, and to that fear was added the los^ of those
hopes that all day had so comforted them, and now made them desperate: In fine^
the sight of those delicious things before them, that would have comforted any
other hearts increased their trouble instead o^ satisfying them: The Fiddlers
were sent away grumbling exceedingly, though very well paid, and were so
impudent to curse the Marriage, although they went from that Wedding much
lighter and wiser, and every way much better, than ever they had gone from that
Treating-house in their lives: After the Fiddlers were gone, the Treater himself
came up stairs, and told the Company, that the meat would be spoiled if it were
not presently served in, and that he had spent already a bushel of Coals in
keeping it warm. In the mean time the poor Bride was all in Tears in the midst
of her Kindred and Friends that were comforting her; and as for the rest who
were not so familiar, and others that Fortune had brought in to that place (for
at those kind of Treats there always comes more Company then is invited) they
knew not how to carry themselves; there being many Persons there, more
concerned for the loss of the Supper, then the absence of the Bridegroom: Most
of the Children slept near their Mothers, and those that were awaked never left
crying and bawling, asking indessantly when Supper would come: On the other
side, the Pages and Footmen entertained themselves pleasantly; some saying,
they should have the best part of the Feast if their Masters and Ladies eat
nothing; others cried for fear their Masters should carry them away with them
before they should get a share. At last it stroke One a Clock, and the Company
taking every one a bit very hastily, left almost all to the Laquays and Pages,
without giving them any time to eat it: All the Guests waited on the Bride to
her Lodging, and left the Treater and his Men astonished, having never yet seen
such a kind of Wedding as this at their house.

When Clidimira was in her Chamber, they undressed her, but not with the usual
Ceremonies of such kind of days; there was no Posset nor Banquet at her going
to Bed; no body looked pleasantly, nor was there any so merrily disposed as to
hide themselves in the Bride-chamber; on the contrary, those that were not sad
enough, yet endeavored to appear so; and there were some that could scarce
forbear laughing to consider the disappointments of that day; and all in going
home discoursed upon the way of this adventure, seeking for the reason of this
carriage of Timanders, which they could not imagine came from himself, because
no body had forced him to this Marriage, to which he had always expressed a most
violent inclination. But whilst Clidimira sighs alone in her Bed, let us return
to him that should have possessed the half of it, the poor Timander, whom we left
so near an expiring Rival.

Timander no sooner saw his Rival fall, but he left fighting with him;
Thersander expressed some desires to speak to him, but was not able to
pronounce a word, and dyed a minute after he had received the fatal stroke.

This Conqueror when he saw his Rival without life, thought of nothing else
but going presently to taste the pleasures Hymen had prepared for him; but it
growing very late, and having spent much time, and gone further then they
imagined to find a place unfrequented enough to fight in, Timander in coming
back by those unknown ways, which instead of carrying him to the Town, led him
further from it, and to increase his misfortune, was set upon by Five Thieves;
and although he was one of the most Valiant of his time, yet he was far from
being one of those Heroes who give death or flight to all those that assault
him, how numerous soever they be. All that Timander could do, was to fight like
a Valiant Man, and not like one of those Demy-Gods: He defended himself a great
while, killed one Man, wounded another; but he also received a wound himself,
that put him past fighting for that time, and so those Robbers stripped him and
their own dead Companion, leaving them both for dead, although Timander was
not, though he was something near it.

When he came a little to himself, Oh Heavens! said he, with a Languishing
voice, is it possible that I am that Timander, who this morning thought himself
the happiest of all Men, and who this afternoon have been so Fortunate to
overcome a most terrible Rival? Look round about the World, and an adventure
like mine can never be found. I was yesterday at this hour in the midst of
Divertisements, and Fortune seemed to prepare more and greater for me to day;
in the mean time, by a Caprice which that blind Goddess alone is capable of,
the same hour she promised me all those Pleasures, she has thrown me naked in
the dark into the middle of a Field, wounded and alone, and perhaps upon the
point of expiring without help, or hope of receiving any, and without knowing
what way to go to be delivered from this distress; and all this to happen in a
time when Love and Hymen accompanied with all kind of delights, waits to
conduct me to Marriage Bed.

Thus this miserable Man, instead of hearing his Epithalmium Song, lies cursing
the Capritiousness of Fortune, and lamenting his unhappiness, unheard, and
unrelieved by any; his Enemies you may imagine hasted not to his relief, they
stayed not so late nor charitably in that Field; there passed by no generous
unknown person to carry him to his House, and dress his Wounds, and persuade
him at last to relate the History of his Life, which would not have taken up
much time; yet notwithstanding he received help in the midst of these
Disasters, and help which came from Heaven, although it was but a glimmering of
the Moon, which lighted him to a Peasants house, whither he made shift to
crawl; and knocking at the door, he told those people that spoke to him through
the Keyhole, that he had been Robbed, and was Wounded; he added to his Tale
promises of a recompense, which was more powerful with them then all he had
said before, and made them open their doors to him, after they had peeped
through the window to discover what manner of man he was, and whether he was
wounded or not.

Timander was no sooner entered that house, but he desired them to fetch the
nearest Surgeon; which the Farmers Son ran for with all the diligence
imaginable, bringing with him a Surgeon that was by chance at that time in the
house of a Gentleman who lay sick hard by that place. The Surgeon having
searched his wound, found it not mortal, and gave him very good hopes of a
speedy recovery from that weakness, which only proceeded from his loss of so
much blood.

This unfortunate Hero after he was dressed, slept all that night very well,
and in the morning writ a Letter to his Father-in-Law, to tell him the place
where he was, conjuring him to come and bring Clidimira with him, desiring him
to let none know that he had heard of him till he had seen him. He sent this
Letter by his officious Host, with a charge not to answer any question
whatsoever was made him. The Father of Clidimira received this Letter with
great joy, and immediately carried it to his Daughter, who agreed with him to
go privately to the house where Timander lay; which was not very difficult,
since it was at so near a distance, they might easily go and come in a day.

This good man, after he had conducted them into the Chamber of his new Guest,
went out, leaving them at liberty to discourse freely. Timander desired them to
lay aside their fears for him, his hurt being not at all dangerous; withal he
told them, since they were persons so near and dear to him, he would not
disguise any thing from them of what happened to him since he last saw them; and
he hoped the strangeness of that sad accident that had befaln him, would be his
excuse for leaving them so suddenly that day; and then he related the whole
story of his adventures, desiring their counsel what to do next, and to tell
him what the world said of his absence, and whether people did not already
suspect something of the truth of what had happened to Thersander. Clidaris told
him, that Thersanders Kindred knew nothing of it as yet, and only believed that
the vexation to see his Mistress married to another man, had made him quit the
Town, and that they were not in much pain for his absence since; and that
Melasia had confessed nothing of what she knew from whence they conjectured
that she would always conceal it, for her own sake, she having been the cause
of their fighting.

After this and some other discourses concerning these matters, they all agreed
to conceal this accident happened to our Hero, but were much put to it to frame
an^ excuse for his going away upon such a day, there being scarce an^ Apology
to be found for a man^ that willingly absents himself on his Wedding Day,
unless he had been Married by force, which he was not; and therefore not
knowing what reason to give, they troubled not themselves much, but resolved to
let the World think what it pleased; and now let us see what they did.

Clidaris and his Daughter having stayed some few hours longer in that place,
took their journey toward the Town, carrying with them a Letter written by the
Hand of Timander, and sealed with his Seal; and when the next day their house
was full of those Kindred and Friends that came to make their condoling
Complements, this Letter of Timander's was brought in (by a Stranger hired to
that purpose) Clidaris read the Letter softly to himself, appearing extremely
surprised at the news it brought, which he pretended he could no longer conceal
from the Company, but showing the Letter, he desired them to rejoice with him
at that good news it brought.

But before I tell you the Contents of the Letter, you must know that the
Mother of Timander was yet living, and dwelt in a Country house some fifteen
miles off that City, to which house her extreme age had confined her so
Timander cunningly writ word that although he more deserved their pity then
blame for his having been obliged to quit that person in the World which he
loved best, and upon his Wedding day; yet the just scor^ that he knew the World
would put upon that action, condemning it as a want of Love to his Dea^
Clidimira, had been an extreme affliction to him, yet he hope^ those Censurers
of him would condemn him no longer, when they read the truths of that Letter,
which were these.

At his going from Church to hi^ own Lodging that day he was Married, he found
upon the Table in his Chamber a Letter, which informed him that his Mother was
dying, and desired to speak with him before she dyed, of some business which
she would deliver to no other, and was of great consequence to himself. And
just as he was reading this Letter, he saw passing by his door a Friend of his,
who was going in his Coach to the Country, and being to pass by the door of
that house where Timander 's Mother lay sick, he took that opportunity of going
along with him; believing the Note, which he hastily wrote to his Father-in-law
by a Laquay which he left behind, would excuse that abrupt leaving him for that
time, and also his dear Wife, who though he was then snatched violently from,
yet now he desires passionately to see.

This Artifice prospered well, you may imagine, since it was confirmed by the
Parties concerned, who well enough knew the truth; as for those that were not
so, they did not dive so deep into the matter, and so the Company all concluded
this excuse very reasonable, and the whole fault was laid upon the Laquay that
Timander sent to carry this Letter.

Clidaris and his Daughter that had not so great a journey to make as was
imagined, went the next day to the house where Timander lay, instead of going,
as they pretended, to the house of his Mother: They staid with him till he was
perfectly recovered, and during their abode in that house they heard that there
was a man found dead in the Fields, whose face none knew, and therefore people
supposed he had lain there a long time, and likewise believed he had been
murdered, because they found his Sword in the Scabbard, and he was not robbed;
they carried him to the nearest Church. All this persuaded our Hero and his
Company to believe this dead unknown person was the unhappy Thersander; for
Timander confessed he had left him in this posture on purpose to disguise the
manner of his death.

As soon as this unfortunate Bridegroom was healed of his wound, he returned to
Town with this company, and was so happy to find none in that Town suspected
the least of what had happened; and since you may believe their Marriage is
consummated, it is time to speak a word or two of their persons.

Clidimira was the only Daughter of her Father, her stature was low, and though
she was very agreeable, yet none could call her a Beauty; she had that I know
not what charming Air which takes so extremely, and is often seen in those
indifferent Women, but seldom or never is found amongst those great and perfect
Beauties, which are so Celebrated in the World: her Wit resembled her Beauty,
and although it was not very great, yet it was full of those flashes which made
it so much admired in Conversation. To all these charms was added that much
more attractive in the eyes of most Men, a great Estate; and that was the
reason why Timander sighed so passionately for Clidimira, his own being very
small, though in revenge to that, he was one of the most accomplished Men of
his time; and therefore Clidimira consented so easily to Marry him. The humor
of these two Persons you shall shortly know.

Six months after the Wedding of Timander and his Clidimira, he was visited by
one of his nearest Kindred, that was his neighbor in the Country; this Person
having not conversed with him since his Wedding, and being one of a pleasant
humor, and much inclined to Mirth, he asked Timander a hundred questions
concerning his Marriage, and at last he desired him to tell what kind of humor
Clidimira was of. Timander instead of answering to his demand, told him, that
since he knew him a great lover of Novelties, he would show him a new piece of
Wit that was given him that morning, and taking a Paper out of his Pocket, gave
it to this Friend, which he received with much joy, and read these words,

The Jealousy of Women.
Although it is the common opinion that Men are more inclined to Jealousy then
Women, yet it is as true, that though Nature and Custom have given the power
only to the Husband, yet those Women that are once infected with this disease,
disturb that Prerogative of their Husbands, giving them often a trouble; which
renders those Wives so insupportable, that the strongest Jealousy of all
mankind is nothing, if compared with the effects which the clamor of these
Women produce, of which there are innumberable examples.

When a Man is so unhappy to find a Mistress of that humor, she makes him
suffer un-imaginable Torments; what business soever he has, and what lawful
excuses soever he makes to her, yet he must be always in her company; who will
not be persuaded to believe his. Affairs can be of more importance then to
visit her; and if at last she is convinced that in wasting his time in her
company, he also loses his Fortune; yet her humor is so Fantastic, that she
grows jealous of Fortune it self, and fears lest that Goddess should favor him
too much, and suspects that her Servant will one day forsake her, to give
himself up entirely to Fortune. If by chance she meet him in Company, he must
speak to none but to her, and appear the most ill-bred, and uncivil Man in the
World, only for a quiet life with her, who will break off with him twenty times
in a month; protesting she will never more speak to him, and yet will piece
with him again at every visit he makes her; and although she scolds
perpetually, breaks off, gives him an angry reception, appearing always
displeased, yet her Flames for him still burn; which confirms me in the opinion
that Jealousy is a great sign of Love, and that notwithstanding all the
troubles which the Jealousy of Women give, yet no Woman's Love is to be
confided in so much, as that of her that is Jealous of her Servant.

You see now what a jealous Woman does before she is married; let us now
discover if she will be more reasonable afterward. Marrimony sometimes cures
the jealousy of Men, who had some reason to fear some other person more happy
then they might snatch away that Treasure which they aimed at, and having it
not in their possession, had a just excuse for their jealousy of all those
Rivals which laid claim to it as well as themselves; but Women are of another
mind: They hold, that there is much more reason for jealousy after Marriage
then before, because the apprehension of losing a good we enjoy, is much
greater then that of being deprived of what we only hope for; and therefore a
Woman says, that if before she is married she would have her Servant always to
attend her, now that he is a Husband, she will prove it his duty always to be
with her, scarce suffering him to stir a minute from her, though it be to go
about his domestic affairs; still believing he gives more time to those
businesses then is necessary, or else that he is diverting himself with Company
that pleases him better, when he is not with her. This happening (from the odness
of her humor) every day makes her insupportable to her Husband, who is not
able to endure her reproachful complaints, so often and violently repeated in
his ears, with sharp upbraids and continual murmurings, because he courts her
not now at the same rate he used before she was his Wife, when he entertained
hone but her self in all Companies where they met; which now she bawls to have
him do still, giving him a dreadful look if he fix his eyes (though by chance)
upon any other Woman in the room. But she appears for this the more ridiculous
to all the World, who discovering her jealousy, rallies her severely, and
makes her Fantastic insolent humor the diversion of most conversations,
whilst in the mean time she is busy in following her Husband into all places,
and spares no cost to find out all his intrigues, being assisted with that
excellent help, Jealousy, which added to a Woman's craft is very ingenious in
making those kind of discoveries; but this knowledge is so far from curing,
that it exasperates her disease to that abominable height that none can express
but those poor unfortunate husbands that so often suffer it without complaint,
who if they were asked can better describe then I,

How far the Fury of a Jealous Wife can Transport her.
And therefore I will not venture to say more to it then this; There is no
sight in the World so terrible, as a Woman in this condition; her Eyes, her
Actions, etc. all express her a Fury, and if by chance she hold her peace, her
very looks are dreadful enough to make the boldest man to tremble.

What is become then of that softness so charming and natural to that Fair Sex?
It is for ever banished from the first minute this cursed Jealousy siezes
them, and to their great misfortune; for if they could but once call it back
again into their looks, their Husbands would quickly be reconciled to them; but
the Jealousy of these Women abhors the only remedy that can cure their
Disease; for if ever any Wife would lay aside that Fury which so Transports
her, and complain to her Husband with a good grace; if she could overcome her
passion so far as to sigh only loud enough to be heard by none but himself, and
instead of complaining of him to all the World, stifle those fiery sighs which
so justly are called the Children of an undiscreet rage, and makes her appear
so ridiculous to the lookers on; if she did only appear to him in that lovely
soft charming Melancholy, against which there is no Man's heart so hard as to
resist; then she would get that victory which she loses in those other mistaken
ways, which that ill Conducter, Jealousy, leads her to her own ruin; and it
is most certain, that those quarrels which so often arise between a Man and his
Wife, would never begin, or else quickly end, if the Wife would but make her
complaints with mildness: but the miserable distemper of Women is such, that
when once they have begun to declaim loudly against their Husbands, they can
never give over, whether they have cause or not; their Jealousy so blinds
them, they are capable of no Sentiments but what that Passion inspires; and
therefore the Senate of Marseilles had reason to accept the petition of that
Man that asked leave to kill himself, to be delivered from the Tempest of his
Wife: How well that word Tempest expresses the clamor of a Jealous Wife, and
shows still more and more that a Man can suffer no greater torment then that!
And although it is confessed to be a great proof of Love, yet it were better
let alone, for it does more hurt then good; yet a rational Man ought not to be
displeased with the Jealousy of his Wife when it is not excessive, as I have
showed before; the Jealousy of a Wife being commonly accounted a greater sign
of Love then that of a Husband, because most part of Men are Jealous only of
their own Honor, but Women are Jealous only of their Husbands.

But as there are very few of these kind of Women that I have described, I hope
from the rest of that Fair Sex (who are exempt from this dangerous Passion) the
justice of their votes on my side, instead of their anger for what I have writ;
which will be a great strength to me in the War I shall always maintain against
those furious Ladies, whose humor at last receiving a change, there may be
nothing found amongst all Women but Perfections.

After this Gentleman had read this Paper, which made him laugh in many places,
he repeated these lines, which he found most to his taste; The Jealousy of
Wives is commonly a greater sign of Love then that of the Husband, because that
most Men are Jealous of their Honor, etc. When he had again read over that
part, I remember, said he to Timinder, that a little before you gave me this
Piece, I asked you concerning the humor of your Wife, and you gave me no
reply: You have no great reason to complain of that, said Timander, for since
you asked me that question, I think I gave you that which pretty well resolves
your doubt, and leaves me nothing more to say; yet I perceive (continued he
looking steadfastly upon him) that this discourse surprises you; but you must
know that this piece, which fell by chance into my hands, and that which you
have been reading, describes exactly the humor of my Wife, who I believe was
the Copy by which it was drawn. It is scarce six months since I Married her,
and since that hour her Jealousy has almost made me desperate. He had said
more, but was interrupted by a person that came to him about some business, so
his Kinsman went away, leaving them together, it is no matter whither he went;
I have only undertaken the relation of the passages between Timander and his
Wife, therefore let us pass on to something more divertising.

Timander having Married (as you have read) Clidimira more for Love to her
Fortune, then her Person, therefore it is no wonder he was not very fond of his
Wife, being none of those Husbands that make Court to their Wives as much after
their Marriage as before; yet he nevertheless paid her (like an honest Man) all
the respect imaginable, was extremely civil to her, and refused her nothing she
asked, giving her liberty to live where and how she pleased, hoping that would
teach her to allow him the same liberty of living according to his own Fancy;
but he deceived himself, for his extreme compliance gave Clidimira too much
confidence, and by little and little she at last grew not to fear him at all;
and when the Jealous humor took her, made loud complaints to all the world of
her Husband, not apprehending his displeasure in the least.

Timander on the other side was very little concerned for this Jealous humor
of his Wife, and altered not his custom of going abroad very often to divert
himself; and being a Man as gallant in his Humor, as handsome of his Person,
he pretended Love in many places, and often complained of a Passion which
seldom troubled him, making Court to all the Women he liked.

Not long after he was Married, it was his Fortune to see a very handsome Woman
called Almaziana, and was so happy to be placed near her at a public Feast:
none are ignorant how a man well read in Gallantry behaves himself at such an
Entertainment, where he had time enough to make his Wit sparkle in the
Conversation before the Meat is brought in. Timander made good use of his time,
and so charmed the Fair Almaziana and her Mother, that he obtained their
permission to visit them at their house; which he failed not to do very often,
and with such assiduity, that he gained all the esteem of the Mother, and
tenderness of the Daughter, who knew not that he was Married, till an accident
happened, which I am going to tell you, which entangled this Monsieur not a
little. The Mother of Almaziana came to him one day and said, Sir, I have much
acknowledgment for your kindness to our House, and Passion you have so long
expressed to my Daughter; and therefore I do with all my heart give you my
consent to Marry her this day if you please. Timander was surprised at this
discourse, not knowing what answer to make; for if he confessed himself a Married
Man, he feared a certain banishment from the old Ladies house, whose Daughter
he by a frequent conversation had began to like with a more then ordinary
esteem; and therefore without much pumping for an answer, he promised the old
Lady to Marry her Daughter very suddenly, trusting to his Wit for a new
pretense every day to put her off, till he had accomplished his design. The
first it presented him was this, he said he had writ a Letter to a Kinsman of
his who was gone to Italy, for his consent, whose approbation concerned him
very much, and till that Letter was answered he could not Marry, but he hoped
it would not be long in coming, and that she would give him leave to stay for
it, which was much against his will.

But see how Fortune thrusts it self into Affairs, to which she is not called!
It happened that Clidimira was informed of all these passages by a Merchant that
went often to the house of Almaziana; Clidimira was in such a rage at the
hearing of this, that being unable to go to Almaziana's house (by reason of
some indisposition of health) she presently writ a Letter to the Mother of that
young Lady, stuffed with all the railing she could invent against her Husband,
sparing not the old Lady her self, who she passionately reproached for
permitting her Daughter to be Courted so easily: So that the next visit which
Timander made to Almaziana, he was amazed at their cold reception of him; the
old Lady asked him if he would find no other excuse to defer his Marriage with
her Daughter, though his Friend in Italy should give his consent, or if he had
not in that Town some other inclination besides her Daughter. Almaziana seeing
him non-plust, told her Mother that she injured Timander in believing it was
Love that hindered him from performing his promise to Marry her; for she knew
well enough, that the only person in the world who had power to oppose it, was
one that he hated extremely. Timander hearing her speak so, presently imagined
they meant his Wife, and began to suspect some body had told them he was
Married; but still believing they were not certainly informed of the truth, he
denied all, till, they showed him his Wives Letter, which he no sooner read,
but he turned those denials into excuses, and spoke a hundred pleasant things
upon the resistless power of Almaziana's Beauty: but yet for all that he was
forbid the house.

As soon as Timander received his dismission from thence, he went home, and far
from quarrelling his Wife for the Letter she had writ, he patiently suffered
(without answering one word) all the reproachful Language that the most violent
anger and the cruellest jealousy could put into a Woman's mouth.

Clidimira finding by that silence of his, that her jealousy was not without
cause, set her self to watch her Husband's actions so narrowly, that she
discovered the best part, and not only interrupted all his divertisements by
her Spies, but followed him her self into all Companies whither he went, and
there she made the laughing world a witness of her Follies: but when she saw
that signified nothing, and the greatest part of the shame fell to her own
share, she began to think that the only way to take him off from that way of
Life, was to make him jealous; which she resolved to do without inujring her
Virtue.

Some time after she had made this resolve, she went to visit one of her
Neighbors, where there was much Company, who having spoke to diverse Subjects,
they at last came to jealousy. Clidimira disputed to admiration against all
those that condemned that Passion, declaring that that Woman who had a jealous
Husband, was perfectly happy. Every one contradicted her, and chiefly Argantes,
who was one of the greatest Gallants of that place, and had long time defended
the side he had chosen against all the Arguments of Clidimira; but at last he
told her he yielded her the Victory, which he had so long disputed with her,
only to have the honor at last of being Conquered by so charming an Enemy.
After that the discourse changed to another Subject, in which Argantes and
Clidimira took no part, but entertained one another all the time that
conversation lasted: he promised her to write a Piece for her of the advantage
of all those Women that have Jealous Husbands, and to make it more agreeable,
he would set down the greatest part of those expressions which she had so
wittily declared in their favor; he also desired her permission to wait upon
her at her own house, which she granted him; he gave her a visit two days
after, she no sooner saw him, but she challenged the performance of his
promise, which he presented her in these words;

The good Fortune of Women that have Jealous Husbands; or the Apology of
Jealousy.
All those who are acquainted with the Passions of women, know very well that
their Love is violent, and their Hatred is excessive, and that their desires
are to be loved at their own rate, will not think it strange that they should
profess themselves happy in having Jealous Husbands, because Jealousy is a
sign of Love; and whatsoever is a sign of Love, cannot certainly displease
those Persons that Love Passionately, and desire to have that Love returned:
yet the most part of the World would persuade, that Jealousy is less
supportable then Hatred, and that it cannot but be extremely troublesome; and
therefore I would here endeavor to discover all the advantages and delights of
it.

The jealous have in all Ages been so unfortunate, that by a big and strange
injustice, they have been still condemned by the greatest part of the World,
without having yet been so happy to find any person that would undertake their
defense; but on the contrary, most People agree in declaiming against them,
they dare not show a fear of losing a person they Love, without exposing
themselves to be called troublesome and ridiculous persons; as if the fear of
losing what is beloved (which is in all others called a demonstration of Love
and Reason too) were only Criminal in the jealous, whose fear of losing what
they Love, is caused by the Beauties, which they discover in that object, and
whose excellencies makes them believe others may admire as well as they; and
from that fear grows their Distemper, which is so much condemned by the
greatest part of People, who rather then they will leave any excuse for these
who are unfortunately touched with jealousy, and to justify their censures of
the thoughts and actions of these miserable persons, are also unjust to Beauty
it self, which in all Ages has been so adored; and that Beauty to which so many
Temples have been, they now seek to deprive of all its Ornaments, rather then
they will want the satisfaction of condemning the jealous with more applause,
not allowing them sentiments so just and natural, which have been in all Ages
authorized by custom and reason both, and are still allowed to others, not only
for all other things that are Beautiful, but also for all Beautiful Persons.

There are more Women then are believed, that make frequent complaints against
those Persons who persuade Husbands that they grow troublesome to their Wives
in those visible proofs of affection, of being too often seen in their company;
and truly those Women do not complain without cause; for the Husbands of these
days are too much inclined to harken to those pernicious Councillors, who
condemn all public expressions of hindness between Man and Wife, calling it
jealousy, and accusing those Husbands for distrustful ill natured Men, and
have at last made it the fashion to cry down all fond Husbands as the most
criminal amongst Men. These Censurers do not only cry down this virtue so
rarely found amongst Men, but they make it pass for a ridiculous humor, and no
Man dare now adays be seen in his Wives company without exposing himself to the
public Rallery; as if Men Married their Wives only to be rid of their company,
and Women took Husbands only to see them no more; for if a Man comes into his
Wives Chamber before night, he is looked upon as a troublesome impertinent; and
if he stay at home much, his Wife is pitied by all the Town as the miserablest
Woman in the world; let her do or say what she will to contradict that report,
nay, though she is Passionately fond of her Husband, and expresses it in great
raptures, no body believes her, all conclude it is her virtue alone that makes
her speak so.

Strange injustice of the People of this Age! that will force or imagine that
these persons can live in any satisfaction when they are separated from that
half of themselves, without whose company it is impossible for them to taste
any true delight or lawful satisfaction; and since I have told you that most
women take delight in that part of jealousy, which is called the most
troublesome, I mean the company of their Husbands; let us now see if they will
take less satisfaction in those other effects which this Passion produces.

If to express a fear of losing what one Loves, if to believe that Beauty is to
be Loved by all persons that look upon it, and if the assiduity of Husbands to
their Wives, are by these condemners of jealousy accounted such horrible
crimes; judge then what opinion they have of the careful and suspicious part of
it which yet never Alarms an honest Wife but to make her virtue the more known,
and affords her many pleasures and advantages which I will show you, after I
have a little examined what these Critics upon Love require from a Husband,
and a Lover in the discovery of their Passions.

Although there is no Lover that ought not to fear that what he is not yet
possessed of, may be carried from him by some other more happy man, and
therefore may justly be jealous of his misfortune; and although the jealousy
of a Lover is only this reasonable fear, yet he is not permitted (without
drawing upon himself the hatred of his Mistress) to make the least complaints
of her, or to discover any resentment against his Rivals; but on the contrary,
he must be civil to those cruel Enemies of his that seek to deprive him of all
his happiness, nay, although he sometimes too clearly discovers them very near
the accomplishment of their designs to ruin him. Is there any Laws in the
World so severe as those that are imposed upon jealousy? Must a Man give no
testimonies of Love for fear of being called jealous, and be either insensible,
or else endeavor to appear so? Must he Carress his Enemies, and find out a way
to be Victorious without fighting, or doing any thing to show the greatness of
his Courage? He must besiege a Heart without making use of Love to take it in,
although no other Arms but those of Love have force enough to cause that heart
to yield; yes, he must do and suffer all this, or else be looked upon as a
troublesome Chagrin, ill-humoured Person; and so that heart which ought to be
the reward of him who Loves most, is often given to him who appears the most
insensible.

But if these Testimonies of Love are so troublesome from a Lover, and (as
these blind Critics say) deserve the hatred of his Mistress; those that a
Husband gives are insupportable, and ought to make him hated by his Wife; all
that comes from him displeases (if we must believe them) they condemn his Love
and all the proofs he gives of it; they blame his jealousy and all its
effects; what then shall we call Love, since they condemn it and all its
effects, and will acknowledge it no longer? They would (without doubt) have it
live in indifferency; for if a man express a passionate fondness of his Wife,
or by all his actions assures her that she is not indifferent to him, then
presently these people say, he is an enemy to his own repose and also to hers;
they would have married men love coldly, or at least without discovering any
remainder of that Fire which they so much complained of before Marriage: They
also find fault with all those little cares which some Husbands take to show
their kindness, concluding that they are signs of Hatred, not of Love, and that
all those who make use of them, hate even in loving: but though they will have
it that Love produces Hate, etc. must it needs follow that Hate produces Love?
will the passions produce their contraries, to authorize the Caprices of these
men, and to better their cause? or if they should confess (with some, who
though they are on their side, yet are less severe) that in the midst of that
Hatred, Love does discover it self; yet how will they reconcile these two great
passions? can two things so opposite consist together? can a man hate what he
loves, and loves without ceasing? It is true, Jealousy and the little doubts
that usually accompany it, does give some trouble to the person beloved; yet
nevertheless that pain serves only to give a better relish to the following
pleasures, as the rigours of Winter sets off the delightful Freshness of the
Spring: How pleasant to Lovers are those little quarrels which Jealousy
creates! how full of pleasing raptures and ravishing joys are those little
skirmishes in the Wars of Love! how agreeable and charming is that
reconcilement of those Lovers who repent of their Jealousy! All true Lovers
will confess and acknowledge that an Age of suffering the most cruel torments
imaginable is absolutely forgot, and largely recompensed in the charming
ecstasy of that sweet moment of their reconciliation; the pleasures it affords
are so great, that if they could be expressed, yet they would seem incredible;
therefore I will only say, that if the joys which Loves War gives are so great,
what can express those delights its Peace affords?

But we see every day (say these Censurers of Jealousy) that even amongst
these pleasant quarrels arising from the doubts of Lovers, there are some that
last very long, and are very troublesome both to the Lover and the person
beloved, and though this Jealousy is at last cured with much satisfaction, yet
it has been the cause of all the past vexations; and therefore it is said with
reason, that Jealousy creates innumerable evils, though she appears but once,
yet she is the foundation of all those disturbances, etc.

And that is one of the strongest of their proofs, for all those things they
impute to jealousy, which they affirm nothing can destroy; I will endeavor to
prove the contrary, and describe here the hatred of a Jealous Person, though I
confess, if all things were judged by appearances, I should accomplish my
design with much difficulty, there being some actions of Jealous Men that seem
very often to express more hatred then Love to the Person beloved; yet it is a
true saying when they complain most,

Love is in their Hearts, although Hate be in their Mouths.
Let us now examine what kind of Hate this is that reaches not the Heart, and
whether or no it causes any pain to the Person beloved.

Those Women who have sometimes been the object of this kind of Hate, know very
well that Love accompanies it, although he disguises himself, taking Hatred for
a vail; yet the covering not being large enough, some parts of him will be
seen, he is easily known through all disguises, and that of Hatred of this kind
is too little and too thin to hide him; his rays pierce that Curtain easily, so
as it may be said, Love stands behind that vail of Hate which Jealousy causes,
even as the Sun that shines behind those envious Clouds that sometimes
interpose themselves.

So this beloved Person having been acquainted with the usual effects of this
jealousy, is not at all Alarmed by it, and remains without fear, whilst all
the world is afraid for her, and pities her condition; she knows the advantage
will be hers in the conclusion, and looks upon that hatred (so dreadful in the
opinion of others) as a resemblance of those storms, which when they are blown
over, render the day more Fair, and the Calm that follows more delightful; and
this makes her rejoice even in the midst of the Tempest.

But lest some mistake that Hatred I have endeavored to describe (which cannot
hide Love, and is only caused by the little doubts and fears of jealousy) and
take it for that other kind which the world calls Hate, I think it not
unnecessary to speak a word of it in this place. That which the world calls
Hatred, is a Passion that cannot endure the object which created it, nor hear
it mentioned without Fury; it wishes nothing but ill, will not be appeased, all
its transports are violent, affects nothing but War and Treason, threatens
perpetually, and takes a Pride in being Invincible. But that Hatred which I
have told you of, does nothing resembling to this; it Loves passionately that
which creates it, and never hears it named without satisfaction, wishing it
nothing but good; and all its Transports are Raptures of Love; and it may
justly be called a Hatred proceeding from Love, because it is begot by an
excess of that Passion, and it loves and seeks after nothing but Peace; it
desires not to be eternal, and is born only that it may quickly dye, complains
only to be appeased; and whereas that other sort of Hatred desires to lose the
sight of that object which created it, calling it insupportable; this Hatred
(which I mean) Courts it to her, and hates it only because she Loves it; in
fine, it is nothing but an angry Cupid that desires to be strokt and kissed,
and though he take the name of hatred to disguise himself, yet he is too well
known to be long hid, and cannot leave loving, though he may desire to hate.

That which was spoken by a French Lady to her Lover, Any ina haine pour toy va
jusques a l'extreme, si l'on peut toutesfois hair ce que l'on aim, proves this
truth; and let us see, that although hatred is sometimes in the will, yet it is
never in the power of a Lover.

Thus you see the difference that is between hatred and hatred, between the
common hatred, and that which is caused in the heart of a Lover from the doubts
of jealousy, which may subsist with Love, which is impossible for the other
kind of Hate, unless Love and perfect Hatred could be reconciled.

Nevertheless, to convince all those who condemn jealousy, and to let them see
that it is not the cause of so much ill as is imputed to it; let them assure
themselves, that there is nothing at all of what I have said, if a Man find his
supitions true, and that he is not deceived by appearances, and so comes to an
expressible hatred of the person beloved.

But what is the hatred of a Lover? What is the hatred of a Husband? has it not
deceived all those who confided in it? what do they not do to stifle it in
themselves, and to destroy it absolutely? what do they not do to kindle that
Fire which they put out so much against their will, and which they do desire to
re-kindle? one look mingled with sweetness, a Sigh, a Tear, one kind word of
justification quickly appeases their hatred, though it appeared implacable;
which confirms this saying,

A suspicion cleared, re-kindles a strong Love.
Two Persons are never more united, nor more inflamed, then after a quarrel of
this nature, and she that seems to have suffered most by the injustice she met
with, receives now a pleasure much above her former pain, when she sees the
Person beloved prostrate at her Feet and asking her pardon, expressing his
fears of having lost her affection by his rashness, in suspecting her of
infidelity. Caressey importunes her, and appears ashamed and confounded at this
Crime, and is more submissive and passionate then ever.

Besides the pleasure and extreme joy which this re-inflamed Lover gives to the
person beloved, she has this great advantage from it, of making good use of
that time, in which a man can deny her nothing, but grants all requests a Woman
can make, and which at another time are not so easily obtained: there is also
this advantage to them both in such a reconcilement, which can hardly be made
without a knowledge of the virtue of his Wife, which when the Husbands
Jealousy has served him to find out, it is a ravishing discovery; and since
there are many things unknown because untryed, a Jealous Husband has this
advantage of an indifferent careless unsuspicious one, he may answer for his
Wives virtue, which the other cannot do, having never given himself the trouble
to enquire whether she were virtuous or not.

I have told you before, that some Women rejoice more then is imagined in the
company of their Husbands; but since I have not told you why they do so, and
that these enemies of Jealousy will not believe it, I will speak a word or two
concerning that.

Since there is no pleasure can equal that of being in the company of those we
love, we must not wonder if Women that love their Husbands are fond of their
company, complaining when they do not stay with them, and grow jealous of their
absence, believing themselves hated, suspecting that their Husbands fly from
them to please themselves in places where they are not, forgetting that they
are married; besides, another great vexation is the expense which they believe
their Husbands are at in other places, which is often but too true: and thus
they weep, torment themselves, make complaints, and suffer the greatest
torments imaginable, without receiving any help from those fruitless tears and
doleful stories which they tell; for they are irremediable griefs, which
nothing can cure unless it be the Jealousy of their Husbands, because Jealous
Husbands are always with their Wives, and waiting very assiduously upon them,
giving them no cause of suspicion or complaint, because they are still so happy
to be with them they love; which shows that there are Women who desire their
Husbands should be always with them.

But if there are Women found of this humor, to wish their Husbands should
always stay at home with them, there are also Jealous Husbands in the world
that will not permit their Wives often to go abroad; but since they have always
been condemned, and their Wives looked on as Prisoners and Unfortunate Persons,
let us see whether they are as unhappy as the World thinks them.

Those Husbands that see plainly that their Wives pay to them without dispute
all the obedience they require, and are satisfied that this obedience proceeds
from Love, return, carress them extremely, redoubling their kindness to them
every moment: They receive other great advantages by their obedience, besides
that of letting the World see the great power their Husbands have over them,
and the great interest they have in his heart, which is very rare, and is no
little glory and honor to those Women, whose Husbands, though they are always
with them, yet put no restraint upon them at home; and when they go abroad,
they take care to bring these Wives whatsoever they fancy will please their
humors, as New Fashions, Fine Rarities, etc. And it is observed, there are no
Women go better dressed, and wear richer Cloths, then those who have Jealous
Husbands, which is very agreeable to that Sex, whose ambition for Gallantry is
almost as powerful with them as that of Love. If all Women were of this humor
of loving the company of their Husbands, if there were no Gossips in the World
who love Gallants, and to be Courted; perhaps I had well enough proved that
this jealousy is not so odious as it is believed: but since it is too well
known, that it sets all those kind of Women upon the rack, it will without
doubt be said that I was not able to justify jealousy in all cases; yet I
wish it were true, that jealousy would but give them all those tormenting
inquietudes and cruel pains it is accused of, perhaps it would oblige them to
alter their course of life; but these Gossips have so much wit and cunning
invention, they turn all this to their own advantage, as well before, as after
they are Married; for whilst they are un-married, the jealousy of their Lovers
gives them but little pain, because they have too little power over them, and
too much respective fear to those persons they adore, to torment them, by doing
any thing against the humor of those Coy Mistresses, who know their own
strength well enough, and use it to their own advantage; but the jealousy of
their Husbands who they must fear and obey, is not the same, for that disquiets
and enslaves them (at least in their own opinion) yet they nevertheless draw
these great advantages usually from it.

The Ambition of these Women being to be Courted, and to have all sort of
Gallants, the jealousy of their Husbands, instead of preventing, draws the
greater number about them; some Men making Court to their Wives, believing the
hatred they ought to have of their Tyrants (for so they call their Husbands)
will make the Conquest very easy; others think, that a Woman that has power to
create jealousy must needs have something extraordinary, although she is not
handsome. Some fancy there is much pleasure in deceiving a jealous Man, and the
rest adore her, imagining it a great glory and a sign of Wit to have a Mistress
that gives such jealousy, and is so much Courted by others, striving to be in
the fashion; and thus the jealousy of the Husbands gives these Women what they
wish, an extraordinary crowd of Gallants. But some will answer, that although
it is true the jealousy of the Husbands is the cause of all this Gallantry,
yet these crowd of Lovers cannot defend her from the ill humor into which that
jealousy puts him, but on the contrary creates it; I grant that is most
certain, yet nevertheless they usually draw their greatest advantages from that
ill humor of their Husbands; for they being very cunning, they easily know how
to appease them at any time, though in the mean time they use all their
endeavors to make the world believe they are ill used, by publishing this ill
humor of their Husbands, and especially to those amongst their Gallants who
they cannot affect, and have a mind to banish; and also to gratify those whom
they do Love best, by telling them how much they suffer for their sakes, and to
what dangers they are often exposed by the extreme passion they have for them,
from the rage of that jealous Husband who perceives it. This expression of
kindness from a beloved Politic Woman, gives these obliged Lovers an
unexpressible joy, who presently believe themselves much more beloved then they
are; and in this Fools Paradise into which these gossips have led them, blinded
with the fancied dangers these poor Women are exposed to for their Love, they
think they can never be grateful enough, though they almost ruin their
Fortunes with the vast Presents they make them; which are received by these
Women with delight, and many a jeer to the deluded Fool that presents them:
which confirms what I say, that the jealousy of the Husband is not so
prejudicial to those kind of Wives as it is imagined, since it brings them in
all that they care for; as in the first place, giving them a handsome occasion
to rid themselves of those Men they hate, without being in the least suspected
by those discarded Gallants. Secondly, making them pass for handsome by some,
and beloved by most, and passionately adored, and richly presented by the Men
they like.

This is all I can tell you at present of the good fortune of those Women that
have jealous Husbands; and though I have not spoke well enough upon such a
subject, yet I have in the discovery of my thoughts endeavored to show you
Joys, Pleasures, and other considerable advantages, even in the midst of
whatever is most terrible in jealousy; and I think I have forgot nothing to
show you that those troubles which are caused by jealousy, are many times the
occasion of great profits even to those people that complain most; you have
also read how it serves to make known the Virtue, Wit, Merit, and all the other
good qualities a Woman is capable of, and how it is of equal advantage to the
Married and Un-married, to the Virtuous, and those that are not so, and that
without it Love would lose his heat, there being nothing else but jealousy
capable of awakening, nourishing, and enabling him to find out new and
unthought of Pleasures; all its effects being signs of Love, whose pains are
rather to be desired then feared. This being a great truth, we may justly call
that Love imperfect and insipid, which is not accompanied with jealousy, nay,
it is a languishing, sleepy, sottish Love, which does not understand it self,
scarce knowing if he be alive or dead, and infine cannot subsist long in that
estate.

Clidimira having read this Paper with a joy that was remarkable enough in her
eyes, told Argantes (with a smile) that she was confident he did not look upon
her in the number of those Women he described at the conclusion of his
discourse, because she desired to have her Husband jealous, and thought no
Woman happy whose Husband was not so: he replied, he never intended it to her,
nor should have a thought so unjust of her; and as for that conclusion, he only
made it to show that he had forgot nothing in that Paper to speak his opinion
of jealousy, without intending to injure any person, since it was a truth so
well known, that all the world were not of one humor, nor had inclinations
alike.

After that they talked of diverse other things, and although Clidimira had a
great deal of Wit, yet she nevertheless resembled those Women that love to tell
what they ought rather to conceal; for she told Argantes all she could imagine
of her Husband and his humor, and the little affection she believed he had for
her. Argantes being one of those that only sought his own Divertisment, and
easily flattered himself, drew from the discourse of Clidimira many things that
were advantageous to his design, and though she had only made it to help out
the conversation of that afternoon, yet he presently believed she did not hate
him, and fancyed that if be would give himself a little trouble to assault that
Fort, the Conquest would be very easy for him; but he deceived himself, for in
the end the Virtue of Clidimira let him see the folly of his thoughts, and
convinced him that those Women that are many times the free'st in conversation,
and are apt to speak their minds freely, are the hardest for designs to work
on, and the most Virtuous in Reality; which those that seek to make advantages
upon them, often find in conclusion, and is a truth which experience daily
confirms.

Argantes was already thinking and contriving what to do to make use of this
good Fortune, which he fancied he saw coming toward him, when Clidimira told
him, she was persuaded that the only way to work this desired change upon her
Husband, was to make him jealous, which she that minute had resolved upon, and
her thoughts had chosen him for the fittest person in the world to help her in
that design, if he would please to consent; which he easily granted, thanking
his kind Fortune for that blessed motion, believing now that that kind Goddess
would undertake his happiness; doing all things her self for him, without
suffering him to take any pains for his happiness, since she had inspired
Clidimira to prevent those addresses which his lazy humor would have scrupled
to make, notwithstanding the greatness of his growing Passion; he offered to
serve her in all things she desired, and being one of those that fear nothing,
and never trouble themselves to examine what designs soever they take in hand,
he considered not at all how Clidimira's Husband would take it, thinking upon
nothing but the accomplishing what he had now promised, and wholly took up his
thoughts; and thus they began to make the poor Timander jealous.

Clidimira having gained all her Husbands Servants, was informed of all he did,
and the next day hearing that he was gone abroad in the company of Ladies, was
resolved to follow him, and knowing the place where the Treat was to be given,
she sent for Argantes and three or four Ladies of her acquaintance, who went to
divert themselves at the same house; and Fortune to give a good beginning to
their design, carried them into a room so near to that which Timander and his
company had taken, that both the Companies might easily hear and see each
others actions. Clidimira set her self by Argantes, talking always with him,
and often whispering in his ear, but most when her Husband looked that way.
Those that were with Timander pretended not to know it was his Wife, and were
so discreet and obliging to him, seemed to take no notice of her carriage,
though it afforded them wonder and divertisement enough. Timander appeared with
his ordinary gayety, unconcerned at all things, which he yet saw plain enough
without taking of any notice; so that the mirth of both these Companies was not
at all disturbed in appearance, although Timander and Clidimira were not
without their troubles under this discreet disguisement of each others
thoughts. Timander at his return home that night, instead of appearing vexed or
discomposed at what had passed that afternoon, appeared more gay and pleasant
then ordinary, in hopes that way to make his jealous Wife leave off her custom
of following him into all places; and knowing the design which brought her into
the house where he was that afternoon, he seemed to remember nothing of what
had past that day before his face between her and Argantes: but on the
contrary, Clidimira (far from imitating him) received him very coldly, and
having much ado to contain herself, was every minute upon the point of breaking
out into a furious rage, her anger being raised to the height, when she saw so
little concern in Timanders carriage; and instead of the jealousy she hoped
for, saw so much pleasantness in his looks: but hoping for some effects from
him, and the resolution she had taken to make him jealous, she went on, Fortune
being yet on her side.

Some few days after that, knowing that Timander was gone into the Public
Walks, with the same Ladies that were in his company the day before, Clidimira
followed him thither immediately, having none with her but Argantes, and one of
her waiting-Women; and seeing Timander at a good distance from her, she made
two or three turns about the Walks, and left her Woman with a charge not to
follow her into the Walk, where she saw her Husband conversing with those
Ladies; she past all alone with Argantes near the place where her Husband and
those Ladies were at that time very pleasantly entertained by a Lady of a very
merry humor, which infinitely diverted the Company, who gave her leave to say
what she pleased without contradiction from any body, though she rallied them
all She seeing Argantes pass by with Timanders Wife, she told him very
pleasantly, that she never saw so handsome, well shaped, and so Gallant a Man
as that person was, that was alone walking with his Wife, and was the day
before in her company at the Treating-house. Timander knowing well enough that
this Lady and all the company had a mind to rally him, took no notice of it,
and answered merrily, that he had given his Wife a charge to make choice of no
Gallant but one that was handsome, witty, and of a good Mien; and that now he
was extremely pleased to see she had so much wit as to make so good a choice.
Timander had a hundred pleasant things upon that subject whilst the Company
stayed there, reparting very wittily to the rallery of that Lady that had so
long played upon him and the rest of the Company; but as soon as he returned
home he began to reflect upon all the passages of those two days past between
his Wife and Argantes before his face, and adding to this reflection her having
not complained of himself now as heretofore, though he had given her more cause
to be jealous: all these things made him conclude that his Wife was really in
Love with Argantes, and then he was convinced that (although he had resolved
never to be jealous) there was none could resist that Passion, and any man
might fall into it whether he would or no, and that how little soever a Husband
might care for his Wife, yet the spite and indignation of seeing himself
rallied by the world, inspires often a more furious Jealousy then that which
proceeds from the fear of losing what one loves, or seeing another have a share
in that which a man ought to possess alone.

When this Forced Jealous man was come home, he could not hide his resentments
from his wife, who did not fail to give him a return sharp enough upon the same
subject, in his own Language, though with much more noise; but at last they
reconciled themselves with reciprocal promises of giving no more cause of
Jealousy to each other. The Caresses and renewed Protestations of Love which
usually attend those reconcilements between a Husband and his Wife, were not
wanting at that time, and Timander from that hour staid much oftener at home
with her then he had ever yet done. Thus Clidimira's wishes were accomplished,
and she did not at all repent (as yet) the having made her Husband jealous,
still resolving to reclaim him this way as often as he returned to his old
courses: but as it is no easy matter to change inclinations, or to alter an
old habitual custom of life, whatever resolution any man may make, none is so
much master of himself to do it; for the reformed Timander quickly returned to
his old ways, not being able to restrain himself any longer; which Clidimira
observing, made no more fruitless complaints as heretofore, but betook her self
to her new found-out way of reclaiming him.

She was in these thoughts when Timander came to tell her he had earnest
business into the Country for some few days; Clidimira at another time would
not have refrained her tears and a thousand prayers to divert him from going
away, or to importune him for a speedy return to her; but the resolution she
had taken, hindered her sorrows from appearing, and she persuaded her Husband
instead of seeking to divert him from this journey.

Timander was scarce got out of Town, when Clidimira went to visit one of her
Kindred who loved her exceedingly; she was no sooner entered that House, but
those Tears which she forced her self to keep in (before her Husband) burst out
very passionately, her Face expressing all the signs of a violent grief for the
absence of Timander, who she feared was gone into the Country for no other end
but to divert himself in some other Conversation which was more delightful to
him then hers. Her Kinswoman seeing her in that deplorable condition, used all
her art to comfort Clidimira, persuading her at last to remain with her till
her Husband came home, which he did eight days after, his journey having only
been for Divertisment, as Clidimira imagined; when she heard he was returned,
she made haste home to meet him, carrying Argantes with her, in hopes to
rekindle her Husbands jealousy, which design took effect. Timander grew very
angry, Clidimira did so too, and though he had made this appointment of going
into the Country so privately, that none knew of it, and pretended to ride
Post to disguise his designs from Clidimira; yet she spoke to him with that
cunning, that he apprehended she knew all the passages of that journey of
Pleasure, which put Timander extremely out of countenance, and obliged him to
hasten that minute the peace with her, that is as easy to be concluded between
a Man and his Wife, as it is difficult between great Princes.

Although to go about the making a Husband jealous, is an enterprise that must
be Fatal to all those Women that undertake it; yet Clidimira prospered so well
hitherto in that attempt, that she never gave her Husband any cause to be
jealous of her, but when she had most reason to complain of him: but as many
things happen un-fore-seen, let us now see whether the way which she takes to
change her Husbands humor, will always be so advantageous to her.

Timander after this last reconcilement with his Wife, appeared very much
reformed, as he did the time before, and stayed much at home with his Wife; but
yet he was not altogether so kind to her, nor did he caress Clidimira with so
great a Fondness as his former repentance expressed; so that she now began to
think him jealous in earnest, believing he staid at home only to watch her
actions, which was to her a great satisfaction (though mingled with some fear)
for her humor was such, that she chose rather to be ill used by her Husband,
then to see him go abroad, which yet he loved too well to forbear any longer,
and growing weary of staying at home, and acting against his Inclinations, he
resolved to be his Wives Jailer no longer.

As long as Timander's humor of staying at home continued, Clidimira had
desired Argantes not to visit her more, or speak to her in any place where he
saw her; but as soon as ever her Husband re-took his old customs, she writ to
Argantes to visit her as formerly, who failed not to obey her, and oftener then
he was wont; and as he had his designs as well as Clidimira had hers, he
avoided the sight of Timander, which this virtuous Lady having observed, she
told him one day that she had taken notice of his actions, and therefore
desired him since he had undertaken to oblige her, that he would do it without
interest, and ground no fruitless hopes upon the misunderstanding that happened
sometimes between her Husband and her self, or else never to see her more.
Argantes knew very well that the care he had lately taken to avoid her Husband,
besides those other signs of Love he had too foolishly expressed, was the
occasion of her speaking to him in that manner, and therefore he resolved upon
obeying her, rather than lose his hopes, which he now commits to Fortune; and
in those visits he made her, took no care as formerly to avoid the sight of
Timander, or expressing his growing passion in those ways which Clidimira did
not approve; to prevent the regret that he might one day have for not having
all things in his power to assist his good fortune, he resolved to make
Clidimira some considerable Present, and having some loose Diamonds in his
Cabinet, he carried them to a Jeweller of his acquaintance, and desired him to
add some of his own to those, and make a handsome pair of Bracelets: In the
mean time he continued his frequent visits to the Wife of Timander, who acted a
part at that time that astonished all the world; for the oftener Argantes
visited his Wife, the less he seemed to take notice of it, used him very
civilly, and diverted himself as at other times, speaking to Clidimira with as
much seeming indifferency, as if there never had been such a person as Argantes
in the world. This made Clidimira desperate, because she knew not what to do
next to make her Husband jealous, being ignorant that he was now more jealous
then ever, and carried himself so indifferently, only to find out what he had a
desire to know more clearly. Clidimira in the mean time made Argantes visit her
at all hours, morning, night, etc. whispered to him even before her Husband as
she did before, who still seemed to take no notice of it at all; and if things
had continued longer at this pass, she would have loudly quarreled her Husband
for not falling out with her; which nevertheless he resolved to do, making use
of his patience only to find out the certainty of his Wife's Love to Argantes
by more visible signs, which he intended to punish severely in his own time,
which perhaps would have been a great while a coming; for if Fortune (that is
sometimes treacherous and wicked) had not given him an opportunity of declaring
his resentments, he might have waited long enough for a day of venting his
Passion, Clidimira being too virtuous to do any thing directly against her
honor, though her indiscretion was great in all those just causes of Complaint
she gave her husband. Behold now how Fortune rendered her at last the most
unhappy person alive, and although it may be said, she was partly the cause of
it her self hitherto, yet it is as true, that she contributed nothing to the
conclusion of her part in this History, as you shall find in the following
relation.

As Timander was going out one day in one of his Chagrin humors, he was called
in passing by a Jewellers house, by a person that had sold him formerly many
fine rarities, who told him he had filled his Shop with many Curiosities (since
he had been there) which he knew would please him very much. Timander going in,
and having viewed all the rare pieces of work in that place, he at last cast
his eye upon one of the Jewellers men that was at work upon a very fine pair of
diamond bracelets; he asking whose they were, they told him they were bespoke
by a Gentleman that dwelt hard by his house, whose name was Argantes; Timander
having asked when they would be finished, and they telling him the next day, he
made no more questions, for he presently suspected they were for Clidimira, but
went away, fancying that if he could find out that, he should quickly discover
all the whole Intrigue between Argantes and his Wife.

The next day Argantes receiving the Bracelets from the Jeweller, studied some
time what he was to do, and which way he should present them where he intended,
and at last resolved to write to Clidimira, and accompany the declaration of
his Love with so rich a Present; the reasons were very many that put him upon
that course, he saw that Timander suffered him every day at his house, without
expressing the least signs of jealousy, and that he went on still in that
careless way; that Clidimira showed more resentment then ever against the
indifferency of her Husband, even beginning to hate that unfaithful man:
besides all these considerations, Argantes looked upon this present as
considerable enough to open the eyes of any woman, and began to think that the
ill treatment she formerly gave to the declarations of his Love, was perhaps
because he made his addresses with empty hands. All these thoughts moved him to
write to Clidimira, to tell her he loved her, and with that Letter to send his
Present, hoping that although Clidimira should absolutely refuse to hearken to
his Love, yet the greatness of that Present would prevent his banishment, not
caring for any thing so he might declare his Passion; nor feared he any thing
more then her banishing him her house, hoping from Time, his Passion, and Wit,
and those other qualifications he discovered in himself, to obtain her at last,
as many young men of this Age foolishly persuade themselves into a belief that
no Beauty how great soever can resist their Charms, or defend themselves from
falling into those snares which their wits lay to catch them: And thus Argantes
built his hopes, holding it for a certain rule, that those places which appear
so well fortified, and hang a flag of defiance to the Besiegers to frighten
them with a belief of their great strength and obstinate resistance, are often
seen to render sooner then is imagined. And having thus strengthened his
resolutions, he presently writ a Letter, which with the Bracelets he intended
to carry himself, and putting them into his Pocket, he went that afternoon to
visit Clidimira, in whose Chamber he had observed a day or two before, there
stood a little Box, with the Key always in it; and having seen Clidimira lay in
that Box some Bracelets of her own Hair, and which she had wrought only for her
Divertisement, Argantes resolved to steal out those, in exchange of his Diamond
Bracelets; which he easily could do, Clidimira not using him with much
Ceremony; for since he was by his frequent visits so familiar in the house, she
often left him alone in her Chamber, whilst she went about her Domestic
affairs: yet that afternoon he waited long for an opportunity of acting his
design, but at last she going as far as the stairs to speak to one that brought
her a message, which was not very quickly delivered, Argantes had an
opportunity of putting his Letter and Bracelets into the Box, and taking out
the Bracelets of Hair, he crammed them hastily into the first bit of Paper he
found in his Pocket, and went away immediately after, as much satisfied as if
he had found great Treasure, though for his Diamonds he carried away nothing
but Hairs: which above all things shows the extravagancy of Lovers.

Argantes that was the most contented Man in the world in being thus rid of his
Diamonds, was no sooner gone out of Clidimira's Chamber, then Timander (who had
in design waited all this while in his Closet) entered the room, in hopes to
discover something of that which he as yet did but suspect, and with an air
mingled with scorn and anger, he asked Clidimira to show him the Bracelets that
Argantes had newly given her; she answered with much assurance, that she did
not know what he meant by that question; for Argantes nor no other Man had
never yet made her any Presents: in saying that, she remembered that she had
laid those Bracelets of Hair in that little Box which stood open, and fearing
that if her Husband searching there should come to see them, and fancy she made
them for some Gallant, though she only wrought them to divert her self, she
went to take them out, which it seems she could not do without being perceived
by Timander, whose Eyes were every where at that time, and who stepping toward
his Wife, snatched the Paper from her as she was conveying it into her Pocket;
and unfolding it hastily, he pulled out those Bracelets of Diamonds, to the
amazement of Clidimira, who knew or thought of nothing more then the seeing
those Bracelets of her Hair which she had laid up in that place; but whilst she
was struck with wonder, Timander read these words;

To the Fair Clidimira.
Although I here present you with Bracelets of Diamonds instead of those of
Hair which I have taken away, yet think not Fair Clidimira, that I believe mine
more considerable then these wrought by your fair hands, which I confess are
unvaluable; and if I would here make use of those Complements that are usually
made, even to those Women that are infinitely below you in all things, I might
here tell you, that these Diamonds have not so great a Luster as those of your
Eyes; but alas! how Fatal is that Luster of theirs to all that look upon them?
and though the sparkling light of these Diamonds causes them to be admired, yet
the dazzling Splendor of your fair Eyes commands Adoration from all those that
look upon them; and we may behold the one without trembling, yet none can look
upon on the other without fear; if the one shines and does not burn, yet the
other shines and burns at once; if the one rejoices the sight without enflaming
the Soul, yet the other never appears without piercing the very heart which it
enflames, and causes a Rebellion in all the Senses: but since it is impossible
for me to hinder this effect, who find as much difficulty in captivating your
Heart, as it self does find little in rendering mine your Slave, I have
nevertheless the confidence to believe I may revenge my self upon your fair
Arms by giving them those Letters, which if I am so happy to see them carry, I
may well boast the good Fortune of enchaining what is most lovely in the
universe, and perhaps of softning what is most cruel in all the world; but to
make me thus Fortunate, you must show for the future as much pity as you have
hitherto expressed goodness to

Argantes.

I am very glad Madam, said Timander to his Wife in a rallying tone, to find by
this Letter how much goodness you have showed to Argantes: It is long since I
began to believe it, though I never was so certainly informed of it as now by
his own hand; you are obliged to continue your favors to him, he is very
acknowledging, as these Presents he makes you sufficiently testify; and these
Bracelets are so dazzling and so rich, that there is no heart so hard which they
would not persuade to Love, especially when they come to speak for so Gallant a
Man as Argantes. I know not, replied Clidimira, what reason you have to say
these things to me, who am very ignorant from whence these Bracelets come, nor
did I ever see the Letter you have read. I see very well, answered Timander,
that you Love the person that writ it so extremely, that you are never weary of
it, and make these pretenses of having never seen it, only to hear it read once
more; which I will do to please you, because I Love you better then perhaps you
think I do; with that Timander read the Letter aloud, to which Clidimira
hearkened very attentively, making very many protestations of her Innocence,
telling her Husband that she was confident that Argantes had put a trick upon
her, conveying these things unto her Box some time or other when she was gone
out of her Chamber, which was true enough; but truth signified nothing at that
time, her misfortune being above her innocence, all she said to prove it was
to no purpose, appearances being all against her, and so sad was her condition,
that Timanders snatching the Paper out of her hand, which she so innocently
attempted to steal, only to prevent a crime, not knowing there was so great a
one committed in that place, and Argantes treacherous exchange of the
Bracelets, and all things whatever that seemed most to justify her, made
against her; and Timander, though his amazement gave him time to harken a
little to her justifications, yet at last quitted that coldness with which he
had begun, and grew extremely passionate, telling his Wife she could not deny
that Argantes had those Bracelets of Hair, for he had writ it there with his
own Hand; and that he had given her those of Diamonds was as clear, for he had
snatched them himself from her, as she was stealing them out of the Box to
convey them from his knowledge; he told her, certainly no person was ever known
to bestow Bracelets of Hair without some inclinations to those to whom they
gave them; nor was there any body ever known to receive Presents of such a
value as those Diamond Bracelets were, without an intention of being
acknowledging for such a favor; nor was there any Man so foolish to be at the
charge of making such a Present, without proposing to himself a certainty of
accomplishing his design. In fine, he repeated to Clidimira all the reasons he
had to be jealous, not omitting the least of observations he had made since the
first day he saw her in the company of Argantes; but all his Passionate
discourses troubled not Clidimira half so much as the trick Argantes had put
upon her, who was more displeased at his bold declaration of Love, then at all
the reproaches her Husbands jealousy could make to her; and being at her Wits
end between these two Men, and having a strange desire to quarrel Argantes, she
desired her Husbands leave to write to him to come thither, that she might
justify her self by his Confession; to which Timander having given consent,
she presently writ these words;

To Argantes.
What business soever you have at this time, yet you must come to me
immediately after you receive this Note.

Clidimira.


As soon as she had ended this Note, she assured Timander that he should be
convinced of her innocence very suddenly, for she knew Argantes would not have
the impudence to affirm that she had ever given him any Bracelets of her Hair,
or received any of Diamonds from him. But this Husband thus forced to be
jealous, studying a little while upon all these things, began to think that
this was not the right way to know the truth of this matter, and being well
acquainted with the greatness of Argantes Wit, he was certain that Lover would
want no Politic excuses to clear himself, and justify his Mistress; and this
thought raising his anger at them both, carried him out immediately (from the
presence of Clidimira, whom now he bated to look upon) and going hastily down
the stairs, with resolutions fatal to them both, he went out to find Argantes,
who as (ill luck would have it) had newly received the Note from Clidimira, and
was going to know her commands, when Timander met him in the Street very near
the Gate of his House, which stood in a remote corner of the Town, where very
few people had occasion to pass; and therefore Timander had opportunity enough
to act his design, who as soon as he saw Argantes, drew upon him. Arganies
received him like a valiant Man, but they had not time to Fight very long; for
Clidimira who had observed her Husbands threatening looks as he went from her,
and had watched his actions at the Window, made some noise, and commanded the
Servants to run after their Master, who with the assistance of the Neighbors
that had heard the noise she made, run to part them; but Argantes who had a
very great care of the reputation of Clidimira, and knew that his pretended
Amors to her had been long the discourse of that Neighborhood, fled away
before any of them could know him; but in flying from them he gave Timander the
leisure to take up a Paper, which it seems he had dropped in taking out his
Handkerchief, when Timander drew upon him so hastily. The curiosity Timander
had to read this Paper was so great, that he very hastily dismissed the Company
that were busy about him, and scarce affording the kind Neighbors a civil
acknowledgment for their concern of him, he desired them to go home, telling
them it was nothing; and so impatiently began to read what he had so unluckily
found.

Admire now what Misfortune will do when it once begins to persecute any
Person. Timander had no sooner opened this Paper, then he saw it was his Wife's
hand, and those Bracelets of her Hair wrapped up in it with these words.

To Argantes.
I desire impatiently to see you, to tell you that Timander is not Jealous,
which I hope will oblige you to make haste; and if you have the same goodness
for me you have so often expressed, it will bring you hither presently, that we
may consult upon what we have to do.

Clidimira.


Whilst Timander is musing upon this Letter, let us read the occasion of it.
Clidimira (as we have already seen) having by her cunning, and the jealousy
with which she possessed her Husband, forced this unconstant Man often to change
his course of life; yet he as quickly relapsed again, and Clidimira as often
tried her enperiment of reclaiming him, by the jealousy she gave him of her
love to Argantes, to whom she had writ this Letter in one of those Melancholy
humors, desiring the Counsels of Argantes, which had hitherto been so
Fortunate to her in that design. Argantes had by chance kept this Letter in his
Pocket, and that (...) day he exchanged the Bracelets, his haste (for fear of
being prevented or seen by those he heard coming into Clidimira's Chamber) made
him wrap the Bracelets of Hair in the first Paper he found about him, which (as
ill fortune would have it) proved to be Clidimira's Letter; who sending for him
so suddenly for her justification to Timander, he had no time either to look
upon the Bracelets, or consider what Paper they were wrapped in. Timander having
read this Letter, appeared very calm, and without passion, told Clidimira he
had now all that he desired, and was so well satisfied as to her, that he
wished no more. The next day he sent for her nearest Kindred, and related to
them all that had passed, desiring to resign her into their Hands, he being
resolved to be troubled with her no longer. Clidimira seeing her self in that
straight, discovered (in hopes to justify her self) all the Stratagems she had
to force her Husband to be jealous, producing amongst other things that Paper,
Entitled, The good Fortune of Women that have Jealous Husbands; which Argantes
had writ at her desire. But Timander made it quickly appear, that this Paper
which she brought for her justification, was a certain proof against her; and
that Argantes pretending to oblige her, had like an expert Gallant contrived
and continued, as much as he could possible, the division between the Husband
and the Wife; his design being only to insinuate himself by degrees into the
favor of the Wife, though at first he seems to aim at nothing more then the
reconciling her to her Husband, though he intends nothing less, which he
plainly discovers in that Piece, called, The good Fortune of Women, etc. Where
he persuades the Women to make their Husbands jealous, possessing them with
those great advantages and considerable Presents those Wives might receive from
that jealousy, if they would make the right use of it: wherein he does not
answer Clidimira's intentions expressed in the desire she made to him for it;
for instead of placing all those great advantages in the reconcilement of a
Husband to his Wife, he brings them in as received during the time of his
jealousy, and from other persons besides the Husband.

Timander having descanted much upon this Paper which Clidimira brought to
justify her self, to no more purpose then all the rest she could say at that
time for her self; he was resolved to talk no more, but now to act in good
earnest what he had resolved upon; and therefore he declared to the Company,
that although he always had esteemed Clidimira too much to believe she had an
ill design at first, but from what had followed, he plainly saw that she had
not strength enough to defend her self from surprise, and in conclusion had
suffered her self to be won; of which truth these Proofs he had given them were
so convincing to him, that nothing could destroy, and he desired no more, being
thoroughly satisfied of all. Her afflicted Kindred confessed she was too guilty
in appearance, and that they saw no excuse for her; and so although Argantes
lost his design upon Clidimira's Virtue, yet he ruined her Reputation for ever;
which let us us see, that all those Women who too often receive the visits from
suspected Persons, expose themselves not only to the like danger, but also to
that of being betrayed into greater inconveniences; and if these cross
accidents had not happened, who knows whether Clidimira's Virtue would have been
strong enough to have held out to the last, although she was one of the most
Virtuous Women of her time; yet that Virtue not being guarded by Discretion,
she was at last so unhappy as to lose her Husband, and to be treated like a
Criminal by her Kindred, who ought to have protected her, and yet were the
first to condemn her. They nevertheless desired Timander to permit her to live
in his House, without allowing her liberty to converse with any, which he upon
that condition consented to; from that hour confining her, not in fear of her
being Courted, for he was not of a jealous Nature, only locked her up safe from
troubling his Divertisements; having done all this for no other end, but to
deliver himself from the clamours of report caused by the jealousy of his
Wife, which heretofore troubled him in all places.

After the patching up this Breach between Timander and his Wife, the Kindred
of this innocent unfortunate Person sought after Argantes to revenge the injury
he had offered to their Family; Timander also made search for him, but he was
not to be found, his Father having conveyed him away far into the Country, to
avoid these violent Pursuers, and great number of Enemies that threatened him.
Clidimira dyed with sorrow two or three years after, teaching all Wives (to her
cost) that they must never force their Husbands to be jealous; for Patience
abused turns into Fury, and the gentlest persons are the most difficult to
appease when once provoked to the height; and though they are a great while
silent to injuries, yet if once their anger break forth, it is most terrible
and fatal to those that provoke it, especially if it is inflamed by the sense
of honor.

And therefore who ever will be happy, let them not meddle with that dangerous
Serpent Jealousy, which though some have placed in the number of remedies, yet
it is worse then any Disease, and a Mortal danger to all those that have made
use of it, as experience has sufficiently proved in all Ages, as well as in
this Paper.

FINIS.

