A Description of BUDA, in its Ancient and Present State; With an Exact and
Complete Account of the SIEGE thereof: Began by the Duke of Lorrain, July 14.
1684, and Continued by him and the Elector of Bavaria, till November the First,
at which time the Siege was Raised.


BUDA, which was ever accounted the most considerable and important City in
Hungary, is by the Dutch called Offeir, and supposed by some Historians to be
the Curia of Ptolemy, but by others with more probability thought to be the
Abriueum of Amoninus, and to have received its name of Buda, either from Buda
the Brother of Mila by whom it is said to be rebuilt, or else from the Budini a
Scythian People mentioned in Herodotus. It is very pleasantly, though somewhat
unevenly situated amidst diverse Hills, in the pleasantest and most fruitful
part of all the Country, on the South side of the Danow. It is curiously
beautisied and adorned with many great and sumptuous Buildings, and Public
Edif^^^s, and exceedingly well fortified with a well built Wall, and a strong
Castle, supposed to be impregnable, and therefore continually watched by the
jealous Turks, with all imaginable care and diligence, lest it should be
surprised. It is furnished with several pleasant and medicinal Baths, which are
the greatest part of their present pomp and s^mptuousness to their new Masters
the Turks, who took it from the Christians May 20. 1591.

It was anciently the Metropolis of the Kingdom, and the Royal Seat of the
Kings of Hungary, and by that means was grown both populous and rich. But
Solomon the Magnificent, after he had conquered the Rhodians, seeing the
Christian Princes at variance among themselves, and that their discords grew to
a greater heat, he resolved to take the opportunity to enlarge his Dominion:
And therefore raising an Army of Two hundred thousand Horse and Foot, he fell
like a raging Tempest upon Hungary, subduing all before him, till he came
within sight of the Walls of Buda. When Lewis King of Hungary, who was young,
and unacquainted with the hazards of War, upon the persuasion of Tomoreus a
Friar, and a few other young rash Councillors, who aslured him of Victory,
adventured to issue out, and give him Battle, contrary to the Opinion of those
of more gravity, who dissuaded him from so rash and desperate an Attempt, but
was soon defeated with a miserable slaughter of his Men, and himself in his
flight, as he was passing over a Fenny Ditch, was overthrown by his Horses
falling backward, and smothered in the Mud. Most of the Hungarian Nobility were
slain in this Fight, and almost all the common Soldiers.

After which Victory Solomon had most of the strong Cities in Hungaria
delivered into his hands; who thereupon gave the Kingdom to Joannes Sepusius
Vayvod of Transylvania: But no sooner was he returned to Constantinople, and
John crowned, but Ferdinand King of Bohemia claimed the Kingdom, and being
aided by his Brother Charles the Fifth Emperor of Germany, entered into Hungary
with a great Army, and with little or no resistance took this strong City of
Buda. And then marching to the Castle of Tocai, where King John lay with his
Army, he gave him Battle, and after a bloody Fight obtained the Victory, and
forced John to save himself by flying into Poland.

John being now driven out of the Kingdom, Ferdinand caused himself to be
crowned King at Alba Regalis, the usual place for the Coronation of the
Hungarian Kings. And this Ferdinand being after the death of his Brother
Charles chosen Emperor, it has ever since remained as the Hereditary
Possession of all his Successors. But John storming at his being thus thrust
out of his Kingdom, mightily importuned Sigismond King of Poland to reinthrone
him; but not prevailing there, he applied himself to the Grand Signior, who had
at first advanced him to be King, entreating him now to aid him against
Ferdinand, and restore him again to his lost Dominion. Solomon thereupon
resolving to maintain the Crown upon the Head of this King of his making,
reentred Hungary with an huge Army, conquering all before him till he came to
Buda, which was as soon as he came before it, surrendered to him with little or
no resistance, together with the strong Castle, and has ever since remained in
the Turks possession.

And as it had ever been till this time the Royal Seat of the King of Hungary,
so has it ever since it was possessed by the Turks, been the Residence of
their chief Bassa; and has proved more prejudicial and injurious to the
Emperial Territories, than all the Turkish Garrisons in Hungary besides. But
the Grand Vizier being overthrown before Vienna, and forced to raise his Siege,
and retire back into Hungary, he was pursued thither by the King of Poland, and
the Imperial Forces. And after several defeats given to the Turks, the Duke of
Lorrain, with the Imperial Army, sat down before Buda on the 14th of July
1684. And on the 19th took the lower Town by Assault 2500 Janisaries and other
Turkish Soldiers being slain in the dispute. The next day the Duke attackt the
Fort of St. Gerard, which the Turks were forced to abandon, together with all
the Cannon that was in it.

After the abandoning of this Fort, the Duke being informed that an Enemy of
Turks that lay hovering about three Miles from Buda, under the Command of the
Serasquier Bassa, he resolved to remove them before he proceeded any further in
the Siege. Wherefore taking most of his Cavalry, and about 1000 Foot, he marched
with them all night, and came to their Camp about break of day, and fell upon
them with such courage and fierceness, that after a Fight of four hours he gave
them a total overthrow, forcing them to abandon their Camp, together with their
Infantry, Cannon and Baggage, four or five thousand Men being slain on the
place.

This Victory thus obtained, he begirt Buda more strictly than before,
whereupon the Turks made several desperate Sallies, wherein they pressed hard
upon the Christians who had the Guard of the Trenches, but were still beaten
back with great loss. In the mean time the Duke continued to batter the Town
with his Cannon and Bombs, and to spring several Mines wherewith he did great
Execution, and made a large Breach in the Wall, but there being no want of help
in the Town, in regard there were Eighteen or Nineteen thousand Men in
Garrison, they quickly made up the Breaches, and being resolved to hold out to
the last, made several Reintrenchments within the Wall. And the Serasquier
Bassa, who still hovered about Alba Regalis, made several Attempts to force
Count Leslies Camp, who lay with an Army at the Bridge of Iurannovitz on the
River Drove, to cover the Siege, but was always repulsed with loss.

The Bassa of Buda being slain, another of the Turkish Bassa's took that
command, and appeared more resolute in the defense of the Town than the former.
And when the Elector of Bavaria sent a Messenger into the Town to acquaint him
with his Arrival in the Camp, and that he was resolved not to stir from thence,
till he had reduced the Place to the obedience of his Imperial Majesty,
advising him to surrender in time, and not suffer things to come to extremity,
which if he did, he must then expect no quarter; he boldly answered, that he
very well understood the Rules of War, and therefore would not surrender the
Place so long as he had Men and Ammunition to defend it, and Provisions to
subsist on. Whereupon the Elector caused the Cannon to play hard, and a Mine to
be sprung on the side of the River, whereby he threw down a great part of the
Wall: But the Serasquier willing to gratify his Master with the Relief of
Buda, made another Attempt to Raise the Siege, but with as bad success as
formerly, being forced to retire under the Walls of Alba Regalis, and thinking
himself safe there, repassed the Bridge of Esseke only in this Attempt about
Five hundred Turks got into Buda.

But the Serasquier being again defeated, the Bavarians made a fierce Assault
upon a Tower of the Castle, toward the water side, which they mastered at
first, but being overpowered with numbers, were fore't to quit it again. And
the besieged continued to make a stout resistance, though they were reduced to
4000 Men, and were in great want of Provision. On the 14th they sallied forth
with such fury, that they forced the Bavarians from their Works, till
reinforced by other Troops, and in a Sally they made the next day, they took
away, and carried into the Town the Deal-boards, and other materials the
Christians made use of in mining, and with incredible pain still countermined
the Christians Works. And the Serasquier lying with his Army within five Miles
of Buda, hindered the Imperialists from forraging, whereupon the Duke of
Lorrain, with half the Horse and Dragoons, went to attack him, which the
Serasquier being informed of by his Spies, retired again to his usual place of
safety under the Walls of Alba Regalis.

But being at last reinforced with a fresh supply of Men, which increased his
Army to 40000. On the 23d of October. he drew toward the Christians Camp with
his whole Force, and four Pieces of Cannon, as though he were resolved to
attack them in their Trenches; whereupon a great Council of War was held among
the Christians, to debate whether they should go to meet the Enemy, or expect
them in their Camp, which was very well fortified, the latter whereof was
resolved on, only a small Body of Horse was sent out, who skirmished with some
of the foremost of the Turkish Troops, whereupon the subtle Turk, who designed
not to fight, but only to weary them out with frequent Alarms, retired. But the
next day the Besieged making a resolute Sally, wherein they endeavored to
ruin one of the Batteries that did most annoy them, killed Colonel Kimeg, who
commanded in the Trenches, and two Captains, and one Lieutenant, with about an
hundred more; he commanded the Bassa of Agria to attempt the Release of the
Town on the side of Pest, who having surprised and cut to pieces the few
Imperialists whom he found there, conveyed in eight Boats about 300 Janisaries,
and some Provisions into the Town which they entered with flying Colors, and
their accustomed Shouts which so encouraged the Besieged, who in all
probability could not without this Relief have held out many days longer; that
the next day they sallied forth again, and killed above an hundred of the
Christians, and ruined several of their Works.

But that which was more injurious to the Christians, and hindered their taking
the City, was the great Rains which fell in such abundance, that the Bavarians
Mines were so filled with Water, that they were forced to abandon them. And the
chief Mine on the Imperialists side having been long ready, was at length
discovered by the Besieged.

The Serasquier being encouraged by the Bassa of Agna's Success, and the Damage
he understood the weather had done in the Imperial Camp, sent out several
strong Detachments, one whereof surprised several of the Imperial Forragers,
took 500 Horse, and all the Baggage of the Regiment of the Count de Stirum;
another took about 100 Hungarians, who were going with Provisions to the Camp;
and a third endeavored to possess themselves of the heavy Baggage of the
Christians, which the two Generals had sent to Gran, but failed of their
Enterprise, which made the Christians, who began now to despair of taking the
City this Campaign, think of raising the Siege, which was resolved on in a
Council of War held on the 29th, their whole care being now to send away their
Cannon, and secure their Retreat, in regard they expected the Serasquier to
fall upon them.

Wherefore all the sick and wounded Men, with the Baggage and the loose
Retainers to the Camp being first sent away, the Cannon was drawn off from the
Batteries, and planted in the Isle of St. Andrews, for defense of the Troops in
their Retreat. And then the Cavalry being commanded to face the Enemy, whilst
the Foot marched off, the whole Army consisting of 30000 Men, passed the Danube
November the first on a Bridge of Boats, which they had kept there all the time
of the S^ege.

The whole Action was performed with so much prudence and caution, that they
lost not one Man in the Retreat; neither the Serasquier nor the Besieged daring
to attack them.

Some time before the Raising of the Siege, the Elector of Bavaria received a
Message from the Governor of Buda, wherein he acquainted him, that by his bold
and adventurous appearing in the Trenches and places of the greatest danger, he
had rendered himself very well known to his Soldiers, for which reason he
advised him to take greater care of his person, in regard his Cannon knew no
respect of persons.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for T. M. and sold by Will. Benbridge in Huggins-Alley in
Woodstreet, 1685.


