THE DEPUTIES Of the REPUBLIC of AMSTERDAM TO THE States of Holland Convicted
of High Treason, Written and Proved By the Minister of State.

According to a true Copy Printed at the HAGVE 1684.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall, 1684.

The DEPUTIES of the Republic of AMSTERDAM to the States of HOLLAND Convicted
of High Treason.
SIR,
WHereas you desire to be informed of me in some measure of what passed in the
Assembly of the Lords the States on the 16th of Feb. last, concerning which in
this our Country so much noise has been made, and whereof the Lords the
Burgomasters and Regents of the City of Amsterdam so much complain; I do
presume to think my self able to give you, and all that think themselves
concerned in the true representation of that affair, the following information,
whereof all those will be able to judge who for any time since have been
present at the said Assembly; which is this.

The Marquess de Grana having sent to his Highness the P. of Orange a Letter
written by the Count D'avaux, Extraordinary Ambassador from the K. of France
to this State, on the 19th of January last to the King his Master, part in
Cifer and part in plain writing, with a Copy of what was cifered, and besides 3
other Letters; which Letter of the said Count D'avaux with the extracts of the
aforesaid 3 particular Letters as much as concerned public Affairs are already
Printed and made public: His Highness considered for some days what he should
do with the said Letters, for that the matter therein contained was of great
importance, and that the State was much concerned to be informed of the
correspondence therein mentioned, and that therefore they ought not to be kept
secret, the more for that some time since, and especially about the time of the
writing of the said Letter, great muttering was among the respective Members in
the Assembly of the States against the City of Amsterdam concerning the
correspondence which the Deputies of that City had with foreign Ministers
without imparting the same to the States, and from whose communication the said
deputed Lords used many discourses in the Assembly of the said States, which
upon enquiry were found false. His Highness thought it therefore best at first
not to concern Justice therewith but immediately to acquaint the Lords
therewith, and to leave it to their wisedoms to act therein, that it might not
be said that his Highness had either done therein too much or too little (as he
notwithstanding all his faithfulness and moderation showed on all occasions,
but chiefly when the Government was almost in the uttermost confusion, was
charged with many forged calumnies chiefly in the said City of Amsterdam) and
accordingly on the 16th of this present Month, being present at the meeting of
their Lordships, he acquainted them that he had somewhat to communicate to them
of the highest importance, with desire that the Members of that Assembly would
appoint that the Doors of their Meeting place might be shut; viz. those of
going out of the house, that so by the going out and in of any of their Members
the matter might not be divulged; that any one desiring might be admitted in,
but that none should be suffered to go forth without leave of their Lordships;
whereupon none of the Members replying or moving ought to consideration, the
Lord Pensioner of Holland rung the Bell to call in one of the Door-keepers, and
told him, It was the order of the Lords the States that he should shut the
Doors of their Assembly place and withdrawing chambers thereto adjoining, and
admit entrance to any desiring it, but to let none out without order of their
Lordships, none of the Members of the Assembly contradicting the order, or
moving ought to the contrary. Then his Highness proceeded saying, that what he
had to communicate concerned in some manner as therein named the persons of the
Lords Hooft, Hop, old Schepens, and Councellor and Pensionary of the City of
Amsterdam; wherefore his Highness desired that the said Lords would retire into
the withdrawing room of the States, whereupon the said Pensioner Hop having
first spoken to the Lord of Marsse Veen Burgomaster of the said City, and
deputed by the said City to the Assembly; the said two Lords Hooft and Hop
without alleging ought to consideration, or that ought was moved by the Lords
Deputies of the said City of Amsterdam or of any of the other Cities, retired
into the withdrawing room, whereupon his Highness disclosed the matter to the
Lords the States in the Assembly, namely, that he had received these Letters
and the original Letter partly in Cifer and partly in plain writing with the
uncifering thereof, and gave the 3 Letters into the hands of the Lord Pensioner
of Holland who read the same, then his Highness declared he had now performed
his duty as Governor, leaving the full liberty and disposal thereof to their
Lordships to act therein as they should judge necessary for the service of
their Country. The Lords rising from their Table to deliberate what might be
the effect of this overture, and the other Members also preparing to advise,
the said Lords Hooft and Hop without order and consent of the Assembly entered
in again, and said they ought to be present when they were to deliberate on the
said matter, whereupon many Debates were occasioned among the Members of the
Assembly, some alleging they ought to absent, and all the other Lords, except
those of Amsterdam, desired them at least in discretion to absent; whereto the
said Lords of Amsterdam would in no wise yield, so that the other Lords to
cause therein no commotion, and being resolved to give no other advice in the
said matter, but what they should judge to consist with all Justice and Equity
and the service of their Country, resolved to proceed, although the two
aforesaid Lords were present, and so insisted no longer on their retirement;
notwithstanding those Members who were for the retirement of the said Lords
Hooft and Hop, expressly declared that according to the custom of all such
Assemblies, and especially according to the most ancient custom and resolution
of their Assembly, the retirement of the said Hooft and Hop ought not to be
left to their discretion, but that they ought to be regulated by the foresaid
resolution and custom; whereupon the other Members having proceeded to give
their sentiments, they all concluded to give knowledge of this discovery to the
Lords the Burgomasters and Commoncouncil their principals and that all the
Papers which were in the Closets of the Lords of Amsterdam, or in the Chamber
of the said Lord Pensioner Hop should by some of the Assembly thereto deputed,
be sealed up and left in the custody of the said Lord of Marsse Veen, and the
sealing of them up should be done by the Lords Vander Gaes, and Boert
Burgomaster and Pensioner respective of the Cities of Delft and Alkmar and the
Lord Secretary Van Beamant, and that to the sealing thereof they should use
their own particular seals. And all the Members and particularly also the Lords
deputed of the said City of Amsterdam undertook to give cognizance of the
discovery and Letters to their Principals the Burgomasters and Common Council
of their said Cities, but of the sealing up those Papers only to the Lords
Burgomasters all under the same Oath of Secrecy; excepting that the Lords
deputed of the City of Amsterdam, since this Sealing up of these Papers chiefly
concerned them, should communicate the same also to their Common council, so
that nothing else was debated in the said Assembly, but what concerned the
discovery made by his Highness, and the absence or presence of the said Lords
Hooft and Hop during the Debate on the said discovery, the sealing and securing
their Papers, and the said resolution of Secrecy.

I leave it to your wise and serious judgment if any who is but any thing
impartial could or ought to have otherwise managed an affair of so great
importance and of so fair a prospect as the contents of the said Letters, and
if any thing has been amiss, it might in truth be said to have been rather by
too great moderation than rigor.

But whether or no the Lords the Burgomasters and Common Council of the City of
Amsterdam, whose Deputies had undertaken to keep the matter secret and not to
disclose the same unto their said Burgomasters and Commoncouncil, but under a
like Oath of Secrecy have regulated themselves according to those promises
when they by their Letters communicated the same to the Burgomasters and
Governors of the other Cities, and permitted, atleast connived the publishing
the same by their City Printer.

But that I may give the better information herein, It will be needful to
consider what it properly is that the Lords the Burgomasters and Governors of
the City of Amsterdam complain of in relation to that Letter; and that is,
First concerning the shutting of the Doors, Secondly, concerning the
withdrawing of the said Lords Hooft and Hop, and Thirdly concerning the sealing
up of their Papers. Concerning the first it is sufficiently known to be the
custom, that when their Lordships in their Assembly have been in debate
concerning a matter of great import, that they have caused the doors of their
Assembly place to be shut, and prohibited the going forth of any without
knowledge of their Lordships; the examples of which are so known, that all
those who have frequented that Assembly for some years since cannot be ignorant
of, so that the said Lords and Commoncouncil have no cause to complain thereof
as a matter extraordinary and unheard of; and that the Pensionary Councellor of
Holland should alone have given order concerning the same, without first
putting the question round to all the Members of the Assembly, is wrongly
mentioned; for his Highness had openly desired it of all the Members present,
that for the importance of the business, and for that many of the Members did
often use to go out and come in, that therefore the doors of the said place
might be shut; and that no man contradicted that matter, or urged any the least
consideration against the so doing. It was therefore the place of the Lord
Pensionary Councellor to signify unto those who in the Assembly are concerned,
the pleasure of the Lords the States, and accordingly the Doorkeepers being
called in, he told them the resolution of the States to have the doors shut,
which he did not privately but in the hearing of the whole Assembly, without
opposition, contradiction or appearance thereof by any; and since I cannot
perceive wherein he the said Lord Pensionary Councellor has done ill or
against the orders of our Country, notwithstanding that period might easily
admit such an interpretation, as if he had designed to himself an unjust and
illegal power; I must therefore believe that the same is rather pretended out
of animosity than reason, the rather for that in the same Letter it is
insinuated by a repetition to have been the sole duty of the Lord Pensionary
Councellor, especially when you shall please to call to mind that in matters of
much greater import than is that of shutting and opening the Doors of the
Assembly place, the said Councellor Pensionary has been used oftentimes to
take the resolution of the Assembly as concluded, without moving the question
round to every particular Member, when none of the Members have objected any
thing against what was moved. As to the second point concerning the presence or
absence of the Lords Hooft and Hop during the opening and debate on the
aforesaid Letter, I desire you will consider that it is not only used in all
Collegiate Assemblies that those on whose matters the debate is, when they are
Members of the same Assembly, should absent themselves during the said Debate,
to leave unto the rest a freedom in debate of the said matter, to give their
sentiments free and undisturbed; and that also the instructions of most
Collegiate Assemblies are to that end directed, and that it has also been a
very ancient custom in the assembly of the Lords the States that not only
those in whose matters particular debates and resolutions are to be had, are to
absent themselves from that Assembly, but that also the absence has been
commanded of those that were their nighest relations, notwithstanding their
quality in that present Assembly; yea that even the Lords deputed to that
Assembly by the single notice given by the then Lord Councellor Pensionary of
Holland are accustomed to absent when in the Assembly any debates were to be
had concerning the Cities from whence they were deputed; yea also in such an
occasion when all the members of the said Assembly having on the matter in
debate brought in the advice of the Lords their Principals, and should advise
not according to their own judgment as on accidental causes, but even when they
alone are to deliver the charge of the Lords their Principals in which the
presence of such Members could make no change, yea, that the deputed Lords of
such Cities desiring not to be absent out of the Assembly that they might only
hear the Lords Principals of the other Members; notwithstanding they have been
necessitated to obey the orders given them to absent, although it were but by
the plurality of the Votes of the other Members, and that several of the other
Members declared themselves free to utter their minds in presence of those
Members which were ordered to absent. The Assembly of their Lordships have
judged it necessary in matters of the least importance, and therefore as an
express resolution have caused it to be registered, viz. that each one
concerning whom as to the distribution of any Office or place, it was
deliberated, that during that deliberation he should be absent, to leave them
free to their deliberation. It is true that the Lord Marsveen Burgomaster of
the said City and deputed to the Assembly, protested to be ignorant of all the
correspondencies mentioned in that Letter; and that the Lord old Burgomaster
Van Opmeer had said that the said Lords Hooft and Hop had done nothing without
order, but it is also true that that Order could not qualify the said Lords
Hooft and Hop during the said deliberation to be present in the Assembly, since
by reason and very ancient custom in such a case all those who had
participated in the same matter, yea also all the Lords deputed of that City
ought to have absented themselves if the Lords the Members of the Assembly had
insisted thereon.

But it is said the Lords Hooft and Hop were not particularly named in the said
Letter of the Count D'Avaux, none but the Lords of Amsterdam being therein
expressed, and when the Lord Councellor Pensionary said to them that on the day
of the writing of the said Letter they had been at the house of the said
Ambassador, they proved they were then elsewhere. It were in truth to be
wished, that when they would make known matters of that nature to Members of
the Government for their discharge, they should then declare the truth thereof
without any coloring; it is true that the said Lords Hooft and Hop are not
mentioned in the said Letter by name, and that therein is only expressed
Messieurs D'Amsterdam the Lords of Amsterdam, but it is also true that what in
the Letter of the said Ambassador is mentioned must have been transacted by
these Lords of Amsterdam, who had spoke with the said Lord Ambassador of
France; since those who had not spoken with the said Ambassador, by the name
of Messieurs d'Amsterdam, the Lords of Amsterdam, who had told him thus, as is
expressed in the Letter, could not be comprehended. Now it is true and
acknowledged as well by the Lords of Amsterdam as by the Lords Hooft and Hop,
that the same Lords Hooft and Hop were the same who had spoken with the Lord
Ambassador, and I know none that shall justly judge, but will find a
difference therein, whether the said Lord Ambassador in the aforesaid Letter
should have named the said Lords Hooft and Hop, or that he should say the Lords
of Amsterdam, had told me thus, when it must be construed from the
acknowledgment of the said Lords, that the said Lords Hooft and Hop were the
same who at that time were with him and spoke with him without being able to
name any others, and although it be true that the said Lords Hooft and Hop when
the Lord Pensionary Councellor asked them if on the Sunday when the Letter was
written they had not been at his house, they answered in the Negative, and
could prove themselves to have been elsewhere; but it is also true the said
Lord Pensionary was mistaken in the day, and that the said Lords acknowledged
to have been the day before, namely, Saturday, with the said Lord Ambassador,
and spoke to him as he expressly has mentioned it in the said Letter, and I
leave it to your judgment whether in this they proceeded with the required
sincerity when they carp at the mis-expression of the day, when the truth of
their speaking to the Ambassador and the time thereof and their own confession
may consist together. When now the resolution of the Lords the States and the
practice thereon succeeding expressly infer that those whose affair was in
deliberation before the Assembly ought to absent during those deliberations,
and that by the confession as well of the Lords of Amsterdam as of the said
Lords Hooft and Hop it appears that they are the same who had spoke with the
said Ambassador, and that it is therefore their case that is in debate; and
that the said Lords took the power to be present notwithstanding many of the
Members were of judgment that they should conform to the aforesaid resolution
and practice; and I judge that all impartial men will adjudge that act of
theirs in thus staying in the Assembly a very great disrespect showed to their
Sovereign Power there lawfully assembled, and informing themselves and debating
concerning actions not only in themselves unlawful, but also in the highest
punishable, and said by them to have been acted. And that the other Members of
their Lordships assembly had great reason to complain of them and to resent the
wrong done them by the Lords of Amsterdam depending on their own authority as
if they were not tied to the foresaid resolutions nor any practice ensuing
thereon.

Concerning the third point, to wit the sealing up of the aforesaid Papers, the
aforesaid Lords Burgomasters and Common Council of Amsterdam have as little
reason to complain as they have concerning the shutting of the doors
beforementioned; or the required absence of the Lords. Hooft and Hop, but that
this may the better appear we must of necessity touch somewhat nearer the
matter giving occasion to that resolution of theirs for Sealing up the foresaid
Papers, which was this; that their Lordships perceived out of the forementioned
Letter of the said Ambassador that what was written was not to a private
friend to whom a man might write his sentiment as he pleased, but that it was
writ to the King his Master to whom he was obliged to give an exact account of
all his negotiations, and whom he ought not nor could abuse, and writ to him of
several matters, concerning which he said to have treated with the Lords of
Amsterdam, and that he judged them of such importance that to the end the King
his Master might also be informed thereof, he sent that Letter with an express
Post by one of his own domestics; so that what is charged on the Lords of
Amsterdam was not founded on a supposition or on the saying of a third person,
but on the Letter of an Ambassador writ to his King, to whom he is obliged to
give an account of all his Negotiations, and not of that which was related to
him by a third person, or what he learned accidentally, but of something that
himself in person had treated with the said Lords of Amsterdam also in person,
and whereon he expected farther order in answer from the said King his Master.
I need not, Sir, acquaint you with the duty of an Ambassador as well known
unto your self as to any other, for although the Character given them which
they may make use of, in not dealing too strictly just with those to whom they
are sent, they are not by common reason therefore dispensed from giving to
their Principals an exact true and faithful account to the utmost of their
power, of all their transactions and intelligence gained, especially in the
most essential parts thereof. And therefore that the Count D'Avaux who has so
many years performed the function of an Ambassador, and that with so general
approbation of all men, who if I may so say has been educated under the
tuition of the late Count D'Avaux, who has gained the repute throughout the
World to have been one of the greatest Masters in matters of Negotiations and
Treaties, and who fully understood the duty of an Ambassador as is manifest by
the Negotiations he has treated. That he could fail in one of the most
essential duties of an Ambassador, viz. the giving of a true and exact account
to the King his Master of that which himself had treated about, and that
therein he would abuse him, even such a King who so well knows to make
himself obeyed by those that serve him, or to punish the least failure therein,
will by none be consented to who is not prejudiced. And this is also herein
confirmed, that the Lords of Amsterdam had with the same Lord Ambassador such
a familiar converse, that the other Members of the Assembly were ever therewith
offended; and that the said Lords of Amsterdam were admonished to quit or
moderate that so offending communication by the other Members before the
Assembly was met and ready to deliberate; and when several of the Members stood
discoursing together, and at the end of their debates had quitted their places,
even then the Lord Councellor Pensionary Hop with a great confidence, and to a
farther discontent of very many Members, answered, that they understood their
liberty to go so often to the Lord Ambassador as they should think fit; yea,
and that with so much greater confidence he expressed himself, that the said
Lords deputed of Amsterdam had inserted some things in their advices, which the
Minister of the King of Great Britain should have said; and his Highness being
informed by the said Minister of England, that what was alleged was untruth,
and having thereof given notice to the Assembly of the Lords the States, with
complaint concerning the conduct of those of Amsterdam. At the same time, and
on the deliberation for a farther prohibition of communication with Foreign
Ministers concerning affairs of the State, The said Lords Deputies in the
Assembly in their turn expressing their sense by the mouth of the said Lord
Pensionary Hop, in a braving manner declared they were resolved not to cease
that communication, and that they would yet that Afternoon speak with the Lord
Ambassador of France, that the said Lord Ambassador gave them thereto
encouragement, that he had spoke to them on Christmas Eve of some matters
concerning the Trade for St. Vallery, and that on occasion of these particular
matters he sometimes intermingled some State Affairs, but that thereof they had
given an account to the Lords their Principals, that they also had been at
Delft to confer with them, that they were convinced of their endeavors to the
welfare of the Republic, and therefore were not obliged to reflect on the
jealousy of the Members; but not in all this touching one word concerning the
matters relating to the Commonwealth, whereof was treated between them and the
said Lord Ambassador; and that the said Lords of Amsterdam farther
acknowledged that the said Lords Hooft and Hop had been with the Ambassador
the day before the writing of that Letter; add thereto that several matters
mentioned in the same Letter that the said Lords of Amsterdam should have done,
were also in truth by them effected, as I shall hereafter more at large
demonstrate, and that so many circumstances concurred with the said fact as
seldom can be brought together to make clearly out the truth of a matter
treated of between a few persons. What the contents of the said Letter were,
you may collect out of the Printed Letter of the Count D'Avaux, and I would not
have made farther mention thereof if I had not thought it needful for your
better information to explain the contents thereof somewhat more particularly.

Sir, you may remember with what immoderate zeal the Lords of Amsterdam have
endeavored to oblige the other Members under pretext of Counsel to force the
King of Spain to accept of one of the Equivalents expressed in the memorial of
the Count D'Avaux of the Fifth of November last, you will possibly also know at
least many Lords who frequent the Assemblies of the Lords the States, have at
several times heard that when the poor Inhabitants of the Spanish Netherlands
were bewailed, and that men even stood amazed at the desolations which the
hard, Unchristian, yea Inhumane procedures of the French effected; that it has
often been said by some of those Lords, that the Spaniards must be thereby
forced to give satisfaction to the King of France; that it was a punishment
which the Spaniards must suffer for not resolving to comply with the will of
the King of France, and many other like discourses you may remember, also how
often they have desired that Debates should be had on the said memorial of the
Fifth of November, how often they have obliged the Members to confer with their
Principals concerning the same after they had already by formal resolutions in
their Councils taken several times declared that Spain must accept one of the
Equivalents, and that therefore they could no more confer with their
Fellow Members on the same subject; what particular endeavors the Lords of
Amsterdam have used now with the one, then with the other Member, yea so much
that the other Members have been offended thereat, with what earnestness they
have opposed the Levy of the Sixteen thousand Men, notwithstanding all the
other Members of their Lordships Assembly consented thereto, and which they
judged so highly necessary for defense of this State, and that without it this
State even without any consideration of assistence to Spain was exposed to the
greatest danger, and when they herein effected nothing, they then addressed
themselves to the Lords deputed in the Generality from the other Provinces, and
particularly also to the Lords deputed from the Province of Friesland and the
Cities and Countries. The contents then of the Letter is, first, that the Lords
of Amsterdam had complained to him the Lord Ambassador that by their single
Authority they could not effect that the States might deliberate on the
measures which they had to take in case Spain before the end of January
concluded not an accommodation with France, that he the Lord Ambassador could
present no Memorial concerning the same, and by that means bring the matter to
be deliberated notwithstanding their earnest desire of him to that method; they
had together considered of all the expedients which might supply the effect of
Memorial; that the Lords of Amsterdam had thereupon proposed to him, that he
would permit them, that by their means a conference might be had with him by
some deputed out of the States General, and that in that conference a friend of
the City of Amsterdam, who was one of the Deputies of Holland, should desire of
the Lord Ambassador an explanation of what might happen, if before the end of
January Spain did not accept one of the Proposals made by France, upon which he
would find sufficient matter to bring it to a deliberation among the States
General; to which he had consented; that immediately thereon those Lords of
Amsterdam had spoken with some of the Lords deputed to the Generality, most of
his Highness's party, to have a conference concerning the taking of the Ship La
Regle (otherwise named the Terms of Amsterdam which the French had taken before
the Road of Alicant from under the protection of the Flag of this State, under
pretense that it was an Algerine Ship) That those deputed Lords were glad to
hear the complaints of Amsterdam against France, but there were others more
foreseeing wherein that expedient failed them; it was truth, and the Lords of
Amsterdam have been necessitated to acknowledge it, that among others they had
spoken with one Lord deputed to the Generality from the Province of Guelderland
to bring that conference about, and it is also true that endeavors have been
used for such a conference, and that the holding of that conference has been
declined, not that it was suspected; for as yet there was no such suspicion of
the Lords of Amsterdam, but only for that they did not yet know wherefore a
complaint should be made to the Lord Ambassador, since the remedy on the
complaint was to be sought not here but in France; and that in France we had an
Ambassador who might there move the said complaints and prosecute the same
remedy, so that that intreague which the said Lord Ambassador in the foresaid
Letter said, that the said Lords of Amsterdam had continued with him to bring
the States General to deliberate concerning the aforesaid measures, was in
truth a business contrived by the Lords of Amsterdam, and which they also
confessed and avowed.

The Second matter contained in the Letter was, that the aforesaid first
expedient failing, the Lords of Amsterdam would make use of another means,
which by their vigilance succeeded in place of the first, which was on occasion
of a complement of congratulation which the Lords the States General had to
make unto him the Lord Ambassador on the Birth of the Lord Duke of Anjou, and
that they the said Lords of Amsterdam had informed the Lords deputed from the
Province of Friesland City and Country of the whole matter, and had obliged
the said Lords to speak to him on the same manner as the deputed from Amsterdam
should have spoken to him if the deputation had been complete. The Lords of
Amsterdam also must acknowledge that they had given notice of the design to the
Deputies of the Province of Friesland City and Country, viz. under pretense of
that conference to speak of the foresaid measures they were to take in case
Spain should decline the acceptance of any of the Equivalents before the end of
January.

I cannot also conceal from you that I suppose my self to be sufficiently
informed that the day before the said complement of congratulation was to have
been made, some Members of Holland came to the Councellor Pensionary of
Holland, and asked him if the Lords appointed to perform that complement should
propose any other matters than the said complement, saying, that they were
informed, that under pretense thereof they were to speak of other matters.

It Is also true what the said Letter also mentions, that after the
performance of that complement there was spoken also concerning the taking the
aforesaid measures, and what further is mentioned concerning the same in the
foresaid Letter, excepting only that in the Letter is contained that the Lords
the Deputies of Friesland City and Country did first begin the discourse
concerning the taking the foresaid measures, and that the deputed Lords who
made that complement say, that the discourse was first mentioned by the said
Lord Ambassador of France, and that after they were all risen in order to
depart.

In the foresaid Letter it follows that the Lords of Amsterdam about an hour
after came to speak with the said Lord Ambassador, informing him of the
endeavors which by them had been used; as also that in the Generality no
deliberation was had concerning any matter, concerning which no Memorial had
been presented. And the Lords of Amsterdam have been necessitated to
acknowledge that at the same time they had been at the house of the said
Ambassador, and acquainted him that in the Generality there was no
deliberation upon any matters not contained in a Memorial.

The said Lord Ambassador adds further that the said Lords of Amsterdam had
moreover said, that when a Minister spoke with Deputies, those Deputies then
resolved together, whether what was said to them should be proposed as a point
of deliberation, and that they had the promise of Friesland City and Country
that they would be of advice, that thereof should be made a point of
deliberation, and would therein also vote with the Lord deputed from Holland in
case those in fear of his Highness should be of another sentiment; and that
those of Amsterdam said, that notwithstanding all precautions they durst not
assure themselves that thereof would be made a point of deliberation. And, Sir,
you know that the Here* of Werckendam who had performed the aforesaid
complement of congratulation, having communicated to the Lord Councellor
Pensionary of Holland what the said Lord Ambassador in the said conference had
said concerning the taking of the aforesaid measures; the said Here of
Werckendam and Lord Councellor Pensionary were of advice that what in the
aforesaid conference was moved, must also be reported in the Assembly of the
States. And you also may remember that the Lord deputed from the City and
Country, and the Lord deputed from Friesland, which had been present at the
said conference, being then absent from the Hague, used very earnest endeavors
to the end that the same might be made a matter of debate by the deputies of
the States, and that the Councellor Pensionary of Holland had insisted that the
received and confirmed custom of their Highnesses Assembly must herein also be
observed, and that to that effect the Lord Ambassador must first present
thereof a Memorial, that in an orderly manner it might be known what in the
aforesaid Conference happened, and what the true meaning was of the King of
France, from which those deputed Lords who assisted at that Conference somewhat
differed. It was also in the end resolved, that the said Ambassador should be
informed that in case he judged it needful thereon to take a resolution, that
he would then without difficulty present the foresaid Memorial, so that the
contents of the said Letter in that matter agreed evidently with the truth.

The said Ambassador writes further, that the said Lords of Amsterdam had
said that they desired the presentation of that Memorial, not so much for to
have a deliberation thereon in the Generality as to make appear the good
intention of his Master for this State, and that the knowledge they had thereof
had already wrought considerable effects, and that they hoped yet more thereof
when that should be spread abroad.

That they had alleged to him, that not to express the matter too plain, and
that it might appear that that proposition was made to no other end, but to the
advantage of the States General, that some allays might be found; as that he
the Lord Ambassador had observed from several of the Members of State the fear
they had of his Majesty's Arms, if Spain assented not before the end of
January, that therefore his Majesty had ordered him the said Lord Ambassador
to make known to their Highnesses, that if they remained in the State wherein
they were, and hindered that the Troops they had sent the Spaniards should not
further act than in defense of the Spanish places; his Majesty to free the
States General from that fear, would promise them to attack no places, and to
cause his Forces to act elsewhere, and content himself to force the Spanish
Netherlands by quartering of his Troops on them, and the exacting of
Contributions; and what concerned the security which his Majesty desired, that
no new Levies should be made, that those were matters that might best be by
Verbal expressions, but not mentioned in the Memorial, that thereby the
intrinsic of Government should not be touched, but that it would be sufficient
to say that they should remain in the State wherein they were, and that also
otherwise when they agreed concerning the rest, they would then rather think on
discharging of those already raised, than of raising any new Troops.

That the Lords of Amsterdam had very earnestly pressed him to obtain that
permission of his Majesty, and that they did all what was possible thereby to
cause that matter to take effect, that they had assured him that every day they
gained one or other City to their judgment, and that they had gained one of the
principallest; that they wrought hard to bring the Spaniards to an
accommodation, and if that could not be effected, that they must then take the
aforesaid means in hand to maintain the Peace in the Spanish Netherlands, and
that they hoped that the Provinces of Friesland City and Country would agree
to their Sentiments, and that they had desired him to speak with their Deputies
to confirm them the more. So that the Lord Ambassador could assure his Majesty
that the Lords of Amsterdam did do all that was in their power, and that they
agitated with the other Cities with an incredible zeal and application, and
that he could not omit to acquaint his Majesty that some Members of the State
had made difficulty to agree that his Majesty should execute upon the Spanish
open Countries, for that it was impossible that these Provinces could maintain
themselves, when* they should not know from whence to find subsistence, and
that so indirectly the whole Barrier should be taken away*

Now to consider whether there be truth in what the Lord Ambassador has
written in this matter, you will no doubt remember that the Lords* of Amsterdam
in particular discourses they had with the Members of the Assembly before they
had orderly taken their seats, as also when the same Members were risen after
the conclusion, and demitting of the Assembly they had now and then spoken much
of expedients that ought to be taken to keep the War out of the Spanish
Netherlands in case the Spaniards should accept none of the French Postulata,
or accommodate themselves with France; that they also endeavored particularly
to inform themselves of his Highness, whether the Militia of this State in the
Spanish Netherlands had any other order but only to defend the Cities, and
that some of them as herebefore I have said, had named the foresaid procedures
by the French in the Spanish Netherlands, a chastisement which Spain had well
deserved, and a remedy whereby the King of Spain would be obliged to submit to
the Will of the King of France, and thereby it may be deduced that it is easily
to be believed that those propositions issued from those who were possessed
with such an ill will against Spain, and so great a good will for France, that
all those horrid actions committed in the foresaid Netherlands were only
palliated with the names of chastisements, and looked on as remedies to force
Spain to agree to the Will of France; and you are not ignorant how often they
in the Assembly of the States by their public advices have said that they must
necessitate Spain to yield to one of the French Postulata. And that they have
more and more explained themselves that they thereby understood that in
relation thereto means must be used to constrain them and make them sensible.

That it is also true that the Lords of Amsterdam have desired that that which
France had to propose might be public to all the World, thereby to gain their
advantage on those who were ignorant, may hereby appear; that when in the
Assembly of Holland they had deliberated on the means of Secrecy which should
be observed in the Treaties set on foot with the Allies concerning the means of
an accommodation, the Lords of Amsterdam had openly said, that they would not
consent therein, because they would be over-voted by all the other dissenting
Members in the negotiation of that affair, that in that same matter they might
not make any notes nor relate to others what passed therein, and that therefore
they rather would the same should pass through a number of above 400 persons
than pass through a few; out of which, according to my judgment nothing else is
to be concluded, but that the Lords of Amsterdam finding themselves in their
opinion singular, and that all the other Members meeting in the Assembly much
blamed their conduct, though that by those who did not there appear, but daily
heard and saw what was there deliberated on, and who could not so well be
informed of all things as the others, they would reap more benefit by an
abusive information given them; and to raise an agitation in the minds of the
Regents and other inhabitants under that pleasing pretense of Peace and Freedom
from extraordinary Taxes, and that they could not so well serve themselves
thereof when they must only speak to those who were as well informed of these
matters as themselves, and could on all occasions undeniably convince them of
their abuses and wrong propositions. For that the Allegation which they made,
that this negotiation was of that importance, that the whole Government ought
to have cognizance thereof, was but a pretense, will not only appear that the
business wherein the foresaid Secrecy should have been used, should have only
been preparatory, and not that the Lords thereto appointed should have
concluded ought finally without the States of the respective Provinces, or
those who should be thereunto by them authorized after a full account of what
in that affair had passed, and with full and considerate deliberation should
have resolved and determined what they should have judged to consist with the
service of the Republic; which design and intention of theirs appears
undeniably, that they themselves proposed that when the other Members would
conform to their sentiments, and would join with them for the furtherance of a
peace, they by writing declared to consent to leave the direction thereof to a
very few persons, so that no importance in the negotiation, public or secret
direction and ordering concerning the furthering thereof, comes in
consideration, but only whether the other Members will agree to the sentiments
of the Lords of Amsterdam, and then all may pass, but when that cannot be
assented to, although all the other Members agree in one sentiment, nothing
must pass how rational soever it be, and on whatsoever foregoing examples and
practice it may be founded; and concerning the earnestness and endeavors they
have used with the other Cities, I need not mention they being so known that
the Lords of Amsterdam could not deny it; also neither the earnestness and
endeavors they used with the Lord Deputies of the Provinces of Friesland and
City and County: You also well know that hitherto the Lords of Amsterdam have
not consented to the ordinary and extraordinary State of War, that they might
make it appear that it was true which they had promised the said Lord
Ambassador, that if all things succeeded to their mind, it would rather be
endeavored to discharge, than to raise, new Forces, and that when some of the
Members of the Assembly about that time spoke with the Lord Pensionary
Councellor of Holland concerning the Declaration which the King of France
should make to attack no Cities, but only to execute upon the open Country
till they should be agreed about a Peace between the two Crowns; the said Lord
Pensionary Councellor should have asked these Members how and from whence those
Cities should be thus supplied when the open Country was thus ruined, for that
it was clear these Cities could not subsist without the open Country, and so
must of themselves fall into the hands of the King of France.

What farther is contained in the said Letter concerning the designed Levy, and
the opposition of the Lords of Amsterdam against it; It also is true and known,
that to hinder the same, the Lords of Amsterdam have used all possible
endeavors, that I need to speak no farther thereof, but I could never have
thought that they had done it, induced by the good intentions the King of
France declared to have toward them, and strengthened by the means which were
propounded to them, if the said Lord Ambassador had not so plainly expressed
the same in the said Letter; and I am the more convinced of the truth of the
whole contents of the Letter when I remark, first that the Lords of Amsterdam
had often asked from whence those Solicitours would get money, when the raising
of the Forces would be begun without their consent, and that they in the
Assembly of the States have by proposition asked who should bear the charges of
the foresaid Levy, when they consented not therein; and secondly, that it is
true that the Here Van Haren extraordinary Ambassador of this State to the
Court of Sweden, then being here in the Hague, and speaking with his Highness
concerning the necessity of the said Levies, and complaining that the
deliberations concerning the same, proceeded so slowly, and that the opposition
of the Lords of Amsterdam against the said Levy much hindered the consent of the
other Provinces; whereupon his Highness answered, that he hoped that the
Members in Holland would make an end thereof, and in few days bring it to a
conclusion if possible, with assent, if not without the assent of Amsterdam,
since the Country must not be deprived of their defense for obstinateness of
one Member; and lastly concerning that the said Ambassador writes, viz. that
he as yet desired not to know of his Majesty what security he should demand of
the Lords of Amsterdam in case they could not move the States to consent to
those things his Majesty desired of them, because he knew not what therein his
Majesty's intentions might be, that he the Lord Ambassador could only say,
that the Lords of Amsterdam had thereupon not yet explained themselves to him,
and that they had expressly said to him, that they were remedies to which no
recourse ought to be had but in the utmost extremity, that they would not speak
to him concerning the same, till they had lost all hope to give to his Majesty
by the States that security which ought to be given him, which they yet
imagined to be able to effect, and though I readily yield that to be very
hardly believed, that the Lords of Amsterdam should be able to arrive to such
an extravagancy, yet I must confess I ought not to doubt thereof, when I
consider not only the discourses which the said Members at this time often
have maintained, namely, that if they were not consented to, that they then
must consider their own security; yea, that they also so far expressed themselves
that when the other Members required that the matter of the Levy should be
brought to a conclusion, that they in their turn giving in their advice in the
Assembly of the States publicly had dared to say, that they understood not to
remain in a Society wherein they enjoyed not the right of that Society, not
considering that the Body of the Sovereignty of Holland and West-Friesland was
not brought together as particular Members united by special contract, as the
union of Vtrecht brought the several Provinces together, but in a manner, of
which no particular account can be given, only that in the old Histories it is
said, that the City of Amsterdam in its beginning was under the power and
direction of particular Lords, who were also at that time Subjects to the Earls
of Holland; whereas the ancient Histories mention not that several other Cities
were under the like subjection to other Lords also subject, but immediately
under the Earls of Holland, and have thus immediately from the beginning
composed the Body of the States, whereas the City of Amsterdam could not enjoy
that honor during they were under those particular subject Lords; besides that
every one must think it strange that the Lords of Amsterdam complaining that
the said Levy was concluded without their consent, and would say that the right
of the Society was not yielded them, whereas the Body of the Sovereignty of
Holland and West-Friesland being obliged for the conservation of their Religion
and Freedom to the Land to their utmost power; that the Lords of Amsterdam by a
strange obstinateness refused to help to provide what all the other its Members
judged indispensably necessary for their common defense, and in a time when all
their Neighbors round about strongly armed, did more and more strengthen
themselves by new Levies, and all the friends of this State had their eyes on
the resolutions of this State, for the defense of it self against oppression
and overruling, and with God's blessing to free itself therefrom; and of which
in that sad year of 1672. they had experimented so great and sensible a
fusserance, for having neglected the putting themselves in a posture of defense.

I suppose in what has been said, I have clearly showed that what the said
Ambassador has expressed in the said Letter, is not only very probable, but as
evident as things of that nature can be made, and that there is therein no
farther cause of doubt when it may be seen what since the writing of the
aforesaid Letter by the forementioned Ambassador farther has been done,
namely, that the said Ambassador having by the aforesaid Letter earnestly
desired that his Majesty would give him some permission to present Memorials,
and particularly that he should not need therein to express of the not making
the said Levy; and that he might therein use some sweetnings in consideration
of the open Country of the Spanish Netherlands, first by a Memorial the
Nineteenth of this Month, presented to the States, has declared that he would
take it on himself to grant some time to bring the Spaniards to an
accommodation on the conditions proposed by his Majesty, if they would promise
his Majesty to remain in the State wherein they were without making any steps
which might make the Spaniards more obstinate by the hopes of a new and greater
succor: and then afterward, first in a Conference (which he willingly would
have had on the Sixteenth of the said Month, but which was had on the
Seventeenth, for that the Deputies of Holland who were also to be at the same,
assisted on the aforesaid Sixteenth of February, at the deliberation which then
was had in Holland on the aforesaid Letter of the Lord Ambassador) and has
afterward declared by a Memorial, that in case the States would engage to
cause Spain to agree within two or three Months to one of the Equivalents
contained in the aforesaid Memorial of the Fifth of November last, or a Truce
of Twenty years, that his Majesty would cease all Hostilities against the Crown
of Spain, but so that if the Spaniards should suffer those two or three Months
to run out without effect, that then the States should cause that their Troops
now in the Spanish Netherlands should not be otherwise employed than in defense
of the places his Majesty of Spain there possesses, that they also should
promise to give no where else any assistence to Spain against his Majesty of
France or his Allies, and that then France would promise to Besiege or take no
places in the Spanish Netherlands, yea not to act the War any more on the open
Country on condition that Spain should also observe the same, and reserving to
himself to use his Arms elsewhere till that Crown should compose the Peace
which it had broken. Or if the States would not oblige themselves thereto, and
would only use earnest endeavors to press Spain to a friendly accommodation,
that also in such a case his Majesty would yield to a Cessation of Arms in the
Spanish Netherlands as long as the present War should last, and also promise
neither by Siege or otherwise to make himself Master of any places in the
Spanish Netherlands; provided that the States on the contrary should oblige
themselves not only that their Troops in the Spanish Netherlands should only
be employed for defense of the places in the said Netherlands, but that also
they should give Spain no farther assistance in any other place whatsoever, nor
to act directly nor indirectly against his Majesty or his Allies; and that also
his Majesty would oblige himself to perform no acts of Hostility in the
foresaid Spanish Netherlands, provided Spain shall from the said Netherlands
act no Hostility against him, or if it would there continue the War, that his
Majesty would then continue it there only against the open Country, for what
can better agree with what the Lords of Amsterdam had discoursed with the Lord
Ambassador, they say there must be no speech of making no new Levies, but to
leave matters in the same state they were in? He does also the same by his
first Memorial. They say there should be a Cessation of Hostility against the
Cities in the Spanish Netherlands, provided that the State meddle not with the
Quarrel elsewhere, or elsewhere help Spain, he does so likewise, and for that
he feared it would offend, that that Cessation of Hostility should not extend
to the benefit of the open Country; he profereth the same also for so much as
concerns the open country, if Spain on its part will not from the
Netherlands act ought on the open country of the French. He presents also
those Memorials as late as he can, and then when he judges that he would be
thereby sitted to support the Lords of Amsterdam in their designs, so that none
beforehand not prejudiced, can deny or doubt in his mind that what is
contained in the aforesaid Letter is in truth for so much as concerns the
essential part, not come to pass and effected.

That being so, we may consider whether the Lords of Amsterdam may not be said
to have there in done amiss, yea greatly done amiss. I believe not that the
said Lords will themselves call in doubt that what is said in the foresaid
Letter to have been done by them should not contain offenses hurtful in the
utmost to the greatness and justness of the State, and the welfare thereof, and
capable to cause the ruin of the Country; for what can be more hurtful and
hindersome to the State that at this time (when we should endeavor either an
accommodation between parties at War together, or must experience the loss of
the Spanish Netherlands, or to fall in difference concerning the same with the
King of France, and that as well the loss of the Spanish Netherlands as the
falling at odds with the King of France, would be very prejudicial to the
State) they should particulary discover to the King of France, or that which is
the same to his Ambassador the difference which was in the State between the
Members thereof about finding out means of accommodation; that the one was of
advice, that to put our selves in security of not being surprised, was by
raising a greater number of Militia, and then to speak and endeavor for a good
and lasting accommodation; and that others advised that without providing any
means of Defense, they must blindfold help to execute what France desired of
Spain. That the Lords of Amsterdam said they would never yield to a Levy, but
to do what might be done to oblige Spain to accept one of the French
proposals, for that these communications could indeed be of no other effect
than more and more to encourage France to yield in nothing of what he
pretended, and to draw Spain more and more off, and make him averse from all
that by this State should be proposed to him to the furtherance of a Peace; for
since the mediation of the Peace depended not on the will of this State, but on
the approbation of Spain, for that all what France pretends whether out of
the head of his first proposal, or by consequence of the Equivalents, whereof
was pertaining to Spain, and by that King must be yielded, and that Spain was
so persuaded that that which France demanded was so unjust, that Spain desired
that his Allies together would examine whether the foresaid pretensions were
founded on reason, adding, that if they should judge the said pretensions were
just, he would much yield in such a case to the judgment of his Allies, we
could in such a case never make this State more unfit to use endeavors with
Spain for an accommodation, than to declare to France that we should force
Spain to the acceptance of one of the aforesaid propositions, that we
incessantly endeavored the same, employing all our credit to make disputes in
the Cities, and also withhold what in case of need might serve us in some
measure to defend the State, to wit the Levy of the foresaid Men. And what
could more move France to yield nothing, as being ascertained, not from without
or from some out of the Government, but of such a considerable Member of the
same Government, that the said Member used its utmost endeavors with an
incredible zeal and application to bring Spain to accept one of the foresaid
proposals, and to withhold that which in any manner might serve to put off the
first push, if no accommodation could have been made with France, which was the
foresaid new Levies, since France was thereby assured that Spain must either
yield to the aforesaid conditions, or that otherwise he finding Spain and this
State without any power to resist, and giving him all opportunity with the
approaching Spring to settle and bring to effect his designs to possess himself
not only of the foresaid Netherlands, but also of this State; I leave it to
the judgment of wiser persons, if this be not criminal and deserving punishment
in the highest, for that it hurts to the utmost the security of the State, by
discovering the weakness thereof to those whom the State ought chiefly to fear,
and animated them withal not to diminish of his demands, and put a sufficient
opportunity into his hands of carrying the Spanish Netherlands, to the utmost
detriment of this State, if not this State it self at last. Secondly it
appears by the aforesoid Letter, that the Lords of Amsterdam in consult with
the French Ambassador, and animated by the kindness the King of France
pretends to have for them, and fortified by the means he proposed to them,
had openly withstood the said Levy and caused many Disputes in several of the
Cities concerning the same; you may, Sir, hereby judge whether it be not
criminal to raise disputes among the Members of the Assembly, and animated
thereto by the service a Foreign Prince pretends they do him therein, and
strengthened by the means which that Foreign Prince proposes; yea, and that of
a Prince who by his Forces has attacked an Allye of this State, in a place in
which the State has so sensible an interest, and whither the State has sent
assistence to that Allye so attacked, and these said assisting Troops are
actually employed to the assistence of the Attacked against the Attacker, and
that these disputes are occasions to put and keep the State out of a posture of
needful defense.

Thirdly, That the Lords of Amsterdam have, if not personally, yet openly
concerted with the French Ambassador concerning overtures whereby this State
should be engaged either to force Spain to accept one of the French proposals,
or to desert them on condition only that France should leave the places in the
Spanish Netherlands unattacked and continue to molest the open Country with
Quarterings and Contributions; that they had earnestly insisted that he would
present a Memorial to that effect whereby they would be in a condition to
effect the business; if that be not also criminal and punishable in the highest
degree, I willingly leave to the censure of wiser and sharper judgments. I very
well know how that matter was resented in the year 1666. and what Letters some
Ministers of this State, being then in France, have written notwithstanding
that what then passed has no more comparison with this present affair, than a
Gnat to an Elephant; for what can be more hurtful and disadvantageous to the
greatness of this State, than that a Member of one Province by particular
authority, without knowledge of its other Fellow Members, should in such a
manner deal with a Foreign Prince who has Attacked one of the Allies of the
State, who must be assisted by that State, and is already actually assisted,
and should confer with that Foreign Prince, not only to make ineffectual, but
even to break the Treaty the State has made with the Attacked? where is it
(wherein the State must find its security, (as the said Lords of Amsterdam have
often said) by Allyances and Contracts with Foreign Princes against the over
power of others, which by their own power they cannot effect;) and what can
bring such Allyances and contracts in more discredit with Foreign Princes, than
that they shall perceive that it is in the power of one Province, yea, of one
Member of a Province by its own Capricio to make ineffectual Treaties solemnly
made, or to withhold the effect thereof? and how can it be born by the Supreme
Authority, that whereas by the constitution of the Government of these
Countries, one Province alone (how Sovereign soever it be) cannot enter into
Treaties with Foreign Princes; that one Member of a Province, to wit, the Lords
of Amsterdam shall propose or at least concert with the said Ambassador
without knowledge of the Government concerning such overtures of accommodation,
and desire him to propose the same by a Memorial, and that they hope by that
means to bring them to effect? I will not now speak of the Proposals themselves
so dishonorable and so unfit, that every one that has yet remaining in him
but a small portion of Fidelity and Honor, must have for the same the utmost
abhorrence; for what can be more dishonourably imagined, than that this State
which is obliged to defend Spain against unjust Force, should by a public
Treaty oblige it self to force Spain to that which France alone by force and
over power acquireth of Spain (as Spain says) and not by Right and Justice, and
that in a time when Spain will permit this State to examine the justice or
injustice of the French pretensions, or if they could not arrive thereto, that
by a public Treaty they should oblige themselves to give Spain over to the
will of France; and that in all parts of the World France might at his pleasure
exercise all force and wrong on Spain, only that the Cities in the Spanish
Netherlands might not be Attacked, yea, that in the same Netherlands they might
act on the open Country these horrible sorts of executions of which in former
Wars has not been heard? In truth if this conduct of affairs had not been so
publicly and clearly seen, it could not be imagined that such a Government as
is that of Amsterdam should have arrived so far, to give so evident a proof of
a perfidiousness so great and unheard of. I cannot deny that it may sometimes
have happened that one has left his Friend and Allye in need, and although it
be very ill done, and that God has often sadly punished such perfidiousness,
yet has the deserter always found or made a pretense to color that his
saying, that he could no longer assist his Friend; but so far as I can remember
no instance can be found that a Prince or State without any the least reason
should oblige himself by a particular Treaty, to force his Friend to yield to
what is unjustly required of him or to give him over, to the pleasure of his
opposite party, when the opposite party has not put that his pleasure in
execution in presence of the deserter of his Friend; besides that when that
scandalous and dishonorable dealing could not produce that expected effect,
for that Spain finding it self treated in such a base manner only that the
Spanish Netherlands might remain safe, and that thereby the War would but the
more furiously be transported to his other Countries and Kingdoms would soon
find means to secure himself from that danger by a yielding over or changing
these Countries which they desire to preserve in the Spanish Netherlands, for
that which Spain in former Wars had now or formerly lost.

Fourthly, It appears by the foresaid Letter that the Lords of Amsterdam had
spoke with the said Lord Embasladour concerning the security which they in
particular were to give, if the State should not approve to yield those matters
his Majesty had proposed. You may, Sir, easily conceive that this is not a less
but at least as great a crime as any of the forementioned, for how can it agree
with the Majesty of the State, that one of the Members of the same should give
security to a Foreign Prince to effect that the State should grant those
conditions which the said Foreign Prince desires of them, yea, how can it be
suffered by a Sovereign State, that one of the Members shall comprehend all the
rest, or if that cannot be effected, shall engage it self to agree apart
concerning other particular Securities which this Member should then give to a
Foreign Prince?

Lastly, by the said Letter it also appears, that the design on foot to cause
the said Ambassador to present the foresaid Memorial, was to raise the good
Subjects against the Government, as if the Government were inclined to the War,
and that the King of France presented and Proffered Peace, and that the City of
Amsterdam lending thereto their helping hand, sought to evade the War, and that
his Highness and the other Members who in that matter could not join with the
Lords of Amsterdam sought to engage the State in a sad and deplorable War,
whereas his Highness and all the Members composing the Assembly of States have
often declared with the utmost sincerity, that they designed nothing else than
if it were any ways possible to help to allay these differences by an
accommodation, which according to the present constitution of times and matters
might be in any manner esteemed honorable and secure; and that they would
concerning the same, enter into Conference with Spain, and the other their high
Allies, since unto Spain belonged that which should be sacrificed to the Peace;
and that by the aforesaid written Letter no security for Peace was made,
neither could be, if it were not secured by a good Guaranty of other Princes
and States, and that for the obtaining that Guaranty there was nothing to be
expected or hoped, if concerning that Peace there were no consultation with the
said high Allies, and they induced to the conditions thereof, yea, to hear all
the Members who frequented the Assembly; also the Lords deputed of the City of
Amsterdam have often been necessitated to acknowledge that all the measures his
Highness took were toward a Peace, and that his Highness had not given to any
of them reasons to suspect that he was not inclined to a Peace: And, Sir, you
know what reason I have to be well persuaded, that the Peace had been long
since attained, at least would have been much furthered, and that the
inhabitants of the Country would have had much less trouble if the Lords of
Amsterdam by their conduct had not given France cause to hope to obtain better
conditions than could be effected, and had thereby made on the one side all
council and inducement, which could have been made with Spain invalid, and on
the other side stirred up France to yield nothing, and to quit nothing of his
Demands and Proposals by him made as conditions of Peace; yea, Sir, you well
know that when here in the Hague entrance was made into a Treaty with Spain,
and the other high Allies who had here expressly their Ministers to enter into a
Conference of Proposals for accommodation, that on the part of the Lords of
Amsterdam in the Assembly of the States, where (in consideration of the
confidence and security which should be among Allies and friends, having one
and the same design) then concerning the keeping secret, not of that which
should be brought to a conclusion, for that was proffered to be made known when
it was proper, but of that which in that Conference might happen, yet without
concluding; and then concerning many Questions, Speculations and the like,
which could not but cause a great suspicion, and alienate the minds of the high
Allies, from one another, there has often such Propositions issued forth from
which nothing else could be concluded but that the Lords of Amsterdam must have
had a design to smother the said Conference in the beginning, and to make it
fruitless; and that the other Members of the States Assembly were in this their
conduct, and so acting much dissatisfied, and have much blamed them all, none
excepted.

I must, Sir, ask you whether a rational man, and who is a lover of the welfare
of his Country, and of that Religion and freedom in so great esteem with our
Forefathers shall be found, who seeing such a Letter written by an Ambassador,
who has managed the affairs of his Master in this Country so many years, and
has been before employed in the like affairs, seeing and knowing that what is
written in the said Letter so well agrees with that which has happened and
was transacted even by the said Lords of Amsterdam as here before at large I
have demonstrated and knowing that that which was contained in the said Letter,
if it agreed with the truth, was in the highest criminal and punishable, and
that this Republic could not subsist, but must perish if such transactions
were tolerated that every Member who could not in Assembly effect the matter to
his desire, might concert with the Ministers of Foreign Princes, and join with
them, and conclude how best to oblige the other Members thereto, would not do
at least so much as to contribute what could be thought thereof to attain the
truth contained in that Letter, and since it could from nowhere else better
appear than out of the Papers which possibly might be found in the Lodgings of
the Lords of Amsterdam here in the Hague, and in the Chamber of the Lord
Councellor Pensionary Hop, who had for the most part held the conferences with
the said Lord Ambassador, and where the Members knew that the Lords of
Amsterdam had caused the continuance of those Conferences, notwithstanding the
other Members had demonstrated to be offended and scandalized thereat, whether
they were not also obliged to take care that those Papers should be sealed, to
the end the States, after all the deputed Lords should have made their report
to the Lords their Principals, might be in condition to deliberate and resolve
on what they should find expedient to have done or left therein, for that is
all that hitherto has been done, or ordained by the States, viz. that the
foresaid overture which his Highness should make, should be received with
closed doors, that the mentioned Lords Hooft and Hop should absent while his
Highness made the same overture, that the foresaid Papers should be sealed up,
that the whole overture should be kept Secret, except that thereof was to be
given notice to the Councils of the several Cities, and of the sealing of them
only to the Lords Burgomasters and all this upon Oath, that the said matter
might be managed with as little noise as was possible, till the respective
Burgomasters and Councils having had knowledge of all things might dispose of
Affairs, and if the Lords Burgomasters and Council of the foresaid City, had
not only been the first who had writ their foresaid Letter to the other
Members, but also connived at the public Printing thereof, the aforesaid
matter might have been as little noised abroad as other matters which in the
like manner were debated in the Assembly with shut doors in secret, and without
noise. But it is said that hereby is deminished the freedom and security which
those Deputies who were in the Assembly ought to enjoy as to their persons and
Papers: For what concerns the persons, the complaint is yet too unripe, for
against the persons of the said Lords Deputies has nothing been determined,
but I would have asked whether those who are deputed to the Assembly have
thereby a license to commit and act whatsoever they think good without being
for the same searched or punished; I believe not that it will be said by any,
at least those that would say it, must then suppose that those deputed to such
an Assembly might also sell their Country to the Enemy; and that the Assembly
of States which is designed for the good of the Country, and is so needful
and serviceable for the peace and conservation of the same, might produce the
hurtfullest effects to the said Country without means of punishing such evil
doers, and those who abused the freedom of such an Assembly in such an unfit
and dishonorable way; but that being otherwise, and the foresaid Assembly
being only designed to prevent any ill effect that might accrue to the
Commonwealth, therefore those who under pretense of such an Assembly, and that
they are Members thereof when they shall come to contrive such matters as only
tend to the subversion of the liberty, and the ruin of their Country must not
think they may evade by a fair pretense of liberty and freedom, the search
which their Lawful and Sovereign Authority does resolve to make; but it is
said the Lords of Amsterdam were not admitted to make their Defense in relation
to the contents of the said Letter. But I leave it to your judgment how justly
this is objected, for the Lords of Amsterdam complain now that the Nobility and
the other Deputies, whereof the Assembly of the States was then composed, did
resolve to seal up those Papers, the sealing up whereof was performed in that
manner, which was least offensive, the same sealing up of them being only a
mere securing of them, and had no communication with any criminal process; The
Lords Deputies leaving all matters as they were, that when the respective
Councels of the Cities should have had cognizance of what had passed, they
might deliberate what was to be done, viz. whether they should proceed to a
farther examination either of the foresaid sealed Papers, or to hear and
examine those who had held those Conferences with the said Lord Ambassador,
and also of others who might be detected to have had knowledge thereof. If they
had proceeded to the hearing of the said Lords, would it not then have been
said that the Assembly of the States had designed to begin a criminal process
by the examination of the said Lords which the said Assembly ought not to do,
it being no seat of Justice? and what more might be said to that purpose. It is
further said concerning the forementioned Lords of Amsterdam, that this Letter
was writ by a Foreign Minister, which could import nothing to the hurt of a
third Person; but it was also true that the Writer thereof was an Ambassador
who gave an account to his King, and who was obliged to give that account in
the best and truest manner; it appeared also out of that Letter how neatly he
therein distinguished what the Lords of Amsterdam had concerted with him what
they had proposed to him, and what they had undertaken to effect and further
what was known to him of the matter under dispute, whatsoever sense he had
thereof, the duties he had to observe with them, and the duty in which he was
obliged to his Master, and especially that his Majesty was therein in the
highest concerned, that he might know and be well informed of all what passed
here, and that he therefore to know his Majesty's intentions on what he had
written, had sent the said Letter with an express; he was also a Minister who
kept with the Lords of Amsterdam a perfect friendship and correspondency, who
by their council had been to confer with the other Members of the Assembly, and
again with whom the Lords of Amsterdam used so great confidence that they would
rather load on themselves the scandal and* the suspicion of the other Members
of the States Assembly than to miss the said conversation; but it is said the
design was Peace, and all the Members professed their inclination thereto, and
it was not prohibited to correspond with such Foreign Ministers whose Masters
were in friendship with this State. As concerning the matter of the Peace I
have spoken before, and also showed it to be a Crimen laesae Majestatis in the
first and highest degree to undertake such negotiations as are mentioned in the
said Letter which the Lords of Amsterdam had held with the said Lord the French
Ambassador; it cannot also not be thought by any one that it should be lawful
in a State obliged to one another in such manner, and composing one body of
Government as does this State, that one Member of one of the Members of that
Body should comprehend all the other Members in matters of Peace, wherein all
the others cannot comprehend that one Member; and I would that any one were
found so understanding and sharp witted who should then tell me what a
Government we had in this Country, where was the Sovereign Power lodged, and
with whom men had to treat and contract, and how far might extend the Capricios
of one Member who designeth to distinguish it self from all the other Members,
each of which has the same right with this Member, and who esteem themselves
as good Patriots of their Country, as that one Member, and to be as much
inclined to Peace as that one separate Member, and who would treat and contract
with a Government constituted in that manner. I will not now enter into the
Examination, whether and how far Members of the same Government may undertake
to correspond with Ministers of Foreign Princes, and how that is understood in
this Republic, but I will only say that I have seen when the Queen of England
in the year 1588. endeavored to treat of Peace with Spain, and that in that
matter there was there in this Country no small disagreement in the Assembly
of Holland, that the Members thereof were not only obliged to abstain from all
correspondence, but were also obliged to discover all what occurred to them
even from that Queen or any one whomsoever of her Ministers, notwithstanding we
were in a very strict Alliance with her Majesty, and had from her Majesty an
actual assistence, and had also two Counselors of her Majesty present in our
Council of State, to whom then the greatest part of the direction of Affairs
was imparted; but the matter is not whether any Member of the State keep
correspondence with a Foreign Minister, but whether it may be permitted to any
Member of the Government whatsoever to keep such correspondences as are
mentioned in the foresaid Letter. It is further said that it was only
uncifered, and which the Marquis de Grana had sent, it is true it was sent by
the Marquis de Grana as having intercepted it, and conceived the State to be so
much concerned therein, that it ought to know what was here contriving to the
detriment of the Public, but the said Marquis de Grana whose uprightness some
would question, has proceeded therein with that candor that he also sent
hither the Key whereby he uncifered the Letter, that it might appear by what
Rule they uncifered the same, and that it was impossible to feign the like, as
they now endeavor to make it suspected.

To which is added, that the Lords deputed from Amsterdam to the Assembly of
States having understood that the Lord Ambassador had some Proposals to make,
whereby the Peace in the Spanish Netherlands and between France and this State
might be preserved, and that he was desirous to confer with them concerning the
same; that they had made report thereof to the Lords their Principals with many
circumstances, who had especially charged them to have a nearer Conference with
the Lord Ambassador concerning the same, and oblige him to give notice thereof
to the Members, and especially to the Lord Councellor Pensionary of Holland, as
the Minister of the Lords the Nobles, and that the said Lords deputed of the
said City of Amsterdam had also given notice thereof to the said Lord
Councellor Pensionary of Holland; but hereon I will first ask wherefore the
Lords deputed from Amsterdam were so scrupulous to hear and receive such
Proposals of the said Ambassador, if there had been nothing else to treat
between them, and that they charged the other Members who had no order from
their Principals with the having visited the said Lord Ambassador, and to have
heard the said Proposals of him, for they say that they were those, who would
have had that they should also speak to the other Members, whereas before they
had made no difficulty to speak to so many other Foreign Ministers, without
having had such special charge from their Principals, and said with so much
assurance even against the displeasure therein of the other Members, they both
should and would continue the said Conferences with the said Ambassador, and
notwithstanding the foresaid narration of that Conference is clearly and at
large made appear, even as if the said Lords Deputies had given to the States
in the Assembly a full and perfect knowledge and information thereof, whereas
all those know who have been in that Assembly, that the said Lords had given to
the said Assembly, not the least knowledge thereof: what here and there they
might by particular discourses have said to some one or other of the particular
Members I know not; it may be they may have to every one given such an overture
thereof as they thought might serve their design. You know, Sir, that the Lord
Councellor Pensionary of Holland has said more than once, that the said Lords
deputed had not in the least made him acquainted therewith, but only that the
said Lord Ambassador had also said to him the Lord Councellor Pensionary in
the aforesaid Visit, that in case the Lords the States would treat to preserve
the Peace in the Spanish Netherlands, and leave his Majesty free to further his
pretensions on Spain elsewhere, and that they would engage themselves in such a
case to afford no assistance to Spain, that his Majesty would not be averse
thereto; and that the said Lord Councellor Pensionary of Holland had answered
either to the said deputed Lords, or to the said Lord Pensionary Hop, that
there could be no deliberation had concerning the same before a Memorial to
that effect was presented, and that it would occasion a very honorable name to
this Republic, with all Foreign Princes, if we should so deal with those with
whom we were in Alliance: and you know, Sir, that the said Lord Pensionary of
Holland has also often declared that the said Lords deputed except that one
time, and in that manner had never given him any other information of the said
overture of the said Treaties and Conferences. The said Lord Pensionary of
Holland has not to my knowledge ever pretended that the Lords of Amsterdam
were obliged to give him any account of what they did, and it will therefore
appear as strange to him as to any other, that the said Lords did now appeal to
the knowledge they should have given him thereof. What is further said of the
cutting off of correspondence with foreign Ministers; I know that to have
proceeded from the so much offending Conferences, which the said Lords deputed
had with the forementioned Lord Ambassador. You also know, Sir, that the Lords
of Amsterdam have explained themselves thereon to the Assembly, in a manner so
irreverently, that all the Members thereof were thereat highly offended,
however none then knew or could surmise from whence that proceeded, and what
was then ordered concerning the discourse relating to the ship La Reigle, and
that on the 8th of January last, the said Lords deputed had spoken with the
forementioned Lord Ambassador, shows clearly the design contrived with him
concerning the foresaid matter of which before larger mention is made, and also
how abusively and captiously, they would excuse themselves for having held the
said Conferences mentioned in the said Letter, when the said Lord Pensionary of
Holland mistaking in the date, said, that the foresaid Conference should have
been held on the 9th, whereas it was held on the 8th as is noted in the said
Letter; and it is not a little remarkable that the said Lords of Amsterdam
having first said, that the said Lord Ambassador of France had not urged them
to enter into any concern or particular engagement, they notwithstanding in the
same breath add, that he the Lord Ambassador having pretended to be secured by
word of mouth of the constant inclination of that Government to the Peace, and
that they would enter into the expedients by him proposed, that they had often
roundly refused it notwithstanding he expressed his displeasure therein in sharp
terms, so that the said Lords do thereby acknowledge that there had been a
Speech concerning such a security by the said Lord Ambassador when they say,
he demanded the same of them, and they denied it, and then also when the said
Lord Ambassador showed his displeasure thereat in sharp terms; and the said
Ambassador says also in the said Letter, not that the mentioned Lords of
Amsterdam had engaged themselves to give particular security, but only simply
that they had said, that there were remedies to which no recourse was to be had
but in the utmost extremity, and that they would not speak with him thereof
till they had left all hope of moving the States to assent to that security his
Majesty desired.

This being a true recital of what passed in the Assembly of the States on the
16th of this Month, as also of what happened about the conduct which the said
Lords of Amsterdam were pleased to observe; and concerning what farther passed,
and by undeniable consequences must be deduced from thence, I leave it to the
judgment of every one if in these matters in the procedures against the Lords
deputed of Amsterdam, there has appeared any rigor, prejudice or
unbeseemingness, and if they have not abused the State and Fellow Members in an
unheard of and insufferable manner, and if those Lords which then composed that
Assembly, and who with so much circumspection proceeded to the aforesaid
sealing up of their Papers were rather to be condemned, that in a matter so
important and such a high nature they used not more vigor for the conservation
of the right of their State against those who had proceeded in such an unworthy
manner to the ruin of the said State, and who had so criminally acted therein,
and more than once made themselves guilty of Crimen laesae Majestatis, and
whether the good Inhabitants of the Country have not the greatest reason to
complain that such a chief Member of the Government as is the Government of the
City of Amsterdam, could fall into so pernicious a conduct, that they would cut
off and separate themselves from their other fellow Members; and that all this
is vented among the good Inhabitants with so much untruth as if the Government
of the foresaid City had in this matter no quarrel with their fellow Members,
but only with his Highness, to make all his actions every where odious, and to
decry them down, whereas all the Members of the States Assembly, none excepted,
have agreed with his Highness in the same sentiment, as well concerning the
said Levy, as concerning the promoting of an accommodation; that they all, none
excepted, have highly blamed and been scandalized at the conduct of the Lords
of Amsterdam, and whereas the moderatest of them who had labored to find out
expedients to allay, and remove if possible the said differences so hurtful
and ruinous to this State, were convinced that on the part of his Highness all
has been done which has been required of him, and that this condescension
has only extended to confirm the Lords of Amsterdam in their difference, as
if the Government of the State had been solely entrusted to them, and that all
the other Members must yield to them. The length of this discourse troubles
me, but I thought I ought once to let you see without any disguisement, and in
all truth, the matter which here being related as it has passed, can by none
who was in the Assembly be contradicted as to the truth of the affair.

I shall always remain, Sir, Your humble Servant, PHILALETHES.

POSTSCRIPT.
AFter I had witten the aforesaid, there came to my hands a Memorial presented
to this State by the Count D'Avaux Ambassador of the King of France the 28th
of this Month; I acknowledge I could never have thought that a Lord of so great
a capacity and experience could have resolved to present a Memorial of that
kind, and that the zeal for defending the Lords of Amsterdam who have so much
mistaken themselves, and acted in such a criminal manner against the Majesty
and Sovereignty of the State, had so far prevailed with him thus to express
himself as appears by the said Memorial, which also more and more confirms
the said correspondency, and more and more accuses the said Lords. The first
thing that the Lord Ambassador in the said Memorial says is in effect (what
he had said by word of mouth to those deputed by the Lords the States who were
with him in Conference) that he had informed his Majesty of the matter, as in
truth it was, but in that manner as he supposed he must represent it to his
Master; and that he therefore in that Letter had alleged many circumstances
which agreed not with the truth of the matter. For first, what can more
strongly serve to destroy all the Conferences that he had with him the Lord
Ambassador, and which he should represent to his Master, according to the
truth what had therein passed, when the said Ambassador by a formal Memorial,
says, that he represented the matter to his Master, not as they are, but as he
judged it best to represent it, and who will believe that so considerable a
person having the honor to serve such a King should take upon him to relate
matters in another form than in truth they were acted; yea, who will believe
that in this Relation he has so done, since the said Lord Ambassador was
first so careful to add in the same Letter the trouble he was in that he could
no sooner advise his Majesty of what here passed, and how much his Majesty was
therein concerned that he might be well informed of what here passed, chiefly
when therein may be remarked, that of himself and without order he dare not
make the least step or advance though much thereto solicited, and how
serviceable soever himself might judge it, how much he has in regard the
interest of his Master when he truly speaks; and agreed to points which might
be urged of him yet with that precaution that his Majesty should not thereby be
forepromised, than that his Master should not thereby be too much engaged; and
again that his Master might not be hindered to do what he should judge best?
None can imagine that a Minister even in that Letter, who has such respect to
his Master's interest, and with those who seek to deal with him in that manner
understands how to be able to Treat; and yet in the said Letter to represent
the truth that happened otherwise than it came to pass. It is also worth
observation, that whereas the said Lord Ambassador in the aforesaid Memorial
alleges, that for the ordering of a Conference concerning the Ship La Regle,
he should not have used the conduct, of which in the said Letter mention is
made: The Lords of Amsterdam on the contrary by their advice acknowledge and
avow that conduct. Secondly, It is to be observed that the said Lord
Ambassador by the foresaid Memorial alleges, that the aforesaid Letter
either through ignorance or malice was wrong uncifered, and that therefore no
credit was to be given to the same, whereas the mentioned Ambassador in that
Memorial yields that he had writ what had passed concerning the Ship La Regle
so as it was uncifered; yea, that he had written concerning the trouble of some
of the Members of the State concerning the devastation of the open Country, by
which the mentioned Barrier would come to sink or vanish in the same manner as
it is uncifered, from whence necessarily must follow that the same cifers which
in the rest were used also, signify the same Letters which they have signified
in the said periods, and how can any one be taken for an Impostor or Cozener
who sends withal the Key wherewith he has uncifered it, and who mentions
the A. B. C. and the other Letter which by Cifers have been signified, which A.
B. C. and those other Letters have as well been used in the passages spoken of
the foresaid Ship La Regle, and the aforesaid devastation of the aforesaid open
Country, as in the other passages wherein is carped? he the said Lord
Ambassador touches further in the foresaid Memorial on two passages, which he
says are very maliciously turned to a wrong sense; the first is the passage
which in what is uncifered infers, that the Lords of Amsterdam were but
little moved concerning the pretended coming over of 135, for in the uncifering
that number is used, and it is true that some Lords of the Government have
thought that by that was meant the coming over of the Here Pensionary Heinsius,
since the same had as well writ from France as by word of mouth here reported
that the State ought to put it self in a posture of Defense, then the Peace
would then in all likelihood follow, and they must not suffer themselves to be
amused by promises to neglect that which to the aforesaid defense was
necessary, and yet no man notwithstanding has ever said, much less the
unciferer of the aforesaid Letter, that that number designed the Here Heinsius:
what malignity there might be herein, I cannot conceive, for true it is, that
the Lords deputed of the City of Amsterdam would never give credit to that, nor
to other advertisements, thinking and always saying they were better informed,
and therein expressed themselves even so far that in their turn giving their
advice they feared not to say that although they were singular, yet it
sometimes happened that one alone might see as far and as much as all the rest
18. But I pray what is there in this Explication that is so remarkably
malicious, when the said Ambassador says, that the uncifering does not infer
that the Lords of Amsterdam were not a little allarmed at the pretended arrival
of that Letter, which says that they only sought to abuse them, when as no
man that I know has drawn out of that period any thing, or would charge on the
Lords of Amsterdam as an offense, that they were more or less credulous or
scrupulous. The Second period is that which speaks of the Here Paets, and
others well intentioned who had now again taken courage and joined themselves
to Amsterdam, and who had said to their friends that they never had conceived
that his Majesty would have done so much as was now done in Flanders with
annexing the number 180. It is true the words have but small sense, except
only that it might thereout be concluded, that the same whom the Lord
Ambassador in that period named or designed began again to appear, encouraged
thereto by the good which they never expected the King would have done or did.
And the said Ambassador says not alone that that uncifering is false, but
confirms the same very sliff, when by the aforesaid Memorial, he says, that
what is Cifered supposes that all the well minded whom he there names good
Republicans had reassumed courage, that they had said to their friends that
they never had conceived that his Majesty would do so many things as he now
did in favor of the good party, but that is true that no man has thought that
there was a party so affixed to France, and of which Amsterdam was the head,
and for which his Majesty would do so many things, of which no man had given
the Government any knowledge, either directly or indirectly; and thence had
also been no knowledge thereof, if the said Lord Ambassador had not so clearly
mentioned it in the foresaid Memorial, and had placed the Lords of Amsterdam
and the good Republicans together; and in one place, what offense it is to make
such a Party in a State, and that also with Foreigners, is very well known, and
there be Capital Examples thereof to be produced out of the Register of the
States, which will also be shown when the Matter shall be brought before the
Judgment Seat. What concerns the last Point concerning the security, which
should be required of these of Amsterdam in particular, I will speak thereof no
more, for that in my latter I have made ample mention thereof: I will only
say, that the said Lord Ambassador has said by the said Memorial, that he
well knew particulars could not give it, and that his Majesty never would have
desired it; and that yet the Lords of Amsterdam in their Information say, That
he the Lord Ambassador had often urged it from them, yea so far, that they
denying it, he should have expressed his displeasure; whether this agrees
together, judge ye. I can do no better than to say, that the Lords of Amsterdam
have suffered themselves to be amused by deceitful promises, as the Priest of
the Lord Ambassador well says in his Note, who by the said Memorial they
would say to be such a simple fellow, to those who are not acquainted with him,
but who has a quite other reputation by those to whom he is in any manner
known. I will hencewith conclude, and only say, that it needs must be a great
grief to me and all good Patriots, that the Lords of Amsterdam have used so ill
a Conduct, and taken so wrong a path, and to so great a disadvantage of their
Country, as to put and maintain the same in a State, without defense, through
their abstracting the said Levy, and in that manner expose the same to the
utmost danger on the Promise or Conditions of Peace, which by the State could
not be brought forth, for that it depended on the approbation of Spain, and
which was declared by the Spanish Ministers here, as also by the Minister of
this State residing in Spain, that it never would be agreed to by Spain, let
the event be what it will, and that they draw their design with so great
immoderation and presumption, that therein they neither would spare their
Country nor the good Inhabitants thereof; and this obstinateness is so much the
more to be admired, for that it cannot be denied, but that of two matters, the
one must be true; that is, that either the said Lord Ambassador by the
foresaid Letter does represent the truth of what had passed between him and the
Lords of Amsterdam, in which Case the said Lords of Amsterdam are notoriously
guilty of Crimes, Laesae Majestatis, as is before demonstrated, or that the
aforesaid Lord Ambassador has not represented matters according to truth in
the foresaid Letter, and has not therein proceeded with them in that just
manner which so important a matter required; in which Case the said Lords of
Amsterdam, if they were such good and sincere Patriots as they pretend to be,
and would clear themselves of all Partiship, of which the said Lord Ambassador
maintains in the foresaid Letter they ought to show their Resentment against
those who so wrongfully and insinuatingly would make them to be suspected; and
finding themselves amused by deceitful promises, and under color thereof
endeavored to make the Partiships, they would at last join with their
fellow members, and with such zeal and inclination as was fitting, would concur
to the establishing of those means which all their other fellow members judge
reasonable and necessary for the common desence without longer amusing
themselves with those who create such intreagues to so great a detriment of the
State, chiefly since the said Lord Ambassador in his foresaid Memorial is
convinced, and clearly acknowledges that by the whole Government, how there is
a great inclination in a friendly manner to put a period to these differences
by an Accommodation.

FINIS.

