A Discourse OF A METHOD For the well guiding of REASON, And the Discovery of
Truth In the SCIENCES.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Newcombe. MDCXLIX.

To the Understanding READER.
THe Great DES CARTS (who may justly challenge the first place amongst the
Philosophers of this Age) is the Author of this Discourse; which in the
Original was so well known, That it could be no man's but his own, that his
Name was not affixed to it: I need say no more either of Him or It; He is best
made known by Himself, and his Writings want nothing but thy reading to commend
them. But as those who cannot compass the Originals of Titian and Van-Dyke,
are glad to adorn their Cabinets with the Copies of them; So be pleased
favorably to receive his Picture from my hand, copied after his own Design:
You may therein observe the lines of a well formed Mind, The hightnings of
Truth, The sweetnings and shadowings of Probabilities, The falls and depths of
Falsehood; all which serve to perfect this Masterpiece. Now although my
after-draught be rude and unpolished, and that perhaps I have touched it too
boldly, The thoughts of so clear a Mind, being so extremely fine, That as the
choicest words are too gross, and fall short fully to express such sublime
Notions; So it cannot be, but being transvested, it must necessarily lose very
much of its native Luster: Nay, although I am conscious (notwithstanding the
care I have taken neither to wrong the Authors Sense, nor offend the Readers
Ear) of many escapes which I have made; yet I so little doubt of being excused,
That I am confident, my endeavor cannot but be grateful to all Lovers of
Learning; for whose benefit I have Englished, and to whom I address this
Essay, which contains a Method, by the Rules whereof we may Shape our better
part, Rectify or Reason, Form our Manners and Square our Actions, Adorn our
Minds, and making a diligent Enquiry into Nature, we may attain to the
Knowledge of the Truth, which is the most desirable union in the World.

Our Author also invites all letterd men to his assistance in the prosecution
of this Search; That for the good of Mankind, They would practice and
communicate Experiments, for the use of all those who labor for the perfection
of Arts and Sciences: Every man now being obliged to the furtherance of so
beneficial an Undertaking, I could not but lend my hand to open the Curtain,
and discover this New Model of Philosophy; which I now publish, neither to
humor the present, nor disgust former times; but rather that it may serve for
an innocent Divertisement to those, who would rather Reform themselves, then
the rest of the world; and who, having the same seeds and grounds, and knowing
That there is nothing New under the Sun; That Novelty is but Oblivion, and that
Knowledge is but Remembrance, will study to find out in themselves, and
restore to Posterity those lost Arts, which render Antiquity so venerable; and
strive (if it be possible) to go beyond them in other things, as well as Time:
Who mind not those things which are above, beyond, or without them; but would
rather limit their desires by their power, then change the Course of Nature;
Who seek the knowledge, and labor for the Conquest of themselves; Who have
Virtue enough to make their own Fortune; And who prefer the Culture of the
Mind before the Adorning of the Body; To such as these I present this
Discourse (whose pardon I beg, for having so long detained them from so
desirable a Conversation;) and conclude with this Advice of the Divine Plato:
Cogita in te, praeter Animum, nihil esse mirabile.

A DISCOURSE OF A METHOD, For the wel-guiding of REASON; AND The discovery of
TRUTH in the SCIENCES.
IF this Discourse seem too long to be read at once, it may be divided into six
parts. In the first, are diverse Considerations touching the Sciences. In the
second, the principal Rules of that Method which the Author has studied. In
the third, some of those in morality, which he has drawn from this Method. In
the fourth, the reasons whereby the existence of God and of the humane Soul is
proved; which are the grounds of his Metaphysics. In the fifth, the order of
these Physical questions, which he has examined, and particularly the
explication of the hearts motion; with some other difficulties relating to
Physic; as also the difference between our Souls and those of beasts. In the
last, what he conceives requisite to make a further inquiry into Nature, then
has hitherto been made. And what reasons induced him to write.

PART. I.
RIght understanding is the most equally divided thing in the World; for every
one believes himself so well stored with it, that even those who in all other
things are the hardest to be pleased, seldom desire more of it then they have;
wherein it is not likely that all Men are deceived: But it rather witnesses,
That the faculty of right-judging and distinguishing truth from falsehood (which
is properly called, Understanding or Reason) is naturally equal in all Men. And
as the diversity of our Opinions, is not, because some are more reasonable then
others; but only that we direct our thoughts several ways, neither do we
consider the same things. For it is not enough to have good faculties, but the
principal is, to apply them well. The greatest Souls are as capable of the
greatest Vices, as of the most eminent Virtues: And those who move but very
slowly, may advance much farther, if they always follow the right way; then
those who run and straggle from it.

For my part, I never presumed that my Mind was more perfect in any thing then
an ordinary Man's; nay, I have often wished to have had my thoughts as quick, my
imagination as clear and distinct, and my memory as large and as ready as some
other Men have had. And I know no Qualities which serve more then those to the
perfection of the Mind; for as for Reason or Understanding, forasmuch as it is
the only thing which makes us Men, and distinguishes us from beasts, I will
believe it to be entire in every One, and follow herein the common opinion of
the Philosophers, who say, That there is only more or less among the Accidents,
and not amongst the Forms or nature of the Individuals of one species.

But I shall not stick to say, That I believe my self very happy, in having
encountered from my youth with certain ways which have led me to considerations
and Maxims, from which I have found a Method; whereby methinks, I have the
means by degrees to augment my knowledge, and by little and little to raise it
up to the highest pitch, whereto the meaness of my capacity, and the short
course of my life can permit it to attain. For I have already reaped such
fruits from it, that although in the judgment I make of my self, I endeavor
always rather to incline to mistrust, then to presumption. And looking on the
diverse actions and undertakings of all Men, with the eye of a Philosopher,
there is almost none which to me seems not vain and useless. Yet I am extremely
satisfied with the Progress, which (as it seems to me) I have already made in
the search of Truth, and do conceive such hopes for the future, That if among
the employments of Men, purely Men, there is any solidly good, and of
importance, I dare believe it is that which I have chosen: Yet it may be that I
deceive my self, and perhaps it is but a little Copper and Glass which I take
for Gold and Diamonds. I know how subject we are to mistake in those things
which concern us, and how jealous we ought to be of the judgment of our
friends, when it is in our favor. But I should willingly in this Discourse,
trace out unto you the ways which I have followed, and represent therein my
life, as in a Picture, to the end, that every one may judge thereof; and that
learning from common Fame, what men's opinions are of it, I may find a new
means of instructing my self; which I shall add to those which I customarily
make use of.

Neither is it my design to teach a Method which every Man ought to follow, for
the good conduct of his reason; but only to show after what manner I have
endeavored to order mine own. Those who undertake to give precepts, ought to
esteem themselves more able, then those to whom they give them, and are
blameworthy, if they fail in the least. But proposing this but as a History,
or if you will have it so, but as a Fable; wherein amongst other examples,
which may be imitated, we may perhaps find diverse others which we may have
reason to decline: I hope it will be profitable to some, without being hurtful
to any; and that the liberty I take will be grateful to all.

I have been bred up to Letters from mine infancy; and because I was persuaded,
that by their means a man might acquire a clear and certain knowledge of all
that is useful for this life, I was extremely desirous to learn them: But as
soon as I had finished all the course of my Studies, at the end whereof Men are
usually received amongst the rank of the learned. I wholly changed my opinion,
for I found my self entangled in so many doubts and errors, that me thought I
had made no other profit in seeking to instruct my self, but that I had the
more discovered mine own ignorance. Yet I was in one of the most famous Schools
in Europe; where I thought, if there were any on earth, there ought to have
been learned Men. I had learnt all what others had learnt; even unsatisfied
with the Sciences which were taught us, I had read over all Books (which I
could possibly procure) treating of such as are held to be the rarest and the
most curious. Withal, I knew the judgment others made of me; and I perceived
that I was no less esteemed then my fellow Students, although there were some
amongst them that were destined to fill our Masters rooms. And in fine, our age
seemed to me as flourishing and as fertile of good Wits, as any of the
preceding, which made me take the liberty to judge of all other men by my self,
and to think, That there was no such learning in the world, as formerly I had
been made believe.

Yet did I continue the esteem I had of those exercises which are the
employments of the Schools: I knew that Languages which are there learnt, are
necessary for the understanding of ancient Writers, That the quaintness of
Fables awakens the Mind; That the memorable actions in History raise it up,
and that being read with discretion, they help to form the judgment. That the
reading of good books, is like the conversation with the honestest persons of
the past age, who were the Authors of them, and even a studied conversation,
wherein they discover to us the best only of their thoughts. That eloquence
has forces and beauties which are incomparable. That Poetry has delicacies
and sweets extremly ravishing; That the Mathematics has most subtle
inventions, which very much conduce as well to content the curious, as to
facilitate all arts, and to lessen the labor of Men: That those writings which
treat of manners contain diverse instructions, and exhortations to virtue, which
are very useful. That Theology teaches the way to heaven; That Philosophy
affords us the means to speak of all things with probability, and makes her
self admired, by the least knowing Men. That Law, Phpsick and other sciences
bring honor and riches to those who practice them; Finally that its good to
have examined them all even the falsest and the most superstitious, that we may
discover their just value, and preserve our selves from their cheats.

But I thought I had spent time enough in the languages, and even also in the
lecture of ancient books, their histories and their fables. For it is even the
same thing to converse with those of former ages, as to travel. Its good to
know something of the manners of several Nations, that we may not think that
all things against our Mode are ridiculous or unreasonable, as those are wont
to do, who have seen Nothing. But when we employ too long time in travel, we
at last become strangers to our own Country, and when we are too curious of
those things, which we practiced in former times, we commonly remain ignorant
of those which are now in use. Besides, Fables make us imagine diverse events
possible, which are not so: And that even the most faithful Histories, if they
neither change or augment the value of things, to render them the more worthy
to be read, at least, they always omit the basest and less remarkable
circumstances; whence it is, that the rest seems not as it is; and that those
who form their Manners by the examples they thence derive, are subject to fall
into the extravagancies of the Paladins of our Romances, and to conceive
designs beyond their abilities.

I highly prized Eloquence, and was in love with Poetry; but I esteemed both
the one and the other, rather gifts of the Mind, then the fruits of study.
Those who have the strongest reasoning faculties, and who best digest their
thoughts, to render them the more clear and intelligible, may always the better
persuade what they propose, although they should speak but a corrupt dialect,
and had never learnt Rhetoric: And those whose inventions are most pleasing,
and can express them with most ornament and sweetness, will still be the best
Poets, although ignorant of the Art of Poetry.

Beyond all, I was most pleased with the Mathematics, for the certainty and
evidence of the reasons thereof; but I did not yet observe their true use, and
thinking that it served only for Mechanic Arts; I wondered, that since the
grounds thereof were so firm and solid, that nothing more sublime had been
built thereon. As on the contrary, I compared the writings of the Ancient
heathen which treated of Manners, to most proud and stately Palaces which were
built only on sand and mire, they raise the virtues very high, and make them
appear estimable above all the things in the world; but they do not
sufficiently instruct us in the knowledge of them, and often what they call by
that fair Name, is but a stupidness, or an act of pride, or of despair, or a
paricide.

I reverenced our Theology, and pretended to heaven as much as any; But having
learnt as a most certain Truth, that the way to it, is no less open to the most
ignorant, then to the most learned; and that those revealed truths which led
thither, were beyond our understanding, I durst not submit to the weakness of
my ratiocination. And I thought, that to undertake to examine them, and to
succeed in it, required some extraordinary assistance from heaven, and somewhat
more then Man. I shall say nothing of Philosophy, but that seeing it has been
cultivated by the most excellent wits, which have lived these many ages, and
that yet there is nothing which is undisputed, and by consequence, which is not
doubtful. I could not presume so far, as to hope to succeed better then
others. And considering how many different opinions there may be on the same
thing, maintained by learned Men, and yet that there never can be but one only
Truth, I reputed almost all false, which had no more then probability in it.

As for other Sciences, since they borrow their Principles from Philosophy, I
judged that nothing which was solid could be built upon such unsound
foundations; and neither honor nor wealth were sufficient to invite me to the
study of them. For (I thank God) I found not my self in a condition which
obliged me to make a Trade of Letters for the relief of my fortune. And
although I made it not my profession to despise glory with the Cynick; yet did
I little value that which I could not acquire but by false pretenses. And
lastly, for unwarrantable Studies, I thought I already too well understood what
they were, to be any more subject to be deceived, either by the promises of an
Alchymist, or by the predictions of an Astrologer, or by the impostures of a
Magician, or by the artifice or brags of those who profess to know more then
they do.

By reason whereof, as soon as my years freed me from the subjection of my
Tutors, I wholly gave over the study of Letters, and resolving to seek no other
knowledge but what I could find in my self, or in the great book of the World,
I employed the rest of my youth in Travel, to see Courts and Armies, to
frequent people of several humors and conditions, to gain experience, to
hazard my self in those encounters of fortune which should occurr; and
everywhere to make such a reflection on those things which presented
themselves to me, that I might draw profit from them. For (me thought) I could
meet with far more truth in the discourses which every man makes touching those
affairs which concern him, whose event would quickly condemn him, if he had
judged amiss; then amongst those which lettered Men make in their closets
touching speculations, which produce no effect, and are of no consequence to
them, but that perhaps they may gain so much the more vanity, as they are
farther different from the common understanding: Forasmuch as he must have
employed the more wit and subtilty in endeavoring to render them probable. And
I had always an extreme desire to learn to distinguish Truth from Falsehood,
that I might see clearly into my actions, and pass this life with assurance.

Its true, that whiles I did but consider the Manners of other men, I found
little or nothing wherein I might confirm my self: And I observed in them even
as much diversity as I had found before in the opinions of the Philosophers: So
that the greatest profit I could reap from them was, that seeing diverse things,
which although they seem to us very extravagant and ridiculous, are
nevertheless commonly received and approved by other great Nations, I learned
to believe nothing too firmly, of what had been only persuaded me by example
or by custom, and so by little and little I freed my self from many errors,
which might eclipse our natural light, and render us less able to comprehend
reason. But after I had employed some years in thus studying the Book of the
World, and endeavoring to get experience, I took one day a resolution to study
also within my self, and to employ all the forces of my mind in the choice of
the way I was to follow: which (me thought) succeeded much better, then if I
had never estranged my self from my Country, or from my Books.

PART. II.
I Was then in Germany, whither the occasion of the Wars (which are not yet
finished) called me; and as I returned from the Emperors Coronation toward the
Army, the beginning of Winter stopped me in a place, where finding no
conversation to divert me and on the other sides having by good fortune no
cares nor passions which troubled me, I stayed alone the whole day, shut up in
my Stove, where I had leisure enough to entertain my self with my thoughts.
Among which one of the first was that I betook my self to consider, That often
times there is not so much perfection in works composed of diverse pieces, and
made by the hands of several masters, as in those that were wrought by one
only: So we may observe that those buildings which were undertaken and finished
by one only, are commonly fairer and better ordered then those which diverse
have labored to patch up, making use of old walls, which were built for other
purposes; So those ancient Cities which of borough^, became in a succession of
time great Towns, are commonly so ill girt in comparison of other regular
Places, which were designed on a flatt according to the fancy of an Engeneer;
and although considering their buildings severally, we often find as much or
more art, then in those of other places; Yet to see how they are ranked here a
great one, there a little one, and how they make the streets crooked and
uneven, One would say, That it was rather Fortune, then the will of Men endued
with reason, that had so disposed them. And if we consider, that there has
always been certain Officers, whose charge it was, to take care of private
buildings, to make them serve for the public ornament; We may well perceive,
that it is very difficult, working on the works of others, to make things
complete. So also did I imagine, that those people who formerly had been half
wild, and civilized but by degrees, made their laws but according to the
incommodities which their crimes and their quarrels constrained them to, could
not be so well pollic'd, as those who from the beginning of their association,
observed the constitutions of some prudent Legislator. As it is very certain,
that the state of the true Religion, whose Ordinances God alone has made, must
be incomparably better regulated then all others. And to speak of humane
things, I believe that if Sparta has formerly been most flourishing, it was
not by reason of the goodness of every of their laws in particular, many of
them being very strange, and even contrary to good manners, but because they
were invented by one only, They all tended to One End. And so I thought the
sciences in Books, at least those whose reasons are but probable, and which
have no demonstrations, having been composed of, and by little and little
enlarged with, the opinions of diverse persons, come not so near the Truth, as
those simple reasonings which an understanding Man can naturally make, touching
those things which occurr. And I thought besides also, That since we have all
been children, before we were Men; and that we must have been a long time
governed by our appetites, and by our Tutors, who were often contrary to one
another, and neither of which always counseled us for the best; It Is almost
impossible that our judgment could be so clear or so solid, as it might have
been, had we had the entire use of our reason from the time of our birth, and
been always guided by it alone.

Its true, we do not see the houses of a whole Town pulled down purposely to
re build them of another fashion; and to make the streets the fairer; But we
often see, that diverse pull their own down to set them up again, and that even
sometimes they are forced thereunto, when they are in danger to fall of
themselves, and that their foundations are not sure. By which example I
persuaded my self, that there was no sense for a particular person, to design
the Reformation of a State, changing all from the very foundations, and
subverting all to redress it again: Nor even also to reform the bodies of
Sciences, or the Orders already established in the Schools for teaching them.
But as for all the Opinions which I had till then received into my belief, I
could not do better then to undertake to expunge them once for all, that
afterward I might place in their stead, either others which were better, or
the same again, as soon as I should have adjusted them to the rule of reason.
And I did confidently believe, that by that means I should succeed much better
in the conduct of my life, then if I built but on old foundations, and only
relied on those principles, which I suffered my self to be persuaded to in my
youth, without ever examining the Truth of them. For although I observed herein
diverse difficulties, yet were they not without cure, nor comparable to those
which occurr in the reformation of the least things belonging to the public:
these great bodies are too unweldy to be raised, being cast down, or to be held
up when they are shaken, neither can their falls be but the heavyest.

As for their imperfections, if they have any, as the only diversity which is
amongst them, is sufficient to assure us that many have. Custom has (without
doubt) much sweetened them, and even it has made others wave, or insensibly
correct a many, whereto we could not so well by prudence have given a remedy.
And in fine, They are always more supportable, then their change can be, Even,
as the great Roads, which winding by little and little betwixt mountains,
become so plain and commodious, with being often frequented, that it is much
better to follow them, then to undertake to go in a strait line by climbing
over the rocks, and descending to the bottom of precipices. Wherefore I can by
no means approve of those turbulent and unquiet humors, who being neither
called by birth or fortune to the managing of public affairs, yet are always
forming in Idea, some new Reformation. And did I think there were the least
thing in this Discourse, which might render me suspected of that folly, I
should be extremely sorry to suffer it to be published; I never had any design
which intended farther then to reform my own thoughts and to build on a
foundation which was wholly mine. But though I present you here with a Model
of my work, because it has sufficiently pleased me; I would not therefore
counsel any one to imitate it. Those whom God has better endued with his
graces, may perhaps have more elevated designs; but I fear me, lest already
this be too bold for some. The resolution only of quitting all those opinions
which we have formerly received into our belief, is not an example to be
followed by every One; and the world is almost composed but of two sorts of
Men, to whom it is no ways convenient, to wit, of those, who believing
themselves more able then they are, cannot withold themselves from
precipitating their judgments, nor have patience enough to steer all their
thoughts in an orderly course. Whence it happens, that if they should once take
the liberty to doubt of those principles which they have already received, and
to stray from the common road, they could never keep the path which leads
strait forwards, and so, would straggle all their lives. And of such who having
reason and modesty enough to judge that they are less able to distinguish truth
from falsehood then others, from whom they may receive instruction, ought much
rather to be content to follow other Men's opinions, rather then to seek after
better themselves.

And for my part, I had undoubtedly been of the number of those latter, had I
never had but one Master, or had I not known the disputes which have always
happened amongst the most learned. For having learnt from the very School, That
one can imagine nothing so strange or incredible, which had not been said by
some one of the Philosophers; And having since observed in my travails, That
all those whose opinions are contrary to ours, are not therefore barbarous or
savage, but that many use as much or more reason then we; and having considered
how much one Man with his own understanding, bred up from his childhood among
the French or the Dutch, becomes different from what he would be, had he
always lived amongst the Chinese, or the Cannibals: And how even in the
fashion of our Clothes, the same thing which pleased ten years since, and which
perhaps will please ten years hence, seems now to us ridiculous and extravagant.
So that it is much more Custom and Example which persuades us, then any assured
knowledge; and notwithstanding that plurality of voices is a proof of no
validity, in those truths which are hard to be discovered; for that it is much
more likely for one man alone to have met with them, then a whole Nation; I
could choose no Man whose opinion was to be preferred before another: And I
found my self even constrained to undertake the conduct of my self.

But as a man that walks alone, and in the dark, I resolved to go so softly,
and use so much circumspection in all things, that though I advanced little, I
would yet save my self from falling. Neither would I begin quite to reject,
some opinions, which formerly had crept into my belief, without the consent of
my reason, before I had employed time enough to form the project of the work I
undertook, and to seek the true Method to bring me to the knowledge of all those
things, of which my understanding was capable.

I had a little studied, being young, of the parts of Philosophy, Logic, and
of the Mathematics, the Analysis of the Geometricians, and Algebra: Three arts
or sciences which seemed to contribute somewhat conducing to my design: But
examining them, I observed, That as for Logic, its Sylogisms, and the greatest
part of its other Rules, serve rather to expound to another the things they
know, or even as Lullies art, to speak with judgment of the things we are
ignorant of, then to learn them. And although in effect it contain diverse most
true and good precepts, yet there are so many others mixed amongst them, either
hurtful or superfluous, That it is even as difficult to extract them, as it is
to draw a Diana or a Mercury out of a lump of Marble, which is not yet
rough-hewn; as for the Analysis of the Ancients, and the Algebra of the
Moderns; besides that, they extend only to matters very abstract, and which
seem to be of no use; The first being always so tied to the consideration of
figures, That it cannot exercise the understanding, without very much tiring
the imagination. And in the latter they have so subjected themselves to certain
Rules and ciphers, that they have made a confused and obscure art which
perplexeth the mind, in stead of a Science to instruct it. For this reason, I
thought I ought to seek some other Method, which comprehending the advantages
of these, they might be exempt from their defects. And as the multitude of Laws
often furnishes excuses for vice; so a State is fair better polic'd, when
having but a few, they are very strictly observed therein: So, instead of the
great many precepts whereof Logic is composed, I thought these four following
would be sufficient for me, if I took but a firm and constant resolution not
once to fail in the observation of them.

The first was, never to receive any thing for true, but what I evidently knew
to be so; that is to say, Carefully to avoid Precipitation and Prevention, and
to admit nothing more into my judgment, but what should so clearly and
distinctly present it self to my mind, that I could have no reason to doubt of
it.

The second, to divide every One of these difficulties, which I was to examine
into as many parcels as could be, and, as was requisite the better to resolve
them.

The third, to lead my thoughts in order, beginning by the most simple objects,
and the easiest to be known; to rise by little and little, as by steps, even to
the knowledge of the most ^^xt; and even supposing an Order among those which
naturally do not precede one the other.

And the last, to make every where such exact calculations, and such general
reviews, That I might be confident to have omitted Nothing.

Those long chains of reasons, (though simple and easy) which the
Geometricians commonly use to lead us to their most difficult demonstrations,
gave me occasion to imagine, That all things which may fall under the knowledge
of Men, follow one the other in the same manner, and so we do only abstain
from receiving any one for true, which is not so, and observe always the right
order of deducing them one from the other, there can be none so remote, to
which at last we shall not attain; nor so hid, which we shall not discover.
Neither was I much troubled to seek by which it behooved me to begin, for I
already knew, that it was by the most simple, and the easiest to be discerned.
But considering, that amongst all those who formerly have sought the Truth in
Learning, none but the Mathematicians only could find any demonstrations,
that is to say, any certain and evident reasons. I doubted not, but that it was
by the same that they have examined; although I did hope for no other profit,
but only that they would accustom my Mind to nourish it self with Truths, and
not content it self with false Reasons. But for all this, I never intended to
endeavor to learn all those particular Sciences which we commonly called
Mathematical* And perceiving, that although their objects were different, yet
did they nevertheless agree altogether, in that they consider no other thing,
but the diverse relations or proportions which are found therein; I thought it
therefore better to examine those proportions in general, and without
supposing them but in those subjects, which might the more easily serve to
bring me to the knowledge of them. But withal, without any ways limiting them,
That I might afterward the better fit them to all others whereto they might be
applied. Having also observed, That to know them, it would be sometimes
needful for me to consider every one in particular, or sometimes only to
restrain them, or comprehend many together; I thought, that to consider them
the better in particular I ought to suppose them in lines, for as much as I
find nothing more simple, nor which I could more distinctly represent to my
imagination, and to my senses; But to hold or comprehend many in one, I was
obliged to explain them by certain Ciphers the shortest I possibly could, and
that I should thereby borrow the best of the Geometrical Analysis, and of
Algebra, and so correct all the defects of the one by the other.

As in effect I dare say, That the exact observation of those few precepts I
had chosen, gave me such a facility to resolve all the questions whereto these
two sciences extend; That in two or three months space which I employed in the
examinanation of them, having begun by the most simple and most general, and
every Truth which I found being a rule which afterward served me to discover
others; I did not only compass diverse truths which I had formerly judged most
difficult, But me thought also that toward the end I could determine even in
those which I was ignorant of, by what means and how far it was possible to
resolve them. Wherein perhaps I shall not appear to be very vain if you
consider, That there being but one truth of every thing, who ever finds it,
knows as much of it as one can know; And that for example a child instructed in
Arithmatick having made an addition according to his rules, may be sure to have
found, touching the sum he examined, all what the wit of man could find out.
In a word the method which teaches to follow a right order, and exactly to
enumerate all the circumstances of what we seek, contains, whatsoever
ascertains the rules of Arithmatick.

But that which pleased me most in this Method was the assurance I had, wholly
to use my reason, if not perfectly, at least as much as it was in my power;
Besides this, I perceived in the practice of it, my mind by little and little
accustomed it self to conceive its objects more clearly and distinctly; and
having not subjected it to any particular matter, I promised my self to apply
it also as profitable to the difficulties, of other sciences as I had to
Algebra: Not that I therefore durst at first undertake to examine all which
might present themselves, for that were contrary to the order it prescribes.
But having observed that all their principles were to be borrowed from
Philosophy, in which I had yet found none that were certain, I thought it were
needful for me in the first place to endevor to establish some, and that this
being the most important thing in the world, wherein precipitation and
prevention were the most to be feared, I should not undertake to perform it,
till I had attained to a riper Age then XXIII. which was then mine. Before I
had formerly employed a long time in preparing my self thereunto, as well in
rooting out of my mind all the ill opinions I had before that time received,
as in getting a stock of experience to serve afterward for the subject of my
reasonings, and in exercising my self always in the Method I had prescribed.
That I might the more and more confine my self therein.

PART. III.
BUt as it is not enough to pull down the house where we dwell, before we begin
to re-edify it, and to make provision of materials and architects, or perform
that office our selves; nor yet to have carefully laid the design of it; but we
must also have provided our selves of some other place of abode during the time
of the rebuilding: So that I might not remain irresolute in my actions, while
reason would oblige me to be so in my judgments, and that I might continue to
live the most happily I could, I formed for my own use in the interim a Moral,
which consisted but of three or four Maxims, which I shall communicate unto
you.

The first was to obey the laws and customs of my Country, constantly
adhaering to that Religion wherein by the grace of God I had from mine infancy
bin bred. And in all other things behaving my self according to the most
moderate opinions and those which were farthest from excess, which were
commonly received in practice by the most judicious Men, amongst whom I was to
live: For beginning from that very time, to reckon mine own for nothing,
because I could bring them all to the test, I was confident I could not do
better then follow those of the deepest sense; and although perhaps there are
as understanding men amongst the Persians or Chinese as amongst us, yet I
thought it was more fit to regulate my self by those with whom I was to live,
and that I might truly know what their opinions were, I was rather to observe
what they practiced, then what they taught. Not only by reason of the
corruption of our manners, there are but few who will say, all they believe,
but also because diverse are themselves ignorant of it; for the act of the
thought by which we believe a thing, being different from that whereby we know
that we believe it, the one often is without the other. And amongst diverse
opinions equally received, I made choice of the most moderate only, as well
because they are always the most fit for practice, and probably the best, all
excess being commonly ill; As also that I might less err from the right way, if
I should perhaps miss it, then if having chosen one of the extremes, it might
prove to be the other, which I should have followed. And particularly I placed
amongst extremities, all those promises by which we somewhat restrain our
liberty. Not that I disapproved the laws, which to cure the inconstancy of weak
minds, permit us when we have any good design, or else for the preservation of
Commerce, one that is but indifferent, to make vows or contracts, which oblige
us to persevere in them: But because I saw nothing in the world remain always
in the same state; and for mine own particular, promised my self to perfect
more and more my judgment, and not to impair it, I should have thought my self
guilty of a great fault against right understanding, if because I then approved
any thing, I were also afterward obliged to take it for good, when perhaps it
ceased to be so, or that I had ceased to esteem it so.

My second Maxim was, To be the most constant and resolute in my actions that
I could; and to follow with no less perseverance the most doubtful opinions,
when I had once determined them, then if they had been the most certain.
Imitating herein Travelers, who having lost their way in a Forest, ought not
to wander, turning now this way, and then that, and less to abide in one place;
but still advance straight forwards, toward one way, and not to change on
slight occasions, although perhaps at first Chance only moved them to determine
that choice: For by that means, if they do not go directly whither they desire,
they will at least arrive somewhere where they will probably be better then in
the midst of a Forest. So the actions of this life admitting often of no
delay, its a most certain Truth, That when it is not in our power to discern
the truest opinions, we are to follow the most probable: Yea, although we find
no more probability in the one then in the other, we yet ought to determine
some way, considering them afterward no more as doubtful in what they relate
to practice; but as most true and certain; forasmuch as the reason was so,
which made us determine it. And this was sufficient for that time to free me
from all the remorse and repentance which uses to perplex the consciences of
those weak and staggering minds, which inconstantly suffer themselves to pass
to the practice of those things as good, which they afterward judge evil.

My third Maxim was, To endeavor always rather to conquer my self then
Fortune; and to change my desires, rather then the order of the world: and
generally to accustom my self to believe, That there is nothing wholly in our
power but our thoughts; so that after we have done our best, touching things
which are without us, all what is wanting of success in respect of us is
absolutely impossible. And this alone seemed sufficient to hinder me from
desiring any thing which I could not acquire, and so to render me content. For
our will naturally moving us to desire nothing, but those things which our
understanding presents in some manner as possible, certain it is, that if we
consider all the good which is without us, as equally distant from our power,
we should have no more regret for the want of those which seem due to our
births, when without any fault of ours we shall be deprived of them, then we
have in wanting the possessions of the Kingdoms of China or Mexico. And making
(as we say) virtue of necessity, we should no more desire to be in health being
sick, or free being in prison, then we now do, to have bodies of as
incorruptible a matter as diamonds, or wings to fly like birds. But I confess,
that a long exercise, and an often reiterated meditation, is necessary to
accustom us to look on all things with that bias: And I believe, in this
principally consists, the secret of those Philosophers who formerly could
snatch themselves from the Empire of Fortune, and in spite of pains and
poverty, dispute felicity with their Gods. for employing themselves incessantly
in considering the bounds which Nature had prescribed them, they so perfectly
persuaded themselves, That nothing was in their power but their thoughts, that,
that only was enough to hinder them from having any affection for other
things. And they disposed so absolutely of them, that therein they had some
reason to esteem themselves more rich and powerful, more free and happy then
any other men; who wanting this Philosophy, though they were never so much
favored by Nature and Fortune, could never dispose of all things so well as
they desired.

Lastly, To conclude these Morals, I thought fit to make a review of men's
several employments in this life, that I might endeavor to make choice of the
best, and without prejudice to other men's, I thought I could not do better then
to continue in the same wherein I was, that is, to employ all my life in
cultivating my Reason, and advancing my self, as far as I could in the
knowledge of Truth, following the Method I had prescribed my self. I was
sensible of such extreme contentment since I began to use this Method, that I
thought none could in this life be capable of any more sweet and innocent: and
daily discovering by means thereof, some Truths which seemed to me of
importance, and commonly such as other men were ignorant of, the satisfaction I
thereby received did so possess my mind, as if all things else concerned me
not. Besides, that the three preceding Maxims were grounded only on the
design I had, to continue the instruction of my self. For God having given to
every one of us a light to discern truth from falsehood, I could not believe I
ought to content my self one moment with the opinions of others, unless I had
proposed to my self in due time to employ my judgment in the examination of
them. Neither could I have exempted my self from scruple in following them, had
I not hoped to lose no occasion of finding out better, if there were any.

But to conclude, I could not have bounded my desires, nor have been content,
had I not followed a way, whereby thinking my self assured to acquire all the
knowledge I could be capable of: I thought I might by the same means attain to
all that was truly good, which should ever be within my power; forasmuch as our
Will inclining it self to follow, or fly nothing but what our Understanding
proposes good or ill, to judge well is sufficient to do well, and to judge the
best we can, to do also what is best; to wit, to acquire all virtues, and with
them all acquirable goods: and whosoever is sure of that, he can never fail of
being content.

After I had thus confirmed my self with these Maxims, and laid them up with
the Articles of Faith, which always had the first place in my Belief, I judged
that I might freely undertake to expel all the rest of my opinions. And
forasmuch as I did hope to bring it the better to pass by conversing with men,
then by staying any longer in my stove, where I had had all these thoughts:
before the Winter was fully ended, I returned to my travels; and in all the
nine following years I did nothing but roll here and there about the world,
endeavoring rather to be a spectator, then an actor in all those Comedies
which were acted therein: and reflecting particularly on every subject which
might render it suspected, or afford any occasion of mistake. In the mean time
I rooted out of my mind all those errors which formerly had crept in. Not
that I therein imitated the Scepticks, who doubt only to the end they may
doubt, and affect to be always unresolved: For on the contrary, all my design
tended only to fix my self, and to avoid quick-mires and sands, that I might
find rock and clay: which (me thought) succeeded well enough; forasmuch as,
seeking to discover the falsehood or uncertainty of those propositions I
examined, (not by weak conjectures, but by clear and certain ratiocinations) I
met with none so doubtful, but I thence drew some conclusion certain enough,
were it but only this, That it contained nothing that was certain. And as in
pulling down an old house, commonly those materials are reserved which may
serve to build a new one; so in destroying all those my opinions which I judged
ill grounded, I made diverse observations, and got several experiences which
served me since to establish more certain ones. And besides I continued to
exercise my self in the Method I had prescibed.

For I was not only careful to direct all my thoughts in general according to
its rules, but I from time to time reserved some hours, which I particularly
employed to practice it in difficulties belonging to the Mathematics, loosening
from all the principles of other Sciences, which I found not stable enough, as
you may see I have done in diverse explained in my other following discourses.
And thus not living in appearance otherwise then those who having no other
business then to lead a sweet and innocent life, study to separate pleasures
from vices, and use honest recreations to enjoy their ease without weariness;
I did not forbear to pursue my design, and advance in the knowledge of truth,
perhaps more, then if I had done nothing but read books or frequent learned men.

Yet these nine years were vanished, before I had engaged my self in those
difficulties which use to be disputed amongst the learned; or begun to seek the
grounds of any more certain Philosophy then the Vulgar: And the example of
diverse excellent Men, who formerly having had the same design, seemed not to
me to have succeeded therein, made me imagine so much difficulty, that I had
not perhaps dared so quickly to have undertaken it, had I not perceived that
some already had given it out that I had already accomplished it. I know not
whereupon they grounded this opinion, and if I have contributed any thing
thereto by my discourse, it must have been by confessing more ingeniously what
I was ignorant of, then those are wont to do who have a little studied, and
perhaps also by comunicating those reasons, I had to doubt of many things which
others esteemed most eminent, rather then that I bragged of any learning. But
having integrity enough, not to desire to be taken for what I was not, I
thought that I ought to endeavor by all means to render my self worthy of the
reputation which was given me. And it is now eight years since this desire made
me resolve to estrange my self from all places where I might have any
acquaintance, and so retire my self hither in a Country where the long
continuance of the war has established such orders, that the Armies which
are intertain'd there, seem to serve only to make the inhabitants enjoy the
fruits of peace with so much the more security; and where amongst the crowd of
a great people more active and solicitous for their own affairs, then curious
of other men's, not wanting any of those necessaries which are in the most
frequented Towns, I could live as solitary and retired as in the most remote
deserts.

PART. IIII.
I Know not whether I ought to entertain you with the first Meditations which I
had there, for they are so Metaphysicall and so little common, that perhaps
they will not be relished by all men: And yet that you may judge whether the
foundations I have laid are firm enough, I find my self in a manner obliged to
discourse them; I had long since observed that as for manners, it was sometimes
necessary to follow those opinions which we know to be very uncertain, as much
as if they were indubitable, as is beforesaid: But because that then I desired
only to intend the search of truth, I thought I ought to do the contrary, and
reject as absolutely false all wherein I could imagine the least doubt, to the
end I might see if afterward any thing might remain in my belief, not at all
subject to doubt. Thus because our senses sometimes deceive us, I would suppose
that there was nothing which was such as they represented it to us. And because
there are men who mistake themselves in reasoning, even in the most simple
matters of Geometry, and make therein Paralogismes, judging that I was as
subject to fail as any other Man, I rejected as false all those reasons, which
I had before taken for Demonstrations. And considering, that the same thoughts
which we have waking, may also happen to us sleeping, when as not any one of
them is true. I resolved to faign, that all those things which ever entered into
my Mind, were no more true, then the illusions of my dreams. But presently
after I observed, that whilst I would think that all was false, it must
necessarily follow, that I who thought it, must be something. And perceiving
that this Truth, I think, therefore, I am, was so firm and certain, that all
the most extravagant suppositions of the Scepticks was not able to shake it, I
judged that I might receive it without scruple for the first principle of the
Philosophy I sought.

Examining carefully afterward what I was; and seeing that I could suppose
that I had no body, and that there was no World, nor any place where I was: but
for all this, I could not feign that I was not; and that even contrary thereto,
thinking to doubt the truth of other things, it most evidently and certainly
followed, That I was: whereas, if I had ceased to think, although all the rest
of whatever I had imagined were true, I had no reason to believe that I had
been. I knew then that I was a substance, whose whole essence or nature is, but
to think, and who to be, has need of no place, nor depends on any material
thing. So that this Me, to wit, my Soul, by which I am what I am, is wholly
distinct from the Body, and more easy to be known then it; and although that
were not, it would not therefore cease to be what it is.

After this I considered in general what is requisite in a Proposition to make
it true and certain: for since I had found out one which I knew to be so, I
thought I ought also to consider wherein that certainty consisted: and having
observed, That there is nothing at all in this, I think, therefore I am, which
assures me that I speak the truth, except this, that I see most clearly, That
to think, one must have a being; I judged that I might take for a general
rule, That those things which we conceive clearly and distinctly, are all true;
and that the only difficulty is punctually to observe what those are which we
distinctly conceive.

In pursuance whereof, reflecting on what I doubted, and that consequently my
being was not perfect; for I clearly perceived, that it was a greater
perfection to know, then to doubt, I advised in my self to seek from whence I
had learnt to think on something which was more perfect then I; and I knew
evidently that it must be of some nature which was indeed more perfect. As for
what concerns the thoughts I had of diverse other things without my self, as of
heaven, earth, light, heat, and a thousand more, I was not so much troubled to
know whence they came, for that I observed nothing in them which seemed to
render them superior to me; I might believe, that if they were true, they were
dependancies from my nature, as far forth as it had any perfection; and if they
were not, I made no account of them; that is to say, That they were in me,
because I had something deficient. But it could not be the same with the Idea
of a being more perfect then mine: For to esteem of it as of nothing, was a
thing manifestly impossible. And because there is no less repugnancy that the
more perfect should succeed from and depend upon the less perfect, then for
something to proceed from nothing, I could no more hold it from my self: So as
it followed, that it must have bin put into me by a Nature which was truly more
perfect then I, and even which had in it all the perfections whereof I could
have an Idea; to wit, (to explain my self in one word) God. Whereto I added,
that since I knew some perfections which I had not, I was not the only Being
which had an existence, (I shall, under favor, use here freely the terms of
the Schools) but that of necessity there must be some other more perfect
whereon I depended, and from whom I had gotten all what I had: For had I been
alone, and depending upon no other thing, so that I had had of my self all that
little which I participated of a perfect Being, I might have had by the same
reason from my self, all the remainder which I knew I wanted, and so have been
my self infinite, eternal, immutable, all-knowing, almighty; and lastly, have
had all those perfections which I have observed to be in God. For according to
the way of reasoning I have now followed, to know the nature of God, as far as
mine own was capable of it, I was only to consider of those things of which I
found an Idea in me, whether the possessing of them were a perfection or no;
and I was sure, that any of those which had any imperfections were not in him,
but that all others were. I saw that doubtfulness, inconstancy, sorrow and the
like, could not be in him, seeing I could my self have wished to have been
exempted from them. Besides this, I had the Ideas of diverse sensible and
corporeal things; for although I supposed that I doted, and that all that I
saw or imagined was false; yet could I not deny but that these Ideas were truly
in my thoughts. But because I had most evidently known in my self, That the
understanding Nature is distinct from the corporeal, considering that all
composition witnesses a dependency, and that dependency is manifestly a
defect, I thence judged that it could not be a perfection in God to be composed
of those two Natures; and that by consequence he was not so composed. But that
if there were any Bodies in the world, or else any intelligences, or other
Natures which were not wholly perfect, their being must depend from his power
in such a manner, that they could not subsist one moment without him.

Thence I went in search of other Truths; and having proposed Geometry for my
object, which I conceived as a continued Body, or a space indefinitely spread in
length, breadth, height or depth, divisible into diverse parts, which might take
several figures and bignesses, and be moved and transposed every way. For the
Geometricians suppose all this in their object. I past through some of their
most simple demonstrations; and having observed that this great certainty,
which all the world grants them, is founded only on this, that men evidently
conceived them, following the rule I already mentioned. I observed also that
there was nothing at all in them which ascertained me of the existence of their
object. As for example, I well perceive, that supposing a Triangle, three
angles necessarily must be equal to two right ones: but yet nevertheless I saw
nothing which assured me that there was a Triangle in the world. Whereas
returning to examine the Idea which I had of a perfect Being, I found its
existence comprised in it, in the same manner as it was comprised in that of a
Triangle, where the three angles are equal to two right ones; or in that of a
sphere, where all the parts are equally distant from the center. Or even yet
more evidently, and that by consequence, it is at least as certain that God,
who is that perfect Being, is, or exists, as any demonstration in Geometry can
be.

But that which makes many persuade themselves that there is difficulty in
knowing it, as also to know what their Soul is, it is that they never raise
their thoughts beyond sensible things, and that they are so accustomed to
consider nothing but by imagination, which is a particular manner of thinking
on material things, that whatsoever is not imaginable seems to them not
intelligible. Which is manifest enough from this, that even the Philosophers
hold for a Maxim in the Schools, That there is nothing in the understanding
which was not first in the sense; where notwithstanding its certain, that the
Ideas of God and of the Soul never were. And (me thinks) those who use their
imagination to comprehend them, are just as those, who to hear sounds, or smell
odours, would make use of their eyes; save that there is yet this difference,
That the sense of seeing assures us no less of the truth of its objects, then
those of smelling or hearing do: whereas neither our imagination, nor our
senses, can ever assure us of any thing, if our understanding intervenes not.

To be short, if there remain any who are not enough persuaded of the existence
of God, and of their soul, from the reasons I have produced, I would have them
know, that all other things, whereof perhaps they think themselves more
assured, as to have a body, and that there are Stars, and an earth, and the
like, are less certain. For although we had such a moral assurance of these
things, that without being extravagant we could not doubt of them. However,
unless we be unreasonable when a metaphysicall certainty is in question, we
cannot deny but we have cause enough not to be wholly confirmed in them, when
we consider that in the same manner we may imagine being asleep, we have other
bodies, and that we see other Stars, and another earth, though there be no such
thing. For how do we know that those thoughts which we have in our dreams, are
rather false then the others, seeing often they are no less lively and
significant, and let the ablest men study it as long as they please, I believe
they can give no sufficient reason to remove this doubt, unless they presuppose
the existence of God. For first of all, that which I even now took for a rule,
to wit, that those things which were most clearly and distinctly conceived, are
all true, is certain, only by reason, that God is or exists, and that he is a
perfect being, and that all which we have comes from him. Whence it follows,
that our Idea's or notions, being real things, and which come from God in all
wherein they are clear and distinct, cannot therein be but true. So that if we
have very often any which contain falsehood, they cannot be but of such things
which are somewhat confused and obscure, because that therein they signify
nothing to us, that is to say, that they are thus confused in us only, because
we are not wholly perfect. And it is evident that there is no less contrariety
that falsehood and imperfection should proceed from God, as such, then there is
in this, that truth and falsehood proceed from nothing. But if we know not that
whatsoever was true and real in us comes from a perfect and infinite being,
how clear and distinct soever our Idea's were, we should have no reason to
assure us, that they had the perfection to be true.

Now after that the knowledge of God, and of the Soul has rendered us thus
certain of this rule, it is easy to know; that the extravaganceys which we
imagine in our sleep, ought no way to make us doubt of the truth of those
thoughts which we have being awake: For if it should happen, that even sleeping
we should have a very distinct Idea; as for example, A Geometritian should
invent some new demonstration, his sleeping would not hinder it to be true. And
for the most ordinary error of our dreams, which consists in that they
represent unto us several objects in the same manner as our exterior senses
do, it matters not though it give us occasion to mistrust the truth of those
Ideas, because that they may also often enough cozen us when we do not sleep;
As when to those who have the Jaundies, all they see seems yellow; or, as the
Stars or other bodies at a distance, appear much less then they are. For in
fine, whether we sleep or wake, we ought never to suffer our selves to be
persuaded but by the evidence of our Reason; I say, (which is observable) Of
our Reason, and not of our imagination, or of our senses. As although we see
the Sun most clearly, we are not therefore to judge him to be of the bigness we
see him of; and we may well distinctly imagine the head of a Lion, set on the
body of a Goat, but therefore we ought not to conclude that there is a Chimera
in the world. For reason does not dictate to us, that what we see or imagine
so, is true: But it dictates, that all our Idea's or notions ought to have some
grounds of truth; For it were not possible, that God who is all perfect, and
all truth, should have put them in us without that: And because that our
reasonings are never so evident, nor so entire while we sleep, as when we wake,
although sometimes our imaginations be then as much or more lively and express.
It also dictates to us, that our thoughts, seeing they cannot be all true by
reason that we are not wholly perfect; what they have of truth, ought
infallibly to occur in those which we have being awake, rather then in our
dreams.

PART. V.
I Should be glad to pursue this Discourse, and show you the whole Series of
the following Truths, which I have drawn from the former: But because for this
purpose, it were now necessary for me to treat of several questions, which are
controverted by the learned, with whom I have no desire to imbroil my self, I
believe it better for me to abstain from it; and so in general only to
discover what they are, that I may leave the wisest to judge whether it were
profitable to inform the public more particularly of them. I always remained
constant to my resolution, to suppose no other Principle but that which I now
made use of, for the demonstration of the Existence of God, and of the Soul;
and to receive nothing for true, which did not seem to me more clear and more
certain then the demonstrations of Geometry had formerly done. And yet I dare
say, that I have not only found out the means to satisfy my self, in a short
time, concerning all the principal difficulties which are usually treated in
Philosophy. But that also I have observed certain Laws which God has so
established in Nature, and of which he has imprinted such notions in our
Souls, that when we shall have made sufficient reflections upon them, we cannot
doubt but that they are exactly observed in whatsoever either is, or is done in
the World. Then considering the connection of these Laws, me thinks, I have
discovered diverse Truths, more useful and important, then whatever I learned
before, or ever hoped to learn.

But because I have endeavored to lay open the principal of them in a
Treatise, which some considerations hinder me from publishing; I can no way
better make them known, then by relating summarily what it contains.

I had a design to comprehend all what I thought I knew, before I would write
it, touching the nature of material things. But even as Painters, not being
able equally well to represent upon a flat all the several facies of a solid
body, choose the principal of them, which they place toward the light; and
shadowing the others, make them appear no more then they do to our sight: So,
fearing lest I should not bring into this Discourse all which was in my
thoughts, I only undertook to set forth at large my conceptions touching the
light; and upon that occasion to add somewhat of the Sun, and of the fixed
Stars, by reason that it proceeds almost all from thence; of the Heavens,
because they transmit it; of the Planets, of the Comets, and of the Earth,
because they cause it to reflect; and in particular, of all Bodies which are on
the earth, whether for that they are either colored, or transparent, or
luminous; and last of all, of Man, because he is the Spectator thereof. As
also, in some mnner to shadow out all these things, and that I might the more
freely speak what I judged, without being obliged to follow, or to refute the
opinions which are received amongst the Learned, I resolved to leave all this
world here to their disputes, and to speak only of what would happen in a new
one, if God now created some where in those imaginary spaces matter enough to
compose it, and that he diversely and without order agitated the several parts
of this matter, so as to compose a Chaos of it as confused as the Poets could
feign one: and that afterward he did nothing but lend his ordinary concurrence
to Nature, and leave her to work according to the Laws he has established.

Thus first of all I described this Matter, and endeavored to represent it
such, that me thinks there is nothing in the world more clear, or more
intelligible, except what was beforesaid of God, and of the Soul. For even I
expressly supposed that there was in it none of those forms and qualities which
are disputed in the Schools; nor generally any thing but that the knowledge
thereof was so natural to our understandings, that we could not even feign to
be ignorant of it. Besides, I made known what the Laws of Nature were; and
without grounding my reasons on any other principles, but on the infinite
perfections of God, I did endeavor to demonstrate all those which ^^ght be
questioned, and to make them appear to be such, that although God had created
diverse worlds, there could have been none where they were not observed.
Afterward I showed how the greater part of the Matter of this Chaos ought,
according to those Laws, to dispose and order it self in a certain manner,
which would make it like our Heavens: And how some of these parts were to
compose an Earth, and some Planets and Commets, some others a Sun and fixed
Stars. And here enlarging my self on the subject of Light, I at length
explained what that light was, which was to be in the Sun and Stars; and thence
how it traversed in an instant the immense spaces of the Heavens, and how it
reflected it self from Planets and Commets toward the Earth. I added also
diverse things touching the substance, situation, the motions, and all the
several qualities of these heavens and these stars: So that I thought I had
sa^^ enough to make known, That there is nothing remarkable in those of this
world, which ought not, or at least could not appear altogether like to these
of that world which I described.

Thence I came to speak particularly of the Earth; how, although I had expressly
supposed, that God had placed no weight in the Matter whereof it was composed;
yet all its parts exactly tended toward its center: How that there being water
and air upon its superficies, the disposition of the Heavens, and of the
Stars, and chiefly of the Moon, ought to cause a flood and an ebb, which in
all circumstances was like to that which we observe in our Seas; And besides, a
certain course as well of the water, as of the air, from East to West, as is also
observed between the Tropicks: How the Mountains, the Seas, the Springs and
Rivers might naturally be formed therein, and Metals run in the mines, and
Plants grow in the Fields, and generally all bodies be therein engendered which
are called mixed or composed..

And amongst other things, because that next the Stars, I know nothing in the
world but Fire, which produces light, I studied to make all clearly understood
which belongs to its nature; how it is made, how it is fed, how sometimes it has
heat only without light, and sometimes only light without heat; how it can
introduce several colors into several bodies, and diverse other qualities; how
it dissolves some, and hardens others; how it can consume almost all, or
convert them into ashes and smoke: and last of all, how of those ashes, by the
only violence of its action, it forms glass. For this transmutation of ashes
into glass, seeming to me to be as admirable as any other operation in Nature,
I particularly took pleasure to describe it.

Yet would I not infer from all these things, that this World was created
after the manner I had proposed. For it is more propable that God made it such
as it was to be, from the beginning. But it is certain, and it is an opinion
commonly received amongst the Divines, That the action whereby he now
preserves it, is the same with that by which he created it. So that, although
at the beginning he had given it no other form but that of a Chaos (provided,
that having established the Laws of Nature, he had afforded his concurrence to
it, to work as it used to do) we may believe (without doing wrong to the
miracle of the Creation) that by that alone all things which are purely
material might in time have rendered themselves such as we now see them: and
their nature is far easier to conceive, when by little and little we see them
brought forth so, then when we consider them quite formed all at once.

From the description of inanimate Bodies and Plants, I passed to that of
Animals, and particularly to that of Men. But because I had not yet knowledge
enough to speak of them in the same style as of the others; to wit, in
demonstrating effects by their causes, and showing from what seeds, and in what
manner Nature ought to produce them; I contented my self to suppose, That God
formed the body of a Man altogether like one of ours, as well in the exterior
figure of its members, as in the interior conformity of its organs; without
framing it of other matter then of that which I had described; and without
putting in it at the beginning any reasonable soul, or any other thing to serve
therein for a vegetative or sensitive soul; unless he stirred up in his heart
one of those fires without light which I had already discovered; and that I
conceived of no other nature but that which heats hay when its housed before it
be dry, or which causes new Wines to boil when it works upon the rape: For
examining the functions which might be consequently in this body, I exactly
found all those which may be in us, without our thinking of them; and to which
our soul (that is to say, that distinct part from our bodies, whose nature (as
has been said before) is only to think) consequently does not contribute, and
which are all the same wherein we may say unreasonable creatures resemble us.
Yet could I not find any, of those which depending from the thought, are the
only ones which belong unto us as Men; whereas I found them all afterward,
having supposed that God created a reasonable soul, and that he joined it to
this body, after a certain manner which I described.

But that you might see how I treated this matter, I shall here present you
with the explication of the motion of the heart, and of the arteries, which
being the first and most general (which is observed in animals) we may thereby
easily judge what we ought to think of all the rest. And that we may have the
less difficulty to understand what I shall say thereof, I wish those who are
not versed in Anatomy, would take the pains, before they read this, to cause
the heart of some great animal which has lungs, to be dissected; for in all of
them its very like that of a Man: and that they may have shown them the two
cells or concavities which are there: First that on the right side, whereto two
large conduits answer, to wit, the vena cava, which is the principal receptacle
of blood, and as the body of a tree, whereof all the other veins of the body
are branches; and the arterious vein, which was so mis-call'd, because that in
effect its an artery, which taking its origin from the heart, divides it self
after being come forth, into diverse branches, which every way spread themselves
through the lungs. Then the other which is on the left side, whereunto in the
same manner two pipes answer, which are as large, or larger then the former; to
wit, the veinous artery, which was also il named, forasmuch as its nothing else
but a vein which comes from the lungs, where its divided into several branches
interlaid with those of the arterious vein, and those of that pipe which is
called the Whistle, by which the breath enters. And the great artery, which
proceeding from the heart, disperseth its branches through all the body. I would
also that they would carefully observe the eleven little skins, which, as so
many little doors, open and shut the four openings which are in these two
concavities; to wit, three at the entry of the vena cava, where they are so
disposed, that they can no ways hinder the blood which it contains from
running into the right concavity of the heart; and yet altogether hinder it
from coming out. Three at the entry of the arterious vein; which being disposed
quite contrary, permit only the blood which is in that concavity to pass to the
lungs; but not that which is in the lungs to return thither. And then two
others at the entry of the veinous artery, which permits the blood to run to
the left concavity of the heart, but opposes its return. And three at the
entry of the great artery, which permit it to go from the heart, but hinder its
return thither. Neither need we seek any other reason for the number of these
skins, save only that the opening of the veinous artery, being oval-wise, by
reason of its situation, may be fitly shut with two; whereas the other, being
round, may the better be closed with three. Besides, I would have them
consider, that the great artery and the arterious vein are of a composition
much stronger then the veinous artery or the vena cava. And that these two
later grow larger before they enter into the heart, and make (as it were) two
purses, called the ears of the heart, which are composed of a flesh like it;
and that there is always more heat in the heart then in any other part of the
body. And in fine, that if any drop of blood enter into these concavities, this
heat is able to make it presently swell and dilate it self, as generally all
liquors do, when drop by drop we let them fall into a very hot vessel.

For after this I need say no more for to unfold the motion of the heart, but
that when these concavities are not full of blood, necessarily there runs some
from the vena cava into the right, and from the veinous artery into the left;
for that these two vessels are always full of it, and that their openings which
are toward the heart cannot then be shut: But that as soon as there is thus but
two drops of blood entered, one in either of these concavities, these drops,
which cannot but be very big, by reason that their openings whereby they enter
are very large, and the vessels whence they come very full of blood, are
rarefied and dilated because of the heat which they find therein. By means
whereof, causing all the heart to swel, they drive and shut the five little
doors which are at the entry of the two vessels whence they come, hindering
thereby any more blood to fall down into the heart, and continuing more and
more to rarifie themselves, they drive and open the six other little doors
which are at the entry of the other two vessels whence they issue, causing by
that means all the branches of the arterious vein, and of the great artery, to
swel (as it were) at the same time with the heart: which presently after falls,
as those arteries also do, by reason that the blood which is entered therein
grows colder, and their six little doors shut up again, and those five of the
vena cava, and of the veinous artery open again, and give way to two other
drops of blood, which again swell the heart and the arteries in the same manner
as the preceding did. And because the blood which thus enters into the heart,
passes through those two purses, which are called the ears; thence it comes,
that their motion is contrary to the heart's, and that they fall when that
swells.

Lastly, That they who know not the force of Mathematical demonstrations, and
are not accustomed to distinguish true reasons from probable ones, may not
venture to deny this without examining it, I shall advertise them, that this
motion which I have now discovered, as necessarily follows from the only
disposition of the organs (which may plainly be seen in the heart,) and from
the heat (which we may feel with our fingers,) and from the nature of the blood
(which we may know by experience,) as the motions of a clock does by the force,
situation and figure of its weight and wheels.

But if it be asked, how it comes that the blood of the veins is not exhausted,
running so continually into the heart; and how that the arteries are not too
full, since all that which passes through the heart discharges it self into
them: I need answer nothing thereto but what has been already writ by an
English Physician, to whom this praise must be given, to have broken the ice in
this place, and to be the first who taught us, That there are several little
passages in the extremity of the arteries whereby the blood which they receive
from the heart, enters the little branches of the veins; whence again it sends
it self back toward the heart: so that its course is no other thing but a
perpetual circulation. Which he very well proves by the ordinary experience of
Chirurgians, who having bound the arm indifferently hard above the the place
where they open the vein, which causes the blood to issue more abundantly,
then if it had not been bound. And the contrary would happen, were it bound
underneath, between the hand and the incision, or bound very hard above. For
its manifest, that the band indifferently tied, being able to hinder the blood
which is already in the arm to return toward the heart by the veins; yet it
therefore hinders not the new from coming always by the arteries, by reason
they are placed under the veins, and that their skin being thicker, are less
easy to be pressed; as also that the blood which comes from the heart, seeks
more forcibly to pass by them toward the hand, then it does to return from
thence toward the heart by the veins. And since this blood which issues from
the arm by the incision made in one of the veins, must necessarily have some
passage under the bond, to wit, toward the extremities of the arm, whereby it
may come thither by the arteries, he also proves very well what he says of the
course of the blood through certain little skins, which are so disposed in
diverse places along the veins, which permit it not to pass from the middle
toward the extremities, but only to return from the extremities toward the
heart. And besides this, experience shows, That all the blood which is in the
body may in a very little time run out by one only artery's being cut,
although it were even bound very near the heart, and cut betwixt it and the
ligature: So that we could have no reason to imagine that the blood which
issued thence could come from any other part.

But there are diverse other things which witness, that the true cause of this
motion of the blood is that which I have related. As first, The difference
observed between that which issues out of the veins, and that which comes out
of the arteries, cannot proceed but from its being rarefied and (as it were)
distilled by passing through the heart: its more subtle, more lively, and more
hot presently after it comes out; that is to say, being in the arteries, then
it is a little before it enters them, that is to say, in the veins. And if you
observe, you will find, that this difference appears not well but about the
heart; and not so much in those places which are farther off. Next, the
hardness of the skin of which the artery vein and the great artery are
composed, shows sufficiently, that the blood beats against them more forcibly
then against the veins. And why should the left concavity of the heart, and the
great artery be more large and ample then the right concavity, and the
arterious vein; unless it were that the blood of the veinous artery, having bin
but only in the lungs since its passage through the heart, is more subtle, and
is rarefied with more force and ease then the blood which immediately comes
from the vena cava. And what can the Physicians divine by feeling of the pulse,
unless they know, that according as the blood changes its nature, it may by
the heat of the heart be rarefied to be more or less strong, and more or less
quick then before. And if we examine how this heat is communicated to the other
members, must we not avow that it is by means of the blood, which passing the
heart, reheats it self there, and thence disperseth it self through the whole
body: whence it happens, that if you take away the blood from any part, the
heat by the same means also is taken away. And although the heart were as
burning as hot iron, it were not sufficient to warm the feet and the hands so
often as it does, did it not continue to furnish them with new blood.

Besides, from thence we know also that the true use of respiration is to bring
fresh air enough to the lungs, to cause that blood which comes from the right
concavity of the heart, where it was rarefied, and (as it were) changed into
vapors, there to thicken, and convert it self into blood again, before it fall
again into the left, without which it would not be fit to serve for the
nourishment of the fire which is there. Which is confirmed, for that its seen,
that animals which have no lungs have but one only concavity in the heart; and
that children, who can make no use of them when they are in their mothers
bellies, have an opening, by which the blood of the vena cava runs to the left
concavity of the heart, and a conduit by which it comes from the arterious vein
into the great artery without passing the lungs.

Next, How would the concoction be made in the stomach, unless the heart sent
heat by the arteries, and therewithal some of the most fluid parts of the
blood, which help to dissolve the meat received therein? and is not the act
which converts the juice of these meats into blood easy to be known, if we
consider, that it is distilled by passing and repassing the heart, perhaps more
then one or two hundred times a day? And what need we ought else to explain the
nutrition and the production of diverse humors which are in the body, but to
say, that the force wherewith the blood in rarifying it self, passes from the
heart toward the extremities of the arteries, causes some of its parts to
stay amongst those of the members where they are, and there take the place of
some others, which they drive from thence? And that according to the situation,
or the figure, or the smalnesse of the pores which they meet, some arrive
sooner in one place then others. In the same manner as we may have seen in
several sieves, which being diversely pierced, serve to sever diverse grains one
from the other. And briefly, that which is most remarkable herein, is the
generation of the animal spirits, which are as a most subtle wind, or rather,
as a most pure and lively flame, which continually rising in great abundance
from the heart to the brain, discharges it self thence by the nerves into the
muscles, and gives motion to all the members; without imagining any other
reason which might cause these parts of the blood, which being most moved, and
the most penetrating, are the most fit to form these spirits, tend rather
toward the brain, then to any other part. Save only that the arteries which
carry them thither, are those which come from the heart in the most direct line
of all: And that according to the rules of the Mechanics, which are the same
with those of Nature, when diverse things together strive to move one way, where
there is not room enough for all; so those parts of blood which issue from the
left concavity of the heart tend toward the brain, the weaker and less
agitated are expelled by the stronger, who by that means arrive there alone.

I had particularly enough expounded all these things in a Treatise which I
formerly had designed to publish: In pursuit whereof, I had therein showed what
ought to be the fabric of the nerves and muscles of an humane body, to cause
those animal spirits which were in them, to have the power to move those
members. As we see that heads a while after they are cut off, yet move of
themselves, and bite the ground, although they are not then animated. What
changes ought to be made in the brain to cause waking, sleeping, and dreaming:
how light, sounds, smells, tastes, heat, and all other qualities of exterior
objects, might imprint several Ideas by means of the senses. How hunger and
thirst, and the other interior passions might also send theirs thither. What
ought to be taken therein for common sense, where these Ideas are received; for
memory which preserves them; and for fancy, which can diversely change them, and
form new ones of them; and by the same means, distributing the animal spirits
into the muscles, make the members of the body move in so many several
fashions, and as fitly to those objects which present themselves to its senses;
and to the interior passions which are in them, as ours may move themselves
without the consent of the Will. Which will seem nothing strange to those, who
knowing how many Automatas or moving Machines the industry of men can make,
employing but very few pieces, in comparison of the great abundance of bones,
muscles, nerves, arteries, veins, and all the other parts which are in the body
of every Animal, will consider this body as a fabric, which having been made
by the hands of God, is incomparably better ordered, and has more admirable
motions in it then any of those which can be invented by men. And herein I
particularly insisted, to make it appear, that if there were such Machines
which had organs, and the exterior figure of an Ape, or of any other
unreasonable creature, we should find no means of knowing them not to be
altogether of the same nature as those Animals: whereas, if there were any
which resembled our bodies, and imitated our actions as much as morally it were
possible, we should always have two most certain ways to know, that for all
that they were not real men: The first of which is, that they could never have
the use of speech, nor of other signs in framing it, as we have, to declare
our thoughts to others: for we may well conceive, that a Machine may be so
made, that it may utter words, and even some proper to the corporal actions,
which may cause some change in its organs; as if we touch it in some part, and
it should ask what we would say; or so as it might cry out that one hurts it,
and the like: but not that they can diversifie them to answer sensibly to all
what shall be spoken in its presence, as the dullest men may do. And the second
is, That although they did diverse things as well, or perhaps better, then any of
us, they must infallibly fail in some others, whereby we might discover that
they act not with knowledge, but only by the disposition of their organs: for
whereas Reason is an universal instrument which may serve in all kind of
encounters, these organs have need of some particular disposition for every
particular action: whence it is, that its morally impossible for one Machine to
have several organs enough to make it move in all the occurrences of this
life, in the same manner as our Reason makes us move. Now by these two means we
may also know the difference which is between Men and Beasts: For it is a very
remarkable thing, that there are no men so dull and so stupid, without
excepting those who are out of their wits, but are capable to rank several
words together, and of them to compose a Discourse, by which they make known
their thoughts: and that on the contrary, there is no other creature, how
perfect or happily soever brought forth, which can do the like. The which
happens, not because they want organs; for we know, that Pyes and Parrots can
utter words even as we can, and yet cannot speak like us; that is to say, with
evidence that they think what they say. Whereas Men, being born deaf and dumb,
and deprived of those organs which seem to make others speak, as much or more
then beasts, usually invent of themselves to be understood by those, who
commonly being with them, have the leisure to learn their expressions. And this
not only witnesses, that Beasts have less reason than men, but that they
have none at all. For we see there needs not much to learn to speak: and
forasmuch as we observe inequality amongst Beasts of the same kind, as well as
amongst men, and that some are more easily managed then others; it is not to be
believed, but that an Ape or a Parrot which were the most perfect of its kind,
should therein equal the most stupid child, or at least a child of a
distracted brain, if their souls were not of a nature wholly different from
ours. And we ought not to confound words with natural motions, which witness
passions, and may be imitated by Machines as well as by Animals; nor think (as
some of the Ancients) that beasts speak, although we do not understand their
language: for if it were true, since they have diverse organs which relate to
ours, they could as well make themselves understood by us, as by their like. Its
likewise very remarkable, that although there are diverse creatures which
express more industry then we in some one of their actions; yet we may well
perceive, that the same show none at all in many others: So that what they do
better then we, proves not at all that they have reason; for by that reckoning
they would have more then any of us, and would do better in all other things;
but rather, that they have none at all, and that its Nature only which works
in them according to the disposition of their organs. As we see a Clock, which
is only composed of wheels and springs, can reckon the hours, and measure the
times more exactly then we can with all our prudence.

After this I had described the reasonable Soul, and made it appear, that it
could no ways be drawn from the power of the Matter, as other things whereof I
had spoken; but that it ought to have been expressly created: And how it
suffiseth not for it to be lodged in our humane body as a Pilot in his ship, to
move its members only; but also that its necessary it be joined and united
more strongly therewith to have thoughts and appetites like ours, and so make a
real^ man.

I have here dilated my self a little on the subject of the Soul, by reason 't
is of most importance; for, next the error of those who deny God, which I
think I have already sufficiently confuted, there is none which sooner
estrangeth feeble minds from the right way of virtue, then to imagine that the
soul of beasts is of the same nature as ours, and that consequently we have
nothing to fear nor hope after this life, no more then flies or ants. Whereas,
when we know how different they are, we comprehend much better the reasons
which prove that ours is of a nature wholly independing from the body, and
consequently that it is not subject to die with it. And that when we see no
other cause which destroys it, we are naturally thence moved to judge that it is
immortal.

PART. VI.
ITs now three years since I ended the Treatise which contains all these
things, and that I began to review it, to send it afterward to the Press,
when I understood, that persons to whom I submit, and whose authority can no
less command my actions, then my own Reason does my thoughts, had disapproved
an opinion in Physics, published a little before by another; of which I will
not say that I was, but that indeed I had observed nothing therein, before
their censure, which I could have imagined prejudicial either to Religion or
the State; or consequently, which might have hindered me from writing the same,
had my Reason persuaded me thereto. And this made me fear, lest in the same
manner there might be found some one amongst mine, in which I might have been
mistaken; notwithstanding the great care I always had to admit no new ones into
my belief, of which I had not most certain demonstrations; and not to write
such as might turn to the disadvantage of any body. Which was sufficient to
oblige me to change my resolution of publishing them. For although the reasons
for which I had first of all taken it, were very strong; yet my inclination,
which always made me hate the trade of Book-making, presently found me out
others enough to excuse my self from it. And these reasons on the one and other
side are such, that I am not only somewhat concerned to speak them; but happily
the Public also to know them.

I never did much esteem those things which proceeded from mine own brain; and
so long as I have gathered no other fruits from the Method I use, but only
that I have satisfied my self in some difficulties which belong to speculative
Sciences, or at least endeavored to regulate my Manners by the reasons it
taught me, I thought my self not obliged to write any thing of them. For, as
for what concerns Manners, every one abounds so much in his own sense, That we
may find as many Reformers as heads, were it permitted to others, besides
those whom God has established as Sovereigns over his people, or at least, to
whom he has dispensed grace and zeal enough to be Prophets, to undertake the
change of any thing therein. And although my Speculations did very much please
me, I did believe that other men also had some, which perhaps pleased them
more. But as soon as I had acquired some general notions touching natural
Philosophy, and beginning to prove them in diverse particular difficulties, I
observed how far they might lead a man, and how far different they were from
the principles which to this day are in use; I judged, that I could not keep
them hid without highly sinning against the Law, which obliges us to procure,
as much as in us lies, the general good of all men. For they made it appear to
me, that it was possible to attain to points of knowledge, which may be very
profitable for this life: and that in stead of this speculative Philosophy
which is taught in the Schools, we might find out a practical one, by which
knowing the force and workings of Fire, Water, Air, of the Stars, of the
Heavens, and of all other Bodies which environ us, distinctly, as we know the
several trades of our Handicrafts, we might in the same manner employ them to
all uses to which they are fit, and so become masters and possessours of
Nature. Which is not only to be desired for the invention of very many
expedients of Arts, which without trouble might make us enjoy the fruits of the
earth, and all the conveniences which are to be found therein: But chiefly
also for the preservation of health, which (without doubt) is the first good,
and the foundation of all other good things in this life. For even the mind
depends so much on the temper and disposition of the organs of the body, that
if it be possible to find any way of making men in the general wiser, and
more able then formerly they were, I believe it ought to be sought in Physic.
True it is, that which is now in use contains but few things, whose benefit is
very remarkable: But (without any design of slighting of it) I assure my self,
there is none, even of their own profession, but will consent, that whatsoever
is known therein, is almost nothing in comparison of what remains to be known.
And that we might be freed from very many diseases, as well of the body as of
the mind, and even also perhaps from the weaknesses of old age, had we but
knowledge enough of their Causes, and of all the Remedies wherewith Nature has
furnished us. Now having a design to employ all my life in the enquiry of so
necessary a Science; and having found a way, the following of which me thinks
might infallibly lead us to it, unless we be hindered by the shortness of life,
or by defect of experiments. I judged that there was no better Remedy against
those two impediments, but faithfully to communicate to the public, all that
little I should discover, and to invite all good Wits to endeavor to advance
farther in contributing every one, according to his inclination and power, to
those Experiments which are to be made, and communicating also to the public
all the things they should learn; so that the last, beginning where the
precedent ended, and so joining the (...) and labors of many in one, we might
all together advance further then any particular Man could do.

I also observed touching Experiments, that they are still so much the more
necessary, as we are more advanced in knowledge. For in the beginning it is
better to use those only which of themselves are presented to our senses, and
which we cannot be ignorant of, if we do but make the least reflections upon
them, then to seek out the rarest and most studied ones. The reason whereof is,
that those which are rarest, do often deceive, when we seldom know the same
of the most common ones, and that the circumstances on which they depend, are,
as it were, always so particular, and so small, that it is very uneasy to find
them out. But the order I observed herein was this. First, I endeavored to
find in general the Principles or first Causes of whatsoever is or may be in
the world, without considering any thing for this end, but God alone who
created it, or drawing them elsewhere, then from certain seeds of Truth which
naturally are in our souls. After this, I examined what were the first and most
ordinary Effects which might be deduced from these Causes: And me thinks that
thereby I found out Heavens, Stars, an Earth; and even on the Earth, Water,
Air and Fire, Minerals, and some other such like things, which are the most
common, and the most simple of all, and consequently the most easy to be
understood. Afterward, when I would descend to those which were more
particular, there were so many several ones presented themselves to me, that I
did believe it impossible for a humane understanding to distinguish the forms
and species of Bodies which are on the earth, from an infinite number of others
which might be there, had it been the will of God so to place them: Nor by
consequence to apply them to our use, unless we set the Effects before the
Causes, and make use of diverse particular experiments; In relation to which,
revolving in my mind all those objects which ever were presented to my senses,
I dare boldly say, I observed nothing which I could not fitly enough explain by
the principles I had found. But I must also confess that the power of Nature
is so ample and vast, and these principles are so simple and general, that I
can observe almost no particular Effect, but that I presently know it might be
deduced from thence in many several ways: and that commonly my greatest
difficulty is to find in which of these ways it depends thereon; for I know no
other expedient for that, but again to seek some experiments, which may be
such, that their event may not be the same, if it be in one of those ways which
is to be expressed, as if it were in another. In fine, I am gotten so far, That
(me thinks) I see well enough what course we ought to hold to make the most
part of those experiments which may tend to this effect. But I also see they
are such, and of so great a number, that neither my hands nor my estate (though
I had a thousand times more then I have) could ever suffice for all. So that
according as I shall hereafter have convenience to make more or fewer of them,
I shall also advance more or less in the knowledge of Nature, which I hoped I
should make known by the Treatise which I had written; and therein so clearly
show the benefit which the Public may receive thereby, that I should oblige
all those in general who desire the good of Mankind; that is to say, all those
who are indeed virtuous, (and not so seemingly, or by opinion only) as well to
communicate such experiments as they have already made, as to help me in the
enquiry of those which are to be made.

But since that time, other reasons have made me alter my opinion, and think
that I truly ought to continue to write of all those things which I judged of
any importance, according as I should discover the truth of them, and take the
same care, as if I were to print them; as well that I might have so much the
more occasion thoroughly to examine them; as without doubt, we always look more
narrowly to what we offer to the public view, then to what we compose only
for our own use: and oftentimes the same things which seemed true to me when I
first conceived them, appeared afterward false to me, when I was committing
them to paper: as also that I might lose no occasion of benefiting the Public,
if I were able, and that if my Writings were of any value, those to whose hands
they should come after my death, might to make what use of them they think fit.

But that I ought not any ways to consent that they should be published during
my life; That neither the opposition and controversies, whereto perhaps they
might be obnoxious, nor even the reputation whatsoever it were, which they
might acquire me, might give me any occasion of mispending the time I had
designed to employ for my instruction; for although it be true that every Man
is obliged to procure, as much as in him lies, the good of others; and that to
be profitable to no body, is properly to be good for nothing: Yet it is as true,
that our care ought to reach beyond the present time; and that it were good to
omit those things which might perhaps conduce to the benefit of those who are
alive, when our design is, to do others which shall prove far more
advantageous to our posterity; As indeed I desire it may be known that the
little I have learnt hitherto, is almost nothing in comparison of what I am
ignorant of; and I do not despair to be able to learn: For it is even the same
with those, who by little and little discover the truth in Learning; as with
those who beginning to grow rich, are less troubled to make great purchases,
then they were before when they were poorer, to make little ones. Or else one
may compare them to Generals of Armies, whose Forces usually increase
proportionably to their Victories; and who have need of more conduct to
maintain themselves after the loss of a battle, then after the gaining one, to
take Towns and Provinces. For to endeavor to overcome all the difficulties and
errors which hinder us to come to the knowledge of the Truth, is truly to fight
battails. And to receive any false opinion touching a general or weighty
matter, is as much as to lose one; there is far more dexterity required to
recover our former condition, then to make great progresses where our
Principles are already certain. For my part, if I formerly have discovered some
Truths in Learning, as I hope my Discourse will make it appear I have, I may
say, they are but the products and dependances of five or six principal
difficulties which I have overcome, and which I reckon for so many won Battails
on my side. Neither will I forbear to say; That I think, It Is only necessary
for me to win two or three more such, wholly to perfect my design. And that I
am not so old, but according to the ordinary course of Nature, I may have time
enough to effect it. But I believe I am so much the more obliged to husband the
rest of my time, as I have more hopes to employ it well; without doubt, I
should have diverse occasions of impending it, should I publish the grounds of
my Physics. For although they are almost all so evident, that to believe them,
it is needful only to understand them; and that there is none whereof I think
my self unable to give demonstration. Yet because it is impossible that they
should agree with all the several opinions of other men, I foresee I should
often be diverted by the opposition they would occasion.

It may be objected, These oppositions might be profitable, as well to make me
know my faults, as if any thing of mine were good to make others by that means
come to a better understanding thereof; and as many may see more then one man,
beginning from this time to make use of my grounds, they might also help me
with their inventions. But although I know my self extremely subject to fail,
and do never almost trust my first thoughts; yet the experience I have of the
objections which may be made unto me, hinder me from hoping for any profit from
them; For I have often tried the judgments as well of those whom I esteemed my
friends, as of others whom I thought indifferent, and even also of some, whose
malignity and envy did sufficiently discover what the affection of my friends
might hide. But it seldom happened that any thing was objected against me,
which I had not altogether foreseen, unless it were very remote from my
Subject: So that I never almost met with any Censurer of my opinions, that
seemed unto me either less rigorous, or less equitable then my self. Neither
did I ever observe, that by the disputations practiced in the Schools any Truth
which was formerly unknown, was ever discovered. For whilst every one seeks to
overcome, men strive more to maintain probabilities, then to weigh the reasons
on both sides; and those who for a long time have been good Advocates, are not
therefore the better Judges afterward.

As for the benefit which others may receive from the communication of my
thoughts, it cannot also be very great, forasmuch as I have not yet perfected
them, but that it is necessary to add many things thereunto, before a useful
application can be made of them. And I think I may say without vanity, That if
there be any one capable thereof, it must be my self, rather then any other.
Not but that there may be diverse wits in the world incomparably better then
mine; but because men cannot so well conceive a thing and make it their own,
when they learn it of another, as when they invent it themselves: which is so
true in this Subject, that although I have often explained some of my opinions
to very understanding men, and who, whilst I spoke to them, seemed very
distinctly to conceive them; yet when they repeated them, I observed, that they
changed them almost always in such a manner, that I could no longer own them
for mine. Upon which occasion, I shall gladly here desire those who come after
me, never to believe those things which may be delivered to them for mine, when
I have not published them my self. And I do not at all wonder at the
extravagancies which are attributed to all those ancient Philosophers, whose
Writings we have not; neither do I thereby judge, that their thoughts were very
irrational, seeing they were the best Wits of their time; but only that they
have been ill conveyed to us: as it appears also, that never any of their
followers surpassed them. And I assure my self, that the most passionate of
those, who now follow Aristotle, would believe himself happy, had he but as
much knowledge of Nature as he had, although it were on condition that he never
might have more: They are like the ivy, which seeks to climb no higher then
the trees which support it, and ever after tends downwards again when it has
attained to the height thereof: for, me thinks also, that such men sink
downwards; that is to say, render themselves in some manner less knowing, then
if they did abstain from studying; who being not content to know all which is
intelligibly set down in their Author, will besides that, find out the
solution of diverse difficulties of which he says nothing, and perhaps never
thought of them: yet their way of Philosophy is very fit for those who have but
mean capacities: For the obscurity of the distinctions and principles which
they use causes them to speak of all things as boldly, as if they knew them,
and maintain all which they say, against the most subtle and most able; so
that there is no means left to convince them. Wherein they seem like to a
blind man, who, to fight without disadvantage against one that sees, should
challenge him down into the bottom of a very dark cellar: And I may say, that
it is these men's interest, that I should abstain from publishing the principles
of the Philosophy I use, for being most simple and most evident, as they are, I
should even do the same in publishing of them, as if I opened some windows, to
let the day into this cellar, into which they go down to fight. But even the
best Wits have no reason to wish for the knowledge of them: for if they will be
able to speak of all things, and acquire the reputation of being learned, they
will easily attain to it by contenting themselves with probability, which
without much trouble may be found in all kind of matters; then in seeking the
Truth, which discovers it self but by little and little, in some few things;
and which, when we are to speak of others, oblige us freely to confess our
ignorance of them. But if they prefer the knowledge of some few truths to the
vanity of seeming to be ignorant of nothing, as without doubt they ought to do,
and will undertake a design like mine, I need not tell them any more for this
purpose, but what I have already said in this Discourse: For if they have a
capacity to advance farther then I have done, they may with greater consequence
find out of themselves whatsoever I think I have found; Forasmuch as having
never examined any thing but by order, it is certain, that what remains yet for
me to discover, is in it self more difficult and more hid, then what I have
already here before met with; and they would receive much less satisfaction in
learning it from me, then from themselves. Besides that, the habit which they
would get by seeking first of all the easy things, and passing by degrees to
others more difficult, will be more useful to them, then all my instructions.
As I for my part am persuaded, that had I been taught from my youth all the
Truths whose demonstrations I have discovered since, and had taken no pains to
learn them, perhaps I should never have known any other, or at least, I should
never have acquired that habit, and that faculty which I think I have, still to
find out new ones, as I apply my self to the search of them. And in a word, if
there be in the world any work which cannot be so well ended by any other, as
by the same who began it, it is that which I am now about.

It Is true, That one man will not be sufficient to make all the experiments
which may conduce thereunto: But withal, he cannot profitably employ other
hands then his own, unless it be those of Artists, or others whom he hires,
and whom the hope of profit (which is a very powerful motive) might cause
exactly to do all those things he should appoint them: For as for voluntary
persons, who by curiosity or a desire to learn, would perhaps offer themselves
to his help, besides that commonly they promise more then they perform, and
make only fair propositions, whereof none ever succeeds, they would infallibly
be paid by the solution of some difficulties, or at least by complements and
unprofitable entertainments, which could not cost him so little of his time,
but he would be a loser thereby. And for the Experiments which others have
already made, although they would even communicate them to him, (which those
who call them Secrets would never do,) they are for the most part composed of
so many circumstances, or superfluous ingredients, that it would be very hard
for him to decypher the truth of them: Besides, he would find them all so ill
expressed, or else so false, by reason that those who made them have labored to
make them appear conformable to their principles; that if there were any which
served their turn, they could not at least be worth the while which must be
employed in the choice of them. So that, if there were any in the world that
were certainly known to be capable of finding out the greatest things, and the
most profitable for the Public which could be, and that other men would
therefore labor always to assist him to accomplish his Designs; I do not
conceive that they could do more for him, then furnish the expense of the
experiments whereof he stood in need; and besides, take care only that he may
not be by any body hindered of his time. But besides that, I do not presume so
much of my Self, as to promise any thing extraordinary, neither do I feed my
self with such vain hopes, as to imagine that the Public should much interesse
it self in my designs; I have not so base a mind, as to accept of any favor
whatsoever, which might be thought I had not deserved.

All these considerations joined together, were the cause three years since why
I would not divulge the Treatise I had in hand; and which is more, that I
resolved to publish none whilst I lived, which might be so general, as that
the Grounds of my Philosophy might be understood thereby. But since, there has
been two other reasons have obliged me to put forth some particular Essays, and
to give the Public some account of my Actions and Designs. The first was,
that if I failed therein, diverse who knew the intention I formerly had to print
some of my Writings, might imagine that the causes for which I forbore it,
might be more to my disadvantage then they are. For although I do not affect
glory in excess; or even, (if I may so speak) that I hate it, as far as I judge
it contrary to my rest, which I esteem above all things: Yet also did I never
seek to hide my actions as crimes, neither have I been very wary to keep my
self unknown; as well because I thought I might wrong my self, as that it might
in some manner disquiet me, which would again have been contrary to the perfect
repose of my mind which I seek. And because having always kept my self
indifferent, caring not whether I were known or no, I could not choose but get
some kind of reputation, I thought that I ought to do my best to hinder it at
least from being ill. The other reason which obliged me to write this, is, that
observing every day more and more the design I have to instruct my self,
retarded by reason of an infinite number of experiments which are needful to
me, and which its impossible for me to make without the help of others;
although I do not so much flatter my self, as to hope that the Public, shares
much in my concernments; yet will I not also be so much wanting to my self, as
to give any cause to those who shall survive me, to reproach this, one day to
me, That I could have left them diverse things far beyond what I have done, had
I not too much neglected to make them understand wherein they might contribute
to my design.

And I thought it easy for me to choose some matters, which being not subject
to many Controversies, nor obliging me to declare any more of my Principles
then I would willingly, would nevertheless express clearly enough, what my
abilities or defects are in the Sciences. Wherein I cannot say whether I have
succeeded or no; neither will I prevent the judgment of any man by speaking of
my own Writings: but I should be glad they might be examined; and to that end I
beseech all those who have any objections to make, to take the pains to send
them to my Stationer, that I being advertised by him, may endeavor at the same
time to adjoyn my Answer thereunto: and by that means, the Reader seeing both
the one and the other, may the more easily judge of the Truth. For I promise,
that I will never make any long Answers, but only very freely confess my own
faults, if I find them; or if I cannot discover them, plainly say what I shall
think requisite in defense of what I have writ, without adding the explanation
of any new matter, that I may not endlesly engage my self out of one into
another.

Now if there be any whereof I have spoken in the beginning, of the Optics and
of the Meteors, which at first jarr, by reason that I call them Suppositions,
and that I seem not willing to prove them; let a man have but the tience to
read the whole attentively, and I hope he will rest satisfied: For (me thinks)
the reasons follow each other so closely, that as the later are demonstrated by
the former, which are their Causes; the former are reciprocally proved by the
later, which are their Effects. And no man can imagine that I herein commit the
fault which the Logicians call a Circle; for experience rendering the greatest
part of these effects most certain, the causes whence I deduce them serve not
so much to prove, as to explain them; but on the contrary, they are those which
are proved by them. Neither named I them Suppositions, that it might be known
that I conceive my self able to deduce them from those first Truths which I
have before discovered: But that I would not expressly do it to cross certain
spirits, who imagine that they know in a day al what another may have thought
in twenty years, as soon as he has told them but two or three words; and who
are so much the more subject to err, and less capable of the Truth, as they
are more quick and penetrating) from taking occasion of erecting some
extravagant Philosophy on what they may believe to be my Principles, and lest
the fault should be attributed to me. For as for those opinions which are
wholly mine, I excuse them not as being new, because that if the reasons of
them be seriously considered, I assure my self, they will be found so plain,
and so agreeable to common sense, that they will seem less extraordinary and
strange then any other which may be held on the same Subjects. Neither do I
boast that I am the first Inventor of any of them; but of this indeed, that I
never admitted any of them, neither because they had, or had not been said by
others, but only because Reason persuaded me to them.

If Mechanics cannot so soon put in practice the Invention which is set forth
in the Optics, I believe that therefore men ought not to condemn it; forasmuch
as skill and practice are necessary for the making and completing the Machines
I have described; so that no circumstrance should be wanting. I should no less
wonder if they should succeed at first trial, then if a man should learn in a
day to play excellently well on a Lute, by having an exact piece set before
him. And if I write in French, which is the language of my Country, rather then
in Latin, which is that of my Tutors, it is because I hope such who use their
mere natural reason, will better judge of my opinions, then those who only
believe in old Books. And for those who join a right understanding with study,
(who I only wish for my Judges) I assure my self, they will not be so partial
to the Latin, as to refuse to read my reasons because I express them in a
vulgar tongue.

To conclude, I will not speak here in particular of the progress I hoped to
make hereafter in Learning; Nor engage my self by any promise to the Public,
which I am not certain to perform. But I shall only say, That I am resolved to
employ the remainder of my life in no other thing but the study to acquire some
such knowledge of Nature as may furnish us with more certain rules in Physic
then we hitherto have had: And that my inclination drives me so strongly from
all other kind of designs, chiefly from those which cannot be profitable to
any, but by prejudicing others; that if any occasion obliged me to spend my
time therein, I should believe I should never succeed therein: which I here
declare, though I well know it conduces not to make me considerable in the
world; neither is it my ambition to be so. And I shall esteem my self always
more obliged to those by whose favor I shall without disturbance enjoy my ease,
then to them who should proffer me the most honorable employment of the earth.

FINIS.

