THE AMORS OF THE COUNT DE DUNOIS MADE ENGLISH.

-- In Amore tuentur
Diliciae humani generis.


London, Printed for William Cademan, at the Popes Head in the New-Exchange in
the Strand, 1675.

TO THE READER.
FOR an Author to Court the Reader by an Epistle into a good opinion of his
book is as ancient as customary, and therefore like a man that is called to a
confession of his faith, I here give you an account of the Exposing this small
Treatise to the public. Meeting it by accident, and in the reading finding it
ingenious, pleasant, and new; I took upon me the Translating of it how well I
have acquitted my self I leave to the judicious Reader, and now as you shall
find it, it is much at your service; if it were better done, I should be more
satisfied, and then should not in the least question, but it would be more
gratefully received by you: but however it has pleased me, and I hope will not
meet with your disrellish; if it does, as I cannot help it, so neither will I
be such a Fool as to concern my self at it.

Those who know the Author are too well assured of his ingenuity to doubt any
thing of the address of this Novel, he is endowed with so great a soul that it
is impossible for him to write in a mean low style, and his fancy in all be
does has the highest flights and turns in them imaginable; therefore if you can
content your selves with that dress I have clothed his thoughts in, I am
confident you will not but very well approve of the design he has taken in this
Amor. But still I have my ends in it, my own pleasure; and the Stationer if he
can put it off, his own profit; and you when you have paid your money for it,
may either give it room in your Studies, or else commit it to the flames, as it
shall like you best, Farewell.

Books Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the New-Exchange in
the Strand.
CLarks Examples; in two Vol. Fol. Sandies Travels, Fol. The Protestants
Religion is a sure foundation and written by Charles Earl of Darby Lord of Man
and the Isles. Quar. Fair warning in two Visitation Sermons written by Seth
Bushel, D. D. The great efficacy of the Clergy a Visitation Sermon by T.
Duncomb. D. D. Liquor Alchabest or a discourse of the immortal Dissolvent of
Paracelsus and Helmont, etc. Octa. Sinners Tears, Twelv. Devout Communicant,
Twelv. Sherleys Phylosophical Essay, Octa. Guliel. Farrarii de bello Batavico,
Octa. Court Songs, Octa. Collections of Poems, Octa. Westminster Quibbles,
Octa. Hogan Moganides, or the Dutch Hudebrass. Octa.
PLAYS.
RIvals: A Comedy. Catiline: A Tragedy. Island Princess. Flora's Vagaries. Town
Shifts. Citizen Turned Gentleman. Morning Ramble. Fatal Jealousy. Mackbeth.
Cambyses. Empress of Morocco. Herod and Mariamne. Careless Lovers. English
Princess. Reformation. Spanish Rogue. Marcellia T. C. The Mall or the Modesh
Lover. Notes on Morocco. Love and Revenge. Rehearsal. Mock Tempest. Dumb Lady.
Gentleman Dancing Master. Alcibiades. Dutch Loves.
Plays in the Press.
The Conquest of China by the Tartars. Pyso's Conspiracy.
THE AMORS OF THE Count de DVNOIS.
AFter the Conquest of Italy, Charles the Eighth returning into his Kingdom,
met with the Queen at Amboise, and the Duke and Duchess of Alenson, with their
Daughter Madamois^lle d' Alenson, whose Wit and Beauty were extremely improved
since the King his departure: The Queen gave a thousand praises to the
Conquerours, and especially to the Count de Dunois, to whom France ows its
safety, in distinguishing him as much from the others, as he surpassed them in
all the Qualities that might procure him the esteem of the whole world in
general, and particularly of that Great Queen. Though the Prince received the
Elogies she gave him with a very great Modesty, yet they did pleasantly flatter
his Glory, and heighten in his Person that Noble and generous Mien, which
accompanied all his Actions; but it was not only that Glory which made him
sensible, he began to perceive in his Breast certain sentiments of inquietude,
which in a short time after he knew to be the beginnings of a strong and mighty
Passion: and though he had not always been under an indifferency, yet he was
well assured that the inclinations he had had till then, were but the slight
amusements of an idle and an unactive Youth. Madam de Cominge, who was one of
the fairest Ladies about the Court, would fain have appeared to him
unsupportable with all her Charms, but notwithstanding the designs she had to
please him, it was only Madem iselle d' Alenson that seemed to him worthy of
all his Addresses and Submissions.

The Application with which he gave them her, was quickly discovered by the
Marshall de Gie, who was the first person that took notice of it, and this
knowledge gave him the most villainous affliction in the world: He did
whatsoever he could to confirm himself in this Opinion, although he had no
defires to have the Confirmation made out; and it is certain, he did not know
that he was become a Lover of Mademoiselle d' Alenson, but by the jealousy
which he had of the Count de Dunois: This Marshall was well advanced in years,
and the long practice of War had made him very politic and subtle in his
actions, much contrary to the present Mode of Gallantry; he was become a severe
Moralist, who had always kept himself far enough from any thing of that nature:
But at last his fatal hour was come, he examined into the cause of his new
disquiets; he was assured of them, and did oppose them, but could not get the
Mastery; and though he held this for an Infallible Maxim, that Love was the
Rock of Virtue, yet he could not hinder his splitting upon it. A doubtfulness
in Love is an unspeakable torment, he hoped that he might be delivered from it,
in discovering whither the Count de Dunois was really in Love with Mademoiselle
d' Alenson: To this end he goes one Morning to his Bedside, and finding no body
with him, he presently fell into discourse about the Ladies: the Marshall, who
would fain have instructed himself, and spoke his real thoughts, extolled the
Beauty of Mademoiselle d' Alenson to the highest pitch imaginable, and did no
at the same time forget to observe the countenance of Dunois, he drew from it
the assured conjectures of the passion of that Prince, which was likewise
confirmed by his discourse, when the Marshall to make him confess it, told
him, what were his thoughts of him: It is certain, says the Count, that the
Beauty of this Princess has made so deep an impression upon my heart, that it
never yet had the like; I knew presently I had never been in Love before, and I
believe I shall never more count the days of my life, but by that in which my
Love began: But, said the Marshall to him, are you assured that she will
answer your kindness, and do you fear nothing from her tender age, that is
unable to make her know your Merit, and the respect you bear her? I fear all,
replied the Count, but I hope all likewise, and I am sure of this, that Fear,
and Hope, are the infallible consequences of Love: You have, replied the
Marshall, an infinite Merit, which procures you the esteem of all that come
near you: But, Sir, take my word for it, Love is sometimes an effect of
Capriciousness, rather than Reason; and though you deserve the entire
affections of the fair Princess you love, yet Fate it may be, has resolved it
otherwise: For my part, I count it, continued the Marshall, more dangerous to
stand the adventure of Love than War; and the difficulty which yet could never
stop me in the most perilous occasions, does here appear to me a most dreadful
thing: You know also, Mounsieur le Marshall, replied the Count, that the
greater the danger is, the more glorious is the Conquest, an easy Victory
procures no satisfaction; but howsoever, I am resolved to abandon my self
wholly to my Love: As Victory, said the Marshall, is the appanage of Heroes, I
am persuaded, Sir, you will get the Conquest of her you aspire to, provided
that the Interests of State do not oppose those of your Love.

I cannot tell whether the Marshall should not have said more than he would
have done, if the Marquess de la Trimouille had not come in, and ended the
Conversation, to begin one more general: the Marshall took his leave with his
head full of a thousand thoughts, which afforded him but worse troubles, his
passion pressed him to a Conduct which his Virtue did condemn; but at length
the weaker was forced to quit the Field, and made him resolve upon seeking out
a Confident who was in the same Interests and Concerns with him, to thwart and
oppose the Love of the Count de Dunois; for this purpose he made choice of
Madam de Cominge, whom he knew to be of a piercing and subtle Wit, and very
daring in her Enterprises; and withal, he was not ignorant of the inclinations
she had for the Count. After he had made her an ingenuous Confession of his
Love for Mademoiselle d' Alenson, he craftily got out of her, that she had a
Passion for the Count de Dunois: they resolved that Madam de Cominge, who had
her lodgings in the Castle, should be more constantly near Mademoiselle d'
Alenson, and that she should endeavor to insinuate her self into the
affections of the Princess, by all the complaisances possible to procure her
her Friendship. It so happened, in the mean time, that the others were thinking
of the divertisements that might be took in that place, it was a fair season,
and the Spring began to reinvest the Trees with Leaves, as it did the Meadows
with ^lowers: And as the World has none so pleasant and charming, as those that
border the River de Loire, the Queen made account to spend one whole day in the
Isle S. Jean, but there wanting a place convenient to receive her, it put their
Inventions upon the Tenter how to contrive a way to keep off the scorching heat
of the Sun; but the Count de Dunois took upon him the charge of that day, and
they prepared themselves for this Innocent pleasure, as if it had been for a
Magnificent Entertainment, there chanced to be a good deal of Rain, which
retarded them for some days; during which, the Marshall being gone to Madam d'
Alenson's, found her a little melancholy, which she was not used to be; she
had dismissed Maisiere, one of the pleasant Fellows that follow the Court,
whose open folly conceals a politic subtilty, which never fails to lead them
to their proposed ends, and who was sometimes used to divert the Princess; this
made the Marshall conjecture that her mind was disturbed, especially seeing
her two or three times in a posture that showed as if she was in a thousand
perplexities which way to take, and what to do; he quickly reasoned like one
that is Jealous on this change, and thought, that the Count de Dunois had been
entertaining Mademoiselle d' Alenson with his Passion; and without ever
thinking on the consequences of that false conjecture, he could not refrain
asking her the cause of her melancholy: Truly, said she to him, I cannot tell
you presently, though I must confess I am not so cheerful as ordinarily I was
wont to be, yet I cannot give you a reason for it: So great a change, Madam,
interrupted the Marshall, seldom happens without a cause; you live not in an
Age where the General Affairs can much afflict you, and you are not enough
instructed in those of your House to have them give you any concern, which
makes me conclude, that your melancholiness arises from some secret Source,
which if it be not too great a presumption in me to be desirous to search into,
I should be bold, perhaps, to assure my self that I should not have too remote
a guess at it: You are very pleasant, Mounsieur le Marshall, to persuade me
that I am under some distemper, when you hear me make no complaints; I tell you
again what I have already told you, which is, that I have no trouble upon me,
and that if you found me in a melancholy humor, it is because you came just in
a time that I was seriously musing; and indeed, continued she, I scarce know
any one body that has not theirs, let them be never so brisk. Ah! Mademoiselle,
replied the Marshall, one may easily get out of it, when it is only taking up
for ones pleasure; but you have defended this little time too well, to make me
think that it is not infinitely agreeable and delightful to you. You have
reason, pursued the Marshall, you have reason, Mademoiselle, that Declaration
which Mounsieur le Count de Dunois has made you of his Love, well deserves you
should think upon it; I beg your pardon, Mademoiselle, if I concern my self
with a secret where without doubt you would not call me to your Counsel: I know
not, replied modestly Mademoiselle d' Alenson, whether Mounsieur le Count de
Dunois has any kindness for me, but this I do know very well, that he has not
been so hardy and venturous as to acquaint me with it: He knows that persons of
his and my Quality are not Masters of their Choice, and though what you say
should be true, it ought not to be from him that I should learn it: At least it
should be from your prudence not to do it, replied the Marshall; for as you do
say very well, Mademoiselle, that persons of your Birth are almost always the
Victims of the Public Good, and the Maxims of State often prevail over the
inclinations of the heart, affairs are now in such a posture, as the King has
need of making himself Allies, to oppose the Enemies that the Report of his
Glory has raised up against him. For God's sake, Mounsieur le Marshall, said
Mademoiselle d' Alenson, do not you interrupt this serious moment which you
suppose gives me so much delight, and if it can be, do not you make of it an
insufferable one; let us rather discourse of the divertisement for which we are
preparing. The Princess had no sooner ended these words, but the Count de
Dunois entered her Chamber; the Marshall departed quickly after, but meeting
with Madam de Cominge, he sent her with all speed unto Mademoiselle d'
Alensons, to afford no time to this Lover of entertaining his fair Princess in
private. As she saw him coming in, she blushed, not being able, without some
confusion, to think on what the Marshall had just before told her; yet she
concealed it, and that she might not expose her self to a conversation that
might have increased it, she fell to talk of general things, doing whatever she
could to prevent falling into particulars: The Count de Dunois, on the
contrary, was still letting down his voice, and with earnestness sought after
that which Mademoiselle d' Alenson shunned with all the precaution she could;
but for all that he was just ready to explain himself, when Madam de Cominge
came in, which much to his unhappiness obliged him to desist for that time.

This was the first mischievous hour that she began to prove fatal to the
Count, who notwithstanding took it then for a thing that fell out by accident.
After they had discoursed some time about indifferent matters, there came so
much company to Mademoiselle d' Alenson's, that made him despair to recover the
opportunity that Madam de Cominge had made him lose: He went to the Queen, with
whom he found but few persons; she told him, she had perceived he was fallen in
Love with the Princess, and she had the goodness to assure him, that she
approved his Love, and would be favorable in it. After he had confirmed her in
it, he humbly begged she would continue her protection to him, and be mighty
sollicitous with the King that he would give him his leave to Marry with the
Princess: The Queen promised she would when she saw convenient time, but she
told him that she thought it best to prepossess the Duke and Duchess d'
Alenson's mind. That Evening it was resolved on, that the Morrow after they
would go to the Isle S. Jean: The next day the Queen being dressed, all the
Ladies of the Court came to wait upon her, and got up into their Coaches to go
to the River side, where they found diverse small Boats some painted, and others
gilded, that attended them to take up the Queen, and her Retinue.

The dav proved extraordinary fair, and the weather calm, and the Ladies never
appeared so beautiful as then, when they were in their Dishabilees:
Mademoiselle d' Alenson, above all others, had such Charms in that Dress, that
it was impossible for any to defend themselves: if they made a violent
impression upon the heart of the Count de Dunois, they were fatal to the reason
of the Marshall, who would be one at this Solemnity, not so much for his own
pleasure, neither to contribute to that of the Companies, but to endure there
all the torments of a racking Jealousy, and to give the Princess confusion, if
it were possible. The Queen Landed at the Bank of this Festival Meadow, but
instead of meeting with Willows and Osiers, she was presented with an exact and
regular border of Orenges, Pomegranat-trees, and Myrtles; and for the
Field-flowers, she saw all those that the Spring could produce in the most
curious and imbellished Gardens: The Queen was very pleasantly surpised at
this sight, and much more, when she entered into the Green Arbours which were
prepared for her Reception; for all within were they beautified and set out
with an infinite number of Garlands made of Rushes and Violets, which caused an
agreeable and surprising effect: The Repast was mighty splendid, the Music of
Hoe-boys, and other Instruments, was there complete, and served as an Inter-act
to a Pastoral that was rarely well represented. The whole Court admired that in
four days time all these things could be so exactly and curiously ordered, for
they did seem to be perfectly Natural. In the Evening the Queen was desirous to
taste the sweetness of the Air, and walked a pretty while leaning upon Madam de
Cominge, whom she had a mind to discourse with privately.

It happened that the greatest part of the Courtiers and Ladies were divided
into several Companies, some spending their time in gathering Flowers, whilst
other were observing the motion of the waters, and all of them served to make
an easy way for the Count de Dunois to entertain Mademoiselle d' Alenson. The
Marshall would fain have opposed it, but the Marquess de la Trimouille, who
well knew the pleasure that he should do the Count to divert this troublesome
Companion, put in, and presently fell upon the Subject of War, and Stratagems,
whilst Madameiselle d' Alenson avoided as much as she could the private
conversation with the Count; but it was high time for her to learn from his
mouth a thing not unprofitable to her satisfaction, and which only her modesty
made her to shun: You see, says he, Mademoiselle, how all the world conspires
to give me an occasion of acquainting you with an important secret, whereof the
Queen has permitted me to make you confident, she her self has ordered me to
tell it to none but you alone. As I am always near the Queen, replied
Mademoiselle d' Alenson, who does me the Honor often to speak with me, I
suppose if there were any thing particular which she would have me know, I
suppose, I say, she would have given this Commission to no body:
Notwithstanding she has chosen me for this purpose, replied the Count de
Dunois: and to lose no time in acquitting my self of it, know Mademoiselle,
that the Queen having been acquainted with the Passion I have for you, and the
respect which has kept me from telling you of it, has commanded me not to make
it any longer a secret to you. The very Name of the Queen, answered
Mademoiselle d' Alenson, imposes on me so much respect, as that it makes me to
forbear testifying to you a little more severely the confusion that this
Declaration gives me; not to derogate from the respect I bear her, and not to
do any thing also contrary to my Duty, be assured that I will keep my self to
that which is permitted me; and let me tell you, that it is forbidden persons
of your Quality and mine, to make their own Destinies: But Mademoiselle, said
the Count, what the Queen does Authorize, shall it not be to you an
indispensable Law? What she ordains me, replied the Princess, shall; but pray
let me wait till she does prescribe Laws to me, for I would by no means prevent
her in them. The Count was going to discover to her the melting passion of his
Soul, when word was brought the Queen, that the King was coming to Land at the
Isle. This news, without all peradventure, ended a conversation that was very
sweet and pleasing to the Count, but he had the comfort to perceive neither
severity nor anger in the eyes of this Princess: But yet the Marquess de la
Trimouille, all this while, was not a little pestered with the Marshall de
Gie, who was so terribly afflicted in his mind, that he thought sometime he
would run mad; wheresoever the Marquess led him, he would be turning still that
way which would have carried him to the Count; he several times spoke that
Prince's name for another, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, struck himself
with his hands, and chattered certain words between his teeth, but they were so
wretchedly uttered, that it was impossible for any to understand them; and
sometimes he fell into such a profound silence, that Mounsieur de la Trimouille
could not for his Soul get him out of, though he put to him a thousand
Interrogatories. The King being come, all the people flockt about the Queen;
the King who that day had some affairs to dispatch, could not come to join with
them before the Evening, yet he did not fail sharing with them in pleasures
very agreeable and delightful: For as soon as the day was shut in, there was
seen upon the River a thousand lights very artificially invented, and brought
along at the sound of a hundred Trumpets. After this Divertisement, succeeded
another Treat more magnificent than the former; which being ended, they went
into a green Arbor shining with a prodigious number of Lamps, all burning in
Glasses of Crystal, and here it was that the Ball began; Mademoiselle d'
Alenson danced there with so smooth and delicate a Grace, that she was the
general admiration of the company; the Count de Dunois on his part joining, to
the rare mien that was so natural to him, the ambition he had to please his
fair one, very advantagiously succeeded in his design; and did even more than
he would have done, for Madam de Cominge could not behold him so transcending,
without having her heart sensible again of those former flames wherewith she
had burnt for him, but she could not see them neglected, without forming in her
head a design to revenge her self. She declined dancing that Evening, and
taking her time, now all the company was busied in that Divertisement, which
was not any longer to the benefit of the Marshall, she came to him, and told
him, that the Queen had had a long discourse with her; that she was assured she
bore the Count de Dunois a great deal of esteem and friendship: but withal, at
the same time, forgot not to tell him, that she had observed she had not the
same Sentiments for him: He was not at all surprised at it, for he did remember
the secret Factions he raised to oppose the Queens Marriage, and consequently
the reasons she had not to love him. After a great many discourses on the
subject of their weighty affair, which was Jealousy, they were of opinion that
the Marshall should take the first opportunity that was presented to forestal
the King about it: But yet Maisiere, who made it his business to instruct
himself with the Court-adventures, preferred to the pleasure of seeing them
dance, that of observing Madam de Cominge, and the Marshall, who were slipped
out of the Arbor into another: Maisiere did his utmost to over-hear what they
said, but they spoke so low, that he could pick out nothing, only at the latter
end of their discourse, the mutual assurance they gave of their fidelity each
to other: Maisiere needed nothing more to make him believe that the Marshall
and Madam de Cominge were deeply engaged in Love; he told it to some one
privately, who quickly conveyed it to another, till in a short time it came to
be known to the whole Court. Mademoiselle d' Alenson was not one of the last
who was acquainted with it, for Maisiere took a world of care to give her the
knowledge of any thing he thought might divert her: This gave her occasion
innocently to rally at Madam de Cominge upon the subject of her Love, which she
took little care to dissuade the Princess from, being very glad to conceal,
under this pretext, the private Commerce they had established between them. In
this posture matters were then, when the King learned that the neopolitans were
reduced to the Obedience of the King of Arragon: Only the Marshall de Gie was
with the King when he received this news; he presently resolved to go into
Italy to punish the Rebels: The Marshall strengthened him in his design, and
discovered to him at the same time, that it was requisite to secure the
Milanois to himself, in making an Alliance with them, which would draw them off
from the League which they had entered into with the Emperor Maximilian,
Ferdinand King of Spain, and the Princes of Italy. The Marshall added, that
the only means he knew of to break this Confederacy, was to marry Mademoiselle
d' Alenson to the young Duke of Milan, or at least agree upon things, till such
time as the young Duke should be of age fit to marry. The King did much approve
of the Mareschals advice, and ordered him to go presently and find out the Duke
d' Alenson. The Marshall counseled the King to keep this business secret, and
acquainted him with the love of the Count de Dunois for Mademoiselle d'
Alenson: He said, perhaps this Prince might by some indirect course break off
the Alliance, craftily insinuating into the Kings Breast a kind of suspicion
for the Count. When he had left the King in the disposition he so much desired,
he went and found out Mounsieur le Duke d' Alenson, and Madam his Wife, to whom
he proposed the marriage of their Daughter with the Duke of Milan; and as they
objected to him the Dukes extreme tender age, the Marshall gave them the same
Expedient he had given the King, to Sign the Articles, and not conclude the
Marriage till some years after. This Treaty appearing advantageous to the Duke
and Duchess, they consented that the Marshall should take this business upon
him; but he observed to them the same precantion as he had to the King, telling
them, that secrecy is the Soul of weighty affairs. After this was done, he
sent presently to Sforza about it, Uncle and Tutor of the Duke of Milan. Whilst
he was thus employed, the Queen went to see Madam d' Alenson, to know her
thoughts, and the Dukes her Husband, about the marriage of Mounsieur le Count
de Dunois, and the Princess their Daughter: But the Queen was much surpised to
perceive the Duchess did not answer her as she expected, and that she did not
gladly receive such a Proposition; judging then by the manner of the Duchess
her speaking to her, that there must be some particular reason for her shifting
off this Proposition: The Queen pressed her, and making use of those engaging
words wherewith she commonly subdued hearts, she began to stagger the
discretion of the Duchess, and at last forced out of her the secret of the
Marshall his Negotiation: The aversion the Queen had for him, and the
friendship she bore the Count de Dunois, obliged her to ruin the designs of
the Marshall, by all the ways she could imagine, that were possible to prove
fatal to him. She made the Duchess d' Alenson to consider, that this Marriage
would for ever deprive her of the comfort of seeing a Daughter that was so
beloved by her; that neither her age, nor the Dukes her Husband, would permit
her often to take a Journey to Milan; and on the other hand, the Alliance of
Mounsieur le Count de Dunois, would let her quietly enjoy a good that was so
dear to her: The Queen added yet farther, that the inequality of Mademoiselle
d' Alenson's Age with the Duke of Milan's, would bring such a constraint upon
their minds, that it would be impossible for her ever to live happy. The Queen
seeing these reasons began to work upon the tenderness of the Duchess, pressed
her with so many insinuations, that if the good Lady did not yield up her self
quite at that instant, she found at least she was strongly inclined to fall
into the sentiments the Queen was so vehemently inspiring her withal. After she
had farther urged her upon this subject, she left her, to give her some time to
make reflection upon all the Queen had been saying to her. The Count de Dunois
not knowing either his unhappiness, or the goodness of the Queen in
endeavoring to remove it, was gone with Mounsieur de la Trimouille to
Mademoiselle d' Alenson's, with whom they found Madam de Cominge: The Marquess
pretending to speak to her of the Report that was spread about the Court, that
the Marshall was fallen in love with her, took her to a Window to entertain
her about it: She denied it very scurvily, for she had no mind to remove his
doubt, and still more scurvily, by the jealousy she had in seeing the Count
speak low to the Princess, whom he had so strongly persuaded that day, that she
did not forbid him to love her, nor to hope being beloved again: She easily
thought that the Queen did approve his love, and was not troubled, that it was
not in her power to oppose that Authority with the scruple she made of loving a
Prince, who was not made choice of by those persons to whom she owed
submission. This conversation had all the ravishing sweetness that possibly
could make it agreeable to those between whom it was held: Madam de Cominge,
who took notice of their satisfaction by it, accounted it as Hell and Damnation
to her; the coming in of Maisiere made this jealous Lover hope the Princess
would speak to him as she was wont, but seeing she was deceived, she would fain
have obliged him to interrupt the conversation. Maisiere knowing well that the
familiarity would be at that time very unseasonable, answered Madam de Cominge
after his usual frank way: And would you have been glad, Madam, that I had come
and troubled you in the green Arbor, when you were privately discoursing with
Mounsieur le Marshall de Gie, and the rest were dancing in the Isle S. Jean;
would not you have bid me go and see when the Ball would have ended? I should
have been sure, Madam; to have received such a Commission from you: Now I have
no ambition to be employed upon the like Errand by the Princess, let us speak,
if it please you, of what all the World speaks, that is, of the King his Voyage
for Italy, of the tears that will be shed at his departure, and of the joy that
we shall receive to see him return with Laurels on his Brow. But observing that
Madam de Cominge answered not a word, I believe, went he on, that your mind is
already taken up with the regret of thinking that your Friends are about to
leave you. Let me, Madam, counsel you to be merry whilst you do enjoy the sight
of them, till they be troubled by their absence. Mademoiselle d' Alenson not
being willing, out of regard to civility, to make the conversation last any
longer, the Count took his leave of her, and went to the Queen, of whom he
learned the condition that his affairs were in. At the first, his Resentments
were carried out against the Marshall; but the Queen discovered to him, that
his proceedings being strengthened by the appearance of the Public Good, it
would be to ruin himself in the Kings favor, to show any violence against
him, and then she should not be in a capacity to do him further service: She
gave him then strict charge to smother his anger, and to leave to her the care
of managing his Interests with prudence. When he came from the Queen, the Count
went to his Apartment with the Marquess de la Trimouille, to whom he told all
that she had acquainted him with. They discoursed together what should be the
motives to make the Marshall act in so strange a manner; and reflecting on
what was past, they judged it might proceed from his being in Love, the
Marquess relating to him what he had observed at the Isle S. Jean: but on the
other hand, what Maisier had heard, made them that they could scarce believe
it. In the Evening, the Queen discoursed with Mademoiselle d' Alenson in
private, and spoke to her so extremely advantageous of her Illustrious Gallant,
that the Princess fully resolved within her self to love him, especially being
encouraged by the Queen, who showed her so many disadvantages in her marrying
of the Duke of Milan, that Mademoiselle d' Alenson put away all the scruples
she had made to a band on her heart to this Innocent affection. Many days
passed away, in which Mounsieur le Count de Dunois enjoyed diverse conversations
in liberty with his Princess, both at the Queen's Lodgings, and at the Walks.
Madam de Cominge having been under such an indisposition, that she could not
leave her Chamber; but these pleasant Entertainments, which o'rewhelmed them
with Joy and Delight, proved insupportable to the Marshall; so that not being
able any longer to suffer them, he went to the Duke d' Alenson's, and told him,
that it was necessary he should advert se the Princess his Daughter, that she
shou d carry her self with more indifference toward the Count de Dunois,
without giving of him any other particular reason than that of her humor. As
it is Natural for Fathers and Mothers to cut short the liberty of their
Children, the Duke was much pleased that he had an occasion to give her his
Prohibitions and Commands; a privilege that he often put in practice. He made
Mademoiselle d' Alenson be called before her Mother, and made a long Harrangue
on the Obedience that a Daughter Nobly born owes to the persons that gave them
their being. After which, he did strictly forbid her having any particular
interview with the Count de Dunois, and ordered her to be content with living
civilly with him.

The Princess was so surprised at this cruel Command, that if the Duke had
taken notice of the alterations in her face, he might without any conjuring
have guessed at the cause; but by good hap he left her to discourse with the
Duchess her Mother: She withdrew into her apartment, where Madam de Cominge
entered almost as soon as she. The Princess having known of the Queen the
Mareschals design for her marriage with the Duke of Milan, did make her
complaints to her, whom she supposed was his Mistress, who delivered her as
soon from that Opinion; and after many discourses to disabuse her of it, she
asked the Princess if she had never suspected the Marshall to be in love with
her: The Princess having told her, that she had never given her self the
trouble to think of it. Madam de Cominge took care to make her observe the
application with which the old Marshall did regard her; how neat and modish he
was when he visited her, and a thousand other observations; which made
Mademoiselle d' Alenson remember, that what Madam de Cominge had told her, was
not improbable: but there came then many other thoughts into her head. Her
being forbid to see the Count de Dunois, caused so great an affliction to her,
that she could not keep it to her self. Madam de Cominge was yet unsuspected by
her, and this subtle person had always appeared so strongly inclined to the
Princesses Interests, that she entrusted her with the secret of her heart; the
love she had for the Count de Dunois, and the fear she was in lest her marriage
with the Duke of Milan should be concluded; and the villainous Order that she
had received, not any more to speak to the Count: But she discovered this grief
with such melting expressions, that Madam de Cominge made as if she would have
died with madness.

The Princess having observed she was touched with it, gladly applied her self
to this feigned compassion, and thanked her so obligingly for it, that any
other but this Perfidious Wretch would have submitted to so much goodness and
sweetness of Nature. If she did it not in good earnest, at least she could
pretend it: she railed and stormed against the Marshall; she quarreled with
all the world, and poured out so many tears, that Mademoiselle d' Alenson
thought she could do no better than make a Confident of Madam de Cominge, who
offered to facilitate a Commerce of Letters between the Princess, and the
Count. The Princess being sensible that it was very requisite the Count should
be quickly advertised of the Prohibition the Duke had made her, so that he
should not be surprised at the strangeness of her carriage toward him, and
that he should bethink how he ought to manage himself on his part, took the
occasion that Madam de Cominge offered her, and writ these few words.

Mademoiselle d' Alenson 's Letter to the Count de Dunois.
It Is forbidden me to speak with you, and I must obey: I know not whether you
have any cause to complain; but I avow to you I have. My affliction would be
extremely great, if yours was infinite: Let me find then my Consolation in the
necessity that you will have of being comforted.


Madam de Cominge received this Letter from the hands of the Princess unsealed;
but before she would give it to the Count, she showed it to the Marshall, who
was only concerned at it for the Interests of his Jealousy, and not at all for
the displeasure he did to that person in the world, for whom he had the
greatest passion. He was several times about to run away from her with the
Letter, and to carry it to the Duke d' Alenson's; but the itching desire he had
to see the Answer, made him give it again to this Faithless Confident.

By accident she met the Count, whom she spoke to, and told him she had
something particular to say to him; and that she could not trust him with the
secret, but in a place where they could be neither seen, nor heard by any. They
agreed she should expect him at her Apartment, where she no sooner saw him
coming in, but she was before hand with him: You see Sir, said she to him, how
deeply one is concerned in your Interests; and by this Letter I present you,
you may judge what I do for you, and against my self: Whatever happiness should
come to me from it, replied the Count to her, in taking it, I should be
extremely sorry it should give you the least trouble. Read, says she to him, I
account the peril nothing that I expose my self to. The Count was so surprised
in reading what the Princess writ to him, that for some time it made him lose
the use of his speech. Ah! Madam, said he at last to her, let the trouble I
give you cost me dear, and what is the misery I must undergo for you? I am
mightily concerned, replied Madam de Cominge to him, to increase your
affliction; but I have orders from the Princess for to acquaint you with the
circumstances of her ill fortune, and yours.

She then up and told him what had passed between the Duke and his Daughter;
and at the same time assured him, that since the privilege of Conversation was
forbidden him, she would facilitate that of writing for him. How sensible
soever the Count was of this unhappiness, he was notwithstanding very much
pleased at Madam de Cominge's carriage toward him; and not discerning the
Artifice, he made her his acknowledgments in the most tender and obliging terms
that could be. When he had done so, he begged of her by all the Friendship she
ever had for him, and by the esteem he had conserved for her, to oblige
Mademoiselle d' Alenson to grant him one private interview, where he might
discover to her all his affliction, and give her the assurances of his
faithfulness. She promised him to use her utmost persuasions to bring the
Princess to a compliance. The Count likewise desired it by a small Note he gave
to Madam de Cominge: It had the same destiny as the former; for it was seen by
the Marshall, before it was ever given to the Princess: And this Jealous Lover
read in it these words with the most violent transports, that it was possible
for that Passion to produce.

The Count de Dunois his Letter to Mademoiselle d' Alenson
It Is not a Letter that is capable of acquainting you with the afflictions which
Yours has cost me: Oh! let me die, or see you; that so I may make you
understand what it is impossible I can ever express to you any other ways.


The Marshall would fain have had Madam de Cominge burnt the Letter, or done
any thing else with it, and never mention the Enterview that the Count desired
of Mademoiselle d' Alenson: but the Treacherous Confident discovering to him
the advantage that he might derive from it, made him at last consent that she
should give her the Letter, and insist upon the secret Audience that the Count
desired of the Princess, resolving together to take their measures according to
the use they observed her to make of it; and presently after Madam de Cominge
went to give to her an account of her Commission: But when she was persuading
her to consent to the Enterview that the Count de Dunois begged of her with so
much earnestness and solicitation, the Princess could not get leave of her
self to resolve upon it. She laid down so many substantial reasons to Madam de
Cominge, that she thought she would never farther trouble her about it. But at
last Love was too violent for all her reflections: the time and place were
agreed on to be the next day, at the dusk of the Evening, in the Park, with
Madam de Cominge, and her women only. The Marshall was the first who was
advertised of it, and prepared himself to represent there the troublesome
person, and her Persecutors. The Count also waited the good minute with a great
deal of impatience: but Madam de Cominge put the turn upon him, in telling him,
that Mademoiselle d' Alenson had not found any place more convenient, and less
suspected, than her Apartment, which was not very remote from that of the
Princess. But whilst that Mademoiselle d' Alenson was poring upon the ill
consequences that this Interview might bring along with it, the King was
speaking to the Count de Dunois, and communicating to him his design for Italy,
telling him of the Imploys he ought to have in his Army: and afterward he
closely fell upon the particulars of the Negotiation of Milan; I am obliged,
says the King to him, to facilitate the passage of my Troops, to concern the
Duke of Milan in my Interests, and to draw them off from fiding with my
Enemies, by an Alliance, whereof of necessity, Mademoiselle d' Alenson must tie
the Knot. I know very well, continued the King, your Love will not permit you
to be concerned in this policy; but yet I am more persuaded, that your
affection for me will force you to consent to it: Your Majesty, replied the
Count, is sufficient to exact from me my Obedience; but if it may please you to
examine the Conduct of Sforza with the Milanois, perhaps it would remove the
Opinion you now have, that this Marriage might take effect: Indeed, pursued he,
it is not probable that a man who aspires at Tyranny, will marry a Prince whom
he has a design to ruin: and it is not to be imagined, that a prudent man will
bring again upon himself a puissance so terrible as yours, which Sforza
infallibly will procure to himself, if after this Alliance, he got the State of
the Duke of Milan into his own hands. Those who have the charge of this
Negotiation, said the King, will manage my Interests with so much prudence,
that we shall be secure from that Event, and I expect within these few days the
Conclusion of this Treaty. As he made an end of these words, the King went
presently to the Queen, without giving the Count time to reply upon him. One
may easily imagine that he was sensibly touched at this discourse, but his hope
for some time suspended the affliction that he conceived at it. The hour of the
Rendezvous drawing near, Madam de Cominge writ a Letter to Mademoiselle d'
Alenson, by which she begged her excuse that she could not wait upon her to the
Park, upon some pretense that could by no means in the world be dispensed
withal. The Princess had a good mind several times to break off the
assignation, and then she saw the inconveniences of it, and feared lest this
Interview, though wholly Innocent, might be construed to her disadvantage. On
the other side, the desire of seeing the Prince urged her mightily to it.

After she had made a thousand tumultuous reflections, she determined to do
what her heart inspired her to. She went into the Park a little after it was
dark, but it was with a great deal of trembling. The confusion of those
Sentiments seemed to presage no happiness to her from this carriage; she had
already took some turns in a shady private walk that she had made choice of,
because it appeared to her more retired, and so consequently more safe, when
she perceived a man by the glimmering light of the Moon to come over the Park
Pales, and making near her in an humble and respectful posture, she advanced
toward him: By the peril I expose my self to, judge, said she to him, in
beginning with him, of my esteem, and of my affection; for at last, after the
cruel Prohibitions from my Father of speaking to you, what confusion should I
receive, if ever it should be discovered that I had a private Interview with
the Count de Dunois; and especially if it were known by the Marshall? And why,
Mademoiselle, interrupted the Marshall, (for it was neither better nor worse,
but even he himself) is this unhappy Marshall so dreadful to you, who cannot
be suspected by you, without becoming at the same time the object of your
hatred? It is easy to be judged what was the Princess her surprise, when she
heard this voice: Yet she only had a suspicion of her unhappiness from it; but
what was her fear when she began to think, that the Count de Dunois might come,
and that finding her there at that hour with the Marshall, he might a little
doubt her sincerity; or that seeking an opportunity to quarrel with him, he
might take this advantage from this Rencounter. A thousand things came into her
imagination, which put her almost into fatal Trances. The Marshall perceived
it by her silence, and though a few steps she fled away from him, yet he
respectfully caught hold of her by her Garment: I see well, said he to her,
Mademoiselle, that this Counter-time is displeasing to you, and that for a
happy moment, for which you were waiting, you are like to have but a very
troublesome one: But since the goodness of my stars conducted me here, suffer
me to profit by it; and that I tell you a truth which I have a long time kept
private to my self, and did resolve never to speak of it: Know then,
Mademoiselle, if you thought to find here a Prince that is deep in Love; you
find here in his place one that is the most passionate of all the men in the
world: Your Birth has not dazzled me, but your Charms have seduced my Reason;
and maugre all the resolutions that I took never to love any thing, I have left
my self to be overcome by that Ardour that must consume me. What! replied
Mademoiselle d' Alenson, you do not only find your self in a place where I have
nothing to fear but you, but you will yet serve your self of this advantage,
and lose that respect that is your duty in speaking to me of your foolish
passion: But not to entertain it, continued the Princess, know, that Fortune
does not so much make me averse to you, as the disestimation, nay hatred, that
I have conceived from your unworthy procedure. Ah! Mademoiselle, interrupted
the Marshall, do not you think of that despair that now you cast me into, and
fear you nothing from a Man of Spirit, whose love and respect you slight? If
you kept your self, interrupted she, within the bounds of that Virtue that a
Man of Honor prescribes to himself, you would not have taken such indiscreet
measures to trouble the Innocent and harmless kindness which I have for the
Count de Dunois, and to begin the Intrigue of an Alliance, where, according to
all appearances, you shall never be happy in the success? Do not you abuse your
self with the thoughts of it, pursued she, it may happen, that I shall never be
for him to whom my heart does destine me; but it is certain, that I will die a
thousand times over, rather than you shall be the Director of my Fortune. It
may be, Mademoiselle, said the Marshall, that the inclinations of Mounsieur,
your Father, will make you change your resolves now, and that your Virtue will
not betray it self by a disobedience that will appear Criminal to all the
world: Things are now in such a posture, that you ought not much to hope for
change. The Princess hearing the Marshall speak to her in this manner, thought
that she should have died with grief, but she came to her self, and thought
that in making him see the good that he lost by his proceedings, she might
inspire him with a desire of re-establishing himself in her favor: In truth,
said she to him, I never knew that any gained the heart of those persons they
love, by doing all they can to give them displeasure; and if my esteem was a
happiness for you, why are you so desirous to lose it? and to what purpose does
such a conduct serve you, that is so opposite to the way that might lead you to
it? Alas! Mademoiselle, what reason do you demand from a man, who blindly
follows the Laws that his passion imposes on him? I have perceived I was not
able to live, and see you in the Arms of a Prince who loves you, and whom you
do not hate; and I thought in procuring you a strange Alliance, I should be
less wretched, though I exposed my self to the unhappiness of your absence. You
expose your self thereby, replied the Princess, to all those that may follow my
indignation: If you had loved me with the respect you owe to me; if you had
left it to me to Divine your passion, I might have complained of you, and not
being able to answer your Sentiments, I might have, at least, granted you my
esteem. I have told you already, Mademoiselle, replied the Marshall, that I
had resolved never to speak of it whilst I lived; and I should have done so, if
I had not been forced to seek my Cure in the testimonies of your compassion, or
in the last marks of your hatred: But Mademoiselle, by the measure that you
make me acquainted with it, my Love and my Despair increase, so that I am not
yet at the point where you desire me. The Princess had not held so tedious a
Conversation, but for the fear she was in lest the Marshall should advertise
the Dake d' Alenson, which kept her from leaving him alone: She still hoped to
bring him back to his Reason, and constrained her Resentment, even to desire
him not to reveal this secret to those that might condemn it. He did not make
her a precise answer; he only told her, she was the Mistress of his silence,
and it wholly depended on the manner that she meant to live with him.
Mademoiselle d' Alenson had much ado to leave the Marshall in the disposition
wherein she saw him; and it may be she had yet retained him, but the Marquess
de la Trimouille, who by hazard came back to bathe himself with several other
persons of the Court, was coming up to them, and ended this troublesome
Interview. The Marshall withdrew first, and the Princess was not not long
after him in it, having no disposition to expose her self to another Interview
in the trouble her mind was in.

When she was at her Apartment, she wrote a Note to Madam de Cominge, to know
of her the cause of this dangerous mistake. She gave it to a Maid, whom she
ordered not to put it into the hand of this perfidious Confident, but when she
should see no body with her. This Maid, who was called Mademoiselle de Rieux,
and who was bred up with Mademoiselle d' Alenson, went to Madam de Cominge; and
informing her self in the Antichamber whether she was alone, she was told that
the Count de Dunois had been there with her they knew not how long. She would
not go in when she heard that, but went into a little Chamber, where she waited
till they came, and told her that he was gone. Rieux discharged her Commission,
and Madam de Cominge seemed surprised in reading the Letter the Princess sent
her; but because she looked every minute for the Mareschals coming to her, she
dismissed Rieux with all the haste she could, telling her, that she would be to
morrow with the Princess by that time she was out of her Bed, to give her as
good accouut as she could in whatever she desired to be informed. Rieux carried
her Mistress this imperfect answer, which in all probability did not give her
much satisfaction: And as she asked her why she stayed so long for so slight a
matter, Rieux frankly told her, that the Count de Dunois having past all the
Evening with Madam de Cominge, she waited till he was gone. Those words
augmented the trouble in which the Princess then was: Jealousy began to fill
up her thoughts, and made there its usual extravagancies. Sometimes she did hit
upon some Idea's of the truth; but Jealousy would be Master, and made such
disorder and confusion in her mind, that she stood in need of all her Reason to
keep her from being wholly overcome by it. But this was but the beginning of
her affliction; for in the midst of these troublesome reflections, the Duke her
Father entered her Chamber, and as it was not ordinary for him to make her any
Visits at such an unseasouable hour as that was, it gave her the greater
surprise. But this severe Father did not suffer her to be long in suspense upon
the occasion of his coming; he prevented her, by his outrageous reproaches of
her Conduct, laying open to her her walking in the Park, in all the colors
that might make it appear horrible to her. In vain the Princess would have
justified her self by the approbation the Queen had given to her esteem for the
Count de Dunois: he would not hear a word; and he was so carried out by his
rage, that he had like to have committed the last violences against his
Daughter.

But at last, having Schooled her a great while, he left her, being weary with
it; and it is very probable, that the Princess was extremely tormented to hear
him. As he was going out, he did command her not to stir out of her Chamber but
by his order: he appointed a Gentleman who had followed him, to observe her
motions, and let none of her Women go out of her Apartment. Whilst the Princess
was arguing with her self about her unhappiness, the Count de Dunois was as
much disquieted within himself. He was gone to Madam de Cominge's, and not
meeting with the Princess there, he was in hopes she would not be longe're she
came, During the first moments, he was pleased with his impatience, in having
brought him there to wait for her: but staying there a good while, without any
other inquietude than that which attended on what one loves, he began to find
the hours very long: Madam de Cominge perceiving his uneasiness, feigned to be
troubled at it: she made one of her Women be called, and ordered her to go and
know where Mademoiselle d' Alenson did pass away the Evening. This Woman, after
she had stayed long enough to make them believe that she had acquitted her self
of her Commission, returned, and told her Mistress, that the Princess after she
had walked a long time in the Park with the Marshall de Gie, was gone home.
Madam de Cominge, by an affected smile, stirred up in the heart of this unquiet
Prince, the desire of knowing what she would say. Good God! said this malicious
piece of Harlotry to him, I am afraid of troubling you, therefore I beseech you
release me from giving you an account of my thoughts; for besides that I may
possibly be deceived, I must infallibly cause in you a great deal of disorder;
I know by my self, that passionate and tender Souls do not find small faults in
Love. These words obliged the Count to press this politic Factress for the
Marshall, to explain her self a little more fully: But after a great many
Ceremonies, both impertinent and troublesome, she told him, that she did not
believe that the Princess would strongly resist the Authority of the Duke her
Father; and that at the last conversation she had had with her, she had
acknowledged that she was resolved, without much ado, upon a strange Marriage.
It may be, said she to him, that this very moment your impatience gives you so
much inquietude, it may be, I say -- but no, it is not for me to make so just a
discourse upon this conjuncture; and since your heart does not advertise you of
it, my precaution should be useless. I beseech you Madam, replied the Count de
Dunois, do not give off wholly overwhelming an unhappy man, in leaving him
under an uncertainty of the Reason of his misfortune: Speak then, Madam, but
speak sincerely; show me the Enemies I ought to oppose, and clear up to me a
Mystery that I can understand nothing of without you: What, said Madam de
Cominge to him, you find a great deal of trouble in unravelling that which
Mademoiselle d' Alenson might have prevented by her being here. You apprehend,
that the time which she ought to spend with you, she casts away peaceably upon
the Marshall de Gie, and never remembers her self, that you wait for her at my
Lodgings. Methinks, continued this cunning Gypsy, that having so much Spirit,
and so much Love as you have, you ought to be more informed about this matter.
The Esteem and the Love which I have for the Princess, replied the Count, does
so strongly defend her in my heart, that I have no mind to suspect her of a
weakness, so contrary to the Opinion I have conceived of her Sincerity. But
yet, interrupted Madam de Cominge, the Princess knows that the Marshall is
most passionately smitten with her, that he treats about her Marriage with the
Duke of Milan: She gives him the time that she had destined for you; you love
her, you think likewise she is in love with you: Reconcile all these things, if
you can, and see if your suspicions be unjust. The love of the Marshall for
Mademoiselle d' Alenson, replied the Count, shall never cause me to be Jealous;
all things assure me, nothing disquiets me on that account; and had I but his
Merit and his passion to overcome, I should not have much cause to complain. As
to the Negotiation of Milan, the little appearance there is that the Marshall
should succeed in that Enterprise, seems to resolve me of the Event, and should
make him have an aversion for it, since it cannot but turn to his confusion;
and for the love which I bear the Princess, it is of the force of that love
from which I pretend to derive my safety, and the assurance of her Esteem and
Friendship. I know very well, pursued he, that the appearances are against her,
but if they accuse her, my love justifies her: You are very ingenious to
deceive your self, replied Madam de Cominge; or that I may speak more
handsomely, you are a little too much prepossest, and can scarcely discern the
different Sentiments that you create in hearts. Consider better -- If I am
ingenious to deceive my self, interrupted the Count, beginning to be a little
yellow; Madam de Cominge, you are too ingenious to ruin the little repose that
is remaining in me: But neither to believe your Artifices, nor my credulity in
the case, I will take my leave, and endeavor to inform my self better. To
conclude; he left her, and went home, where he found Mounsieur de la Trimouille
who waited for him, to acquaint him that he had seen Mademoiselle d' Alenson,
and the Marshall, walking together in the Park. The Count, who already had
been told of this meeting, could not forbear conceiving a new vexation, now he
heard it confirmed, and strengthened himself in his suspicions against Madam de
Cominge. He told the Marquess the Conversation he had had with her; and the
Marquess made him be of the Opinion, that it was an effect of the passion she
had always had for him, and of the intelligence that was between her and the
Marshall. In the mean time, the Marshall gave Madam de Cominge an account of
his conversation with the Princess: I left her, said he to her, with the fear
that I would reveal so important a secret to the Duke her Father; for as for
the Duchess, I have observed, that she by little and little begins to be of
the same sentiments with her Daughter. I took then the surest way; I went
directly to Mounsieur d' Alenson's, to whom I gave such a Relation of this
Adventure, as I thought might be serviceable to my design, and I suppressed
what I imagined might be of prejudice to me, or which might render me suspected
by the Duke. He seemed to be much incensed; and a little after he was come to
himself, he took a resolution to be gone the next night after, to the end that,
said he to me, I might give leisure unto absence to make its ordinary effect
upon the heart of the Princess.

As I was speaking to him in the King his Antichamber, he thought it convenient
to take his leave of him, and tell him the reasons of his so sudden a
departure, which the King found very judicious, and weighty. He departed from
the Queen, who had been strongly speaking to him in favor of the Count de
Dunois, and though what the Queen told him had great appearances of Reason, yet
the maxims of State carried him above the compliances he had for her. So that,
continued the Marshall, you may observe that our affairs are in a pretty good
forwardness for the establishing of our repose. Madam de Cominge, on her part,
did not fail to tell him of the Counts impatiencies, and the little progress
she had made upon his heart; which made them both be of the mind, that the
departure of Mademoiselle d' Alenson was the only Remedy they could find out to
cure them of their afflictions. Whilst these perfidious Lovers were laying
about them, and plotting all these Artifices, the Count de Dunois suffered all
that a man was capable of suffering; for Mounsieur de la Trimouille, who had
seen Mounsieur d' Alenson and the Marshall in a great conference, and who
afterward saw them speaking both together with the King, made him conjecture,
that his affairs were likely to be ruined. It was then that the counsels of
this generous and prudent Friend were very necessary for him, to hinder him
from punishing openly the secret offenses of the Marshall; a thing that would
have absolutely spoiled the affairs of the Count. He knew not by which way he
could instruct himself in the interview of the Park, there being none but the
Marshall, and Madam de Cominge, who knew positively the truth of it. He would
not send either his Friends, or any of his menial Servants, to inform himself
about what she did, for fear of doing any thing that might displease him. Not
knowing then what to conclude upon, there came a thought into the head of
Mounsieur de la Trimouille, which as you shall hear, by what will afterward
fall out, did happen to him even according to his own wish.

Maisiere was a person suspected by none at Court; his Foppishness and Antic
kind of tricks, made him pass currantly for an Extravagant Fellow: But
Mounsieur de la Trimouille who was acquainted with him, by his having been
serviceable to him in some former occasions and designs which he managed with
sufficient prudence, imagined, that having free access every where, he might
more easily make discoveries than any other, of what past in the world,
especially at Mademoiselle d' Alenson's. The Count, who was neither satisfied
of his discretion, nor of the safety there was in trusting him, could very
hardly resolve to make use of him: But Mounsieur de la Trimouille having
delivered him from those doubts and scruples, in giving him an account of
Maisiere his conduct, they gave a Page order to look him out, but to do it so,
that no body should take notice of it, and to bring him into the Count his
Chamber.

The Page was not long in doing his duty, but quickly returned; for Maisiere
continually earnest and follicitous to be acquainted with the Intrigues and
Adventures both of Night and Day, went from one Apartment to another, to hear
News, and utter it again when he had done. As he was known to be a great Briber
of Servants, there was scarce any person that had not once, or ostner, received
something from him; so that Maisiere was not ignorant of any thing that he had
a mind to know. The Page having brought him then to the Count de Dunois his
Lodgings, he was surprised to see how Maisiere acquitted himself, in speaking
to him with a certain brisk and assured countenance, which he ordinarily
affected, and took on him a good manly figure, as the others did. He spoke all
the fine things in the world in admiration of the Counts civility, who at last
told him the service that he desired of him. If it had been permitted me, said
Maisiere to him, to enter into this Secret without being called to it, I should
have given you some instructions, which would not have been unprofitable to
you. For Sir, continued he, I was with Mademoiselle d' Alenson's Women, when
the Marshall entertained her: I cannot give you a precise account of their
conversation, but I know very well that the Princess was extremely surprised to
find him in that place. I know farther also, that she went away very much
troubled, and more than all that, I know that the Marshall, after he had
looked for the Duke d' Alenson at his own House, he met him in the Kings
Antichamber, to whom they both spoke: When that discourse was ended, Mounsieur
d' Alenson went to Madamoiselle's his Daughter, where he has left behind two
Officers, whom I am pretty intimately acquainted with, who have orders to look
after her, and not to suffer any whosoever to come into her Apartment: which
thing surpised me, continued Maisiere, and coming to Madam de Cominge's to
inform my self whence this so strict Guard should proceed, I understood that it
was an Intrigue of the Mareschals, who appeared extremely satisfied at it. For
my part, I was not so for all that, not being able to find you in any of the
places where I went, to discover the truth of this adventure. I knew not what
to think when I met with your Page, who has happily brought me hither: I say
happily, Sir, for it would be the greatest advantage that Fortune could procure
me, in giving me a life to employ in your most humble Service.

This Relation of Maisiere's, made the Count perceive that Mademoiselle d'
Alenson was Innocent still; but at the same time it comfirm'd him in the
thought, that the Marshall was otherwise, and both against the Princess, and
him. Mounsieur de la Trimouille could scarcely forbear going presently and
quarrel with the Marshall, and punish him for the afflictions he made them
endure; but the express Commands to the contrary of the Queens, kept him from
doing it. The hour was then too late and unseasonable for him to discover the
posture that things were in. After they had rolled over a thousand things in
their heads, which thwarted and crossed each other, they thought they could put
nothing in execution till the next day. But yet after Maisiere had been
sufficiently recompensed in hand for the service the Count hoped to get from
him; he prayed him only to observe what passed in the Duke d' Alenson's House,
and what was done to and with the Princess his Daughter, which he promised him,
and went away at the same time to discharge himself of it.

The Count de Dunois, and the Marquess de la Trimouille, reflecting in their
minds whatsoever they had seen, and what they had learned, were fully confirmed
what Madam de Cominge had betrayed Mademoiselle d' Alenson, as well as the
Count. The jealous suspicions that she fain would have cast into the Counts
head to the disadvamage of his Princess, and all the conversations that he had
had with her, did but assure him too much of it. It is easy to be imagined,
that this thought did furnish him with a great many others more troublesome all
the rest of the night; and if it was the custom of our French Heroes to make a
great many unprofitable reasonings and discourses to themselves, the Count de
Dunois had matter of reflection ample enough: But having thought fit, with the
Marquess de la Trimouille, that he ought not to take any Resolutions, but only
upon the Orders that he should receive from the Queen, they left one another,
to take, if possible, a little rest themselves. In all probability the Count
had not much; for it is to be imagined, that he was seeking out the Knot and
Mystery of this Intrigue, but the moment in which he was to find it was not yet
come. It was not very long e're the day appeared, and scarce did it afford so
much light as to direct him, but that Maisiere was knocking at the door of the
Counts Antichamber. One of his Servants was laid down there, and thought that
Maisiere, as his ordinary custom was, did want a Bed, and was looking one to
take an hour or two's sleep on, not having any one of his own that he was well
assured of. After he had stood waiting there a pretty while, he opened the
door: He said, he would speak with the Count; but it would not be permitted
him, not thinking that he had any thing to say important enough to trouble the
repose of the Prince, but he was so earnest and pressing, that he was forced at
last to do what he desired. When he entered into the Chamber, and came near the
Counts Bed, he told him that the Duke was gone with his Wife, and his Daughter.
As he departed from hence, said Maisiere, I went to one of the Gentlemen Ushers
of Madam the Duchess, who is one of my Friends, and pretending that I should
stand in need of his kindness to let me pass the rest of the night with him;
the Gates of the Castle being shut, he told me, that he did not intend to make
any use of his Bed himself, and therefore, with all his heart, he would lend me
his Chamber, not only for some hours, but till he came back again: I was very
sollicitous with him to tell me where he was going: He answered me, that he was
waiting upon his Mistress, who was resolved for Alenson: I demanded of him,
whether he knew the reason of their going thither, but I soon perceived they
had not acquainted him with it; for there was not any thing that he would keep
a secret from me. I betook my self to play with him an hour or two, and a
Gentleman Usher of the Dukes joined in with us, and told us, without any bodies
asking him, that the Journey was took only to deprive you of Mademoiselle d'
Alenson, who, as was said, in all peoples accounts, had a great value and
esteem for you; and because she was destined for the Duke of Milan, it was
thought, that removing her from your sight, you might likewise be removed from
her affection. News came just at this instant to these Gentlemen, that
Mounsieur d' Alenson was ready to come down from his Apartment: I got my self
into the Court, where feigning to be light by accident, I came up to him to
make him see me. You are diligent to be up so early, said he to me: It is late
for me Sir, answered I him, making a very low Honor, for I am not yet laid
down; but I may say Sir, it is extreme early for you. It is true, said he to me,
walking onward as he spoke, but I do take the coolness of the night, for I mean
to abate and avoid the sultry heat of the mid. day. As he ended these words, he
was got to the place where his Coaches waited him, getting up into his own, he
said to me very obligingly, Adieu Maisiere, shall not we see you at Alenson? if
you will come thither to us, we will make you welcome: I assured him I would
joyfully come, if he was pleased to do me the Honor to command it me: I pray
do then, said he to me. All the time I was speaking to him, I had my eyes much
upon the Princess, hers seemed to look languishingly toward me, and when she
past under your Windows, I observed her, and made her remark it; but she
answered me with a nod of her head, which I did not look upon as a good Omen.
She went into the Coach with Mounsieur her Father, and Madam her Mother, and I
went to take my leave of the Princesses Women. I came softly to Mademoiselle de
Rieux, who has been my very good Friend a long time; and in saluting her, I
begged of her, that she would sometimes speak of you to the Princess: I spoke
to her so much the more readily, because I knew she interesses her self
mightily on your behalf, and she has the liberty to speak her thoughts. I durst
not, replied she to me, the Princess has too much cause to complain of him; for
instead of being in the Park, he spent the Evening with Madam de Cominge.
Disabuse your fair Mistress, answered I her, for it was a trick of that Ladies,
where Mounsieur le Count bore no part. I had much ado to tell her those few
words, and should not have done it, had there not been something to set to
rights about the Coach: when it begun to set forwards, I withdrew; and came
presently to give you this advertisement. This was worse news to the Count,
than if there had been a thousand Furies and Devils about his ears,
particularly when he knew that Mademoiselle d' Alenson went away with a kind of
an incensed indignation against him. He asked Maisiere a hundred questions, to
which he made as good Answers as his knowledge would give him leave. He asked
him, how he had learned that it was an Artifice of Madam de Cominge's, and that
he had not seen the Princess. I know nothing of it exactly, answered Maisiere,
but there is great probability, for the Marshall and she have had a long
conversation, which made me to apprehend the intelligence that is between them.
The Count de Duunois sent to desire the Marquess de la Trimouille to come to
his Apartment. He was not long before he appeared, where he did his ordinary
office of proving a Consolator. At last, the Count said to him, I have no more
to fear, since Fortune has not more to do against me: I love my fair Princess
with all the ardour and tenderness wherewith a heart is capable of being
filled: she has the goodness to assure me, that I have an advantageous place in
hers; I see again a thousand Innocent marks of her affection; I am protected by
the Queen, and all things seem to be favorable to my desires; and yet I am the
most miserable of all men; all these appearances have not promised me so great
blessings, but only to make me feel the loss of them with more sensibleness: in
this prosperous estate I rested my self too much upon the happiness of my
destiny, and have given mine Enemies a place to establish their affairs upon
the ruins of my own. Things are yet in a condition, replied the Marquess, that
does not forbid you to hope; the Queen is for you. Alas! said the Count softly,
the Queen is for me, it is true, but my Princess it against me; she is gone
away in such a dangerous disposition, that her anger, or absence, or
forgetfulness, which is an infallible consequence of it, will banish me for
ever her Breast.

Maisiere, for his part, was in a deep musing all this time that the Count had
been speaking; but coming of a sudden out of his serious posture, Courage,
comfort your self, said be to him, it is not so difficult as you imagine, to
re-establish your self in the favor of the Princess; Mounsieur le Duke d'
Alenson has commanded me in an invitation to come and see him at his house at
Alenson; I will not only promise you to establish a most safe Commerce between
the Princess and you, but I will engage her to give you leave to see her, if an
occasion does but present it self: Pray, in the mean time, be not you too
boisterous and violent, but repose your self on your Love, and my cares to
serve you, and I warrant I keep you, at least, from being forgot by her; for I
will speak of you to her so often, as she shall have no leisure to banish you
from her memory. Though the Count de Dunois had his mind filled with vexations
and inquietudes, yet he concealed them all, that he might not afford his
Enemies any room to make their advantages by his perplexities and troubles. He
appeared with the King, if not with a brisk, gay, frollick humor, at least
with a countenance that seemed as if it had nothing that disturbed it; and the
King spoke so many obliging things to him that day, that if he had as much
pored upon his Fortune, as he did upon his Love, he ought to have been very
well satisfied. He went also to the Queen, who flattered his afflictions with
much kindness, and good nature, and for some time suspended the violence of
them. During which, she spoke to him of Mademoiselle d' Alenson's departure,
and that the Marshall began to repent that he had caused her Banishment: He
felt the rigours of that absence, which already gave him so cruel a
persecution, that he was more than one time plotting in his head the means how
he should get this Princess back again, with the same ardour and precipitation,
as he had used to get her at that distance from him: But Madam de Cominge, who
had as much reason to be afraid of her return, as the Marshall had to desire
it; told him, that it would be a means to make him suspected by so sudden a
change; and so turned him off from thinking any more of it.

This was the time that the Marshall confirmed himself in the Opinion he had
always had, that Love was the Rock of Virtue, and the Enemy of all quiet and
repose: His memory then furnished him with an Idea of all that his unjust
passion made him do against his duty; and the pains he felt, began to prove his
punishment already. Madam de Cominge was the only person that must know the
secret of his stings and remorses; and though she made use of very powerful
arguments to recover him, he could not without an extreme melancholy, think how
he was absent, how he was plunged over head and ears in Love, and how he was
most mortally hated. Whilst he was suffering all his thought to run out upon
the reflection of what was past, the Count de Dunois let all his go upon the
foresight of what was to come: For in the conversation that he had with the
Queen, he persuaded her to make use of her Authority, to know from Madam de
Cominge's own mouth the truths that he could not unravel, but very imperfectly,
and the certainty whereof imported much to his repose, not to look any farther
to clear up himself thereof. The Queen asked him what Interest Madam de Cominge
could have to trouble his passion for Mademoiselle d' Alenson; which put the
Prince into a great confusion: for though he had a great desire that the Queen
should be informed of the Sentiments that this Lady had for him, yet he would
have been very glad, that it should not have been from his mouth, that she
should have learned it. Nevertheless, not knowing how to do otherwise, he told
the Queen so many doubtful and suspicious things, that at last she did
understand what meaning he was willing that she should put upon them: She
promised him from that time to speak to Madam de Cominge. The Count withdrew
into his own Apartment, to give himself a little liberty to consider in what
condition his Fortune then was, when an Old Woman came and presented to him a
Letter from Mademoiselle de Rieux. The Prince received it, but it was with a
peck of troubles, for he shook when he took it, as if he had got the Cold Fit
of an Ague upon him, imagining that he should find there the confirmation of
his disgrace. After he had opened it, he knew it was written with the Princess
her own hand, and read it in these words.

Madamoiselle's Letter to the Count de Dunois.
I Go away from the Court without any other regret upon me, than that of having
had too great an Esteem for you: It is insufferable for Persons of my Humor to
be mistaken in the like Emergencies; but Repentance pursues the fault so close
at the heels, that for the future I will have little cause to reproach my self.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Do not make use of the way of Madam de Cominge to convey to you this Letter,
she is too much interested to enter into this confidence.




Having read it several times over, as to his particular, he showed it to
Mounsieur de la Trimouille, who counseled him to inform the Queen of it, that
so she might make use of it, to know of Madam de Cominge what was so mightily
desired to be learnt. When it was Evening, the Queen having called her into her
Closet, she was scarce able to keep up that assurance that was almost natural
to her: And the Queen seeing of her alone with her self, looked upon her with
an Air full of Majesty: I wonder, said she to her, Madam de Cominge, that after
I have so many times discovered to you, the desire I have for the Count de
Dunois his Marriage with Mademoiselle d' Alenson, I wonder, I say, that you
should be so careful and industrious in opposing it; for indeed, it is
unprofitable for you to think of denying to me a thing that I know for such a
certainty: Also it is not to instruct my self about it, that I have called you
here; but to know of you the reason that might have obliged you to take upon
you the interests of the Marshall de Gie, against those of the Count de
Dunois, being so well assured that this Conduct was contrary to my intentions.
The Queen seeing that Madam de Cominge gave her no answer, and that her
confidence began to fail, by the confusion that appeared in her face, Your
silence, continues the Queen, does not suffice for the acknowledgment of your
fault, I ask a sincere Declaration of it, if you mean to have my pardon for it;
but I declare to you, that if you resolve not to do what I demand of you, I
shall without doubt find out ways to make my self be obeyed. Now if the
confession of your weakness will be a trouble for you to make, that trouble
that you will have by it, will cause me to excuse it; I will have compassion of
it, and only blame what deserves to be punished. But still, once more, you must
repair your artifice by a sincerity so free and generous, as shall persuade me
of your Repentance. Madam de Cominge seeing that the Queen was resolved to be
obeyed, flung her self at her feet, poured out tears innumerable, and appeared
so afflicted and sorrowful, that the Queen was so kind as to restore her mind
to a more quiet frame and temper, in promising to pardon her. After which, she
gave the Queen an exact Relation of all that had passed between the Marshall,
and her; the Motives that had induced her to take up his Interests; the truth
of the Assignation in the Park, and, in a word, all the secret of that
Intrigue, and all others. But, said the Queen to her craftily, how would you
have me that I shall believe you, and that I shall commit my self to your
Loyalty, seeing that in this procedure you have so often been defective in it?
Ah! Madam, replied Madam de Cominge, it shall not be difficult for me to
justify the truth of my words, diverse Letters which I have happily kept, shall
be the irreproachable Evidences of my sincerity. The Queen put many questions
to her, to which she answered according to her knowledge; but when she came to
demand what she knew of the Negotiation of Milan, Madam de Cominge assured her,
that she knew no more of it than others did, and that the Marshall had never
made her enter into the depth of this confidence. It may be, said the Queen,
you have not very much pressed him to it, for in the intelligence in which you
are, it is not to be believed, that he should have denied you so small a thing,
in a time wherein you did so much for him. It is true, replied Madam de
Cominge, I did not much concern my self from whence the trouble came, provided
that I had the satisfaction to stir him up to it. But Madam, I do without any
Hesitancy own my Crime, continued she, and am ready to repair it by all the
ways it shall please your Majesty to ordain me. If it be so, there is yet a
way, replied the Queen, left for you to be reestablished in my Esteem; and it
is, that after you have done all against the Count de Dunois, so I would have
you do all for him; what went formerly for an unworthy Artifice, shall now
become a commendable Address, when you shall act by my Orders, and for Justice.
I will then, pursued the Queen, that you give into my hands the Letters of the
Marshall, I will that you endeavor to discover the condition that the affair
of Milan is now in; and I will lastly, that you do what ever you can to ruin
the success of it. Madam de Cominge fearing nothing so much as to be banished
the Court, and loving nothing more than to betray those that were so mad to put
any trust and reliance upon her, did easily thereupon resolve to delude
Mounsieur le Marshall, and wholly to betake her self to the Interests of the
Count de Dunois. She did not derogate from her character of Imposture; and her
Perfidie only made her change the Object. She then promised the Queen to do
nothing for the future but by her Commission. And to assure her as much as she
could beforehand of what she then promised her, she did deliver into her hands
all the Letters that the Marshall had written to her, which clearly discovered
to her his love for Mademoiselle d' Alenson, and assured her at the same time,
to squeeze out from him some more of them that should be more urging, and full
of Explication. At last the Queen terrified her so to the purpose, and
flattered her also with so much prudence, that made her fully determine she
would never take any other course than this, which she knew, as much as she
could do, was the safest. The Count de Dunois, after he had understood this
change, and knew of Madam de Cominge the truth of this adventure, sacrificed
his resentment to the necessity he was in of her, and she promised him from
that time forward to be of the number of his Friends; but she was not any
sooner in a condition of acting according to her promise, but the Marshall
fell dangerously sick. During the time that Maisiere began to dispose his
affairs for his Journey to Alenson (I say dispose his affairs) for he had
enough to employ, I do not know how many persons; he was a Match-maker, and an
Accommodater of Differences, he furnished with Menial Servants all those that
had any occasion for them; he was known to the Ladies, and he suffered I know
not what for them, by a thousand little services that he did them: and there
was scarce any news, let it be as private and particular as possibly it could
be, but what he knew of one of the first. Indeed he was something singular as
to the manner of dressing himself: He did not affect to have his apparel quite
different from others, but he shifted his Clothes almost every hour in the day;
sometimes like a Citizen, sometimes like a Cavalier, and always in a Fashion
that was very extravagant and ridiculous. But yet this fantastical outside did
not keep Maisiere from having a good, solid, and piercing Wit, and that was
capable to manage any difficult Enterprise: nay, to add to all this, he had a
discretion that gave him the confidence of all those to whom he was known.

The assurance that the Marquess de la Trimouille gave thereof to the Count de
Dunois, made him fully resolve to commit at last this secret to him, and to
send him to Alenson, to instruct the Princess of the condition in which things
were then. The Count gave him both Money and Jewels, as well for his own
occasions, as to gain him the persons he stood in need of to accomplish his
design. After which he departed for Alenson, where there was need of the like
succor, to dissipate the trouble of a solitude that was very disagreeable. He
was received by the Duke and Duchess with a great many assurances of their
kindness, and much more by Mademoiselle d' Alenson, their Daughter. By good hap
the intriguing humor of Maisiere was not suspected in this Court, because it
was altogether unknown there; and he concealed it so handsomely, that he did
not give the least suspicion to any one of the reason of his Journey. He
thought indeed, that Mademoiselle d' Alenson might have an impatient curiosity
to know what passed at Amboise, but yet he had a mind that she should desire
it, and only said to Rieux therefore, that there had happened a great many
accidents since the departure of the Princess, whereof she would perhaps be
glad to be informed. He understood by Rieux, that her Mistress desired nothing
so much in the whole world, as to hear that the Count was Innocent. Rieux
seeming to concern her self in his Interests, he did not fail of getting her
over absolutely to him, by presenting her with a Diamond of no inconsiderable
value, as coming from the Prince. She did make a great deal of stir to accept
of it: But Maisiere, who was very well versed in the skill of receiving
Presents, without ever putting himself to the blush by it, quickly instructed
her to take that without making any scruple, or case of Conscience about it.
The desire that the Princess had to hear the news whith most affected her,
increased every moment, and made her, being one Evening in her Chamber only
with Rieux: I admire, said she to her, that Maisiere, who to often discourses
with you, has not told you whether the Commerce between the Count de Dunois,
and Madam de Cominge, is very well established; if they do appear well
reconciled, and satisfied, and what the World talks of it: He has not spoke to
me a word about it, replied Rieux; but on the contrary, he told me, that your
departure has caused a general astonishment and consternation in all hearts;
and ever since the time that you went away, he has not spoke with the Lady whom
you now mentioned to me. It may be, Mademoiselle, that if you please to
instruct your self about it, he will very gladly satisfy your curiosity: But I
do not believe that Maisiere will repose any confidence in me, without you give
him order for it: I shall then never learn any thing that I would fain know,
said the Princess, for I am resolved I will not inform my self thereof: It may
be, Mademoiselle, interrupted Rieux, you may hear of such things, as will by no
means any way displease you: Well then, said the Princess, let him tell me
them, without my ever being sollicitous with him to demand them. It is you,
Mademoiselle, replied Rieux, that must beget the occasion; for he will not
venture to entertain you with it, if you do not in some measure assure him that
you desire it. Heavens! replied the Princess, cannot you find any other ways to
satisfy my curiosity, than by giving me the affliction of making it to appear?
Rieux then perceiving what her Mistress would say to her, took upon her to
engage Maisiere to what she so desired of him. But Maisiere, who was concermed
to discharge himself prudently of his Commission, fearing to do otherwise than
according to the measures he had taken, to establish an assured Commerce
between the Princess and the Count de Dunois, was not over-sollicitous to be in
her company. He took his time one day that the Duke and Duchess his Wife were
in a Chamber by themselves in conference, where they would not have any thing
to interrupt and disturb them; that day then Mademoiselle d' Alenson had a mind
to take the Air in a very delicate beautiful Garden, that lay in sight of the
Castle, with her Women, and Maisiere: He insensibly fell into discourse with
the Princess, and as she was asking of him how they diverted themselves at
Amboise since her coming from thence: Those who are afflicted at it,
Mademoiselle, answered Maisiere, have nothing further to make them grieve: And
what is called affliction, continued he, is in my Opinion, nothing but the
privation of some pleasure; but your absence has banished them all from the
Court, and has made all those, who knew the worth of that blessing which they
have lost, miserable. I know a certain person who is so sensibly touched at it,
that if this absence continues long, you will lose that person for ever.

Maisiere then a little while having refrained speaking: And what,
Mademoiselle, went he on, have you so little compassion of the evils that you
are the cause of, that you will not inform your self who those are that undergo
them? I did not ask you, replied the Princess, the names of those who were
afflicted at Court, I would only have known how they do divert themselves
there: Very illy, Mademoiselle, replied Maisiere presently, and Mounsieur le
Count de Dunois worse than the rest of the World, put them all together; not
only for that your absence has made him become melancholy to extremity, but
because he has that wretchedness of Fortune, as to be out of your Esteem: Do
not interrupt me, Mademoiselle, and please you, said he to her, but give me
your patience to hear what I have to say to you; learn, without exasperating of
things, who does wholly deserve your compassion, and who is able to undeceive
you of the unjust Opinion that you have conceived of the infidelity of
Mounsieur le Count de Dunois. But not that you should absolutely give credit to
my sincerity, see, if it please you, in this Letter, the Faith that you may
take upon it. The Princess would not receive it; but fearing that the
resistance she made might be taken notice of by her Women, and that they might
suspect Maisiere to be of intelligence with the Count, she satisfied her self
with the discovery whose the Characters were, by the Superscription, and
permitted Maisiere to convey it into the hands of Rieux. After that he told
Mademoiselle d' Alenson the confession that Madam de Cominge had made to the
Queen of her perfidiousness, the truth of the false Assignation of the Park,
and generally all that she was ignorant of, since the return of the King, even
to the Marshall his falling sick. Maisiere easily perceived that this Relation
was not displeasing to the Princess, who not absolutely relying upon his
Loyalty, was a little angry at him that he had charged himself with this
Commission, and forbid him, although very coldly, not to take upon him any more
the like for the future. I will do more, replied Maisiere, for if you command
it me, I will never speak again of it in my life to you. I do not not say so,
answered the Princess; but -- as they were there, Mounsieur and Madam d'
Alenson came so near the place where Mademoiselle d' Alenson was, that they
were forced of necessity to break off the discourse, although it was extremely
agreeable and pleasing to her. The Duke having demanded of Maisiere what he had
been entertaining the Princess with; he answered him, that he was telling of
her a very pleasant story which happened to him not long since. The Duke, and
the Duchess, desired him to begin it again, which he did without any kind of
Hesitation; as Humming and Haughing, wringing of the Nose, and Spitting, and
God knows what of that nature, which is the usual Ceremony that Ushers in such
an Entertainment, but with a brisk and confident assurance he thus framed his
discourse.

THE HISTORY OF THE Visionary Ladies.
THe Adventure whereof I will take upon me to be the Hero, will appear to you,
without doubt, very fantastical; and so I may assure you, that this most
infinitely is. I parted from Amboise, together with the King, when he set out
for Italy, not so much with a design to fight, as to make a pleasant Journey of
it. I remained sick at Turin, where I was a long time without ever stirring out
of my Chamber. The Count de Santiniany was so kind as to visit me in my
sickness; I had the Honor to be known to him in France, where I made it my
business to acquaint him with a thousand things that a Person of Quality is
glad to hear of in a strange Court: When I was perfectly well, he would not
give me leave to go so soon from Turin; and that the stay should not be
incommodious to me there, he gave me a Lodging in his own House, and made me
acquainted with all the Court of Savoy; where, it is certain, that in a short
time I was as knowing as in this. I accompanied him to a great many Ladies
houses of High Quality and Merit, where there happened to me nothing
remarkable; but being gone to visit the Countess de Bevilaqua, I was surprised
to see in her so many extraordinary rare and transcendent Qualities; for she
had not only a Natural brisk Wit, but it was improved beyond all things that
ever was seen in her Sex, and she made a Judgment of all fine things that was
the most exquisite in the World, all that ever she spoke came freely from her,
and had an admirable Grace with it, that pleased infinitely: She was extremely
neat and exact in her House, and her Clothes; and as for her person, though it
was a little superannuated, yet it had not left off being very agreeable and
taking. I observed also in her one Beauty, that is very rarely seen with so
many years, it was her Hair, whereof she had a most prodigious quantity of the
purest Flaxen color that ever was beheld. I looked upon this Lady with
admiration, and never thought I had seen any in my life whose Merit was more
accomplished. I did continue almost two hours in this Opinion, and in all
probability had done so still, if the Count de Santiniany, who knew her
weakness, and had a desire to mind her of the time of the death of one of her
Brothers, had not said to her, that it was a few days, either before, or after
the death of Mounsieur de Bronzoly. Ah! Mounsieur, cried the Countess up aloud,
do you live too in such a grand ignorance, to believe that Mounsieur de
Bronzoly is dead? No, no Sir, do not you injure the most accomplished of all
men, to subject him to that rigorous term of life. When the Gods, to punish
Mortals, had a mind to deprive the World of that Adorable Person, that was the
second half of me, they placed him in the number of the Demigods; and as he
was all Spirit, they did Emancipate him from those severe and binding Laws that
Nature laid as a Fine upon all men in general. He was taken up to Heaven, where
he remains ever since that he inhabited no more amongst us. This Opinion, said
she, in turning her self toward me, may appear to you a little Chymerical;
(Yes, thought I to my self, and so I may very well, and you too for conceiving
it) but I am convinced of this Truth by Experiences that are not to be
contested: For the short time that you tarry here, I will make you to come over
on my side in it. To that end, said she, it is requisite that I send to know,
if he has not writ to me, in a place where sometimes he conveys his Letters for
me. To conclude, she sent one of her Footmen to look for a Letter from her
Imaginary Gallant; after which, she began the conversation without any
digression: I only perceived a little constraint upon her, but she quickly
relieved her self from it, in dismissing a Gentleman we found with her.
Mounsieur Hippolite, said she to him, I pray leave me a moment in liberty,
cannot you imagine that it is a torment to a body to be continually pestered
with one and the same thing. Hippolite went his way, and the Countess de
Bevilaqua resumed her temper. She told us a story of a certain Lady of her
Country, and promised me to inform me still of diverse other things, which I
ought not to be ignorant of in returning to France, desiring me very earnestly
to come and see her again. I went away with the Count de Santiniany, and
assured the Countess, that I would give my self the Honor of seeing her as
often as I thought I should not be troublesome to her.

When I was in a place where I could be over heard by none but the Count, I
inquired who this deceased Mounsieur de Branzoly was: He told me, it was a Man,
whose Merit and Wit had been so considerable, that for all that he was but of
an obsure and mean Extraction, yet he was extremely beloved by most of the
Ladies of Quality, and Condition. He was always received with a great deal of
satisfaction, by all in general; but to speak the truth of it, said he, the
Countess had still a more fervent esteem for him than the others: She imagined
that this man, who had a greater share of Wit than of Body, ought not to die,
and submit to that cruel necessity: But, said I to him, is it possible? Has she
no Friends that are capable to disabuse her of an Error that is at such a
distance from any reason in the World? There is none living, replied the Count,
is able to work out of her Imagination that foolish and idle fancy of
Bronzoly's. Immortality. Not long after, I desired the Count to tell me who and
what that Mounsieur Hippolite was: He is, replied he, a man whom the Countess
has Espoused by Compassion, because his Fortune has been niggardly, and done
nothing for him. This tender pity, said I to him, methinks is a little
diminished; for it appears to me, that she neither treats him like a Husband,
nor like a Friend; and much less like a man for whom she has the least esteem:
She loves him never the less, replied the Count; but she does not forbear
chearing up her heart sometimes from this necessary engagement by some slight
kindnesses, it being certain that she has an inclination for Love, which she
cannot overcome either by the reflection of her Age, or of that decency which
would become her. I resolved to my self, to lay Siege to the Countess her
heart, and try if I could make her be in Love with me: I hoped much from my odd
kind of extravagant way with me; I easily thought that that would be more
proper to get me into her good favors, than to go after a formal and starched
manner. The next day I went again to her House, I found her alone, I cast some
languishing eyes upon her, and sometimes I sighed A la Francois, which pleased
her infinitely; and that day she told me, that she was mad that she had any
engagement upon her of obligation to Mounsieur Hippolite; and that next to
Mounsieur de Bronzoly, I was the man in the World for whom she had the greatest
inclination.

Not to leave me any room to question it, she gave me her Picture, in a Case
beset with very rich Diamonds. Mounsieur Hippolite just then came into the
Room, I was not very much pleased at it, and the Countess was yet less: she
sadly fell out with him for being come so early; but he went no more out all
that day. The conversation began to grow a little flat, and grovelling, when
there came a Page to her from Madam de Raviary, to give her service to the
Countess. She received the civility with a Complement of the like nature: but
when the Page was gone, she told me, that although she dwelt in a quarter of
Turin, where there were the chiefest of the Ladies of Quality, yet she was so
unhappy, as to have them unsociable, being persons that had Imaginary Visions
that made them forbear either making any Visits themselves, or receiving any
from others. I was a little surprised to hear the Countess begin to talk of the
Chimera's and Visions of others, having her self of them such extravagant ones:
but not reckoning upon her own as any thing, she told me, that the Lady whose
Page I had seen, would not see any person, because it was a very hard matter to
have any discourse from them, but the word Love would be jugled in at some part
or other of the conversation, and that word was insupportable to her; and if
any one desired of her the reason, she could give no other, but that it did not
come close enough to the Fancy. There is another among us, continued the
Countess, in whose presence it is not permitted to speak of Death. She has had
heretofore some Friends, who have been dead above these twenty years, to whom
she sends constantly every day to hear how they do, because that no body has
presumed to tell her that they are dead: But the greatest Rarity of them all,
went the Countess on, is one that lives close by me, who sees the Light but two
or three times in a year: She complains, that the Light makes her troubled with
the Rheum; and she is so afraid of that Distemper, that she will not look upon
a Book to read in it, because she says, that in turning over the Leafs of it,
it causes so sharp a wind, that it makes her Eyes fore again with it. Few
persons can get a sight of her; for except some Abbots, and two or three of the
sour. looked Friars, all persons are forbid the least access to her. I found
that these Ladies were very great Fools; and withal, that they were miserable,
in having such whimsical and troublesome Imaginations. She that could not
endure to hear the word Love, seemed to me more unreasonable than any of the
rest, and I had a great suspicion upon me, that she had had some slippery trick
played her; but the Countess assured me, that she never had made any trial
either of the sweetness or bitterness of it, but she had always lived so
severely with her self, and with her acquaintance, that few Women courted her
Friendship, because she still did subject them to so great a constraint. I
pitied much the Lady that was so exceeding fearful of Death, because there is
nothing so common and sure; I pitied her so much the more, because only
admitting her this frailty, she was looked upon as one that had a strange deal
of Wit, and Merit. As for the dark and obscure Lady, I found her so singular,
that she pleased me wonderfully. I was extremely glad Sir, of finding any
persons in the world, of whom I might say without vanity, that they were less
reasonable than my self; and at that time I made Lectures of Wisdom over the
folly of others.

When Night came, I would have been going, but the Countess desired me to tarry
a little longer, and sup with her: I received a thousand assurances of her good
will, and Mounsieur Hippolite many signs of her aversion, which sensibly
touched him: I was the Innocent cause of it, but I did not perceive that he
designed me any mischief for it: But on the contrary, he went that Evening
along with me to the Count de Santiniany's. As we walked along, he made me
great protestations of friendship and kindness, which yet I did not give much
credit to, but only so far as duty obliged me to receive them civilly; and as I
did value my self much upon the honor that I received from Madam the Countess
de Bevilaqua, he was crastily designing in his head to ruin me by his
mischievous Politics. I would fain have waited on him home to his house, and
had done it, but that I perceived the Ceremony would never have been ended. We
parted both of us, being well satisfied. Mounsieur de Santiniany commanded me
to give an account of my Journey, but considering that it is dangerous, and but
little honest, to make a Confident of a Person of that Quality, I only
acquainted him with what I might tell him without a forfeiture of my
discretion: The History of the three Visionary Ladies was of great succor to
me, to make him believe, that it was the greatest part of our Entertainment.

He told me a great many more circumstances, which I did not give much heed to:
For although I was not deeply in Love with the Countess, yet I did glory much
in being beloved by a Woman of that Quality. But yet when I began to think how
she was in Love with a Dead Man, and had Married another even through pity, I
judged (and I thought I had a great deal of reason so to do) that my good
Fortune would not be of a long continuance. I received a Letter from her the
next Morning by break of day, in which she invited me to go and spend a day in
the Country with her: I was to wait upon her pretty early, and was afraid that
she had staid for me; but I found her so taken up, as if she had never thought
of her design for the Country. I was never so surprised as I was then when I
came into her Chamber, for I saw there a Woman who was cutting off the
Countesses hair with the greatest inhumanity in the world: I beg your pardon,
said the Countess to me, for being seen by you in this posture; but Mounsieur
de Bronzoly has sent me word this Morning by this Woman, that he desired me by
that passion he had for me, to give him my Hair. I am overjoyed, pursued she,
that he has required of me this mark of kindness, since it is impossible that I
can give him a greater, having always had a great esteem for this Ornament. I
would fain have obliged her to content her self with cutting off some part of
it, but the cruel Lucia (for so was that She barber called) maintained to my
face with a confidence that cannot be conceived, that it was Mounsieur de
Bronzoly his most earnest request to Madam the Countess, not to leave any on.
This good Lady was vexed at heart that she had so little, although there was
scarce ever before seen a Head so well furnished as hers was with it. She tied
it up with a Flame-colour'd Ribbon, and put it in a Box of Vermilion guilt.
After she had done so, without giving this dangerous person time to put on her
things again which belonged to her Head: Go, said she to her, and carry this
Box to Mounsieur de Bronzoly; tell him, that I sacrifice to him, without any
regret, the only advantage which my years have left me. The more I condemned
her earnestness in granting her Hair to be cut off, the more did she applaud
her self, that she had suffered it, and I perceived that it was not safe to
contradict her: She put off to the next day her design of going into the
Country, which she could not execute then. I was with her at the hour
appointed, and found her Head so neat and exact with her baked hair, as if I
had still seen-her own on. We went up into the Coach with Mounsieur Hippolite,
who would be one, though the Countess could have said something to him to have
prevented it.

As we passed along the Great Street of the Palace, she perceived a great
Stranger, who was mighty earnestly looking upon the Structure of it. She made
the Coach to stop: Mounsieur Hippolite, said she to him, do you see that man
there, in such and such Clothes, (giving him a description of them) who is just
by that Fountain, I pray ask him, if he will not came and walk with us: I
demanded of her whether she knew him; No, replied she, but I see that by the
posture he is in, he wants some divertisement. In vain would Mounsieur
Hippolite have shifted himself of it, and endeavored to dissuade her from it:
but all the Arguments he could think on were to as little purpose, as if he had
saved himself the pains to pump for them: She would have gone down her self to
have discharged her Commission, if I had not made a Sign to Mounsieur Hippolite
to spare the Countess that labor. He went to find the Stranger, to whom he
made the greatest complement that could be imagined; but the German did answer
him no other ways than by his profound Reverences, not having understood so
much as a word of what Hippolite had spoken to him, nor of the Signs he had
made to oblige him to come up to the Countesses Coach: which was not very
difficult to be observed by their postures and Grimaces. The Countess seeing
she was not like to have the German, resolved to gain something by the humor,
and got away from Mounsieur Hippolite, commanding her Coachman to drive on with
all the speed he possibly could, so that Hippolite should not be capable of
getting to the Coach. If this proceeding of hers did not very much please him,
it did extremely divert the Countess: I never thought she had been of such a
pleasant humor as I found her that day. We went to one of those delicate
places, which in that Country they call Vignes, and we were very well received
there. There wanted nothing that was possible to make a day pass away
pleasantly. The Countess desired me to give her a Ring I had upon my Finger,
and she gave me another of a much greater value, which she commanded me to wear
as long as I lived. When we came back to her house, we found Mounsieur
Hippolite, who appeared very much enraged at me; but the Countess would not
have troubled her self with taking notice of it, had not I caused her to
observe it. I left her at liberty to receive the reproaches of Mounsieur
Hippolite: The Count de Santiniany, who began to suspect that the Countess had
some kindness for me, was very earnest with me to confess it to him; the Ring
that she had given me, and which he had perceived at Supper, through my
negligence, changed his diffidence into a certainty: He assured me that he was
very glad that I had such a pleasant reason to stay me at Turin; but he
advertised me, that the passions of that Lady were violent, but like a furious
Tempest, did not last long. I saw her every day, but found not the least
alteration in her humor, and I thought she had quite forgot the Image of the
Demi-god, when it came into her head on a sudden, in the most extraordinary
manner in the world. I was leading of her to one of her Friends who lodged hard
by her, and all of a sudden she would have left me, to run after a man who was
going a great pace before us. By good hap I did not let her go so; for every
step she took she staggered, and would have certainly fell, had not I assisted
her as she went along. Not being able to overtake this man, she called out to
him, and desired him to let her speak to him, which presently he did with a
great deal of civility: Judge, and please you Sir, of my astonishment, when I
saw the Countess embracing him with a tenderness that is impossible for me to
express. Ah! my dear Bronzoly, said she to him, how overjoyed am I to see you
again! and what is the reason you have so long deprived me of your sight? And
afterward, turning her self toward me, Had not I reason, continued she, to
assure you that Bronzoly was not dead? Dead persons have not a complexion so
fresh, nor eyes so sprightly and vigorous. He to whom these indearing
expressions and Caresses were addressed, understood not a syllable of all this,
nor did he receive them as the Countess would have had him: To speak the
truth-of it, he was in some confusion that he resembled this person in public,
but he assured the Countess that she was mistaken. She affirmed that he was
Mounsieur de Bronzoly, and this contestation began to be so hot and fierce,
that it put the Countess into a wonderful rage. See, said she to me, this
ungrateful person, who would withdraw himself from the acknowledgment he owes
me, for the last assurances of my esteem for him: The hair that he wears upon
his head, was it not the fairest Ornament of mine? In good earnest, Madam, said
the poor man to her, I am not ungrateful of your favors, for I never have had
the honor to receive any from you: this hair which I wear, I have very
honestly paid for, but I will give it you with all my heart; therefore let me
beseech you to permit me to go where my business calls me. I knocked at the Door
of a house, where I caused the Actors of this Comedy to go in, being desirous
to deprive the multitude of this divertisement; but she kept this pretended
Bronzoly prisoner for at least a whole hour. During which time, I observed that
the hair of his Perruque was of the color of that which the Countess had
caused to be cut off, and I thought it was impossible that it should not be the
same, but that Lucia had sold it to him. I came up to him, under pretense to
make him confess that he was the Demigod that the Countess looked for: I
desired him by all the Loves in the world, to tell me of whom he had bought his
Perruque: He told me without any Ceremonies, that it was of such a one whom he
did name to me, and gave me the place where he dwelt. I told him in a few words
the weakness of the Lady, and I advised him to fain himself to be Bronzoly,
since she did desire it; and that it was the only means, as I saw, to reinstate
him in his liberty: But yet he did not quickly obtain it, for he was forced to
submit to a thousand embraces, and swear as often by Heaven, and all the Powers
that are there, that he would preserve for her an inviolable fidelity: She gave
him a Watch of a considerable value, to take notice of the hours of his
absence: He assured her, that he would give himself the Honor to see her every
day; and so at last was delivered from his Captivity, after he had promised to
me his Friendship, of which she told him I was not unworthy. Madam de Bevilaqua
returned to her own house, where I left her with her head brimgfull of
Mounsieur de Bronzoly.

I heard that she had sent to all her Acquaintance the news of his Arrival, and
that she had promised them to bring him to their houses the next day. In the
mean time I learned, that the Woman had sold her Mistresses hair to that man
whom the false Bronzoly had named to me. I was resolved to reproach her for her
malice, which she took with so many signs of Repentance, that I promised her
not to speak any farther of it. I was the greatest Person in the House, having
gained to me the Servants; and if any would have got any thing from the
Countess, it was always from my Oratory and solicitation. The Presents I
received were so frequent, that I might say, she loaded me with them; for there
did not slip a day wherein she did not make me some considerable ones. Lucia
was afraid that I would reveal the secret of the Hair: Hippolite could not,
without a deadly affliction, see me so high in the esteem of his Wife, and both
of them hated me alike mortally, which set them a plotting how to ruin me in
the heart of the Countess; but they were both of one mind as to this, that it
was indispensably necessary to hook Mounsieur de Bronzoly into their design,
and to make him serve as a pretense to the destroying of our Friendship. That
they might happily succeed, the perfidious Lacia entered one day almost
frightened out of her Wits into her Mistresses Chamber, and told her, that she
came from having the greatest fear upon her as ever she had in her life; that
she had met Mounsieur de Bronzoly, who was coming to visit her, that I had
forced him to draw his Sword out, and that I ran at him with such a violence,
that if there had not come a Miracle from Heaven to his succor, he would
without all peradventure have been killed in this Encounter.

The Countess clearly swooned away at this discourse of Lucia's, and by
accident the Count de Santiniany and I came in, whilst they were taken up in
getting her to come to her self. As I had the freedom to go to her house at
what hours I would, I performed the duties of the house to Mounsieur le Count
de Santiniany, and we entered into her Chamber as she began to be pretty well.
I was very busy to render her some service, but she rudely thrust me from her,
and looked upon me with eyes so full of fury and indignation, that I was
surprised at it. I demanded of Lucia the reason of it, who condemned me for the
astonishment I appeared to be in at the alienation of her Mistresses mind: She
imagined that you were about to Assasinate Mounsieur de Bronzoly, she would
have me affirm that I was present at it; and this melancholy Fancy passes so
currantly for a truth in her Opinion, that you will find it a hard matter to
disabuse her of it. The while I was speaking to this Woman, the Countess
recovered again her strength, and her speech. Ah! Perfidious Wretch as you are,
said she to me, have I had so great a kindness for you then, as to see my self
wounded in the most sensible place of my heart, to set upon Mounsieur de
Bronzoly as he was coming to see me, to draw upon him, and to force Heaven to
work a Miracle to rescue him from your fury: Oh baseness! is it thus that you
have received the obliging offers that he made you of his particular
Friendship? Go, ungrateful man, you are unworthy that he ever should give it
you again, or that I should conserve that kindness for you, which I did honor
you withal; go, withdraw, and deliver your self, if you can, from my just
vengeance, and never offer more to appear in my sight. The excess of her
choler had almost suffocated the Countess, and they were fain to have recourse
to their Remedies to fetch her to life again. Mounsieur the Count advised me to
retire, but I was of Opinion that I ought to make some discoveries of my
Innocence to a person from whom I had received such signal instances of
affection and kindness, though I knew very well, I should expose my self by it
to the greatest outrages that it was possible for her fury to inspire her with.
She came to her self the second time, and was more enraged, by far, than she
was before: And what, cried she, as she saw me, will you take away my life from
me, after that you had a mind to rob me of that which only can make me to love
it: I went near her to begin my Justification; and without ever considering
that at that time she was incapable of reason, I told her all that was possible
for me to dissuade her from that Opinion, but nothing would do to prove my
Innocence to her; my sight exasperated her, my discourse invigorated her
resentment; so that I was forced to give over, and let the storm hold, till it
grew calm of it self, Mounsieur the Count told me, that she oft-times laid the
Foundation of great kindnesses and Friendship, which still broke off all to
pieces by her violent choler and passion, and that I was a happy man to come
off so well and cheap. Mounsieur Hippolite, and the crafty Lucia told me, as I
was going away, that this impression was like eternally to abide upon her
spirit; and that when once her Fancy was strongly prepossessed, it was
impossible to be changed. Gratitude did work upon me the effect of Love: I was
extreme melancholy so to be separated from a person to whom I was really so
much obliged; and without ever quarrelling at the strangeness of her humor, I
every now and then accused my self as guilty, at-least in not having discreetly
enough managed her frailty. I retired with the Count de Santiniany, and all
night made a thousand reflections upon the odness and extravagancy of this
adventure. In vain did I write soft and amorous Letters, in vain did I find my
self at the places of Devotion, where I thought to have had a sight of the
Countess: Mounsieur Hippolite, and Lucia, had so strongly prepossest her mind
to my disadvantage, that I could never meet her more in any place. I learned
from one of the Servants of the Countess, all this whole intrigue which
Mounsieur Hippolite and Lucia made use of to destroy me in her favor: But
seeing I had nothing to reproach me upon the account of ingratitude, I took
order for my departure: and after I had taken leave of Mounsieur le Duke de
Savoy, and of those persons to whom I had the honor to be known, I parted from
Turin, and came back to Amboise, where I arrived in a short time after the King.

Maisiere having thus concluded his discourse, Mounsieur d' Alenson, and Madam
his Wife assured him, that the History had extremely diverted them. As it grew
to be somewhat late, they retired to the Castle, where they were no sooner
come, but news was brought, that a Courrier demanded to present to Mounsieu le
Duc some Letters coming from the Marshall de Gie. The time he took up in
reading of them, Mademoiselle d' Alenson went to her Apartment, where she
desired to be alone, to read the Letter that the Count de Dunois had written to
her, and sent by Maisiere; and which he had put, by her order, into the hands
of Rieux: if it did not contain these very words, I am sure it did not much
vary from them.

The Letter of the Count de Dunois to Mademoiselle d' Alenson.
I Must acknowledge, Mademoiselle, that your Esteem and Friendship is so highly
valuable, that I ought not to pretend to Merit it; and that my Enemies have
reason to envy it me, but you are just to have given some belief to their
Artifices. I might have been deceived with them as well as you, if my Love and
my Respect had not defended you against all probabilities. Let me complain then
of the easiness with which you have condemned me without giving me leave to
plead for my self: not but that I am assured I could justify my self; but,
alas! Mademoiselle, who will assure me that absence has not banished me from
your heart? It produces in me such cruel effects, as that the consequence of it
will, I fear, prove fatal to me, if you at least are not so mereiful, as to
assure me that you are concerned at the affliction it causes to me. I have
entrusted this Letter with Maisiere, under very powerful assurances of his
Fidelity, and it is from him, Mademoiselle, that I beg of you by all that you
count dear in the World, to learn that which may justify me, and give me a
place again in your, favors.


What Maisiere had told the Princess, had begun already to disabuse her, and
the Letter of the Counts did completely re-establish the former affection in
her Breast. But she did only change her torment; for the rigours of absence
took up the place of her Jealousies and Disquiets, which had most sadly handled
her ever since that she had suspected the Count de Dunois of infidelity. Her
curiosity to know what the Marshall had sent to the Duke her Father, made her
quickly return to her Mother, who had a most tender love for her: This good
Lady told her, that the Count de Dunois was out of favor, for having
challenged the Marshall de Gie in the Anti chamber of the King, that the Queen
used all her endeavors for the re-establishment of that Prince, and that he
was retired to his Lands in Normandy, till such time as it was allowed him to
return. The retreat of the Count de Dunois, added the Duchess, gives the Duke
a great mistrust, that he will some way or other endeavor to see you, or lay
the Foundation of some correspondence with you. As to the Treaty of Milau,
pursued Madam d' Alenson, the Marshall promises that it will be concluded
within a Mouth at farthest. The Princess was much surprised to hear the Count
was out of favor, but she could not but rejoice to know that he was in a place
which made him be still the more suspected. Moreover, she had the pleasure of
seeing that Madam her Mother was in the same apprehensions with her, that her
Marriage with the Duke of Milan would succeed: So that the Princess watching
her time to make a complete Conquest over her heart, told her all that her
respect and her affection could inspire her with, in protesting to her, that
she should die with grief, if she was taken out of her sight but for one day.

The tenderhearted Lady could not answer this discourse of hers, she was in
such a Flood of tears at it; which furnished the Princess with an occasion of
telling her such things that her Modesty and fearfulness always had made her
keep secret and private. The Confession she made to her Mother of the Esteem
she had for the Prince de Dunois, did not surprise her so much as the audacious
confidence of the Marshall, that he should have dared to declare unto her his
passion. She blamed her Daughter for not having complained of it; but she did
excuse her self as well as she could, in telling her, that her Father was too
much incensed, to be capable of hearing any Reason which might be to her
Justification: Madam d' Alenson promised her to acquaint him of it, and that
far from opposing the affection that she bore to that Prince, she would defend
it for the future. The Princess did not nevertheless think it her Duty to
declare the true cause of the stay that Maisiere made at Alenson; but it was
well enough for that time, that she had brought her Mother to that point which
she had so long desired to do. And from that time Mademoiselle d' Alenson
reassumed her natural briskness, and pleasant humor: These happy fore
intelligences re-establisht in her heart the tranquillity and cheerfulness that
her Jealousy had banished from her ever since her departure from Amboise.
During that time in which Mademoiselle d' Alenson informed her self of the
Exile of the Count, Maisiere on his part, received his news by an intelligence
that he had in Town. He told this expert Agent, that he was in one of his
Farms, not distant from thence above two hours riding, and ordered him to go to
him, and take all possible care, not to give any cause of suspicion that his
absence might peradventure beget in the Dukes head, who of himself was very
mistrustful. He received also a Letter for Mademoiselle d' Alenson, in which
the Count confirmed to her the assurances of his Love, and desired her through
pity to give him one testimony of her affection to comfort him in his absence,
not doubting but that she was recovered from the suspicions that she had taken
up of his Fidelity. The Princess could scarcely resolve with her self to make
him an answer; but at last she writ this.

The Letter of Mademoiselle d' Alenson to the Count de Dunois.
I Have always studied to love you Innocent, and I could never hate you, though
I thought you were guilty: therefore you may imagine, that I easily credited
what Maisiere told me for your justification. I do repent then of my unjust
doubts; and if that is not sufficient to satisfy you, I permit you to hope,
that I will very highly prize the troubles which they have made you suffer.


Maisiere was very much satisfied that he had got such a happy effect in his
Negotiation; and without ever attributing the success of it unto Love, he gave
to himself all the glory of it. Mademoiselle d' Alenson told him, that he might
assure the Count, that Madam the Duchess would not be any longer his Enemy in
it, but that she began to act mighty strongly in his favor. The Princess then
demanded of him how he meant to carry it, that so his Journey should not be
suspected; but Maisiere referred it to her prudence, to instruct him in the
manner of his Conduct. He departed the same day to find out the Count de
Dunois, from whom he received a thousand manifestations of kindness and
affection; and Maisiere, to make himself deserve them, presented him with
Mademoiselle d' Alenson's Letter. He could with much ado allow the Prince a
liberty to read it: You see Sir, said he to him, that the Princess is happily
delivered from her Error: It ought to suffice you, that there is not the least
impression of it left in her mind; and without entering into the particulars of
the manner, which I took to disabuse her, or trifle away this precious time in
unprofitable discourses, pray be pleased to instruct me in the occasion of your
retreat from Court, and of your controversy with the Marshall de Gie. Before
I enter into this Relation, answered the Prince, you must tell me somewhat from
the Princess, what are her Sentiments for me, and whether I ought not to hope
that I may see her during this her Exile, and mine; if it be permitted me,
answered Maisiere, to judge of her heart by appearances, you have a great deal
of reason to be satisfied in it, and I do not think that the hope of seeing her
should be forbidden you, but in like manner, I do not think that you ought to
lay much stress upon a hope that is so doubtful. The Princess possibly may not
be against it in her mind, but in all likelihood she will not consent to a
secret interview; and it must be from some accident, or from some unthought-of
hazard that you ought to expect this good Fortune: but to get it you, I shall
be ready to contribute all my care and prudence. But Sir, because I have but a
short time to tarry with you, pray be pleased to tell me what I ought to say to
the Princess concerning those things that have happened to you. When you parted
from Amboise, replied the Count, the Marshall was sick, and was many days
unseen; but as he began to be so well as to walk about, the Queens turn was
come to fall ill, which indisposition would not permit her to stir out of her
Chamber, nor to think upon any thing besides her recovery. As for the
Marshall, he had rather a little hazard his health, than leave me by his
absence the liberty of entertaining the King, and to act with my Friends for
the advancement of my affairs, and for the ruin of his designs. One day as I
went out of the Kings Closet, where I had left him in a very kind and
favorable humor, I met with the Marshall in the Antichamber, who was
receiving there the Complements of all the Court for the return of his health:
and then after, they were discoursing of the preparations that were a making
ready for the War of Italy. Some one was proposing the difficulty of the Armies
passage: to which the Ma eschal bluntly answered, that he had provided for
that. Your prudence, said I to him, most judiciously provides for every thing
that may any ways be opposing to my designs: but your Modesty is extreme, to
rob you of the advantage which you ought to carry away from so glorious a
Negotiation. I seek no other, replied the Marshall, but to serve my King: That
is the least, said I to him again, that appears to us: It is, answered he me,
the only motive of all the actions of my life. Without examining your
intention, said I to him, I will still commend you, when you shall labour-with
success; but do it so then, as not to make me serve as a Victim for your Zeal;
for setting the service of the King aside, I can easily make you distinguish my
interests from yours. As I have non: that are common to us, replied the
Marshall to me, I know not what distinction I can put between them. Put one at
least between your self and me, replied I, and seriously bethink your self of
the distance that parts us; for I tell you once, that when ever you would
destroy me in the Kings favor, to establish your self therein, I shall bring
such an obstacle to oppose it, as shall not be very easy for you to conquer. A
valiant man that does his duty, meets with none that can put him out of his
way, answered the Marshall. A valiant man, replied I, would not go in such a
one as you do. Ah! Sir, interrupted the Marshall, I have never any thing that
can despoil me of that Title; and it is upon that only which I value my self to
be equal with all those whose Birth have given them a place above me. The
respect I have to the place where I am, replied I to him, does hinder me from
making you know, that there cannot be any equality between us, and I should be
ashamed -- The Marquess de la Trimouille; and some others of my Friends, made
the Marshall retire; which he could not agree to, but with a great deal of
difficulty. A little while after the King came out of his Closet to go to the
Queen, where none followed him, by reason of her sickness. I was immediately
surrounded by all those that were interressed in my concerns, to offer me their
services, for which I returned them my thanks. As the King was coming out from
the Queens Chamber, the Marshall joined with him, and laid open his cause so
subtly to him, that it was impossible to disabuse him, but that I was to
blame, and it was in vain for any to undertake my Justification: All the grace
that I received from the King in this occasion was, that he did not command me
to absent from Court: but the Marquess de la Trimouille, Montsaureau, and some
others of my Friends, counseled me to forbear coming thither for some time.
They would have followed me in my retreat, if I had not judged it more
necessary that they should be near the King for the obtaining of my return, and
preventing the Mareschals further ingratiating himself in the Kings esteem. I
left to Mounsieur de la Trimouille the care of improving the Queens affection,
and parted from Amboise very much incensed at the Marshall; and, for I may say
it, but ill apaid.

But the Marquess de la Trimouille made me understand, that what the Marshall
did, being strengthened upon arguments that were profitable for the State, I
should not have took that pretense to have quarreled with him; and that I had
reason to be content in my disgrace, with the respect the King had not to make
it more unpleasing. As soon as I arrived, my first care was to inform my self
by you of my Princess, and of the condition I was in with her. You were but in
a very ill one there, answered Maisiere, and Mademoiselle de Rieux, and my
self, had a great difficulty to convince her of the error she had conceived.
After that, the Count put a thousand questions to Maisiere, who told him all
that he thought might any ways contribute to his repose. The good inclinations
of Madam d' Alenson, and the tender affections of the Princess her Daughter,
did very much add to it. The night being already so far spent, as that the day
began to appear, Maisiere urged the Count to dismiss him: He being not in a
convenient place to write, did commit to this faithful Agent all that his Love
could inspire him with, and desired him to make use of all his insinuations, to
persuade the Princess to grant him a private Audience. Maisiere not presuming
to flatter himself with the accomplishing so difficult an Enterprise, would not
promise it to the Count, but assured him, that he would lay out the utmost of
his abilities to procure it. He went away from the Prince with no small
disturbance, for it was broad daylight, and though he was sufficiently
disguised, he was extremely afraid lest he should be discovered. He came back
to Alenson, with his heart up at his mouth all the way, through the fear that
had possessed him, when he met with an Encounter that put him into the greatest
plunge that ever he was in in his life; and it was within a mile and a half of
the Town: He had already quitted his Horse, and was disposing himself to go the
rest of his way on foot, when at the turning of a way that led up to the Dukes
house, he saw the Duke, with all his little Court and attendance, in chase for
the Wild Boar, who were already got so near him, as that he could by no manner
in the world escape being seen, and met with: Now it was that Maisiere had need
of all those witty turns, that he knew so ingeniously how to make use of. He
reposed himself a little on his disguize; but as it is an ordinary thing for
Hunters to question all Passengers, he feared, and that with reason, that he
should be asked something; and being obliged to speak, his voice would betray
him. He had recourse to a resolution that was very singular; for it happened
that part of the Company having taken a false track in the Wood, they were
divided and broken; so that some of the Duke d' Alenson's Retinue asked
Maisiere, if he had not met them. At the first Interrogation he answered
nothing, no more than he did at the second, only made a sign that he was dumb,
and so made I do not know how many such extorted faces as those do that are so,
to express the desire that he had to speak, which abundantly procured to him
the charitable benevolences of the Duke. Maisiere thought he was now delivered
from that danger, when a little while after he met with the Duchess, and the
Princess, who came up to him as fast as her Horse could gallop, and demanded of
him if he had not met with Mounsieur the Duke. He used the same stratagem to
her as he had done to her Father, he feigned himself dumb, and past for such in
the Opinion of all those that saw him: At last he got to the Town, and to his
Correspondents house, that he had in it; he understood that the Duke had been
in great Quest for him, to follow him to the Chase of a Wild Boar of a
prodigious bigness; that a vast number of people were gone along with him, and
only he was wanting at the Divertisement. He was told by this man what excuse
he was fain to make for him; I said, replied he to him, that you found your
self very much out of order last night, and that I had kept you with me, and
that you not having slept a wink all the night long, I was very loath to disturb
you, being newly fallen into (as I thought) a sound nap, not knowing how much
prejudice I might do you by it, or how much good you might get, if it please
God to give you a sweet and continued repose. Immediately Maisiere changed his
apparel, and happily met with a horse, and set forward with such violence, that
in a short time he came to the place where they set their Toyls. The Duke
accused him of sluggishness, and Mademoiselle d' Alenson of being too neat and
finnical, and there was scarce any body there that had not some such quarrel
with him, for being the last at a Divertisement, to which almost all the World
had run with precipitation. Maugre the false Prognostics of the Hunters, they
took the Wild Boar, and returned to Alenson: but the Princess could not get any
discourse from Maisiere; she only observed his eyes, the fear she was in that
by his not being found, when the Duke had made such a search for him, there
should come into the head of that suspicious Prince some Idea of the truth; but
when the time came of his conversing with her, he did so pathetically discover
his fear to her, that Mademoiselle d' Alenson thought she had as much of it as
she had had: Tell me, said she to him, how you parted from hence, and in what
place you met with Mounsieur le Count de Dunois: As soon as I had left you,
replied Maisiere, I went into the Town to one of my Acquaintance, where I had
habits of several fashions; I took one of them, with which I might be easily
taken for a Peasant, I hid my hair after the best manner I could, and went all
through the Town, and the Suburbs on foot, to a little Village which is not
very far from it, where I found him who had brought me news of Mounsieur the
Count, and this Man waited me with a Horse, on which I made all the have I
could, to arrive at a place which was a great way distant from any Road, it
being a solitary Retreat of a Gentleman's, where I embraced Mounsiour the
Count), and where I learned of him what you now desire to know. Maisiere then
up and told Mademoiselle d' Alenson all that which had happened to him in his
Journey; he acquitted himself extraordinarily well in persuading her of the
Counts Passion, and she was very much pleased-with his Address: But when he
came to propose to her the Interview that the Prince so much desired, it was
not in his power to obtain it: What, Maisiere, said she to him, would you
engage me to suffer anew what I have suffered ever since the unfortunate day
(or rather night) of the false Rendezvous? Do not you deceive your self there,
Mademoiselle, replied Maisiere, we are not at Amboise; there are none here in
conspiracy to betray you, and there are none in the world but a Jealous
Marshall de Gie, and a Revengeful Madam de Cominge: I own it, said the
Princess, but Mounsieur le Due d' Alenson is to be feared every where equally,
he alone is more to be dreaded, than all the world together, and I am fully
determined not to commit my self to a second misfortune, after I have had such
cruel afflictions by the former; and Maisiere could not obtain one from her,
notwithstanding he used all the Oratory he was capable of. He was in hopes to
get her to it in time, and many days past, in which the Count, and Mademoiselle
d' Alenson, writ to one another with all the passionate tenderness imaginable,
and made it their study for to sweeten the rigor of that absence by a Commerce
which they saw established betwixt them: this was enough to free the Count from
Desperation, though it was too little to render him happy. Maisiere was no
better fatisfied than he, and he ought to do something more to fill up those
Intentions; for he desired that the Prince should have a particular
conversation with the Princess by his procurement and Mediation; and this
design, for some days together, took up his whole thoughts; but at last he
found out this invention: One Evening he told the Princess, that he had seen at
his Friends house a man that was admirable in the knowledge of things that
should hereafter come to pass: He persuaded her to consult him, and assured her
that she would be very much satisfied with it. As the Duke and Duchess were
declared Enemies to this Science, and to those that made Profession of it,
there was a great deal of consideration to be taken how this Astrologer was to
be seen, without having any notice taken of it: but Rieux, to whom Maisiere had
communicated the trick that he was resolved to put upon the Princess, did find
out a way for it, which was to have him sent to the Woman's house, who was Wife
to the Captain of the Castle, an intimate Crony of hers, and who besides had a
great Curiosity upon her to know, whether she should survive her Husband who
was very Jealous, and whom she loved not for it (whether she deserved to have
him so, I shall not concern my self, because it does not contribute to the
making up of my story) This Woman was of one of the best dispositions in the
world (a shrewd sign that she could the less withstand the batteries that were
made against her, as it is likely she had some, because she was very well as to
handsomness) and there was only wanting the Captains absence to accomplish
their design, as to that part; but Heaven, which began to smile upon the
designs of the Count, caused the Duke, who had a mind to go to Argentan, to see
a stately house that he was building there, to carry with him the Captain of
the Castle, being very notable and exquisite in Architecture. Maisiere
acquainted the Count with it, and desired him to come the next day, a little
after the night was shut in, to his Friends, where he would wait him to inform
him what personage he must represent: In the mean time he prepared the Captains
Wife to receive the Astrologer into her house, and told his Friend what he
judged was necessary, not to make him suspect the truth of the matter, the
Count arrived, and Maisiere told him the stratagem he would use to procure him
a conversation with the Princess: He took along with him a habit that was
convenient enough for the person he was going to represent. What cannot Love do
in a Breast that is strongly possessed with it! This Prince, whose Eminent
Quality saw very few superior to him, and who by his Noble and generous Mien,
had so much advantage over all men of his Age, the Prince, I say, whose Heroic
Qualities raised him yet above all that his good Mien and Birth promised of
him, this Prince quitted himself of his Eminence, to take upon him a Figure so
distant, as it was inferior to his own; in this condition he was received by
the Wife of the Captain, with one Gentleman only, who went for one of his near
Friends. This Dame was a great piece of a conceit of Province, and a little
given to the vanity common to the most of her Sex, Gossiping; she had read all
the Romances of her time, and could never speak, but it must be upon some of
the amorous or tragical adventures she had met with in them: She pretended to
give the Count a full discovery of the delicateness of her Wit, and gave him a
History of some of the Women in the Town, and from thence insensibly fell upon
the discourse of the Stars, and their influences. Maisiere gave her a signal
that it was not time to discover her Curiosity, but she had not the talent to
conceal it, and the Count found that he should be harrassed by her: For he was
somewhat conscientions how he flattered the weakness of that poor Woman.
Maisiere had acquainted the Princess that the Astrologer was arrived, and she
happened to come in very opportunely to interrupt the Captains Wife, who had
already written down the day and hour of her Birth, to make him draw the
Figure, and resolve those Questions that were as impertinent as he perceived
her troublesome. There was very little light in the Chamber, and the Astrologer
was put in a place that was most dark and obscure, that so Mademoiselle d'
Alenson might come very near him before she could make any discovery who he
was. Maisiere foreseeing well the effect that this surprise would produce in
the spirit of the Princess, had handsomely got the Captains Wife into a
Gallery, to give the Princess greater liberty to entertain the Astrologer, and
satisfied himself in leaving de Rieux, and the Gentleman, in that where the
Prince and Princess were; the precaution of Maisiere was not unprofitable, when
she knew the Astrologer, and was going in have to depart, but de Rieux, who
coming near her, and pretending as great an astonishment as if she had known
nothing at all of the whole business, helped the Princess a little out of the
trouble that the sight of the Count had pur her in, and made her consider, that
coming so far, it would be a means to expose the Prince to a discovery in that
place, to be gone with so much speed. Mademoiselle d' Alenson fell out with
Maisiere, de Rienx still stirred up her anger against him, easily persuading
him, that he would not find it a difficult matter to get into her favor again;
and at last de Rienx being retired, through respect, near to a Window with the
Gentleman, the Count began to speak: It Is not Maisiere, Mademoiselle, that,
said he to her, upon whom your anger ought to fall, nor is it me whom you ought
to accuse for it, for the fear of displeasing you, should have triumphed over
the passion I had to receive the honor of seeing you; but Mademoiselle, it is
Love that has committed this Crime, and it is to that only that you ought to
impute it. Let it be of You, of Maisiere, or of Love, that I have reason to
complain, replied Mademoiselle d' Alenson, it is certain, that this surprise
gives me a very sensible displeasure, I will not tell you, that I should have
been exceeding glad to have learned your Innocence from your self, but when I
only think of the peril to which you now expose your self, that which should
have given me an extreme satisfaction, is the sole cause of an incredible
affliction to me. Pray, Mademoiselle, reckon not at all upon the danger in
which you conjecture I am, replied the Prince, but give me leave to count you
the villainous torment that your absence has procured me, and the unjust
suspicions that you have had of my fidelity. I beg your pardon, said the
Princess, if I did take up with Appearances, and if I did condemn you, without
giving you a hearing: but do not you refresh my memory either with my fault, or
with the occasion that forced me to commit it, think only of the misfortunes
that the imprudence I was guilty of in giving you an Assignation in the Park of
Amboise has brought upon me. Think only, Mademoiselle, replied the Count, of of
the joy that I at present do possess, of being able to consult you about my
good or evil Fortune: It Is you only, continued he, who can acquaint me with it.
as it is your self only that can make it. If your Fortune was in my
disposition, answered the Princess, you should have reason to be pleased in the
share that I would make you; but the intentions of Mounsieur the Duke d'
Alenson and mine, are so repugnant, that there is no likelihood that the future
should prepare us a more happy destiny than this, whereof we now complain. O!
what will you have me then become, said the Prince, interrupting her, if I
ought to pretend to nothing more favorable in the time to come, than I can now
by that which is past. It Is your prudence you must consult, said the Princess,
upon what you ought to do; but if you would know of me what I desire, I will
tell you, it may be with too much freedom, that I would that you should love me
always, and that it was as easy for us to gain the good will of the Duke my
Father, as it was to obtain that of the Duchess my Mother, to desire our
Alliance. But Mademoiselle, replied the Count, do not deprive me at least of
the comfort to hope, if you will have me live. Hope, live, and love me, replied
the Princess, and after this do not beg of me a longer Audience: It ought to
have ended long before, or to say better, I ought not to have granted it you at
all. Well, Mademoiselle, said the Count, I will not diminish any thing of the
favor you have granted to me, in obliging you by constraint to repent of it. I
am going to separate my self from you, but after you have ordained me to live,
to hope, and to love you; will you tell me nothing of the part I ought to
pretend to in your heart? As I am not unjust, replied the Princess, I do not
exact your affection, without giving you in mine all the part that my duty will
permit me to afford you there. The Count gave the Princess a thousand thanks;
and after that he had assured her of a Love and a Fidelity that was inviolable,
and that he had obtained of her the pardon of Maisiere, she went away from him:
but scarce had she gone six steps toward her Apartment, but she saw the
Captain of the Castle returned, having left the Duke behind at Argenton. This
speed, and this crittical time, did afford to Mademoiselle d' Alenson good
store of anxious thoughts, for the Captain went but that Morning, and to see
him come back the same Evening, one had reason to doubt, that there had
something happened extraordinary to the Duke, or at least that he had
discovered somewhat of that which past at Alenson: In this perplexity she was
at a strange loss how to carry it, for to suffer the Captain to come into the
Chamber, there was no thought of, the Count being in it, and yet was there much
less to entrust him with this secret: But Maisiere, who was still admirable at
a dead lift, said to the Princess; Without doubt, Mademoiselle, you do not
think but that the Duchess will be in an extreme impatience, when she shall
hear that Mounsieur the Captain is returned; Command him, if it so please you,
to give you his hand, and lead you into the Chamber of Madam your Mother.
Mademoiselle d' Alenson past with him along the same Gallery, through which she
came to the Captains house, who made her very great Complements upon the Honor
she had done to his Wife: He did very rationally imagine, that there must be
some cause more than ordinary, which had brought her to make this Visit, but
what it should be, he could not Divine. Whilst the Duchess asked him the
reason of his so quick return, Maisiere caused the Astrologer to depart,
without ever giving him leave to draw the poor Woman's Horoscope, nor so much as
precisely to reply to the great civilities she made him: She desired him not to
take it ill, and being to tarry at Alenson, she could see him at a house there,
where one of her special Friends lived: The Count departed, promising her not
to lose any opportunity of discoursing with her; he was got to the house where
Maisier's Acquaintance dwelt, from whence he departed the next night following,
and Maisiere came back in all haste to the Castle to learn how matters were
carried there: All was very quiet and hush to all appearance, only Mademoiselle
d' Alenson, who was not retrieved from the fear the Captains coming back had
caused her. He also was a little sollicitous and troublesome to know what it
was that had obliged her to visit his Wife, but she could not tell what she had
best to say: But Maisiere suspecting the perplexity she had upon her, took on
him to help her out of it. He came into the Chamber just as the Inquisitive
Husband was affirming peremptorily, that his Wife knew the reason why the
Princess came thither: It belongs to me, said Maisiere to him, to instruct you
in what you demand, for it is to me that you owe the honor which you have
received: One, whom I knew very well, passing by this way, continued he, met me
in the Town, I did think that Mademoiselle d' Alenson (for, as I should have
said before, I knew this Acquaintance of mine was very skilful in the Art of
Prediction) might not be displeased to learn of him something of her Fortune; I
imagined also that your Wife would be glad to know whether you should have any
Children, and what happiness should arrive to you from the Friendship that
Mon^sieur le Duc bears you: But knowing that Madam the Duchess does not
approve of this curiosity, the Princess to satisfy hers made choice of your
Chamber: I am mighty sorry, replied the Captain, that I did not see this honest
man: I am very much troubled at it too, replied Maisiere; but he was not gone
above an hour, at the outside, before you came. Well, said the Captain, and
what has he said of our Fortune? That she shall be with-child, answered
Maisiere, and that you will be extraordinary rich by the Liberalities of a
young Princess; and that you will have but one Son that shall succeed your good
Fortune. This good man was very much satisfied to hear all these fine things;
the next day the Princess gave Maisiere a severe rattle for the trick he had
played her the precedent day, and strictly forbid him ever again to put such
another upon her. I desire with all my heart, Mademoiselle, said he to her, not
to find my self in a condition to invent another stratagem, to make you see
Mounfieur le Count de Dunois, and that Heaven would condemn you in a short
time, so that he might never quit you more. The Princess judged it very
convenient, tha Maisiere should go to Argenton to see the Duke her Father: He
demanded permission of the Duchess, who was glad to see him in that mind; but
he was prevented by the unexpected arrival of the Prince, who commanded, as he
was coming in, to get all things in a readiness to go the next day to Court. He
was accompanied by the Count de Montsaureau, whom the King had sent to him, to
tell him the posture in which things then flood, and to hasten his Journey to
Amboise. The Duchess, and Mademoiselle d' Alenson, were extremely surprised to
see Mounsieur d'Montsaureau with the Duke: They were likewise overjoyed at it,
for he was a person of a consummated honesty, and who had never been in the
interests that were suspected by them. Mounsieur d' Alenson left him with them,
and told Mademoiselle d' Alenson his Daughter, in passing by her, that she
should return to Amboise with a better humor upon her, than that she came with
to Alenson. As soon as he was gone, Mounsieur Montsaureau, not to let them
languish any longer in their expectation of the joyful and welcome news that he
brought to them, began his discourse in this manner, addressing himself to the
Duchess: Your departure, Madam, was an equal surprizal and affliction to all
the Court; but the true cause of it not being known, the most part sought what
should be your Inducements of it, without being able to Divine them, except a
few persons who knew the secret. For my part I was not long ignorant of it, for
the Queen did me the honor to declare it to me, and to tell me all she heard
from the mouth of Madam de Cominge. The Count de Montsaureau gave the Duchess
the particulars of it, and Mademoiselle heard it over again the second time,
for Maisiere had already given her account of it. After that, continued
Montsaureau, the Marshall fell extremely ill, and Madam de Cominge, by the
Commandment of the Queen, visited him daily. She perceived that the absence did
most rigorously torment him; and that not being able any longer to support it,
he was resolved to employ all the Artifices imaginable to ruin the Count de
Dunois in the Kings Esteem, and to make him be banished the Court; and after
that, to order things so, that Mademoiselle d' Alenson shoald be called back
again to it. The Queen was not powerful enough to persuade the King, that Love
and Policy was one and the same thing with the Marshall; and the King was so
possessed with his affection for the good of the Nation, that she could never
compass to undeceive him of it. He desired her that she would never more speak
of it to him: The Marshall being perfectly recovered of his sickness, the
Count de Dunois met him in the Antichamber of the King, and gave him very smart
reproaches before all the Court, and whereat the King was extraordinarily
incensed. The most sincere people of the Court did not forbear addressing
themselves to him, and it was with a sensible regret, that his Friends saw him
go from Amboise. By ill hap the Queen was then sick, and so not in a condation
to act for the Count de Dunois; so that all our arguments were useless with the
King. He had nevertheless this respect for the Count, to advise his Friends
only to counsel him to retire for some time, not being willing to prescribe the
place of his Exile. This departure did absolutely put a consternation into all
hearts, and I never in my life saw the Court so melancholy. Besides, I
perceived the King did but illy bear it, and that he many times called upon
this Count, without thinking that he was at such a distance to answer him. We
expected some happy Revolution which your Presence would give us and which
would call the Prince back, when we heard that the Milanois had renewed the
Treaty of Alliance with the Emperor and Ferdinand, and that they both joined
together to raise great Levies to oppose the passage of the King, upon the
report that was noised about that he would return into Italy. The King had a
great deal of difficulty to believe this news, but it was confirmed from so
many places, that at last he had no farther room to doubt of it. He spoke of it
to the Marshall de Gie, and would have him responsible for the rupture of a
Treaty, of the event of which he had so often charged himself. The Marshall
justified himself, by a discourse full of flourish and Eloquence: But when the
King demanded of him precisely what was the Conduct that he had made use of for
this Negotiation, the Marshall blundered heavily, for he could say nothing to
his Majesty, which he thought would give him satisfaction. All that the Queen
had told him then came fresh into his memory; but his natural clemency, and the
affection he had for the Marshall, which was particular, made him yet for some
time suspend his just resentment. Justify your self, said the King to him, I
would advise you, and I wish that you know how to do it: Let me be assured,
that you did enter into Treaty with the Duke of Milan; what the Propositions
were that you made to him, and the Reasons wherefore the Propositions did not
take effect, after that I shall be content; and if there be any fault in you, I
shall not impute it to the defect of your Zeal for my service, I had rather
cast it upon your Imprudence, than upon your Infidelity. The Marshall would
fain have persuaded the King, that what he had heard was an Imposture, and not
real. It may be at another time he might have done it, but his Loyalty began
then a little too much to be suspected, to suffer him to rely upon his word.
Though the King did demand him, yet he made no positive answer. Being
displeased then at his weak sincerity, he commanded the Captain of his Guards
to go and seize the Mareschals Cabinet, and to bring it to him. I was in the
Antichamber when it came by there, and I went immediately to the Queen, to whom
this news was very pleasant, judging, according to all appearances, that the
King was entered into some suspicion of the fidelity of the Marshall, and that
he did seek to be fully cleared upon it. She assured her self of Madam de
Cominge to tell the truth of all she knew, when she saw a convenient time for
it. In the mean time, the King had no sooner got the Cabinet into his
possession, but he caused it to be opened. He found there a Model that the
Marshall had drawn up to prepare their minds for the breaking off the Treaty
of Milan. After that, he met with the Copy of a Letter he had writ to Sforza,
in which he had proposed the Marriage of Mademoiselle d' Alenson with his
Nephew; and let him know, that if he accepted of the Proposition, the
conclusion of it might be deferred for some years: He desired him to quit the
Party of the King of Spain, and to facilitate the passage of the Army; but so
wretchedly, that it was easy to perceive that he had no desire to obtain what
he seemed to solicit for. There was yet another Paper fastened to this, which
was written in Characters, and where the King could understand nothing, no more
than he could of many others of the same nature that fell into his hands. It
was not possible for him to get out any farther explication from the Marshall,
neither would the King any more look into them; this suffices, said he, to make
me, know the Motives that made you act: retire into your apartment, from whence
I forbid you to stir out but by my orders. And you, continued he, turning to
the Captain of the Guard, take special care that you suffer no person to speak
with him. The King went alone into his Clos. set very much enraged against the
Marshall: but the Queen did not give him a very long time to make his
reflections upon the crime, or upon the Criminal. She made some pretense to go
and to interrupt his solitude, and to speak to him of somewhat else then of the
Marshall; but the King was not in a humor to begin another discourse. He made
to her his complaints of the Mareschal's perfidiousness, he accused himself of
having been prepossest on his behalf, and told her all that his resentment
could inspire him with. For all this the Queen did very well observe that the
King had still some returns that inclined him to clemency, and that if they had
taken but a moderate care to excuse the Marshall, it would not possibly, have
been a hard matter to get him established again. But the Queen, who had other
sentiments, acquainted the King with what Madam de Cominge had told her, and of
which he was not overwilling to be informed; and not to leave him any room to
doubt of the truth of what he had said, she showed him the letters that made a
full discovery of the Love he had for Mademoiselle d' Alenson, and of the fear
that he was in that she would marry the Count de Dunois, Madam de Cominge
added, that he had always spoken to her of the Treaty of Milan, as of a thing
which he saw but very little appearance of. The King laid hold of the letters
she showed him; and as he was putting them up into the Mareschal's Cabinet, the
Queens Curiosity carried her to read other Papers that she found there. In the
first she met with only the confirmation of his fault; in others she read some
rough draughts of Letters that he had a mind to send to Mademoiselle d'
Alenson,; but the last which her hand chanced to light upon being sealed, gave
her a greater desire to read them. It was the Key of the Characters of Sforza's
Letter, and that of the Mareschals. She made use of it to explain both the one
and the other. The Marshall did propose to him to accord the Articles of the
Marriage of Mademoiselle d' Alenson, with the Duke of Milan, and to demand that
she might be with the Duchess Mother to the Duke, to understand the manners of
the Country, and to cherish the love between the Princess and him, upon those
conditions, he promised Sforza to deliver him up the troops that he commanded
in his journey of Italy, and to enter with him into the party of the King his
enemies. Sforza, who did argue with a more sound judgment, then the Marshall,
who only acted by the maxims of his love, and never consulted his Loyalty:
Sforza, I say, would not by such a proceedure, put himself out of a condition
sometime or other to make his peace with the King, and prudently refused to
make a particular league with a man, who without any reason quitted the
Interests of the greatest King in the World, and from whom he daily received
assurance of kindnesses: as also that having a design to ruin the Duke of
Milan, and to possess himself of his Dukedom, the propositions of the
Marshall were not at all to his purpose. I will not re-acquaint you, Madam,
pursued Mountsieur de Mountsaureau, with what a strange anger the King had upon
him, and with his resentment of the Mareschals Treason; it would be needless.
The Queen pacified him, as much as was possible, with that sweet disposition
and prudence that was so natural to her: but she counseled him to thrust from
him that unworthy object of his wrath, and make him prisoner in the Castle of
Tours, and to appoint him his Comissionaries, who should by due process of Law
give him his punishment. Which advice immediately was put in execution. The
Marshall his friends would fain have justified him; but the King imposed
silence upon them, and not one of them durst speak a word more in his favor.
Then the King called to him the Marquis de la Trimoville, and very obligingly
told him, that as it was by his counsel that the Count de Dunois was retired
from the Court, so he would make use of him to fetch the Prince back again, and
made him immediately go about it. He commanded me at the same time to come and
tell you this news, to dispose Mounsieur and you, Madam, to the consent to the
Marriage of the Prince and Princess. Madam the Duchess was so much overjoyed
to hear of this happy change, that she could scarce express her self. It is
easy to imagine that Mademoiselle d' Alenson felt somewhat more sensible and
touching; but her modesty being yet greater then her joy, she did so handsomely
keep it to her self, that she did not make it appear so much as it might have
been permitted her without any breach of virtue or civility. Maisiere could
scarce refrain from going to find out the Count de Dunois, either to be the
first should tell him the news, or to bear a part with him in the joy, if he
knew it before he came; but Mademoiselle d' Alenson did not judge it
convenient. In the mean time, the Marquis de la Trimoville, who went with all
the possible speed he could, arrived at the Count's, where he could hear
nothing of him, nor could he learn by any of the Servants of the house what way
he had taken. He spent some hours in the pains he took of thinking on which
hand he had best go that was most likely to meet with him; but the coming back
of the Prince delivered him from that trouble. The Joy that he had to see
Mademoiselle d' Alenson, and that he had yet the power of embracing a friend,
who was so zealous and faithful in his service, made him let upon the Marquis
with a Countenance that discovered all the pleasing transport imaginable: and
the Marquis was resolved to overwhelm him with satisfaction in telling him what
Heaven and Fortune had done for him, and what they had both done against the
Marshall. He gave himself wholly to the Joy of knowing that all things did
prepare for him the possession of the Princess, and that he was going to
reassume that place in the Kings favor, that he had formerly been happy in.
His generosity notwithstanding stirred up in his heart a compassion for the
disgrace of the Marshall. He might possibly have been glad to put him in a
condition to make him repent of his crime; but he did not demand so complete a
vengeance. Pity nevertheless gave place to the hope he had of enjoying a sole
happiness which he had so long aspired to. The Sun was scarce risen, when the
Count awaked the Marquis de la Trimoville, and and they both parted for
Amboise. The Counts thoughts were only to make all possible diligence to come
to the King, who received him with very great and sensible testimonies of Joy
and affection. He made him know at last in what a manner he was offended at the
perfidiousness of the Marshall. To which Mounsieur the Count did not answer
like an enemy of the Mareschals, and if he did not take that care to justify
him, he did not make use of that occasion to complete his ruin. After a pretty
long conversation, in which he told the Count of the war he was going to
undertake, of the affairs of the State, and of his most private interests; He
fell upon the Marriage of the Prince with Mademoiselle d' Alenson I will, said
the King to him repair the afflictions I have made you endure by the obstacles
that I have brought to your happiness, and begin the chastisement of the
Marshall de Gie by the end of your sufferings, and by a stab in the most
sensible part of his heart: I will yet, continued the King, have you come with
me to salute the Queen. To conclude, he presented the Count to her to whom she
gave great assurances of her good inclination, The King moreover would, to
oblige the Count de Dunois, go the next day a hunting that way by which the
Duke d' Alenson must come, to the end that I may be an eye witness of the Joy
and contentment you will have of seeing your Princess again. The beginning of
this day had very favorable presages for the Count. It was a wonderful fair
time, and the chase very successful: and yet for all that it gave him a great
torment; for the day was almost turned to night, when he perceived the Coaches
of the Duke of Alenson. He came out of it, through respect, as far as he could
ever see the King coming, who received him with a thousand demonstrations of
kindness and affection. There are none but those who have already proved the
rigours of absence that can perfectly express the Joy of this return. The Count
de Dunois and Mademoiselle d' Alenson made a most agreeable experience of it at
this meeting; and if they had not at first the liberty to express themselves of
it one to the other, the delight and the satisfaction of it was more sensible
in their hearts. As the departure of these illustrious persons had infinitely
afflicted all the Court, their presence did bring back to them all the Joy and
the pleasure they had formerly took in it. The Queen had not as yet made so
much of it appear, as she testified unto Mademoiselle d' Alenson for her
return, and the likelihood which she saw for the Marriage of the Princess and
the Count de Dunois. The same day the King spoke of it unto the Duke d'
Alenson, who received the proposition as very advantageous, and returned the
Compliment of the Count with a great deal of civilty and kindness that was very
obliging. After the Ceremonies that were observed by the persons of this
Quality, the Duke de Alenson spoke gallantly to the Count de Dunois, and begged
his pardon that he had been sometime so opposite to his desire, but the
diligence that he would make to satisfy them should repair the fault that he
was not alone guilty of. In short he gave commands to his daughter that she
should no further stifle the inclinations that he knew she had for the Count de
Dunois, since that within a few days time she should be in a condition not to
refuse him any testimony of it. She blushed through modesty, but yet this
Order, although it was sufficiently absolute, had in it all the sweetness in
the World for her; and filled the heart of the Count de Dunois with a pleasure
so ravishing that it is unexpressable. The liberty he had then to make an open
declaration of it, diminished nothing of the delicacy with which he resented
it. Maisiere seemed yet to be more overjoyed than the Prince and the Princess,
for whom all happiness and good fortune was preparing, He was so liberally
recompensed on both sides, that it was almost impossible for him to desire any
more of fortune. But the King, not being willing to mingle any thing of
heaviness with the public Joy, instantly gave orders that they should suspend
the Judgment of the Marshall de Gie, who was kept up a long time in prison, as
the History does credibly inform us. As for the Marquis de la Trimoville, he on
his part made his Joy glorious and splendid, by those various divertisements of
his, that were as nobly invented, as they were executed and performed with
magnificence: but yet those pleasures, how great and weighty soever, ought to
be accounted as nothing in comparison with them, which the Count de Dunois, and
Madamoisel le'd Alenson completely tasted in the happy accomplishment of their
passionate desires, which had been all along as lawful as they were virtuous.

FINIS.

