TRVTH-TRIUMPHANT: IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A PAPIST AND A QUAKER: Wherein (I
suppose) Is made Manifest, that QVAKING is the OFFSPRING of POPERY.

At the least, The PAPIST and the QUAKER, Are [FRATRES VTERINI] Both of one
VENTURE.

London, Printed Anno Domini, MDCLXXI.

TRVTH-TRIUMPHANT: In a DIALOGUE Between a PAPIST, and a QUAKER.
Papist. GOod morrow, my half Brother in Religion.


Quaker. Why, what Religion art thou of?


Papist. I am a Roman Catholic; and I call thee my half Brother, because thou
art a Quaker.


Quaker. What Brotherhood or Relation can there be between a Quaker and a
Papist?


Pap. O Brother! We are nearer a kin, than thou art aware of.


Quak. That Is impossible, for I turned Quaker to avoid Popery: for I did think
the Church of England would set up Popery.


Pap. Nothing less, Brother; for I assure you the Pope, and all of his
Persuasion, of all their Adversaries dread none so much as the Church of
England: But to come to the Point, all, or most part of what you believe, you
have from us; for though I am a Shoo-maker, and work at my Trade, I am for all
that a Priest, and am sometimes a Quaker, and Preach up your Religion, as I
have done several times at Bristol.


Quak. What should be your Reason to endeavor to set up our Religion?


Pap. To make you turn Papist, as you call us.


Quak. This is a strange Riddle to me, pray unfold it.


Pap. That I intend to do; We must do what we can to cry down the Bible, for
that makes clear against us; and that trick we taught you of calling the
Scripture a dead Letter; Then Secondly, we teach Free Will to that height, that
a man has Power in himself to please God, and walk uprightly: Do not you
believe all this, Brother?


Quak. Yea; Thus far we agree.


Pap. Do you know Cap. Everard?


Quak. Yea, He was a Godly Man before he turned Papist.


Pap. He never was otherwise, he was a Priest too, and commanded by the Pope to
pretend to be one of you, the better to oppose the Church of England.


Quak. Strange! Is it possible? now I am afraid I am nearer Popery, than I was
aware of: Bless me! by leaving the Church of England I thought to fly from
Popery; and for ought I percieve, I am running headlong into it.


Pap. Yes Brother, I hope to make you a good Catholic before we part.


Quak. You can never do thut.


Pap. I will either do so, or confirm you where you are.


Quak. For the latter, I am content.


Pap. Have you not heard of my Lady -- How she run through all Religions; from
a Protestant she turned Presbyterian, (to avoid Popery;) there she could not
rest, because there was a Church Government, and therefore resembled too much
the Church of England; and besides, she hearing there were people that Prayed
and taught by the Spirit, away she goes to them: To be short, she was one while
an Independent, a Quaker, and what not? Well, at last hearing that the Church
of Rome had an Infallible guide in Religion, thither she steered her Course,
and there she cast Anchor, and continues a good Catholic.


Quak. I have heard of that Lady you speak of, and for that reason, and because
of what I have heard you say, I love my Religion never the better for it: there
is one only reason persuades me to continue in it.


Pap. What is that?


Quak. I will tell thee, If thou will promise me to say nothing of it.


Pap. I do, upon the word of a Priest.


Quak. Then I will tell thee truly; a Sister (for thou must know we call one
another Brothers and Sisters) may not deny a Brother to lie with her, if the
Spirit moves; for every provocation to that which you call Letchery, We say is
Gods Spirit) nor a Brother a Sister, if the Spirit enable him.


Pap. If that be all, turn Catholic, and I will give thee a Dispensation to
have as many Women as thou will, or art able to turn to, that die when thou will, thou art sure to go to Heaven however.


Quak. A good Argument, I confess, if thou could prove thy self enabled
thereunto by God Almighty; but I suspect, what thou do offer is to satisfy
our Lusts and Letchery, (no matter for our Souls,) to make us subservient to
your ends in this world; whereas what we do is to raise up a Holy Seed unto the
Lord; so that by doing him Service, (not by Sinning against him) we indulge
much to our own satisfaction; so that we serve him without any trouble either
to the Conscience, or the Body: for to give a License for Sin is a most horrid
thing; to say you have Power to Absolve for Sins past, (as the Church of
England says,) is not amiss; but that you have Power to give License to Sin, is
what I can never believe; and therefore for any thing I have yet heard from
thee, I will continue as I am; therefore be one of Us, and thou shall enjoy
Multitudes of Women, without offending God.


Pap. I have the same argument to persuade thee to come to us; I can give
Indulgencies that shall serve thee and thy Posterity for Thousands of Years.


Quak. This is like a Doctrine of ours, that God sees not Sin in Us that are
the Godly; if one of Us lie with many Women, we are then raising a Holy Seed, a
Royal Priesthood; amongst the Ungodly party, this is Fornication and a Sin; the
Goods of the whole World which the wicked possess, belong not to them, they are
Ours of right; to dispossess them thereof is no Robbery.


Pap. We say the same, for the Pope has power to dispose of all the Kingdoms
of the Earth, to take them from the wicked, from Heretics, Schismatics,
Idolaters, etc. and give them to true Catholics; for those are the truly Godly
party.


Quak. Bless me! where am I? I shall be a Papist I very much fear; nay, I doubt
I have been one all this while.


Pap. Doubtless we are very near one another.


Quak. But I Will get further from thee if I can; but pray let me ask thee one
Question; why are you a greater Enemy to the Church of England, than to all
others that differ from the Church of Rome?


Pap. Because they have the resemblance of a Church, which none of you have,
except the Presbyterian; and next the Church of England we dread them; and the
more, because they seem to comply more with the Church of England than
formerly, and begin to perceive it impossible to set up for themselves; for
when ever they shall attempt it, the Independents will infallibly supplant
them, as formerly; and they again, (the Independents I mean) will run into so
many Sects of Religion, and Parties, that they can never subsist; but must at
last be forced to submit to the Church of England, or us of Rome.


Quak. I perceive now I must be either a Protestant, or a Papist.


Pap. Without all peradventure you cannot avoid it.


Quak. I Will even then turn Protestant, as I was before 1641.


Pap. By no means do so; either come strait to Us, or continue a Quaker; Nay,
rather than turn Protestant, I Will get thee a Dispensation from Rome to continue
a Quaker; and that thou shall not so much as go into Purgatory.


Quak. Yours is a very brave Religion, if it could hold water; but what
assurance have you that God allows this?


Pap. The Infallibility of the Church.


Quak. What is that?


Pap. The truth is, we are not yet agreed amongst Our selves; for some of Us
(as we Jesuits) do hold the Pope to be Infallible; that whatsoever He Decrees,
We are obliged to yield unto an implicit obedience and Belief; others do place
it in a General Council, the Pope presiding over it; And lastly, others in a
Council only.


Protestant. And so I perceive it is no where with you, with us it is; for now I
will argue like a Protestant; we have Infallibility in our Church.


Papist. What is that?


Prot. The Old and New Testament; for you cannot deny it to be the Word of God.


Papist. That we cannot; but this we say: That it is but a dead Letter, without
the Interpretation of the Church.


Prot. Whoop holy day! I think your Worship will turn Quaker.


Papist. No such thing, I warrant you; but to proceed, and to speak to you, as
to a Protestant. All your Opposers produce the Bible against you, as well as
against us; What can you answer to that?


Prot. Let right take place; but by the way, this is foul play, for you to urge
me to answer you as a Hydra, with so many Heads; Will you be a Papist, a
Presbyterian, Independent, Quaker, and every thing at once? This is to be a
right Jesuit indeed; but I will allow you all this advantage: I will therefore
go on, as I said before, let right take place; for the Church of England has
the advantage over all her Opposers abovementioned, and over ten thousand
more, if she had so many; for against you all, she has a claim to this
Infallible Guide of the Word of God, with all the difficulties therein
contained, explained by all Ancient Fathers and Councils; against which no
sober man can except. So that we have the Bible against you, and against them;
and against you we have the Bible, as I said before, explained, with the four
first General Councils, with the Practice of those times of Purity; besides, is
it not familiar with you of the Roman Church (together with all those several
enemies abovenamed, and Opposers of the Church of England) to cry up Success,
and may not Protestants make use of the same Plea, so far, especially, as it is
Argumentum ad hominem? And so offer to your prospect and consideration, the
miraculous Restoration of the Church of England, in the year, 1660.


Papist. You mean, the Kings Restoration.


Prot. I mean both; but we are now disputing concerning the Church, not King,
of England; for though you, as being a Papist, a Priest, and a Jesuit, are an
Enemy to both Church and State: But the reason I only name the Church of
Englands Restoration, is, because, I conceive, God restored the King, for the
Churches sake; because God knew the King would restore the Church of England,
for whose sake God did restore him. Moreover, I mention the Church of England
only, because God has dealt so often miraculously for her. As first, in our
King Henry the Eighth his days, that such an occasion of Scandal should be
given to the whole World, as well as to that King, in particular; that though
he did not so very much alter the Roman Religion, yet he absolutely took away
the Popes Authority, which was a miraculous step to that more exact
Reformation: Which, in the second place, God did miraculously bring to pass,
Edward the Sixth. The third Miracle God did act for the Church of England, was,
Mary, Espoused to a King of Spain, having fully restored Popery, and butchered
thousands of Protestants; yet The miracu^ous methods ^f God, on the ^ehalf of
Eng^and, during se^e^al Successi^ns of time.
was it not in her power, though assisted with the House of Austria (which was
then in its Zenith, as I suppose now France is) to prevent the wonderfully
miraculous Restoration of the Church of England, by the ever famous Queen
Elizabeth; and though that Good, and Gallant Queen was in the hands of Her, and
the Church of Englands Adversaries, yet did God miraculously preserve Her, for
his Churches sake. And this Church was, likewise, in the fourth place (though
indeed, not restored, yet powerfully and wonderfully) preserved, when James
Succeeded to this great, and virtuous Queen. The last Miracle (I pray God this
Church may need no more of Spaniards called their Invincible Armad^, in the
Year, 1588. Secondly, the miraculous prevention of the Popish Conspiracy,
November; whereby, the King, His Nobles, the chief of the Gentry and Commons in
Parliament, should have been blown up. The third, the true Christian Valor and
Magnanimity England, (asserting her Reformation) during all His Sufferings, to
the last minute of his Martyrdom. And now, Sir, I hope I have confuted you, by
your own way of Argumentation; and now, Sir, hereafter (if you please) you may
worship your great Diana of Success.


Papist. Your Successes we cannot deny; but still, I conceive, the Bible is not
a sufficient Infallible Guide.


Prot. I think I have very well proved, by the several abovementioned miracles,
that Infallibility of the Bible is for the Church of England (as now it is
established, this Year 1668. Jul.) against your, and all other Dissenters from
the Church of England; and, in my opinion, is a great sign of her being a true
Church; that she is furnished on all sides with good and sound Arguments for
her defense, and offending her Adversaries; for, in the first, she opposes to
you the Bible, Practice of the Primitive Church, the Ancient Fathers, and your
own modern ones; and against such as I was once, formerly; She has the same,
though She have less occasion to make use of the Bible. Thus is she furnished
with complete Armor and Weapons. God Almighty has armed Her Cap ape, against
the Devil, and all his Instruments; So that the Gates of Hell shall never be
able to prevail against Her.


Papist. You have taken your Common Prayer Book out of the Mass.


Prot. You have your Mass out of the Jewish Liturgy.


Papist. How can that be?


Prot. Are not the Psalms of David made use of in the Mass?


Papist. They are, I confess.


Prot. They were, either all, or in part, the Jewish Liturgy.


Papist. We do confess, they were.


Prot. Then hereafter, tell us no more of our Common Prayer being taken out of
the Mass; and now we are speaking of the Jews, let me tell you, that you make
use of the same Arguments to oppose us, that the Jews did to oppose our
Savior; they urged to our Savior, That he was an Innovator, and that he
opposed the Traditions of their Church; which (say they) had continued, from
the establishment of it by God, in Moses's time. This method you observe
against us, calling us Innovators, who are the chiefest opposers of Innovation;
for our Churches endeavor is to cast off what you have Innovated in Christian
Religion. Let me ask you one Question; Do not you believe, all that the Church
of England believes?


Papist. We do, but we believe more.


Prot. Then, let me tell you, whatsoever in more, are Romes Superstructures,
and Innovations; and ought to be rejected of all true Christians.


Papist. I doubt I have killed the wrong man; for I doubted not, from a Quaker,
to have made you one of us; but instead of that, I have made you a Protestant;
and, for ought I know, I may chance to be one too: But I will not quit the
Field yet, but have more discourse with you.


Protest. With all my heart; for (methinks) the more I discourse with you, the
more I am enabled above my capacity, which (...) must attribute to Gods good
(...) who enables me, a wea^ ^^^rument of his, to defend (...) Truth.


Papist. I^ (...) be the Truth, I wish it may appear so; in the mean time, I
shall proceed thus: Your Religion was never heard of, before ^^^her*s time.


Protest. Is not that Argument worn threadbare yet? But seeing you insist upon
it, I shall repeat unto you, for answer, the words of a Learned Man, out of his
Epistle Dedicatory to His present Majesty; the words (as I remember) are these,
-- Since that great Miracle of Divine Providence, in your Majesty's Stilling
fleet.
most happy Restoration, we have seen those, who before triumphed over the
Church of England, as dead; as much expressing their envy at Her resurrection:
Neither could it otherwise be expected, but that so sudden a recovery of Her
former Luster, would open the mouths of Her weak, but contentious Adversaries;
who see Her shine in a Firmament, so much above them: But it is a part of Her
present Felicity, that they are ashamed of the insulting Question (What is
become of your Church now?) and are driven back to their old impertinency
(Where was your Church, before Luther?) They might as well alter the Date of
it, and ask, where She was before your Majesty's Restoration? For as She only
suffered an Eclipse, in the late Confusions; no more did She (though of a
longer stay) in the times before the Reformation; and it was Her great Honor,
that She was not awakened out of it (as of old they fancied) by beating of
Drums, or the rude Clamours of the People; but as She gradually regained Her
Light, so was it with the Influence of Supreme Authority, which has caused so
close an Union and Combination of Interests between them, that the Church of
England, and the Royal Family, have, like Hippocrates his Twins, both wept and
rejoiced together: And nothing does more argue the excellent constitution of
our Church, than that wherein the purity of Christian Doctrine is joined with
the most hearty acknowledgment of your Majesty's Power and Supremacy -- Thus
far that learned Author; I shall add further; That if a Church Eclipsed, or
unseen, shall be the destruction of it, or that there was ever any such thing,
I would very fain know, where the Church of God was, when (it was said) the
whole World was turned Arrian; and before our Savior came into the world, how
often was the Church of God invisible, and the Worship, or Religion appointed,
utterly overthrown by Idolaters? Such as the Church of God was in those days,
the same our Church was before the Reformation; and where the one was, there
was the other; in Dens and Caves and in the hearts of good and Religious Men,
where God did receive an acceptable Sacrifice. We see; in the 19 Chap. of the
first Book of the Kings, verse 10. how 1 Kings, Cap. 19. Ver. 10.
invisible the Church of God was, by the expression of the Prophet Elias there,
-- I have been very jealous for the Lord God of Hosts; for the Children of
Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, broken down thine Altar, and ^^^in thy
Prophets with the sword, and I only am left, and they seek (...) to take it
away. -- These were the words of a true Prophet of the Lord, to whom the Church
of God was so invisible to him (though often a fore-seer and fore-teller of
future contingencies) that he conceives himself to be the only Servant of the
Lord, left upon the face of the Earth; yet in the Eighteen^h verse of the
forementioned Chap. God tells the Prophet, Of Seven Thousand Men in Israel
remaining, even all the Knees that have not bowed unto Baal; and every Mouth
that has not kissed him. -- Thus you see, before Luther's time, notwithstanding
their invisibility (according to this of the Prophet,) God might, and no doubt,
had thousands of true believers, which had not bowed their knees to your Baal
of Rome; and whose Mouths had never kissed him; and, no doubt, the Simile is very
pat between this Baal of Jezabel's, in the Book of the Kings, and your Baal, i.
e. the Pope of Rome; for, as this Baal of Jezabel was to be bowed unto, and
Kissed; so is your Baal, or Pope of Rome, likewise to be bowed unto, and
Kissed, (not his Face, but his Toe) even by Emperors, and Our Savior did
suffer himself to be kissed on the Face; to witness Judas's betraying this
Savior of the World with a kiss.
Kings, as well as by the meanest of his Worshippers and Abettors; and thus,
according to the Apostle, St. Paul, in the second to the Thessalonians, Cap. 2.
Ver. 4. He is an Adversary [to our Savior and his Holy Religion,] and
exhalteth himself above, and against all that is called God, or that is
Worshipped; so that He does sit as God in the Temple of God, showing himself
that He is God. And this truth is yet more confirmed even by your selves, by
whom this Pope is called [Dominus Deus noster Papa;] and to this Pope (in your
ordinary discourse, either to him, or of him) you attribute a Title only due to
God, which is, -- His Holiness. There be three other Texts in this same
Chapter, that may very well be applied to your Baal, or Pope, Ver. 8, 9, 11.
And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the
Spirit of his Mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of his coming, as it
is, Ver. the 8th. For during the darkness of Superstition and Popery, (the
times preceding before Luther, Calvin, and others) this Baal was Worshipped
without control, or visible gainsaying; the true Worshippers, those 7000. that
had not bowed to him, nor Kissed him, being as invisible, as to outward
prosperity, as those 7000. in the days of Elias: But when the time came for the
appearance of those glorious Reformers of Religion, and manners, according to
Gods appointment; for to this, God alone, as it is in the Acts of the Holy
Apostles, Cap. 1. Ver. 7. The Times, and the Seasons, the Father has put into
his own Hands; then did that wicked one [this Roman Baal] begin to be revealed,
whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his Mouth, and abolish with the
brightness of his coming. Ver. 8. The 9. Ver. is applicable to your Baal in
your false Miracles, Signs, and Lying wonders; whereby you lie in wait to
deceive the Ignorant and simple. This person must be consumed and abolished;
even him (as it is, Ver. 9.) whose coming is by the effectual working of Satan,
with all Power; [the Inquisition, and their visible pretended infallibility]
and Signs, and lying Wonders. -- And God knows, with such Signs and lying
Wonders, false Miracles, etc. Your Church is sufficiently fraught. Ver. 11. is
the consequence of the former recited Verses, 8, and 9 and therefore God shall
send them strong delusions, that they shall believe Lies; and this is verified
every day, that many among You, (otherwise, Learned and wise enough,) do give
themselves up to these strong delusions, giving as great credit to your
Legends, as the Fables of one Winifred; etc. as to the Gospel it self; I could
add upon this Subject; but I suppose, what I have already said is sufficient to
evidence unto you the Errors of Your ways, and the Truth of Ours.


Papist. I confess, I am very much shaken by your Arguments; and the next time
we meet, you may possibly obtain an entire Conquest over me.


Protest. I am very glad it is come to this, which is a kind of new Creation in
us; God having thus produced Light out of Darkness: You having thus (contrary
to your intent) sent me into the Bosom of the Church of England, whereinto I
hope you will likewise throw your self; whereby we shall not be half, but whole
Brothers; having one Father, (which is, God,) one Mother, (the Church of
England,) Jesus Christ, the Savior of the World, being our Elder Brother: In
this confidence I dare call you Brother; and Dear Brother, fare you well for
this time.


The CONCLUSION.
THe Dialogue thus finished, I think it not amiss to say something concerning
the first General Council that ever was in the Church of Christ; you have the
whole Story of it in the 15 Chap. of the Acts of the Holy Apostles; I shall
take notice, that it was not called by the particular direction of any of the
Apostles, but that all of them did concur thereunto; and this was, doubtless,
the Method of the Christian Church, during it is greatest Purity and Integrity;
and the truth is, no other way could be used, while the Church of Christ was
under Persecution: but in process of time, when supreme powers did receive, and
protect the Christian Faith; and that (as the Scripture says,) Kings and
Queens were Nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers, of the Spouse of Christ; then
were general Councils summoned by them, and by them were these Councils left to
their free Debates and determinations; whose Decrees were afterward confirmed
by the Supreme Authorities, whereby those Decrees, which before such a
Confirmation did only oblige the Conscience, had then the Coercive Power of the
State to compel their Observation; and this Method did continue, till the
Usurpation of the Bishop of Rome upon all Powers, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical; for he now takes upon him to assume unto himself the power of
calling Councils, of presiding in them, and Confirming their Decrees; saying,
that without His Confirmation, they are invalid. Thus does he make his own Will
to be of more Authority than a General Council; and this same Will of his to be
Superior to all Supreme Powers and Authorities whatsoever: But I shall add no
more upon this Subject, but proceed to what I at first proposed in the
beginning hereof; where I shall take notice of some things in the 15 th Chap.
of the Acts of the Holy Apostles, where we read of the first General Council
that ever was in the Church of Christ; and therefore most likely to be a
direction for all others,) It was occasioned by an Appeal made by some
Converte^ Gentiles, to this General Council; for some Pharisaical Christians
would impose upon these Converted Gentiles the whole Law of Moses; therefore to
this General Council they do appeal; the words of the Council are these. --
Ver. 23. of this 15. Chap.
The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren send Greeting unto the Brethren which
are of the Gentiles in Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia.

24.
Forasmuch as We have heard, that certain which went out from Us, have troubled
You with Words subverting Your Souls; saying, Ye must be Circumcised, and keep
the Law, to whom We gave no such Commandment:

25.
It seemed good unto Us, being Assembled with one accord, to send chosen Men
unto You, with Our beloved Barnabas and Paul;

26.
Men that have hazarded their Lives for the Name of Our Lord Jesus Christ.

27.
We have sent therefore Judas, and Silas, who shall also tell you the same
things by word of mouth.

28.
For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to Us, to lay upon You no greater
Burden, than these necessary things.

29.
That Ye abstain from Meats offered to Idols, and from Blood, and from things
Strangled, and from Fornication; from which if ye keep your selves, ye shall do
well; fare ye well.

These be the words together; We shall now take them into parts. -- The
Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren, [There is no Primacy in St. Peter, or in
any body else; Send Greeting, unto the Brethren, which are of the Gentiles in
Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia. [Now here I cannot but take notice, that the
Church of Jerusalem treats the Churches of Antioch, etc. not with a Maternal,
but a Fraternal Appellation; not like the Church of Rome, (certainly if ever
any had been the Mother Church, it must have been that of Jerusalem, St. Peter,
and all the rest of the Apostles; yea, even a General Council there residing,)
which makes her self the Mother Church, and all others she will have to be
esteemed but Her Children; and yet in this General Council St. Peter was
present, as appears by the 7. Verse of this 15. Chap. and yet St. Peter does
not pronounce any Judgment; contenting himself rather with relating matter of
Fact; and Paul and Barnabas do the same, as it is Ver. 11. But the Apostle St.
James proceeds further in Ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. and in the 19. Ver. is
very bold, saying; -- Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them which
from among the Gentiles are turned to God; -- and Ver. 20. He proceeds. -- But
that we [here St. James is equal with St. Peter, or any of the rest] write unto
them, that they abstain from pollutions of Idols, and from Fornication, and
from things strangled, and from Blood; -- And to this Sentence of St. James the
whole Council acquiesces, not any one speaking after St. James;] -- Forasmuch
as certain which went out from Us, have troubled you with words subverting your
Souls, saying, Ye must be Circumcised, and keep the Law, to whom We, not St.
Peter alone] gave no such Commandment, it seemed good unto Us, being assembled
with one accord; [This Council you see was not called by St. Peter alone,] to
send chosen men unto You, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, Men that have
hazarded their Lives for the Name of Our Lord Jesus Christ; We have sent
therefore Judas, and Silas, who shall also tell you the same things by word of
Mouth; for it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to Us; [you see the Holy Ghost
is not tied to St. Peter's, or the Pope's Chair, nor the College of Cardinals,
but remaining with the General Council;] To lay upon you no heavier burden
than these necessary things, that ye abstain from Meats offered to Idols, from
Blood, and from things strangled, and from Fornication; [all this, the Sentence
of, and Opinion of St. James delivered to the Council, and thus approved of by
the Council,] from which if ye keep your selves, ye shall do well; fare ye well.

I have thus run over the words of this first General Council, with some few
Animadversions thereon; and if therein I have done the Church of Christ any
Service, I have my aim; and do retun unto him all Honor, and Glory, for His
assistance herein, by whom I have been hereunto enabled.

To the Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all Honor, and Glory,
now, and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

