Licensed Jan. 2. 1677.

Roger L'Estrange.

THE UNFORTUNATE HEROES: Or, The ADVENTURES OF TEN FAMOUS MEN, VIZ, Ovid,
Lentullus, Hortensius, Herennius, Cepion, Horace, Virgil, Cornelius Gallus,
Crassus, Agrippa.
Banished from the COURT of AUGUSTUS CAESAR.

In Ten Novels.

Composed by that Great Wit of France, Monsieur de Villa Dieu.

Englished by a Gentleman for his Diversion.

In the SAVOY: Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman at the Blew Anchor in the
Lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1679.

THE UNFORTUNATE HEROES: OR, THE ILLUSTRIOUS EXILES OF The Court of AUGUSTUS.
The First Part.
THE famous Ovid, whose matchless Charms had rendered the Grand Master of the
Universe jealous, as well of his Honor, as in his Amors, was sent into the
Isle of Thalassia, to expiate a Crime, they had only made him guilty of. He
much affected the Court, and its delights: And a Banishment was more cruel and
insupportable to a person of his temper, than it would have been to any other
of a more reserved converse. He vented his resentments in the deepest
complaints, and most extravagant ravings, his Soul was capable to express; and
with a motion, whereby he would seem to measure the length of his misfortunes,
hastily plunged himself into a thick Wood, which bordered upon the Coast, that
respects Macedonia: when passing by a place, which Nature had seemed to have
taken pleasure to make the seat of a vernant Palace, he cast a careless glance
upon a Cloth, disorderly spread on a fragrant Bed of Camomile, which looked as
if with a negligent curiosity it had been embroidered over with scattered
flowers, fruits, empty dishes, and many other ruins of a noble Treat. He cast
a quick eye round about him, to see if amongst the Trees he could retrieve some
person, or other, that might give him an account of so unexpected an Adventure.
At length he discovered two Women of excellent feature; who rushing suddenly
into the darkest coverts of those Woods, made themselves a Skreen, to rob their
Beauties as well from the eyes of Tytan, as his, of some Thickets, which Nature
seemed with the interwoven branches of sweet blossoming Thorns and wild Roses
to have formed for a withdrawing Room to the other, from whence the unseen
Guests, had a little before departed. He made a sign to his Esquire, and two
Slaves (who composed the whole Retinue of his Exile) not to follow him; and
eagerly pursuing the fair Fugitives, he prepared himself to speak something of
gallantry to them upon the first encounter, Fortune had so kindly offered him;
when he thought his own name resounded in his ear: He made a halt; and lending
a more diligent attention, he heard one of them, say to the other, How is it
possible that a Passion so violent, should be so deeply engrafted in a heart,
for a Person, whom one never saw? I understand well enough, that the sight of
an object, which gives a kind of pleasing titillation to the senses, passes
from thence into the cabinet of our hearts; and there creates that agreeable
distemper, which the concurrence, or sympathy of humor, converts into Love; But
upon the bare character, one receives either of the gayety of, wit, or converse
of an unknown, that one should nourish such desires, caress such an unquiet
Guest within their breasts; in a word, Love with such violence, as you love
Ovid, is that, which never yet signalized any of your Sex, but your self; and
what Posterity will chronicle amongst her fabulous miracles, if she shall have
the honor to write your History.

I do not fear that treachery on your part, replied the Lady, to whom this
discourse was addressed, though you are the only person capable to effect it;
since you are the only person in the world, to whom I have unbosom'd the
secrets of my heart. But, my dear one, if this misfortune should arrive me, I
hope, the same Posterity, that shall be acquainted with my name, will not
likewise be ignorant of that of Ovid; and in exposing to the view of the world
my weakness for that great Personage, it will likewise, at the same time,
convince it of my innocence. It is not the beauty of his Person that charms me;
but those more powerful charms of his wit, which never yet any female ones
could boast they were proof against. When I read those passionate expressions
in his Elegies, wherein he so naturally delineates to our fancies the various
characters of Love, with the divine Pencil of his admirable Muse, I am
surpised with a sudden emotion of delight, that inflames me with a most
impatient desire of seeing that more admirable Person, to whom I owe it. I
cannot forbear, methinks, to interest my self in all his Concerns, in gratitude
to those agreeable Transpotts, his Verses inspire into my Soul: And as often as
I make a reflection upon that felicity, which might have blessed these eyes with
so noble an object, as Ovid, in the Court of Caesar, in Rome, had Fortune
treated me with less rigor, I heap as many imprecations upon her for this one
circumstance of my misfortune, as for that obscurity, wherein she forces me to
linger out the inglorious remnant of a vagabond life.

This is call d, my sweet one, replied the other, interrupting her, a Love not
of Ovid, but of his Verses, since you have yet seen no other part of him; but
should Fortune, to regain your good opinion, present you together with the
magic of his enchanting Muse, a sight of his Person, you would then become
more enamored of the Author, than you are now of his Works. Ovid's attention
was so fixed to the discourse of those Women, that he was not sensible of the
noise, which two men made in passing by him; who had the leisure to entertain
him, as well in their embraces, as their knowledge, before he came to his own.
Their caresses reduced him out of his ecstasy, and presented to his admiration
Cornelius Lentulus, whose renowned Victories over the Scythians, and Dacians,
had purchased him the fame of one of the greatest Captains in the world; and
Hortensius Hortalus, the only surviving branch of the illustrious Race of the
Hortensius's. But Ovid's surprise was not so great, at the encounter of him,
(whom he knew Caesar had some three, or four years before banished into
Thalassia, for having refused to receive an eminent Command, and a fair Wife
from his hands,) as of Lentulus; who, he thought had been at the head of those
Troops, which the Emperor had sent forth to chastise the late Revolt of the
Getes.

Have the Rebels, said he to Lentulus, tamely submitted their obedience to your
all-conquering fame? And your redoubted Name, and the memory of those splendid
Actions, you performed once before in the reduction of those Barbarians,
disarmed them of their natural fierceness and courage? Or has Caesar so
unworthily forgotten himself, as to recompense the glorious services of
Lentulus, with an unnatural Banishment? The Getes, replied Lentulus, continue
obstinate, and with a stiff neck refuse to receive again the yoke of their
duty; And if Caesar has unworthily recompensed the zeal, I have ever had for
his interests and glory, it is not now by confining me to this barbarous
Climate; but a motive, no less powerful, than that of his Commands, has call d
me hither; from whence it must be a greater, than the obedience I owe them,
that can recall me. This is a mystery, I shall declare to you at more leisure:
In the mean time let us understand what rigorous Fate has hurried you hither,
to breathe this inhumane air: for if you believe that Caesar has forgotten both
himself and his honor, in confining me to it, I must judge, that he is guilty
of a greater injustice, in treating the renowned Ovid with so much cruelty.

The arrival of the two Ladies, who came forth of their flowery Cabinet,
prevented Ovid from returning an answer: They heard some persons discoursing
not far from them, and they came to inform themselves, who they were. Ovid
ask't Hortensius the names, and quality of those Ladies; who told him, that one
of them was named Junia, daughter to the Triumvir Lepidus; and the other, said
Lentulus interrupting him, calls herself Roselina, and makes a most inviolable
secret both of her Birth and her Fortune: She speaks two or three Languages
with that natural grace and eloquence, that no Man can judge, which of them is
her native Tongue. But by the sweetness of her temper, and the gentile air of
her deportment, I judge her to be of Roman extraction. Whether it were the
beauty of this fair Stranger, that on the first prospect made a deeper
impression in the soft breast of the amorous Ovid, than that of Junia, (over
which notwithstanding the other could challenge no superiority) or that he
thought, he discovered, in the eyes of Roselina, something which seemed more
allied to the blind passion, he understood one of them had for him, than in the
severe and majestic garb of the daughter of Lepidus, he sent a thousand silent
wishes to Heaven, that Roselina might be that secret Amoreuse, he heard them
discourse of. He could not rectify himself in his hopes by the knowledge of
their voices; he had been so short a time their Auditor, that he could not
distinguish them; and as they treated of private affairs, they spoke not so
loud, as to tune them in their natural key. The different proceedings of these
two Ladies confirmed his suspicion. Junia remained not long in the company of
Ovid, after they had acquainted him with their names; But Roselina on the other
side, seemed fixed, as it were, by a secret charm, to the conversation of those
three Romans: each action of hers was passionate, and her eyes expressed a
trouble and confusion, which Ovid had in his Works presented the World too
lively a draught of, to be ignorant of the character. He had scarce time to
make his full Remark on this Subject; for Junia having proclaimed the arrival
of this illustrious Man to all she met, obliged him to turn from Roselina, to
repay the Civilities and generous Caresses of all the eminent Persons, who at
that time did with their Residence illustrate the Isle of Thalassia. Their
number was considerable, and that day Lentulus's invitation of them to a
Collation, had assembled them. The two Friends of Ovid informed him of the
quality, and name of each person, which composed that noble Convention. He
saluted Tisienus Galius, but not without a blush. Hortensius presented to him a
fair Cozen of his, named Adiamante, who was Companion to Roselina. There were
likewise two or three Inhabitants of Lesbos, who came every year about that
season to furnish the Thalassian Exiles with what Commodities, they wanted.
Many were curious to be informed from Ovid's mouth, of the cause of his
visiting that Island; but he reserved that secret for his particular Friends;
and only declared to others, that it was in obedience to the Emperors Commands.
He added moreover, that his Conscience could lay no crime to his charge, but
that he could not pronounce himself wholly innocent neither, since Caesar had
been pleased to pronounce him guilty. This modesty of his proved no example to
be imitated, by those that were witnesses to it; for they fixed the Title of
Cruelty and Injustice upon the Emperor's Commands; and following the Maxim of
most of your Exiles, who do not perceive, that in darting such murmurs and
reproaches at their rebounding miseries, they only administer fuel to those
flames, they endeavor to extinguish. Our Malcontents indulged that liberty to
their tongues, which the rest of their bodies could not command. Hortensius
engaged this new Guest to take his quarters with him. Lentulus would willingly
have raised a friendly debate upon this occasion, had he not been obliged to
another for his own.

When Ovid saw himself alone with Hortensius, he thought he should do an injury
to his friendship, if he should observe that precaution with him, which he
practiced toward persons, wholly indifferent to it. Hortensius had been a
Friend of very ancient acquaintance; and he made no scruple to tell him, that
the favors, wherewith the daughter of Augustus was pleased to honor him, had
been whispered in the Emperor's ear, and occasioned his Banishment: you make me
but half your Confident, says Hortensius, interrupting him: I have such
correspondence at Rome, as will not suffer me to be ignorant of the
circumstances of a misfortune, wherein I claim my self so near a concern.
Confess the truth, my dear Ovid, cried he, with a smile; Caesar would have
pardoned you the glorious attack, you made upon the heart of Julia, had you
confined the luster of your merit within the circumference of that orb; the
Emperor ought to take satisfaction in the gallantries of his daughter; and his
Court would become a Desert, should the honor to serve her, be adjudg'd a crime
of State: But you have attackt that Prince in a more sensible part, and the
fair Terentia was not able to resist the influence of so powerful a Planet.

See, see here, cried Ovid, one of the most cruel darts malice can level at my
disgrace. I received the sentence of my Banishment with constancy enough; but I
am not able without transport to hear Terentia branded with a weakness, she is
so little capable of. I will not endeavor, said Hortensius, to extort a more
ingenuous confession from you: the method you take to vindicate the fair
Terentia, satisfies me, to what degree you love her; and as I hold it for a
circumstance of impossibility, that a Lady of capacity and judgment should be
adored by you, without a reciprocal esteem and respect; I assure my self that
my Agents have good correspondence, and I will send them my thanks in my next
Letters, for the faithful intelligence, they furnish me with. I call the gods
to witness, replied Ovid' that no report had ever so false a false a ground, to
support its malice, as this of a Love-intrigue betwixt Terentia and my self: I
cannot deny but that I have a veneration for her equal to her merit; She has
the command of a clear and piercing judgment, and being affected with some
places in my Writings (where my Pen has been more industrious and luxuriant)
than another woman possibly might be, I doubt not but she may have a more
particular esteem for me than a person of less capacity: but whereas besides
that she seemed to me not to be capable of a Passion for any other, but the
Emperor; I am endeared to the brave Moecenas by obligations too strait, to make
a criminal attempt upon the chastity of his Wife. Oh! said Hortensius, by what
chains of merit and obligations is not Caesar bound to that illustrious
Favorite? What does he not owe to the zeal and prudence of that Great Man?
What has not Moecenas acted to establish him in the Imperial Throne of the
Universe? With what vigilance did he disarm the attempts, which were levelled
at his life? With what fidelity does he assist him by his Counsels? And do we
see Augustus make any scruple to ravish from him the heart and affections of
his Wife? I do not think my self obliged, replied Ovid, to vindicate the Honor
of Caesar; for the breast of a banished Man, is the natural seat of malice and
revenge; and I have left behind me at Rome those concerns, which will always
suggest to them a high resentment of those commands which cast me out of it.
But if the lovely Terentia had practiced as much art and diligence to endear me
to her, as she has done to improve the Emperors affections toward her, and
Moecenas would have expressed the same compliance in my favor, as he did in his
Masters, perhaps Ovid might have as much forgotten himself as Augustus has
done. You cannot affirm, replied Hortensius, smiling, but Moecenas did express
some in yours, otherwise young Crassus could not have surpised you one
night-coming out of her Appartment. Since you have been made acquainted, said
Ovid, with that encounter, I shall confide the secret to you: You are prudent,
and my friend; make use of my confidence in you, as it becomes a man of honor,
that professes he has espoused my Interests.

THE HISTORY OF OVID.
I Should in vain study to render my self guilty of a black ingratitude, in
going about to disown those generous favors, the glorious Daughter of Augustus
has graced me with; which my banishment has caused the World to believe were so
great, that I cannot think it will be interpreted a vanity, or indiscretion in
me to represent them before it in their due character: wherefore I shall avow a
truth, and confess, that that excellent Princess did treat me with a freedom
and confidence, the memory whereof still is, and ever shall be, as precious to
me, as my unfortunate life.

She gave me the liberty to consecrate to her Idea all those passionate Poems,
which I published under the name of Corinna. She was oftentimes pleased to
answer the little Harangues of Love, the languishing Rhetoric of my eyes, made
to her, with regards as full of sweetness, as mine were of passion; which gave
encouragement to my presumption to make those attempts, which might with some
reason be interpreted as criminal, in a simple Chevalier, since they had for
their object the Daughter of his Emperor; but would have been judged innocent,
had Julia been the Daughter only of a Roman Knight.

Varnish that piece over, quoth Hortensius, I beseech you, with as light a hand
as you can; I see the inclination you have to make a fair Apology for a fair
friend; I am acquainted already with every circumstance of the Intrigue betwixt
you and Julia, and I desire only an account of what relates to Terentia.

You are in an error, replied Ovid, and to dispossess you of it, I must beg
your patience to a Discourse, which may perhaps detain it longer than you
desire The beginning of a Love-intrigue with the first Princess of the World
you must apprehend, was sufficient to charm the spirit of an ambitious man with
raptures, scarce comprehensible by imagination it self. I considered the
preference she honored me with in her esteem, before all others of my Rank in
the Court, with a most ravishing satisfaction; and acting the part of a great
Prince in the private Converses she was pleased to admit me to, I could fancy
my self nothing less than one of the happiest in the Universe. I forgot the
quality both of Julia, and my self; but as the Princess (let malice and
detraction spend their mouths as loud as they will, to blemish her virtue) did
always reserve to her self, as a Royal Prerogative of her Greatness, the power
of repressing my audacity; all the little satisfactions she permitted me,
served but to tantalize my vanity, and only entertained my Love with some
slight Banquet of Sweatmeats, which thirsted after a more solid repast. Julia
is one of the most charming Beauties of the Universe; and my desires, which had
kindled a new Aetna within my breast, wanting the blessings of a gentle shower
from her more substantial favors, to qualify its flames, converted all those
flattering pleasures into an insupportable torment. Sulpicia, Wife to Tisienus
Gallus, who is here in Thalassia, that then was Servant to the Princess, and to
whom she unlockt the Cabinet of all her secrets, was a witness to the
deplorable estate, those her half Bounties had reduced me to. Tisienus about
that time was suspected to have been a Complice in the Conspiracy of Marcus
Lepidus, and banished into this Island. His absence gave Sulpicia the freedom
to exercise those liberties his morose humor retrenched her from, when he was
with her. This generous person was touched with a compassion of my Sufferings,
and was sparing neither of her advice, nor interest for the advancing of my
felicity. This your manner of proceeding with Ovid, said she to the Princess,
is as much opposite to the rules of Love, as Virtue; you suffer a person to
expire at your feet, whom you love; because a little punctilio; perhaps, either
of State, or Modesty, will not permit you to allow him the benefit of your
Mercy; when you shall do them both but an equal injury, either by enslaving
them to these terms of rigor and severity, or indulging them those liberties
from which restrain them. Eeither assume the Character of the Daughter of
Caesar, or with courage renounce the arbitrary Yoke it would impose upon your
freedom. A Virtue that can admit of the least allay of any other ignobler
passion, is but the slave of irresolution and timidity; you ought either to
banish him your presence for ever, or render it less mortal to him. The Spirit
of Julia could digest neither of those Propositions. My conversation was a
diversion to her; the languishing countenance of my love raised a tender
compassion in her breast; but her favors never extended themselves beyond the
bounds of that compassion; and though she had an invincible repugnance to
deprive her self of my sight, she had likewise no less to grant me the Suit,
which Sulpicia was my Advocate in. She did testify the regret she had, for not
being capable of doing me a more acceptable service in my affairs in terms so
obliging, that I thought I was not able to retaliate her kindness no other way,
than by making an offer to her of what remained of my self in my own disposal.
If the lovely Sulpicia, said I to her, could be capable of that condescension,
as to content her self with the second rank in a heart, where the Daughter of
Caesar sits in Throne in the first; and that the illustrious Julia would not
consider, as a treason committed again her self, that submission, which low
prostrate at your feet, I would employ to plead the cause of my misfortunes;
the deplorable state wherein you now behold me, and which has already excited
compassion in your noble breast, would soon be sensible of a glorious
alteration. Sulpicia burst forth into a loud fit of laughter at this
proposition, and regarding me with no less surprise than disdain: Have you an
art then, said she, to divide your self so exactly, that neither the Princess,
nor Sulpicia shall have cause to impeach you of partiality in the division? It
is a secret I must confess, said I, I never yet put in practice; but a small
condescension in the Soul of the Princess, and the like compassion in yours,
would encourage me to make the experiment: For example, went I on, suppose your
self wholly ignorant of the Amors betwixt the Princess and my self; and that
retiring all inflames and transports from the Elysium of her private Caresses,
I should throw at your feet a heart inspired with raptures and desires as
violent, as love with all its Magic were able to raise in it, would you judge
the victim unworthy of your acceptance? No, replied Sulpicia, if the cause of
these transports and desires were unknown to me, and I could flatter my self
with the thought, that my Beauty had kindled the flames, I saw so visible an
effect of. Oh! ye gods, cried I, presently, interrupting her, must I then be
culpable and unfortunate, because the Princess has made you her Confident? You
deny not, but that my love, in the same capacity I represent it you, both
should, and ought, to be favorably embraced by a person; who could believe her
self to be the only object of it: And what reason can there be then, that I
should receive so severe correction for an indiscretion I never committed? Are
my transports less transports for being the effects of the Princess,
irresistible Charms? Or should I bring them with me into Sulpicia's Chamber
heightened with all those raptures she knows them capable of, would my Passion
be a less amorous Passion for having derived its birth from the divine eyes of
the incomparable Julia?

My way of reasoning was thought so pleasant by Sulpicia, that she suddenly
left me, to run and make the Princess a Partaker in the gallantry of it: I
endeavored to dissuade her, but could not. I judged it convenient to make
choice of a fit season to treat of so delicate and tender a subject; when I was
most agreeably surpised to understand from the mouth of Sulpicia, that the
singularity it self of my proposition had commended it to the Princesses favor,
who expressed a great satisfacti- for the advancing an Intrigue so admirable,
and new.

About that time I had made a Poem, Entitled, THE GODDESS OF HEARTS; where
feigning that Cupid seeing that his Mother Venus had a greater charge upon her
hands than she could well manage, in charming Mortals, had thought it expedient
for her to assume to her a Co-partner in her Empire of Love, and by the name of
The Goddess of Hearts, had created the Princess Julia, here Co-sovereign in
swaying the AMOROVS Scepter of the Universe.

The Princess, through an indiscretion, which I never took the presumption to
charge her with, showed this fancy of mine to Terentia. The name of Julia was
disguised under that of Corinna; but the Character of Corinna did so perfectly
illustrate the Daughter of Augustus, that Terentia had no difficulty to
discover it. She drew me one evening apart in the Empresses Apartment, and
showing me the Verses the Princess had delivered to her. Sold not one, said
she, oblige you effectually, to present you with the Key of this Mysterious
Work, and unlock the secret of it to the Emperor. This discourse put me into
some disorder, but re-composing my self in the best manner I could: I cannot
think, Madam, replied I, the Emperor will concern his high Thoughts with the
humble Corinna of Ovid; and if he were pleased to stoop them so low to Earth,
the Title of THE GODDESS OF HEARTS, so gloriously suits the Charms of the
divine Terentia, that he might perhaps interpret her to be of the object of
this fancy, and cast a killing eye upon Ovid, for presuming to bring the
illustrious Wife of Mecaenas upon the Theater of an Amor. You have more
ingenuity than sincerity, replied Terentia, and the artificial varnish you give
your answer, ought to oblige me to repay treachery with treachery; but I have
an esteem for you, and desire you to insert me in the first Rank of your
friends. You may go on, and propose to your Muse the Idea of Julia, for her
Goddess; but your love in her Mouth speaks intelligibly; and her language is
easy to be understood by persons less discreet than my self, and who perhaps
will not have so great a regard to the interests of Ovid, as Terentia has.

This generous proceeding of a person, whom the credit of a grand Favorite,
and the affections of the Emperor, had elevated to the highest sphere of
authority and luster in the Empire, did touch me with the sense of a deep
acknowledgement, which I expressed in the most eloquent terms, my gratitude could
prompt to me; and from that day I consecrated to her generosity all the
Raptures of my Muse, which either my Passion for the Daughter of Augustus, or
my esteem for Sulpicia would permit me to borrow from her more Amorous hours.
About that time Crassus began to pay his Adorations to the Shrine of this
resplendent Star. And this Amor scarce deceived the knowledge of any person in
Rome, but the Emperors, and her brave Husbands. He had observed how this great
Lady had called me aside; and it was easy to discover by the motion of her
eyes, and her gesture, that she was saying some obliging thing unto me: He drew
near, and lent his curious attention; but we spoke so low, that he could frame
no connection in any thing he heard us discourse of: He caught only at some
scattered and broken words, as the Title of GODDESS OF HEARTS, and what I had
replied to the first speech of Terentia; which being but an innocent piece of
Gallantry, without design, I was not cautious to render guilty by a whisper:
And seeing, in fine, that I paid my thanks to her in the most humble posture,
and the gratefull'st terms I was able to express, he presently apprehended,
that I had entertained her with some private Love-adventure, which she gave a
favorable ear to; and this fancy begot in him a furious jealousy: and some few
days after presented him with an occasion to confirm it: I was walking in the
beautiful Gardens of Lucullus, when a little after me came Terentia thither
likewise, to make them more beautiful, led by the Great Agrippa, and followed
by Crassus; who seemed to be a shadow inseparably annexed to each motion of her
person. He ushered the young Heluidia, Niece to Mecoenas, by the hand; and
endeavored to cast a blind before the eyes of the public, by persuading them,
that it was either this Lady, or the young Aurelia, who were usually her
Attendants, that with their Charms did daily attract him into the company of
the fair Terentia; but more piercing sights did penetrate into the Mystery.
Terentia by accident saw me cross the end of an Alley, where she was walking:
She sent some of her Servants after me to call me: and as I approached her,
Ovid, said she, inclining her self a little toward my Ear, offers a Sacrifice
too remarkable to his Goddess, the Grand-Courtiers of Heaven begin to murmur at
it, and Jupiter himself is offended. Can Sacrifice offend the Gods Madam? said
I, walking by her side; and are not those Holocausts, which preserve on Earth
our respect and veneration to the Goddesses, sacred and pure enough to be
offered publicly to them? I know not what you treat of, said Agrippa, smiling,
but were I a Goddess, the extraordinary offers of men, would cause me to
suspect some private interest, or design, in the intention of the ambitious
offerer: And I do not find, that it is natural to Mortals of Ovids merit, to
make always pure devotion the object of their Sacrifices. I am of your opinion,
replied Terentia, a person of Ovids Principals will soon become as formidable
to the Gods of the Earth, as the Giants were once to those of Heaven: wherefore
if I were of his Council, I would advise him to be so cautious in paying his
worship to a certain Deity, that none of the Imperial Court above, should be
sensible of it, but herself.

You will apprehend, by what you have heard before, that this discourse of
Terentia, was only a prosecution of that she had began to me in the Empresses
Apartment; and that by my Goddess, and the displeasure of Jupiter, she would
privately suggest to me my love to Julia, and advertise me, that the Emperor
was offended with my frequent visits, and familiarity with that Princess: But
Crassus, who lent a diligent attention to our discourse, gave it another
interpretation. I returned such answers as I thought most opposite to retort
the flatteries they levelled at me. Our Promenade, extended it self to a more
than ordinary length; which I supported with such expressions of gallantry and
pleasant retorts, as merited to be honored with many a glorious Compliment and
Encomium by the fair Terentia, which, I must confess did bear the character of
so much good will and kindness toward me, as would have startled the courage
of any bashful Lover. The Emperor came in quest of his illustrious Mistress
into the Walks; as soon as I saw him I retired: The whole Court was not
ignorant that he desired always to entertain Terentia in private, and Crassus
was obliged more than any other person, not to put himself in the circumstance,
of being a witness to their Converse; he withdrew as well as I; and following
me close at the heels, overtook me upon the Terrass that bounds the Gardens,
toward the River Tyber. May a man aspire, said he, saluting me, without
temerity, to a minutes discourse with the renowned Ovid? Does not the spiritual
Terentia, and the great Agrippa, beget in you a loathing toward persons of
Plebeian Capacities? It Is true, said I smiling, Ovid's spirit has an antipathy
against all base and sordid conversation; and thence it proceeds, that he is so
ambitious, of that of the noble Crassus. We measured the length of the Terrass,
with such discourses as these. Crassus gave them the first diversion, and
talking a while of things indifferent, at length with a kind of affected
cenfidence (he would seem to repose in me) he began to acquaint me with the
design he had to gain some considerable employ in the Army, which was marching
for Illyria. You do not deal with me, added he, with that candor, as I with
you; you see my heart meets you barefaced and open breasted; and you have yet
never honored me with the confidence of the least of your Secrets. My heart,
said I, has hitherto been the Cabinet of very few Secrets: not has it ever been
engaged in any Intrigue of State: The mystery of some youthful gallantry has
yet been the highest Point, either in the wheel of fortune or ambition it has
aspired to; and by a misfortune, which my fate, not designs have drawn upon me,
my Love-adventures do tread the stage of the World so publicly, that it were a
high piece of vanity in me, to go about to confide them, to a person of
Crassus's intelligence. You are a grand dissembler, replied Crassus, and those
Adventures you abandon to the public, are only cast before their eyes like a
juglers Mist, to dazzle them so, that they may not through that thick Cloud
discern the real ones: nor do you doubt to sacrifice some credulous Dames, who
are the Stales only to your designs, to the safety of your more effective
Mistresses. And as we saw not long ago with what artifice you made young
Valerius himself, for two years together, the Stalking-horse to his Sisters
dishonor. I Will swear the open feint you make at Sulpicia must include a sublime
and intricate Mystery. This discourse made me tremble, for the concern I had
for Julia. What reason have you to deny, said I, that the beauty of Sulpicia
ought not to challenge the whole Empire of a heart, though capable of never so
boundless a Passion? I will not prove my self guilty of so great an arrogance,
as to boast my self worthy to make love to the fair Sulpicia; but suppose I
were, has not Sulpicia think you, Wit and Charms enough to satiate each
appetite of my Soul? Let her have all the Wit and Beauty too in the World, if
you please, said Crassus; I will not endeavor to convince your supposition; but
I shall maintain, that Sulpicia is not the Goddess of Ovid; you understand too
well to frame your applications, to give the title of Goddess to the Wife of
Tisienus. Lovers, said I, interrupting him, attribute the name of Goddess, to
all such Objects as receive from them the Sacrifice of sighs and vows; neither
is it the Rank, nor the Quality of any of the Sex, that can snatch this Laurel
out of the mouth of a Lover, and crown their own temples with it; but it is the
suitable harmony and proportion which is found between the title of Goddess,
and the adorations of the Heart, that does fix it there. When Paris made love
to the Shepherdess of Oenona, he gave her the same title he afterward gave to
the Wife of the Spartan King. But you do not ascribe, said Crassus,
interrupting him, the name of the same Goddess of Hearts to Sulpicia, as you do
to a Person more eminent: you offer up your feigned devotions to the Wife of
Tisienus, but your real adorations to the consort of Mecoenas. This last word
was the thread to guide me out of a Labyrinth of confusions; for all that
Crassus imputed to Sulpicia, might so aptly be applied to the Daughter of
Augustus, that till I heard the Consort of Mecoenas named, I thought the whole
Intrigue had been discovered. I assumed courage, when I saw my fears were
deluded, and regarding Crassus with a brisk air in my countenance; I understand
you very well, said I, you take pleasure to introduce a discourse of the
subject you love: but you might have spared your self the trouble, to derive
its streams from so remote a head; I am complaisant to the desires of my
friends, and we might have employed the time of our conversation to better
advantage, if I had thought your design in entering into discourse with me, had
been only to interweave it with that of the divine Terentia. The intervention
of Domitius Aenobarbus, who walked likewise upon the same Terrass, prevented
Crassus from making me an answer: he was upon us so unexpectedly, that we were
forced to discontinue our Converse. You are acquainted with Domitius; he is one
of the persons of greatest merit in the Court of Augustus; and had married one
of the Daughters of the Princess Octavia. We could not decline his encounter as
we might have done another of less consideration. He invited me to Sup with
him; and as soon as the Moon should lend us her silver Torch, engaged me to
wait upon him to a noble Palace he had built at Picene; I continued there three
days, which my absence from Julia caused to appear three ages to me. Besides
the pleasure such a ravishing object would have afforded me, I was impatient to
communicate to her, the advice I had received from Terentia in the Gardens of
Lucullus, and consult her about the best means to elude the Emperors suspicion.
As soon as I put foot out of stirrup, I hastened to her Apartment. She was in
her Closet with Sulpicia; the door was shut, but I had ofttntimes before taken
the liberty to interrupt them in their privacy, the Princess not disapproving
it: Sulpicia came forth when she saw me; but Julia stood with her face turned
from me toward the Window: I thought I discovered by the eyes of Sulpicia,
that something of discontent have past betwixt the Princess and her self: Julia
held some flowers in her hand, which she snapt off, and threw away, with an
action full of passion and indignation: I approacht her with all humility, and
begged her to let me know wherein those innocent Flowers had displeased her. If
you ever see her more, said she, without giving an answer to my demand, you
must not expect to see me again as long as you live. How, replied I, in a
strange surprise, must I never see my Princess more? What Devil shall have the
power to deprive me of the adorable sight of my Goddess? The ill advised
Sulpicia, said the Princess. It seems I renounced the whole stock of interest I
had in you, when I gave her leave to claim a small branch in it; nor does she
doubt to tell me to my face, that her share in you is more considerable than
mine; but she shall not long have cause to boast of these advantages; for if I
may pretend to any power over you, she shall soon see herself retrenched of all
your other favors, but indifferent visits. I leave you to judge to what a pitch
of joy this pretty jealous concern of the Princess did elevate my Soul. I was
cautious not to impart to her the advice Terentia had given me; it had come
seasonable to me; and to disoblige Sulpicia in a conjuncture wherein the
Emperors emergent suspicions began to threaten danger to our affairs, had been
to hazard a greater. But the interest of Love seldom complies with the rules of
Prudence. I heaped a Million of Benedictions upon each syllable her indignation
uttered; I limn'd to her a division in Love, in colors, which expressed it in all
the shapes of horror and deformity; I complained of the injustice she had done
all those faithful devoirs my love had rendr'd her by indulging it so much
liberty; and I earnestly conjured her by a most strict Edict of her sovereign
displeasure to repeal all those she had suffered me to render to Sulpicia. The
Princess gave attention to all I said, but answered me only in the language of
a troubled Mien, which I did interpret as a good omen. I asked her diverse
questions touching the vanities of Sulpicia; she declared some of them to me,
and lest me to divine the rest. I perceived that Sulpicia had done me greater
services by her indiscretion, than her counsels; and by magnifying her own
advantages and interest, had not a little advanced mine: I had hopes the Sun
would have broken forth gloriously upon me, after these sweet dawnings of my
Princesses constancy and favor toward me, had not the arrival of the Prince
Marcellus, wholly eclipsed it; but I had the satisfaction to perceive, this
disappointment was as unwelcome to the Princess, as my self; which she expressed
with a gesture full of chagrin and discontent; and inclining herself toward my
ear, she ordered me not to fail to attend her in the Flower-garden, which the
windows of her apartment look d out upon, as soon as the Emperor was gone to
his repose. We will decide our controversy, said she aloud, at the hour
appointed; this time is not proper for such disputes.

Marcellus asked her, What the dispute was? Nothing, said Julia, but a small
difficulty I have started to Ovid, touching his Treatise de Art Amandi; and
taking a Manuscript of it up in her hand, which by accident lay before her upon
the Table in her Closet, she surpised me with the presence of her sudden wit
and apprehension: And ex tempore formed a dispute with such ingenuity and
solidity of Reasons, as if she had dedicated the study and premeditation of
many hours to the contexture of so elegant a discourse; and by uttering a
thousand things, which plausibly suiting the Subject in question, did likewise
suit with what had past, before the Princes arrival, she struck me into that
admiration, that I was afraid, lest the unadvised Effects of it might have
proved Traitors to their Sovereign Princess. I took my leave, and went to
prepare the appetite of my Soul for that divine Treat, I hoped that night would
afford it. I make this Relation to a person, who has declared himself to the
World, a Nonconformist in the Religion of Love; and has rather chosen the
barbarous Isle of Thalassia for a Mistress, than a beautiful Lady for a Wife;
and therefore is incapable to judge of the state, my hope and impatience
reduced me to. I was possessed with a kind of amorous distraction, which rendered
both solitude and company equally burdensome to me. Each moment seemed an Age to
me in my Chamber; and being impatient to deceive my impatience, going forth to
divert it in Augustus's Palace, I kept continually in motion, and with large
paces measuring the distance between one Apartment and another, I was not
capable of making a serious reflection upon the subject, that might be the
cause of so restless a distemper. This motion, at length, like all others, was
terminated in its center. The Emperor, at that time, was entered into a small
course of Physic, which he used to observe every Spring. The Prince Marcellus,
and Moecenas, came into Terentia's Chamber, where I was; and told her that
Caesar was retir d. It was not yet the ordinary hour, the young Prince used to
withdraw to his Repose: He made a Proposition to them of spending an hour or
two at Play: Moecenas agreed to it; and a Concern either for one side, or
other, had engaged all their idle Followers. I threw away a little time in
looking upon them, not to render the hastiness of my departure suspected; and
thinking that I had observed all the necessary Rules of Policy, I took my time,
and stole in all silence away from them; when, unexpectedly, one of Terentia's
Women came after me, and told me, her Lady had some business with me, and
desired me to walk into the next Room; I thought, at first, to have denied
obedience to this order; but the fear I had, lest the cause of my disobedience
might be suspected, joined to the sincere esteem and veneration I had for
Terentia, caused me to yield an unwilling obedience to it. Terentia had a
desire to impart to me the design of a piece of galantry, she was preparing to
solemnize on the birth day of Augustus, which was then near at hand. The thing
intended required no great premeditation: and if my wits had been in my own
possession* a quarter of an hour had been sufficient to have disposed the whole
Scene; but I was so little my self, that I scarce took notice of what she said
to me. I forced her to repeat one thing two or three times over. She was
sensible of my distraction, and smiling, asked me, If I had not been that day
at some Treat? You know, very well, Madam, answered I, that Bacchus is not my
Deity; but I protest that my wits are at this present so far from home, that if
you do not allow me this night to compose them, your Mask will be very ill
regulated. Terentia is endowed with one of the sharpest apprehensions in the
world; and unfortunately for me, was that night in a humor of Railery. She
conjectured what it was, that had put me off of the hinges, and proposing to me
diverse questions of Wit and Gallantry upon the subject of my Amors, which she
thought would most oblige me, she detein'd me two long hours, maugre all the
attempts I could make, to disingage my self, without rudeness, from her
importunities. Crassus was one of the Spectators, when Prince Marcellus, and
Mecoenas, began to set themselves to play; I could not divert his jealousy:
For Domitius's arrival had prevented me, when I was going about to undeceive
his ill opinion of me; and from that hour I had always been absent from Rome,
or in some occasion or other, which gave me no opportunity to renew our
discourse, or converse. He observed how one of Terentia's Women, had come to
me, and commanded my stay, when I was going forth; he saw me direct my course,
toward a Chamber, whither he had seen Terentia retire a little before; he
stood Sentinel, with much impatience, to watch for my coming out, and was
enraged, that I should be cloistered up two hours together with the person, to
whom he had sacrificed his highest adorations. His jealousy transported his
fury beyond his reason, which caused him to follow me out of Mecoenas's
apartment; and to conceal the cause, as I conjecture, of his resentment, from
those eyes, which were then upon him, he curbed the effects of it, till he saw
me just at the Gate of Mecoenas's Baths, which opens into the Garden, where I
was commanded to attend. Turn again, Ovid, said he, advancing toward me with
his Sword in his hand; the Blessings Fortune showrs down on thy glorious head,
is worth a hazarding an inglorious life; for I knew the voice of Crassus, and
apprehended his error; but it was impossible then, to convince him of it; he
attacked me with a fury, which would not allow me time to open my lips to
undeceive him. The Prince Marcellus arrived, just as we began to draw blood
from each others veins; and separating us, expressed to us, in obliging terms,
the concern he was in, to see two persons of so much honor, as either of us
were, engaged in so desperate a quarrel. Whilst the Prince was endeavoring to
part us, a Maid-slave of the Princess, who waited for me at the Garden-door, to
conduct me to a close Arbor, whither her Lady was retired, hearing the clashing
of our swords and voices, ran hastily to advertise her of our combat. The
Princess imagined herself to be the cause of it; and thinking that this had
been some ambush laid for me to chastise my audacity, she came running to the
place, in a mortal distraction, betwixt love and fear. Her apprehension had rob
d her of her judgment; and she let fall some unadvised words, which betrayed
our intrigue; and being joined to the circumstance of that unseasonable hour,
raised that suspicion in the breast of Augustus his Nephew, that no disguise
could longer conceal from him. Marcellus was a Prince of great honor and
virtue; but the hopes that did elevate him to the thoughts of aspiring to the
Marriage of Julia, had stamped a new character upon the goodness of his nature.
He address d his complaints to the Emperor, against the indiscretion and
dishonorable carriage of his daughter; which so inflamed his indignation, that
he presently sent the Princess away to Tusculum, where so watchful a Guard was
set over her, that I durst not hazard any attempt either to purchase a sight of
her, or convey a Letter to her; and in a short time after, I received the Order
of my own Banishment. The generous Terentia employed her power with the
Emperor, to qualify his displeasure; but the information, which the malice of
some ill Men had whispered to him, forced him to return her a denial. In the
mean time Crassus, (who being convinced by the resentments of Prince Marcellus,
had the justice to think, that a person graced with that favor by the daughter
of Augustus, as to obtain her compliance to such night-assignations, could not
probably be embarked in any other adventure of the like nature) believed that
he had attacked me without reason. He came to take his leave of me, the same
morning, I was to take mine of Rome; when he informed me of those things, which
you may imagine I could not by my self arrive to the knowledge of; and
testified his trouble and grief to me in terms so passionate, that they wholly
disarmed my indignation. But his too late repentanee could not restore me my
Julia again: In adventures of this nature, an occasion once lost, is never to
be retrieved more.

Whilst Ovid was making this Relation of his secret intrigue with Julia, the
Thalassian Lady, to whose heart the blind Archer had sent one of his most
invisible darts, felt the real effects of her Friends predictions. Ovid's hopes
had deceived him, when he was willing to believe, that the fair Roselina, was
the private Inamorata: But the knavish Boy took delight to sport with the
severe humor of the daughter of Lepidus, and it was she, who was become amorous
of the reputation of the famous Ovid. Oh! cruel Friend, said she to Roselina,
you have taught my heart a Lesson, it ought to have been ignorant of. It is too
manifest a truth, that the person of Ovid has ravished from me that esteem,
which I thought nothing, but his Works had been capable to challenge. There is
a Magic in the air of his countenance, which has enchanted me at the first
sight; and if I had not presently retired from the place, where we first saw
him, I believe, I should not have been able to have concealed my surprise from
the observation of the Company. Alas! went she on, with a sigh, Love takes now
too cruel a revenge, of the contempt, I have always hitherto expressed for his
power.

I do not perceive, replied Roselina, that this god merits that character of
Revenge, you impose upon him: Ovid bears not in the World the repute of a cruel
person; and I am deceived, if he be of that inhumane temper, as to be
insensible of a passion, which is dressed in so many Charms and Beauties, as
Junia is Mistress of. Ah! replied Junia, my heart shall never betray that
secret to him: Ovid is the wild Ranger of Cupid's Chases, and unconstant by
profession, whom all the Charms, Venus herself is Mistress of, are not able to
confine to one Object; and should mine, as inconsiderable, as they are, be
endued with that miraculous power, as to influence a constancy upon him,
Tisienus informs me, that the cause of his disgrace, is only a jealousy of
Augustus: And Terentia's interest will quickly re-establish him in the
Emperor's favor, and the Banishment of Ovid will have an end, as soon as she
shall interpose her authority between him and Caesar's indignation. Do not you
think me then most unfortunate in a Passion, which I am in danger to give
entertainment to alone; and were its reciprocal, would be always exposed to
the terror of an infallible separation? Arimant, unhappy Arimant, said she,
letting some tears fall, I now undergo a rigorous chastisement for all the
injuries, I have done thee.

About this Season, Junia was accustomed to celebrate the Birthday of her
Father: she had upon other Years invented diverse sorts of Games and Recreations
to honor that solemn day, and for this, she had designed a Consort of Music
upon a Lake, which was one of the greatest Wonders, that illustrated that
Island. Roselina, was her assistant in the design. She had acquaintance in
Mitilena, the Metropolis of Lesbos, by means whereof, she had procured a
Company of choice Musicians from thence. They came the same night, that Ovid
arrived. Junia expressed all the diligences of a solicitous Lover, to regale
her Ovid with a Banquet of Music, for his first welcome to Thalassia; and as
the intent of this frolic had no other object, than Ovid, she gave order to
the Musicians to tell all, that should examine them, that Ovid had set them on
work. The Inhabitants were much surpised, when walking in the evening by the
side of the Lake, they heard the noise of diverse voices and instruments rebound
from some Boats to the shore, which were purposely prepared for that Solemnity.
Those, who understood not the mystery looked upon one another with
astonishment, and inquired, Who amongst them were the Authors of this piece of
Gallantry? Every one denied it; you will perceive presently, said Ovid smiling,
that we ought to pay our thanks to Hortensius for it. He has an intention to
chastise himself for a fault, which he is indebted to for his banishment, and
repealing his Error, dedicates to some fair Ilandress this public testimony of
his conversion. These false Elogiums, replied Hortensius, cannot seduce my
vanity; you must attack me by some more subtle stratagem, to make me imitate
the Crow in Aesop: And I shall not only not render my self guilty of dedicating
a Treat to any Thalassian Lady, but shall esteem the suspicion, or thought of
having done it, an injury, I will not say to the honor, but humor, of
Hortensius. This is only a glory you have, said Junia, interrupting him, to
make the vanity of your ill humor, more conspicuous. I do not think it worth my
admiration, that there are so many Souls in the world incapable of that
generous Passion; the Star, which governs the sublunary Empire of Love, is
doubtless not without its oppositions; and the Heavens are of an extent vast
enough to comprise two contrary influences within their circumference; but
general divertisements are the innocent effects of a Gallantry, without design
or interest, and like the Motto's annexed to honorable Coats of Arms, may be
practiced as well by a heart wholly unconcerned, as that, which is most
inflamed.

The Spectacles, or Games, replied Hortensius, we exhibit to the People, or the
Diversions and Recreations we present to our Friends, may bear that Motto of
indifferency, you have charactered to us; but those which are wholly
consecrated to the honor of Ladies, must necessarily include a design to please
and oblige the Sex, which I never was, nor ever shall be, and am, at this
moment, in despair of ever being capable of. I shall pay to it all the
respects, a person of honor cannot acquit himself from without incivility; and
if any one of them should be reduced to that straight or circumstance, which
should call upon my assistance, I would afford it her with as much fidelity and
zeal, as if I had been from my Cradle a professed Lover: But this I should
perform, by a principle of natural compassion, which is capable of no
partiality to either Sex; and would express itself with as much concern toward
the most unworthy of all Men, as the fairest of all Women. I judge this
indifferency of Hortensius, said Roselina, may be a vice of that ill
temperament, which nature first seasoned him with: but I think I saw another
way, to derive its pedigree: the aversion he has for our Sex, is too violent to
be the effect only of an antipathy without any foundation: I am of opinion, it
is the daughter rather of Revenge, than Nature; and if he will be so ingenious,
as to avouch the truth, the Memory of some past injuries has imprinted this
character in his Soul.

I am not able, said Lentulus, taking up the discourse, to satisfy your doubts
concerning Hortensius; but if you have a desire to be resolved of those
concerning the Neptunian harmony, I can assure you, that Ovid is the Author of
it, and that I received my intelligence from the Mouths of the Musicians
themselves. This News surpised the Company with wonder, which could not
sufficiently admire by what stratagem Ovid had been able in so short a time to
assemble and unite, in one body, the various parts of so perfect a Consort.
Some called him Inchanter, others desired him to impart some of his Magic to
them, and every one rendered him the subject of his own confusion, and their
astonishment. He had set foot in this Island, in a humor little suiting with
such kind of diversions: He was scarce thrown ashore, when he encountered his
two Friends, and since that Moment Hortensius had never been out of his
company; he desired him to answer for his innocence, and free him from those
undeserved praises, they charged him with. He complained of Lentulus for having
been the Author of this distasteful Railery, and conjured him, not without a
little passion, to suppress a folly which had sported too long with his
afflictions, and was so disagreeable a Companion for them. His Protestations,
and his Complaints, were not regarded, but as the effects of his Modesty; and
whatever he could allege in his excuse, the honor of the Pageant was fixed
upon him. He was troubled to be made the Mask to another disguise: which
caused him to rise very early the next Morning, to find out the Merchants, who
had sold their lies and labor at so cheap a rate: He could not speak with them
the Evening before, for Lentulus had not published what they had told him; till
after the Consort was ended. Ovid hoped to make them deny, what they had said,
and discover the intrigue of this pleasant Mystery, but his most diligent
search could not retrieve one of them in the whole Island. Junia took great
pleasure in the success of her innocent Railery and to give herself a little
more diversion, had discharged them, and sent them away, who by break of day
embarked themselves upon a Vessel which set Sail for Bisantinus. Their
departure much displeased Ovid, who admired, that Fortune should express so
much crossness to him of late, as to oppose most envious obstacles to the least
of his desires: and these reflections representing him to the feet of his divine
Julia in her private Closet, brought such a Melancholy upon him, that he could
not in that condition digest the thought of returning to Hortensius. He took
his walk into a Meadow, which his wandering fancy conducted him to: where he had
scarce measured four or five paces, when he perceived Roselina tripping over
the farther end of it, toward a Grove of Cypress Trees; which some Outlaws,
who had been formerly confined to the place, had probably taken pleasure to
plant there. Ovid found this Stranger so charming, that though he had
established Julia in the throne of his heart, for the sovereign Empress of his
affections, yet he judged he should not turn Traitor to the principles of his
sworn Loyalty, in giving a slight diversion to that Mortal discontent, which
for her absence had invaded his Soul. He followed the tract of Roselina; the
labyrinth, which she entered into, had been designed for a solitary retirement;
where the paths, with a curious artifice interwoven into diverse innocent knots,
as well to confound each other, as the unwary Stranger, were not very difficult
to be traced through all their implicit Meanders. Ovid, with a little trouble,
was guided by his cautious steps, to a green square, encompassed round with
flowery banks, and other natural seats of fragrant verdure, which seemed to be
the center of this pleasant Wilderness: He found there, a Guittar and Books, in
which, amongst some Musical Notes, that were blur'd and torn, he read these
following Verses. Shall I surrender? or stand to my arms?
What power is able to resist such charms?
Must I submit then tamely to my fate?
Perhaps he will such an easy conquest hate.
Alas! poor heart, methinks I hear thee say,
Despair to hopes has damned up every way!
Whilst thou consultest, if thou ought to yield,
Thou have already yielded up the field.


At the foot of these Verses, there were diverse Ciphers, drawn with a Pencil,
wherein the Letters, that composed the name of Ovid, were easy to be
discerned. He flattered himself with a belief, that his secret Mistress, had in
this place entertained her amorous Passion, and finding the method, by which
she expressed it, very ingenious and elegant, he retorted them in this manner.
You must surrender, and lay down your arms;
You need to use no other, than your charms.
You Are young and fair; then doubt not but your fate
Will make us a quick conquest love, not hate:
And since my heart such tender things does say,
To make it despair, were cruel every way:
Whilst you are consulting, if you ought to yield,
has wholly yielded up the field.


He left a blank for his name, as well not to hazard an indiscretion, as to
oblige the Lady, to explain her self first; and skreening himself behind a
bank, he presently saw Roselina enter. She took the Guittar, which she touched
with admirable skill and sweetness; and in playing, cast her eyes upon the
Books, and read that which was interlin'd betwixt the Notes, as one would read
a thing, he had by rote before. She was present, when Junia made those Verses
that morning; but by accident throwing down the Book, the Leaves turned, and
Roselina discovered Ovid's answer to them. She read it over more than once, and
stopping at the place, where Ovid had left the blank for his name, she seemed
to be put to a puzzle, to find out something to fill it up, and suddenly
casting up her eyes to Heaven, and clapping her hands one against the other,
she run hastily toward the track, which guided her out of the Labyrinth. She
need not have done any more, to assure Ovid, that his desires and conjectures
had not deluded him. He made not the least scruple, but that Roselina was the
Party, whose heart his Fame had led in triumph after him; and congratulating
his happy Stars for this their benign influence, he resolved to make it the
diversion of his banishment. Roselina might have been easily overtaken by a
person, that would have pursued her; but Ovid, was an experienced Lover, and
knew with what precaution and tenderness he ought to manage the bashful Modesty
of young Ladies, and leave the impression of the first attacks, to receive its
perfection from the stamp of more serious reflections. Roselina commanded as
much liberty to retire, as she pleased: and Ovid quitted not his post, till he
thought he had allowed her sufficient time to make an entire retreat: when all
transported with joy, that he had made so happy an entrance into the Temple of
Venus, he returned to Hortensius, where he found Lentulus, who willing to
oblige his old Friend, invited him to dine with him. They fell again upon the
discourse of the Music: Ovid renewed his complaints against Lentulus, for
having made him the Subject of a Railery, he was totally ignorant of. Lentulus
confirmed again, what he had affirmed the night before. Ovid seriously
protested, that those Musicians had told him a great untruth; adding a solemn
Oath, that he had not the least concern, or knowledge of a consort, as
miraculously vanished as at first assembled: which, at length, altered the
opinion of Lentulus; and at the same time the gayetie, which appeared before,
in his countenance. Ovid soon took notice of it, and asked him the cause of
this sudden change? It is too manifest, replied Lentulus, that I am betrayed! O
ye gods, cried he, fetching a deep sigh, Is it possible that a person, who has
so long commanded the highest adorations of my Soul, should be capable of so
foul a treachery? We shall afford you our advice and consolation, said
Hortensius interrupting him, as soon as we shall be informed of the cause of
these extravagant Exclamations. Alas, said Lentulus, I need no entreaties to
satisfy your curiosity: A person in my condition, feels a greater reluctance
in himself, to conceal a secret from his Friends, than to reveal it to them.

THE HISTORY OF Lentulus.
WHen I received the Emperors Orders to march the second time against the
Getes, and reduce them to their Obedience; he considered this Expedition, as a
Work only of some few Months: and I assure you, I my self thought it not of
that importance, as the sequel declared it. I was acquainted with the manner of
fighting, the military Laws and Stratagems of that People: This experience gave
me great advantages over them. Their Revolt was yet so young, and so newly
crept out of the shell of Sedition, that it wanted growth and age to establish
it with firmity; and the Troops, which Caesar committed to my conduct, were all
of choice and select men. In the mean while the almost inexpugnable obstinacy
of this Nation, gave me more trouble and laborious exercise, than I could have
imagined: and prolonged a War for two whole years, which I hoped to have
concluded in less than one Campaign. This repugnance provoked me to those acts
of severity, which my ordinary temper is naturally averse from. I sent away the
chief Magistrates of some of their Cities, to plant Colonies in the desert
Islands of the frozen Sea; and running a great danger of my life in an
Encounter, from whence the Romans were forced to retire with loss and dishonor,
I culled out of the Prisoners, we took, those of the best shapes, and
extraction amongst them; and sent them, as a Present, to the Officer, who had
the charge of the Gladiators. This revenge was the most rigorous, that I could
inflict upon those obstinate Getes: which transported them to that rage and
despair, that a few days after I had taken this course, the Sentinels, who
were placed round my Tent, took a young Man attempting to force his entrance
into it, who being searched, was found to carry a dagger concealed about him.
He was brought before me; when the first view I took of him, did not more
surprise, than charm my admiration. He seemed not to be above sixteen, or
seventeen years of age. His stature scarce reached the middle size of Men, and
wanted the addition of some years to give it its just proportion: but yet it
was noble and of generous deportment; and each action of his person did bear
the stamp and character of a charming greatness. His first aspect seemed, by a
secret Magic, to disarm my resolution of a Revenge, to the rage whereof, I was
fully bent to sacrifice him, and all, that bore the name of Get. I asked him,
with a great deal of sweetness, what design had brought him into my Camp? and
for what intent he would have forced an entrance into my Pavilion?

To have killed thee, if it had been possible, replied the fierce Youth; my
rage is too just, to be disowned; and the only regret, which shall attend my
wretched life unto those infamous tortures, to which I know, thy cruelty will
soon expose it, is to outlive the effects of so glorious an attempt. Alas, my
Friend, said I, what injustice have I committed against thee, that should
inspire thy fury with resentments so barbarous and so criminal? Thou have
practiced, said he, against me, one of the most sensible acts of barbarism,
which was in thy power to execute upon me; I am descended of a blood, that
ought to be of some consideration amongst the Romans. Death deprived me of a
Father and a Mother, at an age, when I was only capable of acknowledging one
only Brother for all my Relations and Parents: and Barbarian, him thou have
robbed me of; and being insensible of the charms of that Youth, who was born
with all the advantages, wherewith nature and education could accomplish him,
have barbarously added him to the number of the Gladiators, for a worthy
spectacle to entertain the effeminacy and cruelty of the Tyrant of Rome: and
the first, perhaps, wherewith he designs to regale the lusts of the Adultress
Livia, shall be exhibited at the precious expense of my Brothers life. Oh ye
gods, went he on, (whose fury this reflection had inflamed,) is it possible,
that after an act of such inhumanity, I should tamely look upon thee with
calmness, speak to thee, and not revenge upon thy loathed person, the injury
thou have perpetrated against the blood of Herennius? In pronouncing these last
words, with a savage fury he would have darted himself in my face: which second
attempt, having turned the points of more than twenty javelins upon his breast,
had soon received its due chastisement, had not I interposed my self betwixt
him and the indiscreet zeal of those, that were ready at so many gaps to let
forth his desperate life. I pretended, I would wheedle out of him some
discoveries, which might concern my own safety; and I gave order, he should be
kept under a strict Guard, in a Chamber near mine. This command wanted not an
appearance of reason; because it was not improbable, but that he might have
some Accomplices: And supposing I had an intent to put him to death, it ought to
be such a death, as might strike a terror, into all such, as might be engaged
with him in the same design. But these considerations were not the Motives of
my preserving his life: another more unknown and secret instinct rendered it as
dear to me, as my own. I was more surpised, than he himself, when they
presented their Javelins to his throat; and if my voice had not been sufficient
to avert the danger, which threatened him, I think I should have opposed my own
breast for a buckler, to have defended his. When I found my self alone, and
entered into a serious reflection upon the subject of these extravagant
sentiments, which so insensibly incroach'd upon my reason, I impeached it of
weakness and effeminacy; and was ready to open my mouth a thousand times, to
give command to have an object, which with so infamous a distemper infected my
judgment, removed out of the world by most exquisite tortures, but I had never
the power, to pronounce the sentence, which hung upon my lips. Some Demon, or
other enemy to my repose and glory, had charmed my tongue, and allowed me only
the use of it, to give order to have the Criminal brought again to my presence.
I said, and believed too at that time, that I had no other intent in causing
him to be arraigned before me, than by some curious questions, to extort an
humble confession from him: But as soon as I cast my eyes upon him, so sudden a
fear possessed me, lest he should answer like a desperate and stubborn wretch,
and by that obstinacy provoke me to a necessity of inflicting death upon him
even against my will, that I did not dare to propose one question to him: I
pretended generosity; and told some Officers, whom the report of this accident
had brought to my Tent, that if the attempt of the Get had aimed at any of
their persons, he should have received his due punishment, at the same Moment I
had been made acquainted with it; but since it was only levelled at mine, I
would willingly force my own resentments to subscribe to the ambition I had, to
try all manner of ways to conquer the rigor and obdurateness of that stiff
Nation. We ought to make an experiment, said I, whether these People may not be
more sensible of our generosity, than severity. I will give this young Fellow
his life, restore to him his Brother, oblige him with Presents, and send him
away with his liberty, to proclaim amongst his Countrymen, that the Romans
never exercise their rigor, but upon the obstinate and incorrigible; and that
when the fortune only of Mars renders them Masters of their Enemies, they treat
them, like Brothers. This opinion of mine found but few assenters amongst them;
and those, who opposed it, were doubtless endu'd with most judgment and reason:
But I did not propose it to them, as if I asked their advice in the case, but
as if I had done them the favor to communicate it to them, as a resolution
already fixed and established. I made a sign to the Prisoner to draw nearer to
me; who approaching, I exhorted him never to attempt base and indirect ways,
to revenge himself of his Enemies; and after a long discourse, wherewith the
standers by seemed to be more moved, than the sullen Get, I concluded by
declaring to him, that I granted him a life, his treason had forfeited,
together with the liberty of his Brother.

The Youth seemed to be transported beyond himself with a rapture of joy at
this generous effect of my clemency; and casting himself at my feet, with a
stream of tears, (which seemed even through my breast to have found a channel to
convey themselves to my heart) purling down his cheeks ah! Lentulus, said he, a
Person truly worthy to bear the name of Roman; thou have this day purchased a
fame, which shall make more Nations bow to the Scepter of Caesar, than thy most
victorious Arms could ever pretend to. My Brother shall employ that life and
honor, thou have here preserved, to render himself worthy of thy matchless
generosity. As for my self, I am only capable of offering up vows and oraisons
to Heaven for the augmentation of thy glory, and the preservation of thy
precious life. This hand the gods never shaped for Sword or Lance, it was fury
only that armed it; and to disguise nothing from a Person, to whom I owe all,
know I am a Woman, and that thou have preserved the blood of a renowned Roman,
in preservation of my Brother, and my self. Imagine in your thoughts the
surprise, I was in, at this attestation: I had before a blind inclination to
protect the life of that audacious Youth, but when this inclination saw it self
in a capacity to be owned as a legitimate Love, it grew like a Giant, as I may
say, in the Cradle, and in a Moment attained to that Maturity and Strength,
that as no eloquence in the Mouth of another was able to confute it, so none in
my own, is capable to give it its due character. I hastily raised the fair
Counterfeit, I a thousand times begged her pardon for the ill treatment she had
received both from me, and my People: The confusion of my countenance and
discourse, more clearly discovered to her, what was agitated at the
Counsel-Table of my heart, than the most flourishing Rhetoric, was able to
have expressed. She soon perceived it; and if I may allow credit to the
asseveration of a Woman, a sense of gratitude wrought the same effects in her
fair Soul, as her beauty did in mine. I understood from her, that she was
called Herennia, and descended from that famous Herennius, who followed
Sertorius into Spain at the time of the Tyranous Reign of Sylla. Herennia was
not the own proper daughter of that Herennius, she was too young; but she was
the daughter of a son of that illustrious Proscript: who, after his Fathers
death, having scattered the miserable Relics both of his own, and his Fathers
wandering Errors over most Parts of the Universe, at last fixed his Residence
amongst the Getes; and had by a Lady, of an incomparable beauty, whom he had
espoused, this Herennia, and the young Herennius. They were Twins, and were
left Orphans, almost as soon as they fell into the arms of the wide World; and
had had their Education under a Roman, a Domestic of their Grandfather, who
had instructed them in the Latin Tongue. Old Herennius did after the death of
Sertorius retire into the Baleare Islands, whither the Tutor to the two young
Infants followed him, and there learned the Spanish Tongue, which he afterward
taught his Pupils. He was a great Master in diverse Arts and Sciences, which
were requisite for the accomplishment of Persons of Quality; nor had he been a
Niggard in imparting them to the two Herennian Orphans; and finding them richly
indu'd with natural capacities, had rendered them two Prodigies, of Learning,
Wit and Education.

These things did she recount to me with an excellent grace, and testified an
impatient desire of seeing the Native Country of her Ancestors. I promised her
to conduct her thither, as soon as the War was ended; and ever after I caused
her to be treated like a Roman of Quality, whose Renowned Predecessors Fortune
had before as unjustly ravished from, as now again it had miraculously restored
to Italy. I re-invested her likewise in those Lands, which belonged to her in
the Territories of the Getes; all which were then lately fallen into the power
of the Romans: I made a distinction betwixt those, and our other Conquests; and
appointed certain Troops to guard them, as if they had been a part of the
Patrimony of the Empire. The young Herennius was set at liberty by the Captain
of the Gladiators, and honored with such Charges, as his age was capable of, in
our Army; but he did not continue long in them, for he left the Camp by
stealth, and since his departure, we could never gain any intelligence of him.
The favors I conferred upon Herennius, and those wherewith I daily studied to
oblige his Sister, did purchase me her entire good will, and as she was of a
candid integrity, and her intentions sincere, she made no scruple to declare to
me, the real sentiments she had for me. That Summers Campania was drawing to an
end, and my Troops began to look toward their Winter Quarters; Herennia made
her ordinary Residence in a House, not far distant from the Camp. I entertained
all the leisure my duty would permit me to steal from my charge, in her
conversation: I promised you, said she to me one day, if you remember, only
oraisons and vows in exchange, for the life you gave me, and the liberty you
promised my Brother: And since your generosity has not confined it self to the
limits of your bare word, my gratitude thinks it self obliged too, not to
contain it self within the bounds of a single acknowledgment; I challenge,
methinks, a more sensible interest in all that relates to you, than a bare
sense of a favor is capable of producing. I ought to pay you a respect, as to
the General of the Romans; and though I had no other interest in your Concerns,
than what the Memory of the Obligations I owe you begets in me, your
preservation and felicity ought to be held by me in the same rank with mine
own: But when I consider you within the reach of any danger, those Obligations
present themselves no more to my thoughts, but the preservation only of the
person of Lentulus, which I prefer before the devoir of an acknowledgment; and
if interest moved you to act, as you have done, you ought to repent your self,
that you have obliged me: for, methinks, the sense of your favors, have no
alliance at all with the sentiments, I find in my breast for you.

O! Adorable Herennia, cried I, may you ever forget in that manner the
Obligations, for which you think your self redevable to me: they are but acts
of justice, which merit not a place in your thoughts, and can only charge me
with the praise of having performed my devoir: But may you ever, ever remember,
that Lentulus adores you; that the terrible shape, wherein you first presented
your self to his view, could not defend his heart against the effects of your
charms; and that he shall love you to the last Moment of his Life with a
Passion, no Lovers heart was ever yet capable of. That which you would have me
forget, said Herennia interrupting me, ought perhaps with more Reason to
challenge a place in my Memory, than that which you desire I should retein. You
have effectually snatched me out of the jaws of death, into which my fury would
have precipitated me: the Liberty of my Brother, is an essential favor; the
Obligations, you have heaped upon me, are real Obligations, and your Love,
perhaps, may not have the same solidity: It is a Chimera, which time will
dissipate without your permission; but yet by a Magic, which my strongest
Resolutions cannot conquer, this Chimera charms my Soul with a more real
delight, than a Verity would do of more importance. There is no necessity that
I should farther enlarge my self upon this subject, added Lentulus, the
indifferent Hortensius will dispense with a more tedious recital of such
delicate circumstances; and the Amorous Ovid comprehends as well as my self,
the Raptures they infused into my Soul, which did banquet upon them in all
peace and tranquillity, till Tiberius came like an intruding Guest, and
entrenched upon the bounds of my felicity: He envied the credit and favor of
Marcellus; and the prudent Livia fearing the ill consequences of his Malice,
had persuaded the Emperor to dispatch him away toward me, with some new Levies
he had made, to reinforce the Getish War; the Orders of Tiberius, were nothing
different from those, I had received from Caesar; and it appeared by the
limitations of them, that Tiberius was sent to me rather as a Colleague, than a
General: But I in him regarded the Son of an ambitious Empress, and without any
repugnance resigned to him the honor of the Supreme Command; which he managed
at first with moderation enough. And if the attempt of Herennia had never been
known to him, I believe we might have at this hour held a fair correspondence
together: but the report of it being conveyed to him, by one of those
Tale-brokers which follow Camps, as well as Courts, he considered it as an
Adventure so singular and admirable, that he would needs see her. A secret
presage within my Soul rendered this curiosity suspected to it; I endeavored to
divert it with all the arguments my jealousy suggested to me but being able to
frame none, but what his obstinacy was resolved to confute. Tiberius would not
be convinced* nor could I excuse my self from conducting him to the house were
she was.

I will declare so much in the honor of the beautiful Herennia; she observed
those precautions in all her actions before him, that I could not have exacted
from her. She suppressed part of the natural vivacity of her Spirit, and only
suffered him to discover, what was impossible for her to disguise from him;
whilst her deportment was wholly divested of that gaity and all which gave it
at other times a most charming grace: her regards were modest and constrained:
in a word, Hirennia, that offered her self then to the eyes of Tiberius, was
not the same Herennia, that in our private Converse used to present her self to
mine; but yet though she affected to appear so wholly altered from her self,
she had not the power not to charm Tiberius. This Prince is one of the greatest
dissemblers in the Universe; for a while he disguised his thought; but
perceiving, in some visits he afterward made to Herennia, that I had a Passion
for her, and she some appearance of good will for me, his jealousy for that
time became his Master, and transported him beyond the Politics of his
dissimulation; you have taken your leave of a fair opportunity, said he to me
one day, of making your court to Caesar, by giving liberty to a Daughter of the
Herennius's; you might have made a onsiderable Present to the Emperor in the
person of this Slave; and if you will bestow her upon me to make one to the
Empress, you shall in exchange command any thing of me, that lies in my power
to oblige you. I Sir, cried I, all surpised, Can I deliver up to you, in the
quality of a Slave, a young Daughter of the Blood of Herennius? Oh Sir! said I,
are you ignorant of the Prerogatives which like so many Gems in an Imperial
Diadem, incircle the glorious name of a Roman? Herennia is your Compatriot as
well as mine; if the Caprice of fortune has for some time deprived her of the
advantages her birth gave her, it could not deprive her of the Rights of it:
and instead of rendering a service to the Emperor, in detaining Herennia in
slavery, I am convinced, that Caesar would enter into Arms to protect her from
it, if any one should be so presumptuous as to attempt to impose unworthy
Chains upon her liberty. The Blood of Herennius, replied Tyberius, is not so
recommmendable to Caesar, as you seem to persuade your self: he was one of
those Rebels disguised, who under pretense of establishing Rome in a liberty
which she is too fortunate to have forfeited now to so glorious a Change, did
miserably dilaniate the State by their divisions; and sacrificed the chief of
the Roman Nobility to their private Lusts and Interests. The persons you
mention Sir, said I, were never branded with that Title, but by the enemies of
the public Liberty. None dare deny but that the Reign of Augustus ought to be
preferred before that Liberty, which Sertorius and the Grandfather of Herennia
did with such pertinacy defend. But Sir, when they declared themselves the
Protectors of it, it was not Caesar that invaded it. And I doubt not but they
would have unanimously deferred it to the high merit of Augustus, what they
disputed with the tyrannous ambition of Sylla: And though Caesar should
consider them no otherwise than as the second causes, which Heaven employed to
wrest the Empire out of the hands of a bloody Marius, and Sylla, to conserve it
for the Caesarian Race, I assure my self he would have no dis-esteem for their
memory.

The Emperor has too much reason, replied Tiberius, not to entertain a just
resentment for all such, as opposed the establishment of the Soverain Power; he
is sensible that the same persons, who ran counter to the designs of Sylla,
would have gloried to have been the Assassins of the Great Julius, had they
lived in his Age. They were a company of opiniatre and ambitious Spirits, who
judging that the World could not discover sufficient merit in them to elevate
them to the Throne of Sovereign Authority, would like so many bloody
Anatomists, dissect it into variety of parts, that each one might possess a
parcell'd Empire for his share. The person of Marius, or that of Sylla, or that
of Augustus, would have challenged the same Rank in their levelling thoughts.
It is a Maxim of State to destroy all the young Sciens of that Seditious Race:
If Herennia had been the only remaining Branch of the rebellious Stock of
Herennius, something might have been allowed to her Sex; but she has a Brother,
who has lately by a surreptitious attempt conveyed himself out of the reach of
our Power; and therefore is but justice, that his Sister should remain a Pledge
for him; and if you persist in (...) defense, I shall be forced to advertise
the Emperor of your obstinacy, and cause her to be secured till I receive
farther Orders from Caesar. Upon this discovery of the ill intentions of
Tiberius. I thought to have made my resentments whisper a harsh language in his
ear; but I was afraid to create any division in the Army. I imposed a great
constraint upon my self, to avoid an inconvenience of that importance; and
protesting that the Person of Herennia was wholly indifferent to me, I only
represented to Tiberius, that he ought to consult the opinion of the chief
Officers, touching the regard due to the sacred name of a Roman. Tiberius
readily assented to this proposition: he doubted not, but that the title of the
Son of Livia would captivate the suffrages of the whole Council to his own
desires. And to speak the truth, the credit of the Empress was so formidable to
the greatest part of the Romans, that Tiberius had perhaps succeeded in his
design, had I allowed him the leisure to proceed in it. I went the same night
to Herennia, and giving her a brief account of what had happened, I possessed her
with such an horror of Tiberius's intentions, that she protested to me, she was
resolved to run all hazards, to conserve her liberty. I provided her a faithful
guide, a Captain of a Cohort, in whom I could repose at entire confidence; to
him I committed her conduct; and allowing her only one of her Relations to
accompany her, who was desirous to share in her fortune, I conveyed her into
this Island, to attend here under the name of Roselina, a more favorable
destiny, than that the Getish Camp presented to her.

How, said Ovid, interrupting Lentulus, is Roselina that same Herennia, whose
History you here recount to us? And is it Roselina, of whose affections, you so
confidently assure your self?

Roselina, replied Lentulus, is the very same person, who captivated my
affections, the first minute I beheld her under the name of Herennia, and shall
command them to the last moment of my life, under what title soever she shall
be pleased to honor the World with her disguise: But oh! ye gods, she is now no
longer that Herennia, from whom amongst the Getes I received such tender
demonstrations of her affection. Tiberius was not advertised of the departure
of our Fugitives, but when it was not possible for him to retrieve them: which
transported him to the highest degree of rage; but thinking it safe for him
directly to attack my Person, which he knew was in good esteem with the
Soldiery, he vented his fury upon some of the Cavalry, whom I had made choice
of for her Convoy. He laid to their charge the Crime of Desertion, and
proceeded against them as Criminals convicted. I vigorously opposed my self
against a course of so much injustice, and declared, that they had not left the
Camp, but by my leave. This it was, which gave him a fair open at me, as he
imagined: whereupon he published a Remonstrance against my Conduct; charged me
with holding intelligence with some principal Getes, imputed the protraction of
the War to the private employs, upon which I put the Imperial Forces, and
dispatching away his accusations to the Emperor, he engaged the credit of Livia
so powerfully against me, that Augustus caused me to be cited before the
Senate, to render an account of my proceedings. The whole Army can testify my
fidelity; and though the reduction of the Getes required more time than I at
first apprehended, yet the services I performed against those Rebels, are not
perhaps unworthy that reputation the World does flatter me with: But the favor
of Livia was not to be balanced, either with evidence, or justice. I left the
Camp, as if I had addressed my journey toward Rome; but as it is never safe for a
Subject to lay his head at the foot of his Sovereign, neither was it any longer
in my power, to live without the sight of Herennia, I resolved to dedicate all
the time my friends judged necessary for the quallifying the indignation of
Caesar, to my charming Amor. Cepion only, who is my particular friend, is
acquainted with the place of my retreat: he remains still in the Camp, from
whence he advertises me, of what is acted against my interest there; and by a
Correspondent which I have at Lesbos, I receive certain intelligence what state
my affairs are in at Rome. The reception I have hitherto received from
Roselina, has been conformable to the Sentiments I have always observed in
Herennia; till some few days since, I was sensible of an alteration. I have two
or three times surprised her reading some Love-verses, whereof she refused to
discover the Author. She has daily some secret or other to impart to Junia,
wherein she will not do me the honor to be her Confident. The night before
yesterday, a little after your arrival, she dropped some Tablets, filled with the
amorous Complaints of a Heart, forced (...) to render it self to the violence
of an imperious Passion; she found me perusing them; and perceiving they gave
me a sensible disquiet, instead of endeavoring to calm it, she strove to laugh
me out of it, and told me with a brisk air in her countenance (which had almost
plunged me into the deepest precipice of despair) that the assurance of a
reciprocal love, transported Lovers into an Elysium of Joy and Content; and
that it was no small satisfaction to her, to see that mine was capable of fear
and apprehension. When I desired her to inform me who it was, that Presented
her with those amorous Lines, I daily observed in her hands; she answered me, I
was too inquisitive, and protesting that she could not impart the Secret to me,
without rendering her self unworthy of my esteem, she always tyrannically treats
me with a scornful reserve, Yesterday, when I came to inform the Company, what
I had learnt from the mouths of the Musicians themselves, she cast her eyes
upon Junia: when presently with their wanton smiles they began a Dialogue
betwixt each other, in a language none could interpret but themselves: I
perceived they made a rallery of my error, and understood by some broken words
they whispered to each other, that that Musical Consort included a Mystery, we
were ignorant of. I am doubtless betrayed; Roselina is inconstant; but oh! I
know not upon whom to fix the suspicion of her infidelity. I see no person in
this Island, who deserves the character of my Rival. Tisienus is an ambitious
Reserve, whose proceedings pretend to no conformity with the effects of Love.
Hortensius is a declared Enemy to that Passion. Ovid, whom I should fear more
than all the World besides, has been embarkt but two days in this our Society.
All others who inhabit this wild Solitude, are either employed in concerns of
another nature, or else not worthy to have any with Roselina; yet in the mean
time there is some person, or other within it, whom she affects. I have a
Rival, but cannot find him; and the more trouble I give my self to discover
him, the more conceall'd he remains from me.

Ovid, with a great deal of delight gave ear to the complaints of Lentulus, he
doubted not, but that he himself was the secret cause of this alteration of
Roselina, and tickling his imagination with the pleasing fancy of being made
the Confident of his Rival, there was no kind of malicious question, wherewith,
as with a picquant sauce, he did not endeavor to season the Banquet, which
fortune, as he thought, had prepared to regale his wanton palate. But, said he
to Lentulus, do not suffer your self to be abus d by a groundless nicety.
Roselina is perhaps the same person here, as Herennia was amongst the Getes: It
is nothing, but a caprice of jealousy, which presents her now to your thought
in another shape. Oh! cried Lentulus, I am neither jealous, nor capricious; I
enjoyed so sweet a satisfaction in the thoughts of being loved by Herennia,
that if my heart had cause to fear a surprise, it would have been from too
great a confidence, not a groundless jealousy, of the affections of the divine
Roselina. I have an inclination to suffer my self to be deceived, and was
willing that she should put the cheat upon me; but the ungrateful One will not
afford me the pity to be cheated by her. I met her yesterday coming forth of an
artificial Wilderness, which is in this Island, and which doubtless (said he,
looking upon Ovid) you have not yet had the time to visits she held some Papers
in her hand, wherein I saw her read something; I asked her what it was: she
might, if she had pleased, have answered, that it was a trifle not worth my
perusal; for the least syllable she could have pronounced, might have
challenged an absolute authority over my Soul, and I never found my self more
disposed, than at that time, to give credit to what she said: but she told me
laughing, that it was a Mystery of Love, which she could not then explain to
me; and leaving me suddenly, she gave me cause to apprehend, that she had some
affairs in hand, which were to be preferred before the obligation of giving me
satisfaction. Have you not perceived heretofore, said Ovid, that her levity has
been guilty of any extravagant or chimerical Passion? History informs us, that
a certain Lady became enamored of Alexander, only upon the fame and reputation
of his great Actions, and sacrificed the life of her Husband to this frenzy.
Men of this age are framed of the same Ingredients which composed those of the
former; and the imbecilities as well of the one Sex, as the other, which were
practiced in the time of Alexander, may descend to the Reign of Augustus.
Herennia has a solid Judgment, replied Lentulus, and a Soul above those
Chimera's: which she rarely applies to the cultivating of her Beauty, that care
she casts aside amongst the most unregarded pieces of her curiosity; and the
ordinary affectations of other women, attract her contempt, not esteem: And
though I am sensible that she once affected me with a Passion full of ardor and
sincerity, yet my most passionate endeavors were never able to debauch it to
the least degree of levity, or weakness. A Soul of this temper is scarce
susceptible of the impressions of an irregular imagination. But, added he,
checking himself suddenly, your discourse recalls to my memory, that some days
since, speaking of the extravagant effects of Love, she maintained it might
take birth in a heart, and be inflamed of an object it never saw; and that she
could allege an example of what she asserted: And may not she be that example
her self? Oh! ye gods, Can it be possible, that a heart of such proof against
the attacks of Tiberius, should suffer it self to be seduced by the flatteries
of a Rhiming Sophister? The arrival of Tisienus, prevented Ovid from proceeding
farther in his malicious design: there had been no great correspondence betwixt
him and Tisienus, whilst they were in Rome; but people of the same Country
willingly consort together, when they meet in a strange Climate. Tisienus had
not been informed of the cause of Ovid's disgrace, but by the relation of
persons of bad intelligence: he thought that the too eminent favor of Terentia
had drawn it upon him; and whereas Mecoenas had discovered the Conspiracy of
Marcus Lepidus, in which Tisienus was involved, he had no good thoughts for
that worthy Favorite. He would seem in a Satirical Note to deplore his
misfortune, in having so unfaithful a Wife; Must Caesar have Partners, said he,
in the Empire of Love? It is glorious for a Subject to share stakes in any
thing, with his Sovereign; but for Crassus, for Ovid, and perhaps for some body
else too; when a heart has made the first step upon the course of this
gallantry, it seldom stops in so fair a road. To speak the truth, this is to
put the Philosophy of Mecoenas to too severe a Test; I wonder that a Man of so
powerful a credit, does not cause a new Tribunal to be erected, for the Trial
of the bold Usurpers of Matrimonial Rights. This raillery was very pleasant in
the mouth of Tisienus: Ovid was so much taken with it, that he could not suffer
it to pass without a repartee. Husbands, said he, whose Merits, might claim
oftentimes chaster Wives, than Heaven has joined them to, owe grand obligations
to you, for the charitable complaints, you make of their misfortunes. A person
ought to be assured of the virtue of his own Wife, who so freely glosses upon
another; and if you were not convinced of the fidelity of Sulpicia, you would
not so liberally attack that of Terentia. I must confess, replied Tisienus,
that I am out of the reach of out of those forked Darts my self, which I level
at the Brows of others; for Sulpicia, thanks to the heavens, is endued with a
Virtue, impregnable to all attempts; but though I were my self in the same
predicament with Mecoenas, I could not forbear to rally at the adventure of so
eminent a Politician. That grand Statesman, whose vigilance, like the Monoculus
of the World, at one view comprises the Empire of the Universe, who with a
perspicacious and faithful inspection, penetrates into the secrets of Hearts;
and discovers Conspiracies against Coesar, before they are in Rerum Natura, is
insensible of those which are daily projected against himself: he sleeps in a
high security, when he ought to awake for the defense of his own Honor; and
wakes with an indefatigable activity, to terminate the affairs of Illiria. That
is, replied Hortensius, because he is convinced, that a man should wake in
vain, to divert a woman, from what she is resolved to do. The care and
vigilance Mecoenas dedicates to the Illirian War, may perhaps be crowned with a
glorious success; but had he as many Spies, as Argus Eyes, he could not prevent
the fortune his Wife threatened him with when she had once designed it in her
pleasing imagination. I am not convinced with what you say, replied Tisienus,
the care of a Husband contributes much to the prudent conduct of a Wife: when
he carries a vigilant eye over his Family; confines the exorbitant desires of a
young person within the bounds of moderation; obliges her to be at home at good
hours; weans her with prudence and sweetness from such company, as may corrupt
her innocence: By this means a man may dissolve the Gordian Knot of all ill
habits; and placing only before the eyes of her curiosity a Mirror of good
example, preserve her frailty from the danger of all dishonorable
condescensions and lapses.

Behold, said Ovid, with a grave look, the fair documents Tisienus has used to
make his fair Wife so great a Tygress as she is. I thought that she had owed
her virtue to the excellence of her temper; but now I perceive by the Maxims
Tisienus delivers us, that she derives it from another source; and doubtless
she would not be what she is, had she not had a person of such excellent
Principles to her Husband. Hortensius was scarce able to contain himself from
bursting forth into an open laughter at this reply of Ovid; and fearing he
should not be able to be the Master of himself, if the Converse continued any
longer, he made a proposition to them, to go and take a walk in a pleasant
Garden he had lately made. The Isle of Thalassia was not so populous, as many
others, wherewith the Egean Sea is enricht: yet it was not wholly destitute of
necessaries for the support of humane life. The neighborhood of Lesbos did
furnish it with all sorts of skilful Artificers, and Hortensius, had employed
them, to charm the tedious hours of his Exile: his house, though Countrybuilt,
was uniform and regular, and many artificial Walks, formed with an elaborate
curisioty, which encompassed it, seemed to correct the natural wildeness of the
situation.

Whilst Hortensius was entertaining the three Romans with the Beauty of his
little Thalassian Villa; Roselina, who naturally affected company, being
dissatisfied with their long absence, made a proposal to her fair Companions to
go and surprise them, where they were. Junia expressed a coyness at the motion,
for fear it might blemish her modesty. But Roselina calling her a formal
impertinent, and telling her she would take upon her self the boldness of the
Visit, took the Daughter of Lepidus in one hand, and Adiamante in the other,
and drew them after her toward Hortensius his Garden. He was then busy in
showing his friends some rare Simples, which an Arab, who past by Thalassia,
had made him a present of. These Plants grew within a private square; and the
Servants of Hortensius, who went to advertise their Master of the Ladies
arrival, forgot to look there for him: they hastily run over all the Walks
examined each corner of a Grove of Fir-trees, wherein they all centered; and
believing that Hortensius was gone out at another door, which opened toward
the Lake, they came and gave this imaginary information to the three Ladies;
they were not much concerned at it, for they had found an employment, to
divertise themselves in the place, where they were; which was the Room where
Ovid was lodged: he had forgot to shut a little Cabinet, which stood upon the
Table; and their curiosity invited them, to take an Inventory of what was in
it: The first thing they laid their hands upon, was a Picture of Julia, wherein
she was Pourtrated under the Figure of Venus. A little Love god was presenting
a great number of Hearts to her; and the Goddess was weaving Chains with the
Tresses of her Hair, to captive them; some Links whereof, which seemed by their
color to be borrowed from that fair Venus, served instead of a Ribon, to hang a
rich Carkanet of Hearts at, which were set within a sparkling Case of
Carbuncles; round the Borders whereof, a glorious Devise was engraven. Many
Letters of different Characters were in the same Drawer with this Picture,
Roselina opened one, and read it. When I could not comprehend, how there could
be a division in your Adorations and your Desires, I was ignorant of the
intention of those unusual Sacrifices: I thought you had only offered to my
sincere Passion a slight one of roving Thoughts, which like wandering Pilgrims,
made every Saint the object of their devotion, and wherein each common Goddess,
might claim a share as well as Sulpicia; which fluttering abroad into every
place upon the wings of Levity, or Complaisance, are rather Antidotes against
Love, than a sovereign Cordial for it. But I must now confess, I have committed
an injustice both against your transports and my own charms. Offer up your
adorations daily to the Princess; charm her with your tender and delicate
discourses; dedicate the raptures of your Muse to her Shrine, and still make
love to Sulpicia, in the manner you have begun; I shall not impeach the
division you make in your addresses, of infidelity; for I have so firm an
assurance of your integrity, that I persuade my self Julia will have the
greatest cause to complain of it.

See here an incomparable Epistle, said Roselina, bursting forth into a loud
laughter, to entertain a Lady, whose Stars should destine her to love Ovid. I
have some Verses here too, cried Junia, which will not be improper for the
entertainment you speak of: Roselina cast her eyes upon them, and found the
following Stanza. Dull constancy I hate, which cools our fires,
And only blunts the edge of brisk desires;
Love does to friendship soon degenerate,
When custom once its pleasures does rebate.
My frolic love, which glories still to be
The Ape of Natures Wise Inconstancy,
That with such rich variety does grace
Of Beauty-spots, each Seasons altered face,
Does love with it to change her own. The Rose
Her beauty does each day reveal and close;
Th'enamell'd Fields each year spring, and decay;
Leaves drop in Autumn, and revive in May;
Choice Beauties, like the Clouds, do fleet away.
What would my Love not give the gods t'inspire
It with immortal, but no constant fire?


I do not understand the Latin Tongue so well, said Adiamante, to explicate
word by word the Verses, which are fallen to my share; but interpreting them,
according to what I am capable to comprehend of the sense, I judge them to be a
counter-charm against those you have already read; Junia received them from the
hands of Adiamante, and found them thus expressed. Would you reclaim my wandering
Heart? Learn here
A way to keep in the out-lying Deer.
Love me without self-interest, or art,
Love me, like some innocent striplings heart:
Which loves, 'cause it in love delight does take,
And only loves to love, for lovings sake
What can You more, or Love, require of me,
To make me love with faithful constancy?
But oh! Corinna, you a Woman are,
And though a Woman, All-divine, I fear,
You so much kindness never will have for mine,
As home the wandering Pilgrim to confine.


This is an admirable piece of Courtship of Ovid to our Sex, said Roselina,
when Junia had read out the Verses, to impute all his own crimes to us, and not
to be satisfied only to betray us, unless he likewise rendered us guilty of his
own treasons. Is not this kind of injustice, replied Junia, common to all men?
They love by fancy, and change through levity. When they have made us the
subject of their inconstancy, and perceive that our just indignation looks with
a scornful eye of a regardless insensibility upon their treacheries, they
presently slander it with the title of levity, or infidelity; and seem to
accuse us for plucking some laurels from their triumphs, when we gain so
glorious a conquest over our selves, as not to deplore our misfortunes. And as
if it were too little for us to be despised, to inhance their vanity, the
Ingrates envy us even the slight satisfaction of concealing from the Public,
the effects of their inhumanity. It cannot be denied, said Roselina, casting up
her eyes to Heaven, that this wicked kind of creature, Man, is an enemy to our
repose; but such as they are, we have a natural inclination, to wish them
better, than they deserve. Experience has many Ages labored in vain to infuse
wisdom into us; the Examples of so many Women trepan'd, proves no caution to
us, not to expose our weakness to the like danger; and he that should bring us
all to our Affidavits, would find, that we had rather run the hazard, of being
deceived ten times over in our lives, than to be debarred from the converse of
those Infidels. Whilst Junia and Roselina were discoursing, Adiamante was
busy in examining all the Avenues of the Cabinet: she found there Verses of
different measures, and characters; and an Elegy, which she laid aside, because
she could not understand it; she also encountered with a noted Song, and
amongst all this, some fragments of that famous piece, entitled, The Goddess
of Hearts, which Ovid mentioned in his own History. Roselina's eye was upon
Adiamante, when she opened the Papers, and taking that, out of her hand,
wherein those fragments were contained, she found, it began in this manner. One
day of the Spring so pleasant, so fair,
When Love all in smiles aray'd, did repair
The face of Nature with new life, and taught
The amorous winds a gentle Lovers Note;
The god perceiving that the single care
To charm Mankind, a task was too severe
And weighty for his Mother, did resolve --


Go on, said Junia, seeing Roselina make a stop at that place: so excellent a
beginning, inflames me with an impatience to hear the conclusion. The
conclusion shall be what you please, replied Roselina smiling, the Author has
allowed you the liberty of adding what conclusion, you think fitting, to it.
Junia would not be convinced, but by her own eyes, of what her companion told
her, and taking the Paper from her, with some difficulty picked out the
following Verses, disorderly scattered, betwixt the razed, and blotted lines.
Severe Philosophy did heretofore
Oppose her rigid Maxims against my Power;
The itch of Science did mine quite expel,
And made all hearts against my Laws rebel.
In an old Stoics breast in vain I strove
T'imprint the character of tender Love;
In vain I strained my utmost diligence,
To captivate his Reason to his Sense;
Which Reason still out-braving all my power,
Fresh courage to the half vanquished did restore;
And from my own attacks advantage take,
And vanquishers did of the vanquished make.
My Mother then had all her practice loss'd,
Laws, Science, Arts, and Politics engrossed
All Vows, and Worship to my Altars due,
And after them the chief of Mortals drew.
But new those days, blessed be the Fates, are gone,
And Royal sloth does re-ascend her Throne;
The Ignorant assume the Stoics place,
And now the World's no more, what once it was.


Junia could collect but these few Verses out of her blur'd and scribled
Papers, when they heard a noise in the Hall near them, which made them judge,
that the Romans were returned from their Walk: They hastily placed all things
again in the same order, as they had found them, in the Cabinet; and all
advancing together to meet Hortensius, and his Friends, Roselina briskly taxed
them for the little respect they had shown, in leaving them all that day to
themselves. Their company was diminished by the retreat of the no less jealous,
than amorous Lentulus, whose absence was not displeasing to Ovid. He spoke to
the Ladies a thousand delicate and ingenious things upon the Prerogatives of
Necessity. If the Daughter of Lepidus, said he, were now in Rome in that
splendour and luster, wherewith the Empire of the Universe beheld not long ago
her glorious Family invested, and that Roselina and her fair Cozen were now
with their beauty illustrating another part of the World, which, we are not
ignorant, paid not long since a due homage to their glorious Merit, the Exiles
of the Thalassian Island, would not be regarded, as capable to afford them any
diversion; Junia's would be, to see her Father distribute Crowns; and provide
Governors for the third part of the Universe: And Roselina would take delight,
to see her Charms captivate the heart of one of the greatest Princes of the
World. I know not what Roselina thinks of what you say, replied Junia, but as
to my self, the satisfaction of enjoying the company of the famous Ovid, seems
to merit a preference before all those splendid diversions, wherewith you would
flatter my vanity. I never had yet any experience, what pleasure the dignity of
Lepidus could afford me; I came not into the World, till after he had made his
retreat out of it; nor was I ever acquainted with the ancient splendour of our
Family, but by the loud report the World gives of it. But with what regard
soever I consider the luster of it, there is nothing in it, that offers it self
to my Ambition, which I should not be ready to sacrifice to the satisfaction, I
find in your converse.

Oh! Madam, said Ovid, now I perceive my company is not so agreeable to you, as
you declare; if it were, you would not be so prodigal in scattering those
flowers upon me, which with their flatteries have sealed up my lips; I dare no
longer regard you, no longer discourse you; the too meritorious expressions,
you have pronounced in my favor, have involved me in a confusion, which must
render me a Mute for ever in your presence. I will be her Avoucher, replied
Roselina interrupting him, that no expression of hers, has scattered a flattery
upon you; and that the desire to see you, has not of late usurped the last
place in her ambition; and I can testify, that one of the chiefest regrets;
which invaded her, at the fall of her illustrious house, took its birth from
the impossibility she conceived, of ever seeing the renowned Ovid, but at the
Court of Caesar. Ovid was surpised at this testimony of Roselina; he
remembered, that he had heard almost the same words, at the private Colloquy, he
had not long before been a stolen witness to; but he attributed them to the
daughter of Herennius, though they might as well suit with that of Lepidus.
They were both of Roman extraction; both had cause to deplore the ruin of a
Noble Family, and both might have had an opportunity of seeing Ovid in Rome,
had not the fatal destiny of their Parents expelled them, and all their glories
out of the remotest Territories of its Dominions.

What you relate, Madam, said he to Roselina does not surprise me with its
Novelty; a certain Familiar Genius, which always prompts me with intelligence
relating to my destiny, informed me not many days since, that a beautiful
Person did honor me with some good will, who never saw me, but did with
impatience desire to see me; and testified a regret, very consonant to those,
you have expressed: But if my officious inteligencer has given me a faithful
account, this good effect of my Stars does not make its point toward Junia.
The Familiar you speak of, replied Junia smiling, has had his Memory charged
with such variety of Historical Remarks, since he came to your service, that it
is no wonder, if he has confounded the circumstances of some of them.
Princesses, Lady-Favorites, Senators daughters, Courtezans, and Rural Beauties,
have had the honor (and often too) in their turns, to be the objects of your
gallantry. How can the little Genius then, who Registers all your happy
Adventures, keep an exact account, think you, in a Mass of such confusions?
Whilst Ovid and the Ladies were diverting themselves with such like
gallantries, Hortensius was giving Orders to his Family for the entertainment
of his Noble Guests, who did his little Villa so much honor; and Tisienus was
busy in perusing some of Homer's Odes, which he found upon the Table. Out
curious Searchers of Ovid's Cabinet, had replac'd what they had taken out of
it, and shut it again with so much haste and confusion, that one of the Papers,
which they had read, was left sticking half in, half out, betwixt the shutters.
Tisienus, by accident, cast his eye upon it, and without being perceived by the
company, drew it quite out. It was folded up like a Letter, and Tisienus knew
the Cabinet belonged to Ovid, as having seen it at his first landing in the
hand of one of his Slaves. He imagined, it was a Letter from Terentia, but it
had no superscription; which is the most usual way of writing a Billet Doux.
Tisienus thought he had encountered now a fair occasion of exercising those
resentments, he had long fomented against Mecoenas. He hastily pocketed the
Paper, with a resolution to examine it in private; and had scarce disposed of
it out of sight, when Hortensius came into the room; he had prepared a
Collation, as noble, as either the straitness of the place or the time could
allow, which he had ordered to be served up in a Gallery, adjoining to Ovid's
chamber, whither he invited the Ladies.

This Gallery was adorned with many excellent pieces, which represented the
memorable Gests of the most Renowned Grecian Heroes; you might there behold the
triumph of Ulysses over Ajax, upon the dispute of Achilles's Arms. That
exultancy of joy, which attends a triumphant success, was lively expressed in
the haughty mien of Ulysses; Ajax, on the contrary, bore all the marks of a
furious despair, which wildly stared out at the wide casements of his rolling
eyes. His cheeks were swol'n big with rage, his brows (...) clouded, as it
were, with a sullen Mist, his eyes sparkling, and unfetled: and at a distant
prospect in the same table, you might see him spend his revengeful fury upon a
poor tame sheep; whose innocence the ingenious Pencil had so lively expressed,
that you would have thought, you had heard her in a mournful accent implore
your succor, whilst the butcherly Ajax tearing her bowels out of her body, did
barbarously revenge upon this guiltless Animal, an outrage, it had never
committed. Consider, I pray, these illustrious Heroes said Ovid, whom Antiquity
has commended to us, for no less than illustrious Deitles. The refusal of a
dead Man's Arms, an adverse success of a combat, a slight check of fortune, a
small contradiction, deprived them at once both of judgment and sense; and made
them convert the points of their Swords upon their own breasts; which they
should have turned upon their Enemies. I must confess, that the titles of
Divinity, were pure has'd good cheap in those days; and that the Demigods in
the Fable were very happy, they entered the World before us; for few of them, I
suppose, would have received from us the honors, our Forefathers so liberally
entailed upon them. See here a Man, said Tisienus, pointing to the Picture of
Cymon, who, in what Age soever he had lived, would have attracted to himself
the admiration of it. His bravery, his magnificence, and his virtue, was the
wonder of all the precedent. And do you seriously believe, said Ovid,
interrupting him in an ironical tone, that this virtue, this bravery, this
magnificence, was such in effect, as Histories report it. Those, who chronicled
the actions of these Heroes, were their own Countrymen; and the glory of their
Country, was inseparably annexed to that of the Hero, they would blazon; And
the relation of their Jests was rather, an exercise of wit and eloquence, than
a sincere and faithful Narration. But if we would take a clear prospect of
things, let us consider, what Greece was; it was divided into 10 or 12
Monarchies, and 5 or 6 Republics. The taking of a Town had amongst them the
reputation of the conquest of a Kingdom; And a Man that was so brave, as to
march half a score Miles, to invade the Territory of his Neighbor; and by
surprise, or force, sacked a small Hamlet or Village, had presently the honor
of a triumph and title of Conqueror, given him. The same Hyperboles did often
likewise elevate their virtue to that admired height, you speak of. Epuminondus
was impeached before the Senate of Thebes, for giving the Government of
Myoenas, contrary to the express commands of the Republic, to young Calist
benes his Favorite; and yet he was esteemed a Person of the greatest virtue
amongst the Grecians. The Spartan Laws, which purchased such a reputation to
Lycurgus, contain more Precepts, relating to the ease and convenience of humane
life, than the Libertines of Rome did ever practice. The chiefest care of the
Spartans, was to make their Republic populous; and if a feeble and decrepid
husband found himself overmatch'd in a young and sprightly wife, he was obliged
to provide a brisk Gallant for her, and own all the children of so excellent a
commerce for legitimate, and of his own blood. You make us new Laws for Sparta,
cried Tisienus, this pernicious Maxim, was never yet established in any
civilized Nation. What I have told you, replied Ovid, with a serious
countenance, is a real truth; and the only inducement for me to believe, that
the first Lacedaemonians might with some justice pretend to the title of the
most wise and judicious Nation of the World. The Collation was brought in just
as Ovid had pronounced these last words. If you will take my Advice, said
Hortensius, as he was placing the Ladies, let us hearken no longer to this
eloquent Sophister, he will impose a new sense upon the best established Laws;
and I know not whether he will not find out a way, ere it belong, by his subtle
chemistry, to extract the principle of a secret Passion, out of the
indifferency, I profess. Ovid reserved till another time, the liberty of making
an Answer to his Friend; and seating himself next to Roselina, he applied
himself, during the repast, to take his measures from the regards of that fair
one, and Junia, to discover, which of the two, was the Person, that had those
concealed inclinations for him.

The End of the First Part.
THE ILLUSTRIOUS EXILES. The Second Part.
TIsienus, with impatience, attended the end of the Collation, that he might
have the freedom to read the Letter, he had drawn out of Ovid's Cabinet, which
caused him to steal privately away from the Company; and going forth at the
door, which opened toward the Lake, he pulled the Letter out of his Pocket,
and fixed his eye upon it with a curiosity, suitable to his resentments against
Mecoenas: But he was strangely surpised, when he beheld the hand and character
of Sulpicia; he ragd, he rubbed his eyes as if there had been a Cloud, or thick
Mist, before them; he read, and read over again this terrible Letter, before he
could be convinced of the truth of what he saw: but he found it one, still as
constant, as cruel. This Letter was the same, which Roselina had read some
hours before; and there was not a line, or scarce a word in it, which did not
bring, or confirm, to the unfortunate Tisienus, the most unpleasing News his
Stars could send him; that distinction of Ovid's desires, and adorations, did
aggravate the crime of Sulpicia. Oh! infamous Strumpet, cried Tisienus,
transported to the highest rage, no other Amor will satisfy her, than that
she robs another of! Ovid has not seduced her by any finery, or stratagem; but
has engaged her to be a second to his Treason, without disguising the least
circumstance from her. From this Reflection, passing to that of the Argument,
he had so lately held with the Paramour of his Wife, that malicious joy
represented it self to his imagination, which he thought Ovid might conceive,
when he heard him speak those things of Mecoenas, which he might have applied
to himself; especially, when he expressed such a confidence of the virtue of
Sulpicia, before a person, who was able to have produced convincing proofs to
the contrary. The Ironical Repartees, wherewith Ovid retorted the Raileries
Tisienus had made upon Mecoenas, recurr'd word by word to his Memory. He shall
dye, said he, that infamous Instrument of my dishonor, shall dye. Lentulus, who
not long before had absented himself from the Company, in Hortensius's Garden,
happened to walk, to divert his Melancholy, near the place, where Tisienus did
form his fatal Resolutions; he heard the sentence, he had pronounced; he knew
his voice, and fetching a tour about a small plat of bushes, which was betwixt
them, Who is that, said he, to Tisienus, whom you have condemned to dye? Have
you any Enemies in this Island? Or have you received any News lately, which
gives you hopes, you may shortly have the satisfaction of exercising your
Revenge, upon those you have in Rome? I was Musing, said Tisienus, (all in a
confusion,) upon a place of Homer's Iliads, and recollecting in my fancy, the
words, which he makes Menelaus speak, when Paris ravished Helena from him, the
force of my imagination caused me to break forth aloud into some of those
expressions. The Misfortune of Menelaus, replied Lentulus with a smile, ought
to have made a strong impression upon your fancy, since it has made so great an
alteration in your countenance, I believe it is rather a prosecution, of what
you so lately delivered to us, upon the destiny of Mecoenas; you are sensible
of the dishonor of abused Husbands. The enraged Tisienus finding these
expressions gave a fresh alarm to his disgrace, and not being able to stand
his ground to receive a second, left Lentulus abruptly; and directing his hasty
steps toward his his own house, made such a precipitate speed in his walk,
that Lentulus thought himself not obliged to follow him. His sudden departure
struck him with admiration, he could not apprehend the cause of it; he knew
Tisienus had not been present at the recital, Ovid had made of his
Love-adventures: whereupon he took a resolution to go and re-visit Hortensius,
to inform himself if any thing had happened in his absence, which had caused
this disorder in Tisienus; but he was prevented by one of his servants, who
sought him, and brought him some news, which caused him to return home in
haste; it came seasonably to favor Ovid's designs. He led Roselina, who with
her Companions was taking a walk toward the Firr-tree Grove, and after he had
discovered to her the passage, he had been a private Witness to, at his first
landing in Thalassia, the Adventure in the Labyrinth, and many other remarkable
Encounters, she was concerned in, he endeavored to persuade her, that he had,
the first Moment he saw her, entertained a passion for her, not inferior to
that, which he believed she had allowed a place to in her breast for him,
before ever she saw him.

Roselina was faithful as well to her Lover, as her Friend; and had no design
to advantage herself by this Error of Ovid, but only as far as it might give
her an innocent diversion. Methinks, said she, you have reason to be satisfied
with the hopeful progress, your Merit has already made; you have not been here
above five or six days, and you are not ignorant, that there are those, who
caress you not in the meanest of their thoughts; you have written Love Verses,
which you are assured, have been read; and if it may oblige you, you may
perhaps assure your self too, that those, who have read them, have taken
pleasure in reading them, and could wish, that they contained as much
Sincerity, as Eloquence. What can your desires aspire to more? you must allow
time to perfect the rest. Time, replied Ovid, can claim no title to any
Adventure, but where a heart is to be besieged by the slow Approaches of long
services, and dull constancy; but when mutual sympathy has already made the
breach, and levelled all obstacles, the first Moment, that Lovers see each
other, ought to be the last of all diffidence and scrupulosity.

How? said Roselina, Do you think it then a matter of so slight a consequence,
to wave all scruples in favor of a Lover, of Ovid's temper? The History of
whose Life, is nothing but a contexture of Love Galantries; whose heart has
been a Rover even from the Scepter, to the Sheep-crook. What caution, or
security, would you give a Lady, that she should not be put into the Catalogue
with Sulpicia, Virginia, Terentia, Julia, and many more. Oh! Madam, cried the
brave Roman, I shall ask no more, whether it be your self, or Junia, who honors
me with the glory of some good wishes; you could not have been so well versed
in the whole course of my life, had you not had a curiosity to be instructed in
it; and I may with some justice presume, that this curiosity is the Herald, to
blazon that disguised Passion, which I am assured a Lady of Thalassia had for
me, before she knew me. Whereupon being fully convinced that Roselina was the
Party, of whom he was affected, he spoke a thousand tender and passionate
things, to obtain of her a private Interview. Love, is not capable of
expressing it self but by halves, said he, before Witnesses, grant mine, I
beseech you, that liberty it stands in need of, to make its entire declaration;
my transports shall give you the caution, you demand; which will express
themselves with such ardor, that it would be an injustice to you, to demand a
farther security. It is either Fortune or Inconstancy, which you ought to
impute the multiplicity of my Intrigues too: I never had had but one in the
whole series of my life, if I had obeyed the natural inclinations of my heart;
Pardon those few extravagant courses, which necessity forced it to take, and
you shall not find it has been guilty of being common; it is the same it was,
when the first Princess of the Universe did not disdain the humble Sacrifices,
it daily offered to her Divinity; And I hope, that because it has been so much
consecrated to Love, you will not allow it the less esteem in your thoughts;
since it will prove the glory of your Beauty, to triumph over such multitudes
of others.

Junia, who accompanied by Adiamante, and led by Hortensius, followed Roselina
at a little distance, was something concerned at the long converse, her Friend
held with Ovid. Do you think, said she to Roselina, that the Destinies have
sent Ovid into this Island, for your conversation only? Can you pretend to any
Prerogative over him, more than others? And do you think it a piece of justice,
to ingross him wholly to your self, and allow us no share in him?

You must pardon the fault, replied Roselina, if the Rules of Equity are
forgotten, when Ovid is present; but I shall return to my Devoir, said she,
making a stop, as soon as I am admonished of it; and I here resign to you this
noble Person, more complacent, and more agreeable, than I received him. These
last words did strongly confirm the presumptive hopes of our Illustrious Exile;
he repeated them more than once, in his fancy; and could allow them no other
interpretation, but what did flatter his desires; and finding Roselina most
infinitely amiable, he perceived, that the raptures her presence inspired him
with, began insensibly to deface out of his Memory all the vanishing Idea's of
the Court of Augustus. The confidence, which Lentulus had testified to him in
acquainting him with his Engagements with Herennia, did sometimes intrude a
small scruple amongst his pleasing transports: But, besides that your Amorists
by profession are not very scrupulous in intrenching upon the borders of
friendship, Ovid was not unfurnished with reasons, to authorize his
proceedings. He knew, a Lady in Thalassia had a passion for him, before he knew
Lentulus had one for Roselina; it was no design in himself, but the
capriciousness of his Stars, which had rendered him his Rival; if his
reputation had acquired him a Mistress, could he prevent it? Was there any
obligation lay upon him, to sacrifice this Mistress, to the confidence of a
Friend, since he had never endeavored to force out of his Mouth the secret of
his Love? And ought he to refuse this glorious Present Fortune now makes him,
because Lentulus is guilty of an indiscretion? This reasoning having imbroil'd
the fancy of Ovid most part of the night, and at last calmed those storms,
(which he concluded a virtue out of season had raised) he resolved to bend all
his endeavors to the accomplishing his desires. He had observed, that from the
Gallery, where the Collation was held the night before, there was a fair
descent by a pair of stony Stairs down into the terrass Walk in the Garden:
This he judged was the most compendious and most commodious passage to
Roselina's Lodgings; and with this intention he came out of his Chamber; when
passing through the same Gallery, he perceived Hortensius, with his hands
crossed over his breast, with large and hasty steps measuring the length of it.
Is it you, Hortensius, said Ovid, who walk at so large a rate? I had thought
that your solitude, and this manner of walking, had not agreed with the
indifferency you profess. Ha! my dear Ovid, replied Hortensius, with a voice
quite altered from its usual tone, I am plunged into the deepest Abyss of
Despair: you believe, doubtless, with all the World, that by a principle of
indifferency, I refused from the hand of Caesar the Wife, he had designed me. I
believed indeed, replied Ovid, that either having an aversion for the person of
Aurelia, or against Marriage in general, you had preferred your liberty before
all the Advantages, which were proposed to you. This Maxim of Independency is
commendable amongst the ancient Stoics, but amongst us Modern Romans is a
perfect Fanaticism. If you had had any pre-engagements, to which the offers of
Caesar were either repugnant, or destructive, the consideration of your
fidelity might perhaps fix a moderate censure upon your proceedings; but that
without any other cause, but out of a mere capricio of fancy, you should reject
such considerable Advantages; attract the indignation of Caesar by your
refusals, abandon your Native Soil, to inhabit Rocks and Deserts, is that,
which with all your Friends, I must impute to you as a Problem of unanswerable
folly; and that, which I should be glad, you were able to justify to the
World. I am able to justify it most assuredly, replied Hortensius, and with
more facility to a person, who is not insensible of the effects of Love, than
to any other. Give Attention then to a Secret, which is more really a Secret,
than that you have confided to me. I have a most sincere kindness for you, and
I find my grief too weighty, to neglect an occasion to discharge a part of it,
into the bosom of the best of my Friends.

THE HISTORY OF Hortensius.
THE Mother of the great Julius, whose Niece Aurelia is, and whose Name she
bears, was descended, as without doubt you have heard, of the Race of the
Hortensiuses. This Alliance did allow me a familiarity with Aurelia from my
infancy: And whereas this familiarity has been censured by some, to have been
the Mother of that Antipathy, which the World judges is ingrafted in my nature
against the person of Aurelia, it has on the contrary proved the ground of a
most immovable and a most violent passion. I may presume to publish it,
without the fear of a displeasure. Aurelia expressed a tender respect, and
confidence toward me; and I assured my self, that her Relations would embrace
my honorable Suit; but my Love was of no vulgar stamp, and character: It
ambition'd to bind the heart of Aurelia to its faithful services, and her own
choice, rather than to the Laws of her Duty. My ready obedience did attend each
nod of her head, each motion of her person; which I disguised, under the notion
of a respect and diligence, our Alliance might challenge from me; but which
were really services, that claimed a near Alliance to Love. I found they were
understood in their right sense by Aurelia; And believing, that the happy
Moment to second them was arrived, I went to seek her with that intention; when
at my entrance into Lucullus's Garden, where I heard she was, I found some
Tablets dropped, which I knew belonged to her: I opened them with that impatient
curiosity, which every one has for the concerns of the person, they love, where
I found these Verses: Draw to the life the Love-blind god; his face,
His hair, his feature, lineaments, and grace;
Add to these Charms a fierce and noble air,
Than you will, the ingrate, I love, find present there.
Imagine how just hopes do my desires inflame;
Resign my reason then to those desires, I name;
Oppose to both a Soul as fierce, as cold,
And you will the mystery of my sighs unfold.


These Verses raised a tempest in my thoughts, though I knew no cause for it.
Aurelia commanded as great a liberty, as she pleased; her Mother had been dead
a long time, and she was under the tuition of an Aunt, a person of a sweet
disposition, who had an entire confidence in the virtue of her Niece. By this
her manner of living, Aurelia attracted to her all the youthful Gallantry of
the Court; but I could not perceive, that any of those, who visited her, did by
any particular services endeavor to oblige her esteem. She was neither of that
rank, nor merit, to create an indifferency in the object of her desires; in
fine, I could see no cause to make an application of those Verses to Aurelia:
yet notwithstanding they charged my thoughts with an unusual trouble and
perplexity, I sought her company, to dissipate it; and having in vain made a
diligent inquest in every place, where I hoped to find it, I was guided, at
length, by my roving thoughts, into that part of the Cypress Grove, which
borders upon the Labyrinth of Myrtles. I was scarce entered two or three paces
into one of the Walks, when I thought I heard the voice of Aurelia from an
Arbor not far distant from me; I gave a diligent attention: for there is no
Lover, who would not be desirous to rob his Mistress of a secret, if he could
do it so, as the Theft might not be discovered.

Those, who attribute such an unlimited power to Virtue, said Aurelia to
another person, are as ignorant of the effects of that, as of Love. Virtue is
capable to give a bridle to our passions, but not stifle them in their birth;
it has forced me to dissemble those sentiments, I caress for my Ingrate, but it
cannot effect, that this Ingrate should not be the most amiable of all Men;
that my eyes should not think him so, and that maugre his indifferency, he
should not be the only person in the Universe, which I am destined to love. Oh!
ye Gods, what shape of rage and jealousy did not this discourse transform me
into? I thought my life would have expired betwixt them; but bridling the
effects of both, that I might live to gain a perfect knowledge of all the
circumstances of my Misfortune, I heard a person, whom, by the sound of her
voice, I conjectured to be Helvidia, Mecoenas's Niece, make this Answer: Is it
possible that a person of so much reason and discretion, should suffer herself
to be charmed by the eye? Cepion is a person, I must confess, of a good
presence and mien, but the superficial parts of a Man, shall never ensnare my
heart; if I must surrender my liberty, it should be to a noble passion, and to
the languishing sighs and vows of a no less noble Lover, and not to his good
looks, or modish postures. Were he Master of all the beauties and charms, which
Painters with their luxuriant Pencils have bestowed upon Adonis; if he were not
passionate, humble, and faithful, I should regard those other exterior
varnishes, no more than that of a beautiful Picture; and all, which that
artificial Magic should be able to charm from the sense of my tenderest
affectation, would be at most but a favorable look, or smile. And what I have
hitherto indulged to the charms of Cepion, replied Aurelia, has been no more:
And so much they are able to command from all, that see him. I thought to have
allowed him no more, than what the most indifferent might grant him; but I
perceived, that the Idea's, which entered at the casements of my eyes, did
insensibly penetrate into the cabinet of my heart. I oftentimes imagined I saw
the figure of Cepion a long time present before my eyes, after they had lost
the noble Object: He was all day the business of my thoughts, all night the
labor of my fancy. I suffered these slight Preludium's to gather strength, by
reposing an overconfidence in those Maxims, you just now delivered: for how
could I suspect, my heart should be guilty of such a folly, as to have a
Passion for a Man, that had none for me? I believed with you, that a woman
endu'd with common sense, could never be capable of yielding up her Reason to
the Attacks of the Senses: But yet I did so; and though I perceived by what
Arts they betrayed me, yet I found it was not in my power to resist the effects
of their Treason. Oh! just Heavens! cried I out aloud, is it possible that this
should be Aurelia, who speaks what I hear, and that Hortensius should be so
unfortunate to hear, what she speaks? This Exclamation of mine, caused them to
come suddenly forth of the Arbor, where they were. I leave you to judge, what a
look Aurelia darted at me, when she saw her secret was discovered: Too curious,
and ill-advised Hortensius, said she, with an inflamed countenance, thou have,
against my consent, stolen from me the confession of a weakness, which I would
have concealed from the whole World: But, if thy looks do not deceive me, I
shall find a means to chastise thy indiscretion. I command thee never to set
foot more within my Apartment, and I shall take such caution to avoid thy
Encounter in places indifferent, that thou shall not often have the pleasure to
upbraid my blusher with the imbecility of my Actions. Having said this, she
flung away from me, and left me in a confusion, I am not able to express. I had
scarce recovered the first Fit of this Ecstasy, when I saw Cepion approach me;
we were very familiar, he came often to visit Aurelia, and it was my custom to
spend six or seven hours every day in her company. What makes Hortensius in
this solitary place and posture, said he to me? Is he musing upon his Amorous
Adventures? Does he solace his thoughts with the pleasure of some fortunate
Encounter? Or put them into Mourning, for the loss of his Mistress? I believe
Cepion had no other intention in his Railery, than to make it the Subject of a
youthful discourse; and that he knew not, how near it lanc'd me to the quick;
but presuming to fix such an interpretation upon his words, as I borrowed from
the circumstance of what had lately happened, it becomes you well, Cepion, said
I, to insult thus over my Misfortunes; hug your self with that fancy: But,
perhaps, you may be defective in some Article of your conceited felicity, if
thinking to rob me of the heart of Aurelia, you shall not long enjoy the
satisfaction of glorying in my disgrace! I? cried Cepion, I rob you of the
heart of Aurelia? No, said I, in a rage, you do not rob me of it; for she
bestows it as a free gift upon you, and this is a conquest too inglorious to
boast of.

The conquest, replied Cepion something coldly, would be too glorious for
Cepion; and I must avow, that Aurelia is capable to charm the whole World: but
yet avouch too, that the heart of Cepion is incapable to receive the
impression, which the Merit of Aurelia, has power to dilate through the
Universe. The charms of that incomparable beauty, would require a heart,
pregnant with fidelity and constancy; desires, which can acknowledge no other
Deity, but herself, for their object, and many other perfections of an
accomplished Lover, which my Genius was never endu'd with: when I love, I love
only for my self; and the Passion, I entertain for Ladies, may be more properly
called a youthful diversion, than a real Love.

I am not so credulous, said I, interrupting him, to take for granted, what you
affirm. You act a subtle part, under the disguise of the indifferent one,
whilst I am assured, that Aurelia complains of your ingratitude; and that the
excess of her love, or jealousy, presents you to her eyes in the shape of that
ungrateful one she accuses: But it is not possible you should be so, toward a
person of her Merit, and that you should not love her, that loves you. You
surprise me with Wonder, said Cepion smiling, to see you take so much pains to
persuade me I love Aurelia, which you ought to take to dissuade me from the
thoughts of it, if I had so much presumption, as to entertain any to that
effect. This remark of his, began a little to recall me to my self; I was
sensible, that I was guilty of an Act of high imprudence, in endeavoring thus
to convince my Rival of his good fortune. I suddenly pretended business with
young Paulus Aemilius, who crossed the end of the Walk, we were in; and being
much dissatisfied with my Mistress, Cepion, and my self, I hastily retired home
to my house.

Though I ever regarded with an eye of scorn and contempt the servile homage,
the greatest part of your Courtiers, pay to the Favorites of Princes, yet I
would not do the glory of the great Agrippa that injustice, as to rank those
offices, the Court of Augustus rendered him, in the same form. I saw that his
virtue purchased him his favor; and I endeavored, by all the services I was
capable of, to convince him, that I had a most real and candid esteem for his
Merits; and I am assured, he held me in the number of his most particular
Friends; he gave me a signal testimony of it, at that time, I mention: which
you are not a stranger to, though perhaps, you may be, to the circumstances. A
deep Melancholy had seized me, caused by the unprosperous success of my amorous
designs, and converted all the gaiety of my humor into a sullen chagrin, when
one day I was advertised, the Emperor commanded my presence; I yielded a ready
obedience to his commands. As soon as he saw me, he led me into his Closet; and
after he had extolled the Nobility of my Extraction, and the Merit of many
illustrious Heroes, it had presented to the Empire; I consider, said he, that
Fortune treats you, as she uses to treat persons of higher Virtue; she belies
you to be so rich in your own, that the thinks she should offer you an affront,
to make you a Present of any of her favors. I see many Families in Rome, which
ought to acknowledge an inferiosity to yours; whose Wealth or prosperous Suits,
have elevated them to the highest Dignities. I will not suffer this injustice
to insult longer over you. The Praetor, who held the Government of Egypt, is
lately dead, which I confer upon you, with the Praetorship for the first year.
I cast my self at the feet of Caesar, to render him thanks for a grace so
unexpected, and less merited by me. Hold, said Caesar, this is not the sole
one, Intend you; Princes are accountable to none but the gods, for their
Actions; though we see the best and the greatest stand in need of the suffrages
and affections of the meanest of their Subjects to support their Sovereignty.
There is not one of all my Followers, who can aspire with more justice than
your self to the employ I design you; but there are few amongst them who will
do my judgment that right as to assent to it; for every one is apt to think,
that what is not bestowed upon himself, is detracted from his merit.

But I will remove this stumbling Block out of their way, by coloring the
Present, I shall make you, with the title of Alliance. Aurelia is Niece to the
Mother of the Great Julius, my Father; and an obligation lies upon me, to make
a provision for her establishment; wherefore I bestow her upon you in Marriage;
render your thanks for both these favors to Agrippa; for he is the person who
has revived in my memory the character of the brave Race of the Hortensiuses.

Consider with your self, I beseech you, as well the trouble, as surprise, this
Proposal of Caesar brought to my already distracted thoughts: If he had
declared it but three or four days before, he had rendered me the most
fortunate person of the Universe: I passionately loved Aurelia; and this
passion was the first impression that Love ever stamped upon my heart. I was
ready to make my acknowledgements to the Emperor, and offer up at his feet all
the thanks so unexampled a Grace could challenge from me: but a second
consideration represented to my confused thoughts the violence I should impose
upon Aurelia, if being wholly pre-ingaged in the favor of my Rival, I should be
an envious Instrument in compelling her to receive me for her Husband. This
imagination raised a civil war in my breast; I could not resolve to owe a
Concern of so precious a value, to any other Orders, than those of Love. I told
the Emperor, that I could not tell with what resentment Aurelia would receive
the honor, his bounty was pleased to confer upon me; that I was sensible of its
just estimate; and that I should be prodigal both of my services, and my blood,
to render my self worthy of it; but withal, that if with the Government of
Egypt he should offer me the moity of his Empire, I should refuse it, rather
than hazard to force the inclinations of a Lady allied to the Blood of Caesar.

The Emperor commended as well my discretion, as modesty; and telling me he
would take upon himself the charge of obtaining Aurelia's consent to what he
desired, he left me, and went toward the Empresses Apartment. As I was coming
out of Caesar's Closet, I met Cepion at the door; and well, said he to me,
drawing me aside to a window, Are you yet of the opinion, that I am your Rival?
Know it is I, who this day surrenders the possession of Aurelia into your
hands. I waited last night upon Agrippa in his Chamber, when he declared to
diverse persons there present, the glorious fortune the Emperor had designed
you: I privately informed him of the condition, Caesar was obliged to add to
the rest of his favors, if he intended to complete your felicity: And is this a
service consistent with the designs of a Man, that had an intention to rob you
of the heart of your Mistress? All that you have done, answered I, and all that
Caesar is able to do, cannot assure me, but that you are yet my Rival: That
assurance is only lodged in the heart of Aurelia; and it is from thence, that I
must draw it; But since I shall not be capable to obtain her, without
committing a Rape upon her inclination, she shall remain the Mistress of Cepion
for ever, and Hortensius shall never be her Husband: you express a great
weakness, replied Cepion, in harboring thus an imagination, that Aurelia has
that kindness for me, which I could never yet perceive the least symptom of;
and whereof I do not desire a clearer evidence: for were it true, that she
should honor me with some good wishes, a necessity would enforce me to requite
them with an ungrateful insensibility: but though I glory in the expression, I
do not desire to purchase amongst Women, the Title of Cruel, or Ingrate. Repeal
this fanatical opinion, I conjure you, and believe, that there is no person in
the Court of Augustus, who shall make you a more sincere Congratulation upon
your glorious Marriage, than that you shall receive from Cepion.

A great Concourse of my friends, who came pay their Congratulations to me,
upon the report of those honors, Caesar had heapt upon me, interrupted our
longer Converse. He assured himself of the obedience of Aurelia, and discoursed
publicly of our Marriage before the Empress, and the Charge he had annexed to
it, as of a thing firmly ratified and concluded. I leave you to judge what a
distraction I was in, when I was forced on all sides to receive the Compliments
of Mars and Hymen: I was sensible of an obstacle that intercepted the way to my
felicity, which none of them had a jealousy of; which caused me to receive
them with that coldness, which drew admiration from all that knew me whilst
every one by way of a serious kind of raillery, told me, I was not as sensible
as I ought to be, of the Blessings Heaven had showred upon me. I was exposed to
this persecution all the rest of the day; and as I walked forth in the evening,
to disengage my self from so many troublesome Visitants, I met one of Aurelia's
Slaves, who came from her Lady to tell me, that she had some business with me,
and desired my company. I had never seen her since the day she had forbidden me
her house. I ran to present my self unto her with that confusion and haste, as
your fancy will easily comprehend. You have done this morning, said she to me,
as I approacht her, an act of the highest generosity, that ever man could yet
boast of: I am acquainted with all the circumstances of so glorious an action;
It is not sufficient to say a man loves, to convince the World that he does so;
Effects are more expressive than Words, and I do not doubt but that you have a
real passion for me; yet notwithstanding you have rejected the offers of
Caesar; taken into your compassionate consideration my pre-ingagements; and
renouncing the title another would have given you over my Heart, sacrificed
your most passionate desires to a generous despair, for fear of imposing a
violence upon my inclinations: Ha! Hortensius, what ought not my gratitude to
enterprise, to compensate thy generosity? I could quarrel with my Stars for
your sake, in being so unkind to give me such fatal inclinations. Lend me your
assistance to conquer them; redeem my heart out of the power of that Ingrate,
who detains it prisoner against my consent; you have a spacious field granted
you, to draw up all your forces in, to attack his unworthiness; compel my Soul
to do that through gratitude, which through the influence of my unfortunate
Stars it is not capable to do by inclination.

After diverse expressions to this effect, which I answered by submissive
regards, and deep sighs more sensibly than by words; we agreed, that to indulge
me time to induce her to that, which her goodness was then pleased to style her
duty, I should make it my request to Agrippa, to supplicate Caesar to allow me
a short space to consider the Proposals, he had made me. Agrippa was surpised
when he heard me; You do not seriously reflect upon what you say, replied
Agrippa: the Government of Egypt is the most considerable that Caesar has in
his power to dispose of; it is ambition'd by the most illustrious Pretenders
about the Court; and although the apprehensions of seeing it devolved into
other hands should not oblige you to press the Emperor to the execution of his
promise, yet the possession of Aurelia, should methinks, excite you to
prosecute all advantages, with a most restless impatience. The possession of
Aurelia, my Lord, said I, would not be the same to me, which perhaps it might
be to another. I must be excused if I declare no more to you at present; but
without examining, whether I have reason on my side or no, I humbly beg in the
name of that friendship you are pleased to honor me with, that you would
endeavor to retard for a while the effects of Caesar's generosity toward me.
Agrippa might with ease, satisfy my request; for news came that same day, that
the Praetor, who commanded in Egypt, was not dead; that he was past hopes of
recovery, and that his distemper was accompanied with symtomes, which were
judged to be mortal, but that he was yet alive.

I had now as much time, as Aurelia could hope for, to accomplish the cure, she
desired me to undertake. I left no stone unmoved to effect a work of such
importance; and Cepion seemed to second me with his faithful endeavors. He
uttered things in the presence of Aurelia, which touch me sometimes with real
resentments against his ingratitude. I thank Heaven, said he, one day,
discoursing upon the subject of the deaths of Antony and Cleopatra, that I was
not born to be commended to Posterity for one of those memorable examples: I am
incapable of that honor; and what would be a glorious fortune another, would
prove to me the greatest of misfortune. The Ladies are so fully convinced of
this truth in me, that they think it not worth their pains to level their Darts
at so impenetrable a Mark, as my Heart; and I am much obliged to them for their
discretion; for if any one of them should either out of inclination, or any
other motive, testify the least good will for me, I should fly her company, as
one would fly the encounter of his greatest Enemy.

These discourses did oftentimes produce their effect: The Curtain is drawn
from before my Eyes, said Aurelia to me, Cepion is not so worthy of my
affection, as his flattering appearances would falsely persuade me. I must aver,
for the credit of my own judgment, that there are few men in the World, in whom
the exterior Characters shine with a nobler luster than in his; but do you
observe the pride and audacity, which usurps a prerogative over all his other
qualifications. He has such a respect for himself, as begets in him a contempt
and dis-respect of all others. He looks as if he conceited no person but
himself were worthy of his own esteem. This self-love from his person, passes
to his Spirit and Wit; he is enamored of his own opinions; and esteems it a
point of honor to enter the Lists, and sustain them against Opponents; our Sex
is not thought worthy to have the liberty of offering an argument in its own
defense; the least condescension in favor of it, he accounts a blemish to his
high erudition, and thinks he should wound his reputation, to admit a Woman to
enterprise her verdict in any of his disputes. Ha! generous Hortensius, did I
owe you no other acknowledgements than for the cure you have effected upon
those contagious errors, wherewith that arrogant person had infected my
judgment, I should die deeply in your debt. Madam, said I, the best expedient
to complete the cure you mention, is to proscribe that Ingrate both from your
thoughts and lips; I believe you do not name him, but to accuse his
miscarriages; yet this is always to entertain him in your thoughts; and what
pretense soever it be, that revokes him to your memory, ought to be suspected
to have a tincture of love in it. That tincture, thanks to the gods, said
Aurelia, my Soul is now free from, and I blush to think it should ever have
received so ignoble an impression. I was enchanted without doubt, and the
Passion I had for a man who requited it with so little respect, or
complaisance, could not be but the effect of a magical operation.

Aurelia was not long fixed to this opinion; one obliging expression, one civil
regard of Cepion, would re-entangle her again as fast as ever in the snares of
her old Amor. Sometimes she would commend the noble part of his person:
sometimes the color and elegancy of his hair; when any one discourses before
her of any features or charms, which were remarkable in the face of another,
and had a resemblace of those in Cepion's; those graces, would she say to me,
with a sigh, can pretend in no other person in the World to those advantages,
they find in my Ingrate. Did you ever see a blew eye sparkle like his? Nature
has mixed in his complexion all her richest colors. The whiteness of his teeth,
makes Ivory it self look pale for envy; his mouth, though large, includes in
its circumference a thousand charms; and his mien breaths I know not what; so
gentile and noble, that it commands both respect and admiration, from all that
behold him.

This levity and constancy of humor, did more than half distract me; I resolved
a thousand times to make a private retreat out of Rome, and fly so far from the
noise of misfortunes, that I should never hear more the names of Cepion and
Aurelia. But at length my perseverance seemed to attract upon my sufferings
some compassion from Heaven; Aurelia solemnly protested to me, that she
perceived the hour was near at hand, wherein her distemper should receive a
perfect cure; and all her actions avoucht her expressions. She could see Cepion
without changing color; she testified no regard of any thing, he affected to
say to her. She scarce took notice he was in any place, where she was. I
believe this alteration in Aurelia produced the same effect in the Soul of my
Rival, as the like might do in the thoughts of most men; I observed that he
followed Aurelia with more assiduity and ardor than before; he was always
whispering some little secret in her ear, and I oftentimes discovered them
making to each other private signs of intelligence. This new intrigue involved
me in a new perplexity, and I could not conceal it from Aurelia. You do my
sincerity an injury, said she to me; I have ingenuously confessed to you all
the errors of my weakness; which you ought to believe I have long since
repealed, since you have my solemn protestation for it; Indulge a peace to your
troubled thoughts; Cepion shall never be the object of my love, his triumphs
have seen their most glorious days. Why then, Madam, said I, are there so many
visible marks daily given of a secret combination, to alarm my jealousy? That
which alarms your suspicion, replied Aurelia, ought to assure you of my
integrity; the hatred of that, which once one tenderly affected, is a kind of
destruction, which wears the Vizard Mask of a kindness. I will not suffer one
spark of that fire to harbor it self any longer in my heart; and Cepion is now
grown indifferent to me, to that degree, that I shall always place him in the
first rank of my Friends, and the last of my Lovers.

This kind of indifferency did not at all relish to the palate of my Love; I
conjured Aurelia to confine her disingagements within the beaten tract of
others; and not expose her self to those dangerous precipices, to the brink
whereof her nice distinctions must necessarily reduce her. She spoke many
passionate things to me, which in appearance ought to have convinced my
jealousy; but they could not calm it: I observed daily the familiar carriage
of her, and my Rival; but too much for my repose. As I was coming one night out
of Paulus Aemilius his house, when I had Supt, (which is seated, as you know,
in a place of little Concourse) and crossing a passage, which leads from the
Garden down to the River Tyber, I discovered by the Moonshine, the glimps of a
person, which seemed to me to wear the Liverty of Aurelia. I stopped to see how
he would dispose of himself; when presently I saw him go directy to a Man, who
about thirty paces from thence, stood waiting among some Trees; they went both
of them together from that place, and directed their course toward a private
door, which opened into Mecoenas his Gardens, and there went in. I had a
curiosity to be informed of their defign, which caused me to follow them. I had
scarce got into one of the Allies, which first offered it self to my silent
steps, when I thought I heard Cepion's Voice from the other side of a
Quicksethedge, next to me.

Did thou take good notice of the place where thou did leave her? said
he, Yes, my Lord, replied another man; she waits for you in the Arbor, at the
end of the great Terrass, which is covered over with those yellow Flowers which
came out of Spain. My dear Boy, said Cepion, what rewards do I not owe thy zeal
and fidelity? besides thy freedom, which I am assured I can beg of Aurelia, I
have nothing in the World that I think a recompense equal to this service, thou
have done me.

Cepion kept walking on, as he talked, and I kept at an even distance with him;
but stopped a little before I came to the end of the Walk, for fear of meeting
him; I saw him cross over a green square, and perceived distinctly from the
place where I stood, that it was the same person, I had seen before amongst the
trees, and that the Slave that followed him, belonged to Aurelia.

I am able to convince the World, that never man yet died of grief or
jealousy, since I survived that fatal sight. Shaking and trembling I crept
along under the shelter of a Pomegranatehedge, that bordered one side of the
Terrass, which my Rival ascended; and stealing softly round the Arbor the Slave
had described, I applied my ear to that part of it, which was thickest shaded,
with the over-hanging leaves and curling flowers. Dispense with me, my dear
Ovid, from relating to you what I then heard, I am distracted with rage and
jealousy, as often as I think upon this abhorred encounter. I was resolved to
interrupt the felicity of this too happy Rival, and had in my fury washed away
the stains of the affront, he offered my love, with his Blood; but my Sword
being entangled in some of the boughs, forced me to make some noise to
disengage it; which struck a sudden terror into the fortunate Lovers. The Lady
committed her hasty flight to the dark shades; and Cepion leaping off from the
Terrass into the Walk under it, conveyed himself away with such speed, that it
was impossible for me to retrieve him amongst those intricate Meanders. My
greedy eye made a strict search after my unfaithful one, to charge her
treachery with my just reproaches; but all I could recover of her was a glimps
at a great distance, as she ran into the house, with her Slave at her heels. I
went to the door to wait for her coming forth, with a resolution to impeach her
of her Treason; but she returned not that night to her own Lodgings; and I was
informed by her Coachman, who drove home her Chariot, that she intended to
lodge with Heluidia.

You are a Master in the Art of Love, my dear Ovid, and do doubtless
comprehend, what the most significant expressions, would be too dull a Pencil
to depaint to you. I past the whole night in measuring the length of my Chamber
over and over with my large paces; and next morning Agrippa did me the honor to
give me a visit. I know not what more, said he, approaching me, to allege to
Caesar, for the farther retardment of his Commands. Our Praetor is now
infallibly dead; and last night Aurelia advertised the Emperor by Terentia,
that his designs and commands in your favor, were entirely conformable to her
own desires. Do you tell me, my Lord, said I, interterrupting his discourse,
that Aurelia has assured the Emperor, she gives her free consent to our
Marriage? Yes certainly, said Agrippa; and does likewise press the
accomplishment of it with all the earnestness, her modesty can dispense with. I
am much obliged to her, answered I, for so generous a complaisance; but she may
honor some other with it, if she pleases; for Aurelia shall never be the Wife
of Hortensius. You are not, I fear, in your right understanding, replied
Agrippa, astonished at my repartee, What can you desire in a a Woman, which you
cannot find in Aurelia? She is full of Youth, Beauty, Wit, and allied to
Coesar, who presents her to you with his own hand, and for a Portion, the most
eminent Charge in the whole Empire. The Emperor may Portion her with the whole
Empire it self, if he pleases, said I, but Hortensius shall never share any
part in his Bounty.

Heavens! What can I allege in your justification, replied Agrippa, when the
Emperor shall justly resent this unexampled contempt of his most gracious
favors? I will tell him, said I, that I am resolved never to marry; that I have
a natural antipathy against the Sex; and that nothing ought to be more free to
a Man than the resignation of his liberty. You ought to have declared so much
before, said Agrippa, displeased with my discourse, and not to expose a
Cosin-German of the Great Julius to the public scandal of an open repulse.
This manner of proceeding is not capable of any excuse; your friends will all
disown your interests, if you do not speedily return to your self; and do that
with a ready complaisance, which you cannot refuse to do, without drawing upon
your self, together with an inevitable ruin, the indignation of an incensed
Emperor. I was furnished, but with too many and too convincing reasons, which I
might have offered in my own defense, but a too just respect for that
ungrateful one; for whom I ever had, and still retain an honorable Passion,
hindered me from publishing her infamy. She thought perhaps to put this
consideration to the extremity of the Test; or whether it were that she
imagined it was not in my power to withdraw it, from the object, it had been so
long settled upon, or that being really ignorant of the true cause of my
resentments, she was desirous to clap a specious Mask over the visage of her
foul faced Intrigue, she counterfeited a most extreme grief, for the repulse, I
had given her solemn declarations. She sent me Letters, to confute that
Capricio of mine, as she termed it, sugared over with expressions, as would
certainly have seduced me, had it been possible for artifice to have done it. I
was transported beyond all patience at this last testimony of her treachery;
and I think I should scarce have commanded the impetuosity of my rage, had I
had an opportunity to have vented it; but Caesar, discovering nothing in my
proceedings, but what bore the character of Arrogance and Ingratitude, sent a
party of his Guards to me, with a Commission to Convoy me out of Italy, and an
express command likewise to forbid me to return, till he was pleased to recall
me.

You are now acquainted with the secret of that Adventure, which with so much
injustice, has fixed upon me the title of Indifferent. But, my dear Ovid, see
the capriciousness of my destiny: the Image of Aurelia is scarce yet defaced
out of my Soul; rage and contempt ought to have banished it out of all her
dominion, the very instant I discovered her Treasons; but a heart condemned by
heaven to a rigorous fate of constancy, is deaf to all admonitions, and
insensible of all advantages, which are offered for its disingagement. I must
avouch, to the shame of my judgment, that I am not yet possessed with a due
resentment of Aureliaes ingratitude; I conserve neither a Love, nor an esteem
for her; but that despite, which now usurps the place of both, is a greater
Tyrant to my repose, than those ever were: And could you imagine what object
malicious fortune should now present to this despite? Cepion, that very
Cepion, who is the Author of all my misfortunes, and from whom I have derived
so many fatal injuries, is at this hour in the Isle of Thalassia.

You tell me a wonder, said Ovid, What design has invited him to visit this
inhumane Climate? I know not, replied Hortensius, but he landed yesterday in
the evening; and lodged last night at Lentulus his quarters; I fancied I saw
Cepion afar off walking with him, as I returned from waiting upon Ladies to
their Lodgings; but the little probability of such a truth lessening the credit
of my eyes at such a distance, I could allow none to so strange a Vision.
Whereupon I sent one of my Servants to be informed of the reality of it, who
affirms that which my eyes did make a doubt of; Cepion is in this Island, and I
must either be forced to endure the sight of a person I hate above all the
World, or desert a Solitude, which I begin to take delight in, and have
expended too much cost and time in cultivating it, to leave it without a
sensible regret.

As Hortensius was speaking this, he espied Lentulus at the other end of the
Galery, and with him his Rival, whose sight he so much abhorred. Hortensius
could not Master the first motions of his horror; he owed a respect to the
place, which something reflected upon the person, who was in his own house; and
never did man more religiously maintain the Laws of hospitality, or the devoirs
of civility; but at this time, being incapable of observing either, he hastily
rushed into Ovid's Chamber, and shut the door after him. Lentulus had a
particular kindness for Cepion, from whom he had received an important advice,
which nearly concerned his safety; and this sole motive had brought him into
Thalassia. Lentulus was touched to the Soul, to see in what manner he was
treated by Hortensius, What frenzy has invaded your friend? said he to Ovid:
Is he subject to these distempers? Or is it our fight, that has brought them
upon him?

Cepion is able to resolve your doubt, replied Ovid, smiling upon Lentulus: he
of the three is the person, whom this proceeding, I presume, does least
surprise. I swear to you, said Cepion, I am no less surpised at it, than
either of you can be. Hortensius has been formerly of an opinion, that a
certain person expressed too great a kindness for me in a circumstance he was not
capable to digest: I thought I had not omitted any thing to undeceive him of
his error: But he has since testified so scornful a contempt for the Lady, who
was the subject of that contest, that though he thought himself not obliged to
credit my proceedings, yet his own mutability in deserting his Mistress, ought
to have dissipated those clouds of jealousy, which hung so long over his head.
You relate to us nothing but false appearances, said Ovid; he that would
satisfy his credulity with them, would conclude Hortensius were in a fault;
you could not prevent any persons having a kindness for you; you did not
endeavor to improve that kindness; nay you contributed all that lay in your
power to extinguish it. But Cepion, but the Moonlight Adventure in the Garden
of Mecoenas; the Assignation in the Arbor at the end of the Great Terrass, pray
tell us, does it deserve in your opinion the thanks, or embraces of Hortensius?
Cepion stood mute for a while at this reproach of Ovid; then suddenly lifting
up his hands and eyes to Heaven; Oh! ye just gods, cried he out, What is this,
I hear? How? said he, fixing his eyes intentively upon Ovid; Is Hortensius
acquainted with the Encounter of the Grand Terrass? So well, replied Ovid, that
he was even an ear-witness to it. It was he who made that noise, and gave you
the Alarm, that forced you to leap over the Terrass; and it was that assurance
of your felicity, which caused him to judge it would not be any discretion in
him, to disturb it, by marrying the person, who was proposed to him.

With that Cepion walked toward the door, whereat he had seen Hortensius enter.
Grant me the liberty, I beseech you, said he, to confute the most unjust
opinion that ever suspicion yet harbor'd in her jealous Brain. Aurelia's virtue
is unblemisht with the crimes with which you charge it; she affects you most
passionately; and supports all your reproaches with a goodness, that merits
your highest adorations.

Ovid wisely imagined that Hortensius would be desirous to convince Cepion of
an error, or be convinced by him of his own; and judging that Lentulus would be
a sufficient Umpire in the case, he silently stole from them, and slipped
undiscovered out at the door, which descends into the Garden. He was scarce out
of the house when a young Slave, who waited on Roselina, came from his Mistress
to enquire for him. Lentulus spied the Boy, at the entrance of a door, which
Hortensius his Servants had opened. to look into the Room for Ovid. He run to
him, to ask him his business. I have brought a Note from Roselina, said the
Slave, to a Roman, who lodges here. Give it me, said Lentulus, and I will
deliver it to Ovid. The Boy knowing that Lentulus was a particular friend of
his Mistress, made no difficulty to give him the Ticket he brought. Lentulus
walked a little aside, that the Slave might not see him open it, and with an
earnest curiosity casting his eyes upon it, he found these expressions. Your
Thalassian Mistress is resolved to grant you the private interview, you begged
of her. Fail not to render your self this night at the same Wilderness where
you writ the Verses, you know of; all things shall be so disposed, that you
shall enjoy your desired satisfaction without disturbance.

Herennia did not declare her self in the Billet to be the Lover, it spoke of;
but jealousy would not suffer Lentulus to doubt it could be any other. He saw
her, as she came out of the Wilderness, which the Ticket made mention of; and
found her reading something, which he judged to be the Verses, it specified;
and she her self had told him, that what she was reading, did treat of a
Love-intrigue.

He is now fully convinced, that Herennia is not only unfaithful, but that Ovid
too is the secret Rival, he seeks after. Whereupon he resolves to render
himself at the appointed Rendezvous, instead of the new Lover; and after he had
returned an answer to the Slave, by one of Hortensius's Servants, That Ovid
would not fail to obey the orders which were sent him, he went forth in a
furious rage, and left Cepion and Aureliaes Lover the liberty to entertain each
other without Witnesses, or constraint. The amorous Ovid had nothing less in
his thoughts, than what was projecting against him. He was ignorant of the
Rape, Tisienus had committed upon the Letter of Sulpicia; he knew not what a
Monster was hatching in the jealous breast of Lentulus, and thinking upon
nothing but the charms of Roselina, and the pleasant Intrigue he was like to be
embarkt in, he sacrificed to this Divinity all his designs and adorations. He
found not his fair Goddess at her own Temple, and was told by her Servants,
that she was gone forth to take the Air in the Wood, which bordered upon: the
shore. He run thither with all the speed, the Wings of his desires could carry
him, that he might not loose the opportunity of Lentulus his absence. He
searched all the beaten tracts, nor left he those unvisited, which were least
frequented, but could not retrieve the fair Game: He hunted back again upon the
foil; and despairing at last to gain a view of it, he was ready to return to
Roselinaes Lodgings, to see whether she were to come back thither, or no; when
several loud cries gave his astonished ears the alarm from the neighboring
shore. He run with a precipitate haste to the place, from whence he thought
those cries were sent; where he saw a young Lady of exquisite Beauty, struggling
by violence to disengage her self from a man in whose Arms she was detained an
unwilling prisoner; who, having perforce gained her liberty, came running to
Ovid for succor: he interposed himself immediately betwixt the Lady, and the
man that pursued her, and catching him by the Arm; Whatever you are, said he to
him, who offer this unmanly violence to this young Lady; you have made choice
of an ill place to execute your foul designs in. This Island is inhabited by
many noble Heroes, who have an entire veneration for this fair Sex; and will
all sacrifice their lives at their feet, before any one of them should suffer
the least injury

The unknown employed no other language than a profound sigh, to return an
answer to Ovid's discourse, and sinking down upon the Sands, gave cause to the
Roman to judge, both by the paleness of his countenance, and the tracts of
blood, which in diverse places distained his clothes, that he had received some
dangerous wound. Whereupon Ovid changed his design from the opposing, to the
relieving a person in so ill a condition. He ran toward the Sea for some Water
to refresh him; when a little farther he discovered two men more, engaged in a
mortal Combat, whereof one, before he could come to them, fell dead at the feet
of the other. He that remained victorious, appeared so charming to the eyes of
Ovid, that he considered him as something more than Mortal. He retired a pace
or two backwards, and surveying him with admiration, he was going to express
the wonder of his thoughts in the best of his language; but the fierce unknown
would not allow him the time; and not so much as vouchsafing him a look, rudely
lanc'd himself forth in the pursuit of the fair Fugitive. Ovid thought himself
not obliged to interrupt his pious intent, to follow a Man of so little
civility; wherefore he continued on his course toward the Sea; where he found
a Shallop anchored on the shore, and in her a Man, who seemed to be her Pilot.
Ovid asked him, if he could not furnish him out of some of his Casks with a
little fresh Water, to relieve a person, who lay gasping for breath, at the
entrance of the next Wood. The Mariner gave him to understand by signs, that he
was both deaf and dumb; but by a quick ghess comprehended his demands, drew a
little Bottle out of his Pocket, filled it with water, and followed him to the
place, Ovid had endeavored by signs likewise to describe to him. They both
employed their utmost skill to recall the Soul back again of the breathless
Youth; which was fled from its ancient Harbor; but what Ovid at first thought
only to be a swooning Fit, proved in the end, a real Death.

The Mute made a horrid kind of bellowing and confused noise at the sight of so
dismal an object. Ovid pointed to the place likewise, where the other dead Man
lay, and leaving him to exercise his charity about their Corpse, was resolved to
gain some clearer evidence of so strange an Encounter: and pursuing the tract,
he had seen the unknown Lady take, he discovered her in the great Road, which
past thorough the midst of the Wood; and the strange Youth, whose excellent
Mien had surprised him so much before, upon his knees at her feet; who by the
signs, he saw him express at a distance, seemed to be an earnest Suitor to her
for her stay: But she seemed neither to be moved with his Charms, nor his
Entreaties, and angrily flinging out of his Arms, kept on her way upon the Road
she was in. Ovid by a cross cut gained the advantage of her speed, and overtook
her, just as her weariness forced her to fit down upon the ground, to ease her
delicate limbs. Forbear, sweet Stranger, said he to her, to afflict your self
in this manner; you are here in a Sanctuary of safety; and you shall find in
this Island four or five Romans, who will as freely lay down their lives, if an
honorable occasion shall call upon them, in your defense, as in their own; I am
very much obliged to your generosity, replied the Lady, in a kind of corrupt
Latin; I have no more Enemies, whose violence I fear; and though the
persecution I now sustain, invirons my Soul with greater horror, than that the
Heavens have so lately delivered me from, yet I do not think that it will
compel me to have recourse to the famous Arms of the Romans. No, Divine
Agaritha, (said the beautiful Youth following the Lady at a distance, who fled
from him) you need employ no other Arms, than your inflamed eyes, to destroy
the unfortunate Herennius. Ovid fixed his eyes intentively upon him, when he
heard him pronounce the name of Herennius; are you, said he, the Son of
Herennius, who followed Sertorius into Spain, at the time of Sylla's tyranny?
Yes, Sir, replied the Youth, I am the same, you mention. Do you know Lentulus,
said Ovid, who commanded the Roman Forces in the last Expedition against the
Getes? I have great reason to know the person, you name, answered Herennius,
since he may challenge not the least share in the first misfortunes of my life.
You are arrived in a place, where you have more friends perhaps, than you
imagine, replied Ovid; give me leave to be your Guide to a House not far
distant from hence, where I shall present you with a view of some persons,
whose sight, I suppose, may requite the pains you shall take in going to them.
He requested the fair Stranger, to give them the favor of her company too;
which she granted, Ovid lent her his hand to raise her from her humble Seat,
and to conduct her likewise toward the house of Hortensius: The brave
Herennius offered to take her by the other hand; but she rudely thrusting him
aside, How dare thou approach me Traitor? said she; aspire no more to the
honor of touching that hand, which I have given thee but too often for my
repose, and thy glory. Is it possible, Agaritha, replied Herennius, that so
many humble Petitions for a Pardon offered up, so many Tears shed at your feet,
so many times my Life hazarded in your service, and this day especially against
your most mortal Enemies, should not have the power to deface out of your
thoughts, the memory of a weakness, so often expiated by an unfeined
repentance? Is it a Crime unpardonable in a person of my age, to give ear or
credit to the flattering discourses of the first Princess of the Universe;
which to have entertained with scorn, would certainly have been judged an
unpardonable rudeness in me? I believed (though too soon) you were dead: and my
submission to the Charms of a Princess, who subjugates to her Laws all Hearts,
that dare approach her, cannot properly be termed an inconstancy, but, in the
worst sense; a too hasty oblivion only of your Death. Go perfidious wretch,
said the enraged fair One, interrupting him, excuse not thy levity in the
opinion of my death; the solemn protestations of thy Love, and the memory of
thy infinite misfortunes fortunes that treacherous Love has involved me in,
ought to have induced thee to examine strictly each particular of a report,
which ought so nearly to have concerned thee. But thou were pleased doubt of my
life, because it opposed an obstacle to thy new Amors: thou did fear my
reproaches would have alarmed thee, from which my death would have secured
thee; and thou did flatter thy self with the pleasing thoughts of that,
which thy inconstancy persuaded thee to hope for. The name of the first
Princess of the Universe, had raised a Contest betwixt a paleness and a blush
in Ovid's Face; he thought no person had any right to that Title, but the
Daughter of Augustus. He was about to ask Herennius, who that Princess was, he
spoke of; but the fear of rendering his curiosity too remarkable, caused him to
defer it to a fitter opportunity. Whilst Ovid was framing a thousand conceits
to himself in his suspicious fancy upon the Words of Herennius, and the young
Lover by an ingenious confession and submission excusing his error to his
incensed and irreconcilable Mistress; Hortensius received from the Mouth of
Cepion the Relation of a Mystery, which after the turbulent agitation of so
long a storm, brought a gentle calm to his thoughts.

THE RELATION OF Cepion.
YOU made a right judgment, said Cepion to Hortensius, my insensibility was
nothing but a dext'rous faint; but this faint had not for its object, the
person, you ascribed to it. I have loved Helvidia since the first hour, my Soul
was capable of an impression of love; and I got a particular friend of mine to
sound the intentions of Mecoenas concerning the disposal of his Niece, whose
beauty began to eclipse the luster of the resplendent Terentia, who much
desired to see her cloistered up in a Convent of Vestals.

Helvidia is not designed for Marriage, (replied Mecoenas to my friend, who,
without naming me, endeavored to gain a clear intelligence of his resolves) and
whosoever shall go about to inspire her with contrary sentiments, shall not at
all oblige me. Your resolution surprises me, said my friend, I see all other
persons, whom their Princes favor has placed in an eminent Orb, aspire to
contract themselves alliances, whilst is in its Zenith, to support their
interest in the World, if it should happen to decline. My Maxims are opposite
to those of ordinary Favorites, replied Mecoenas, I am not ambitious to receive
for the full benefit of Caesar's favor toward me, the pleasure only of
flattering my self with the fancy of it: A Roman, who perhaps on terms of
equality would esteem himself honored by my alliance, will think he offers a
glorious Sacrifice to my favor, in demanding my Niece of me. I will not charge
my honor with so scrupulous a vanity, and that I may not render my self
suspected of an ambition or forecast, whereof my soul is incapable, I would
remove from the Court, or enclose within the grates of a vestal Cloister, all
such young Ladies as shall be under my protection.

This Declaration produced, in the heart of Helvidia, those effects in my
favor, which many years services might have despaired of meriting: It mutiny'd,
and thought it lawful to revolt against the tyranny which was imposed upon its
liberty; and as I am naturally bold, and ambitious of enterprizing
difficulties, that which rendered Helvidia propitious to my desires, made them
soar a pitch likewise above the highest flight of ordinary Lovers. Yet we
judged it a part of discretion, to conceal our Amor under the securest
disguise we could invent for it. Mecoenas's credit commanded a great power with
the Emperor, and he might have suppressed me by open force, had I attempted to
justle it. We agreed, the better to delude the Argus-ey'd. World, to make Love,
as I may say, by cross purposes: And then I began to affect that insensibility,
wherewith a long time Aurelia herself was deceived she was then a friend of
Helvidia, but not her confident: And Helvidia was used to say, that the
infallible way to preserve a secret from being betrayed, was always to be the
Mistress of it herself: I saw her oftener at Aurelia's apartment, than
Mecoenas's; and this private disguise I put upon my visits, allowed me the
liberty to make them with more frequency and security. I was much indebted at
that time to the generous proceedings of Aurelia; she was ignorant of the cause
that so often invited me to her Lodgings, and she is naturally of a sweet and
affable disposition; but I perceived, that this sweetness and this affability,
insensibly gave place to their opposite qualities. Helvidia perceived it, as
well as I; and without seeming to take a particular notice of it, she asked her
the cause. Can you ask me such a question, said Aurelia? Have you eyes, and do
not see, after what manner that young Insolent treats me? He seems to have made
choice of me for a Subject, to exercise all his incivilities on; he disdains to
give me his hand to lead me in public; he opposes all I say, or do; and it is
sufficient to cast him into a humor of contradiction, if I but open my mouth in
any place, where he is. Helvidia gave me information of the complaints were
framed against me; but though I could not allow them to be just, yet I began to
carry my self with that respect toward Aurelia, as I was accustomed to do,
when she was best satisfied with my proceedings.

You must force your self, said Helvidia, in a circumstance of this importance,
to act a part contrary to your inclination. We must make use of the house of
Aurelia, for the place of our interviews: affect a complaisance to all her
desires, speak all the obliging things to her, a real Amor could dictate. Oh!
Madam, said I, interrupting her, you do not well consider what you command me;
it so ill becomes a person of honor to act the Lover, when he is nothing less,
that I know not how to express the disorder of my thoughts to you; and you are
sensible, that the same disorder in the thoughts of another, generally derives
its source from the Motions of the heart; and all reasonable creatures, have
not always the reason to be the Masters of them. Helvidia laughed at my
suspicions, and gave me a little check for the presumption I had of my own
Merits. My Friend, said she, is too prudent to love first; and that which I
interpreted a disorder in the heart, was only a point of nicety, which she
conjured me to wave, and satisfy her request; I obeyed it, and endeavored to
make the will of Aurelia, the square of all my actions. I was diligent in
paying all those little services to her commands, which can bear the
construction of nothing but ordinary civilities toward a person, one has not a
passion for; but do assume another character, when Love enters on the Theater.
I applauded all she said, I often took occasion to extol her beauty. About
this time the Emperor took a progress to Tusculum, and as Terentia was always
the glorious Planet, which was fixed to the motion of the Court, Helvidia was
obliged to attend her. I discontinu'd my usual visits to Aurelia's apartment in
its absence; but one evening having the honor to conduct some young Ladies, and
Aurelia amongst them, to take the air on the pleasant banks of Tyber, they
began to reproach me with my pretended insensibility; and this railery was the
subject of the greatest part of our conversation. I took great pleasure in
acting the part of a faithful Lover, under the person of the indifferent; which
seemed to be a private sacrifice offered up to the shrine of my absent
Mistress; I perceived that Aurelia did often change color, and when I
presented her my hand to conduct her to her chariot, she seemed as if she had
taken no notice of my civility, and so in a regardless manner refused me hers:
But I judged it no policy to draw upon me the indignation of more than Aurelia,
at that time, for having unadvisedly declared before, that I suspected Aurelia
had had a kindness for me, I had been reviled by them, as a young Fellow puffed
up with vanity and self-conceit; I durst not discover my thoughts, but
endeavored to seem satisfied, that Aurelia had not really seen me, when I
offered her my hand. The Emperor returned to Rome the day after. Helvidia came
to visit Aurelia, as soon as she was disengaged from Terentia; she found her in
her Bed, and her voice so altered, that she judged her to be dangerously ill;
which put her into such a fright, that she was scarce able to ask her, what her
distemper was? The effect, said Aurelia, of the most malign influence, that
ever the Heavens produced. Ask me no more, for I will rather dye, than make a
larger confession of my Misfortunes. How? my Dear, replied Helvidia, can
Aurelia keep any secret from Helvidia? Can you offer so unkind an injury to our
friendship?

I deal with our friendship, said Aurelia, as I wish I could deal with my self;
would the Gods were pleased, that at the expense of my life, I could conceal
that from my self, which I refuse to reveal to you; let it suffice, that I am
the most unfortunate of Women. Helvidia could gain no other answer from her
that day, but one or two after she conjured her with such vehemence to confide
a secret to her, which so much perplexed her thoughts, that Aurelia suffered
her obstinacy to be conquered by it. You will doubtless accuse Helvidia of some
injustice, seeing with what earnestness she urged a freedom from Aurelia, which
she refused to practice herself; but she had violent presumptions of the truth,
and supposing them to be well grounded, they might authorize a small
dissimulation. Aurelia drew some Tablets out of her Pocket, and having studied
a little time to digest her conceit, she writ the Verses I shall here recite to
you.

Cepion began to repeat the same Verses, which Hortensius had found before in
the Gardens of Lucullus; but Hortensius interrupting him after two or three
words, I am as well acquainted with those Verses, as your self, said he, and I
think I have them still in my possession.

You have them not, said Cepion: Oh! would it had so pleased the Gods, that you
had kept them. Helvidia had a strong presumption, that I was the Ingrate, those
Verses decyphred; they gave a character of my person, such as it could not
merit; but the esteem, wherewith the goodness of Aurelia was pleased to honor
me, did doubtless render her too partial a Judge in my favor. She proposed a
thousand questions to Aurelia, to draw from her a clear confirmation of her
suspicions. Aurelia's amorous distractions had reduced her to that critical
minute, (so famed amongst Lovers) wherein the high swelling tide of Passion,
will not suffer the heart to keep any thing concealed within its center. She
made to her a sincere declaration of the Love she had for me, and in terms so
passionate, that the heart of Helvidia was transfixed with a tender compassion
of her sufferings. She gave me an account of their converse the same day, in a
Garden, where she was waiting upon the Empress, as she was taking the air, when
I was so happy to receive her hand; and as nothing can compare with the
sweetness of her nature, it is a great trouble to me, said she, to see this
poor Lady in that condition you have reduced her to: what she has told me, even
pierces my very Soul; and I conjure you, by that respect you protest you have
for me, to afford some relief to the afflictions she labors under. How? Madam,
said I, not a little surpised and startled, at her expression, are you weary
of my heart, and willing to turn it out of your service? Will you transfer to
Aurelia, the title and right you have acquired over it? I have no such
intention, replied Helvidia, your heart is, and ever shall be most precious to
Helvidia; but if without infringing my right to that heart, you could by some
small compliances flatter a little the passion of Aurelia, I assure you, you
would lay a sensible obligation upon me. Ha! Madam, said I, disturbed with the
thoughts of such an obligation, I have expressed already but too much of that
compliance, you would now again condemn me to. If from the first Moment, I was
sensible of the weakness of Aurelia, I had combated it with all my power,
whilst it was young, I had doubtless suppressed it; but your commands
compelled me to caress, and suffer it to gather strength; the services, your
orders enjoined me to render her, have given that encouragement to her
distempered fancy, that she doubted not, as you know, to express it under her
own hand. To violent diseases your Physicians are used to apply remedies of the
same nature. I think, I understand Aurelia perfectly well; she has a heart
susceptible of the tenderest impressions of an amorous Passion; she has
courage, and firmity of resolution; and if once the first has taken a full
possession of her Soul, it will be impossible to remove it; and therefore the
best expedient would be, to pluck it up, and crush it, before it has taken too
deep a root. Do not think upon so violent a course, said Helvidia; time will
cure Aurelia's distemper, without the help of so rough a Physician. She has
virtue; she understands, that from Caesar she must expect a husband; and I do
not desire you, to flatter her Passion out of any doubt I have, that she will
not be able to surmount it without your assistance; but because I apprehend,
the visible marks of your neglect do inflame and exasperate the wound, she has
unfortunately received. I would have you allow her virtue time to act according
to its own dictates, and owe the conquest to its self. I objected many things
more to Helvidia, to make her sensible of the danger, to which her compassion
exposed us, but all my remonstrances were to no effect: She carried me the next
day to Aurelia, and charged me with greater apprehensions of her danger, than I
had conceived before; she made a sign to me with her eye, to maintain that in
my discourse, which she thought convenient to advance in hers; and when she
perceived I was refractory to her commands, she testified, by the sudden
alteration of her countenance, a displeasure, which had almost congealed my
blood within my veins; and like a sullen cloud, totally eclipsed the usual
serenity of her smiling affability even to the very day, you had that long
conference with the Emperor. You may judge by what I tell you to day, that I
told you no untruth then, when I assured you, that I had employed my utmost
endeavors to invest you in the possession of Aurelia. I was so persecuted with
the importune compassion of Helvidia, that I could have given any thing that
was most dear to me in the world, besides herself, to have purchased a short
truce from it. It was from the Mouth of Helvidia, that your Mistress first
understood that act of generosity your expressed in her favor to the Emperor,
Helvidia being then with Terentia, when Caesar reported it to her. Oh! cruel
Gods! exclaimed Aurelia, in a dolorous Note (when the Niece of Mecoen^s
informed her of your proceedings) is it not enough to satiate the cruelty of my
destiny, that I am forced to love that, I ought to hate; but that I must
likewise be guilty of an inexpiable ingratitude toward that, I ought to love?
Oh! cruel Hortensius, (went she on, with a torrent of tears flowing from her
eyes) why art thou so unkind, to intrude such bitter resentments in amongst
those insupportable afflictions, which already overcharge me? These resentments
may not be unprofitable, replied Helvidia, if you would but a little consult
your reason, Hortensius is a person, in whom Merit and Love contend for the
nobler title; and if the generous resignation, he has made of his own desires
unto yours, has on his part protected you from a husband, opposite to the
inclinations of your own will, you will not be able to protect your self long
from one, whom another will shall impose upon them. Caesar is obliged to offer
a husband to the Cousin German of the great Julius, and it is not probable,
that he will cast his regards upon Cepion, to honor him with that alliance. The
charges and dignities, which he will annex to the possession of your person,
will require a Man of more experience to support their weight and luster, than
the Ingrate, you love, is capable of. Ought not the violence, you will be
forced sooner or later to impose upon your inclinations, to seem less cruel to
you on the part of a generous person, whose adorations you have often before
received at your feet, than on that of some proud morose stranger, you never
saw? Go on, my Dear, said, the languishing Aurelia to Helvidia, go on, and made
me understand what I owe to the generosity of Hortensius: I with scorn
entertained that Love, he has given me so many glorious proofs of; I forbid him
my house, and in the height of all these ill treats he has received from me, he
has refused to take a just revenge of my abuses: make me sensible what care and
regard he had of my honor, when I had so little for it my self. He might have
discovered to the Emperor, the passion I had for his Rival; he knew it, and my
carriage toward him, did not oblige him to conceal it, yet he never gave him
the least intimation of it.

Ovid came in, as Cepion was in this part of his Relation; See, said he to
Hortensius, presenting to him the two strangers, if I do not deserve the honor
of being sent forth upon all expeditions for discoveries? Have you ever seen a
nobler couple, than here I bring before you? Hortensius, with much impatience,
defir'd to hear the end of Cepion's discourse, and Ovid had not obliged him, by
coming to interrupt it: But as he was a person of the greatest civility in the
world to strangers, and those which were presented to him being of that
quality, as to attract his chiefest consideration, he received them with all
the demonstrations of a courteous welcome. You observe, and doubtless not
without admiration, said Ovid to Hortensius, addressing a Salute to the Brother
of Roselina, that this young unknown is a Masculine Beauty in our Sex: you need
but cast your eyes upon him, to confirm your remark; for the first fight of him
was like to have made me turn Idolater, and offer incense to an unknown Deity.
But your admiration will be greater, when I shall tell you, that it is not his
person only which ought to render him thus worthy of your consideration; you
behold in him that young Herennius, the apprehension of whose ignominy, caused
the fair Herennia to attempt so audacious an enterprise. Cepion presently knew
Herennius to be the same, whom Ovid spoke of, he gave him a thousand caresses;
and the three Romans thought it convenient to send for Lentulus, to take his
part in so fortunate an encounter. Hertensius ordered a Servant to go to him,
and to inquire privately likewise, if Roselina were at home. I shall be ashamed
to look that great General in the face, said Herennius to Cepion; the manner
whereby I reb'd him by my flight of a Prisoner, (whom the Laws of Mars had
consigned into his power, and his generosity accumulated with his favors)
carries with it the too just Marks of an ingratitude; which would inviron me
with shame and confusion, did not the cause of my offense plead its own excuse.
Behold there, Sir, said he, showing him the fair stranger, behold the Motive,
which summoned me from your Camp, to give my attendance in another place; my
first chains discharged me of your second; and I had a Master to whose commands
my liberty was engaged, before the fortune of War had captivated it to yours. I
must be forced to acknowledge before this company, said the Lady, interrupting
him, that thou have a great opinion of my discretion, or a very small one of
thy own, since thou do presume with such confidence to boast of the injuries
I have received from thee. Thou hopest perhaps that the presence of these
persons, whom I know all to be Romans, will impose a constraint upon my just
resentments, but when they know their character, as well as thou do, they
will conclude them to be too full of equity, to bear a Moderation. I will
speak, I will utter all that a just despite can prompt to the Soul of a Lover
unworthily betrayed; and violating the Laws of silence, as thou have done those
of honor and fidelity, I shall be more excusable, as a Grecian, in publishing
to the World the shame of Caesar, than thou, as a Roman by extraction, in
dishonoring the house of thy Emperor. These words were like so many fiery
darts, that carried flames of jealousy and distraction into the breast of
Ovid; his suspicions would indulge no quiet to his restless thoughts; I am
better read in Love, than you, said he to Herennius, (who was ready to reply to
the reproaches of the fair Greek;) you ought never to attempt to conquer the
rigor of your Mistress by a contentious dispute, we must allow all Women in
general the liberty of their smart Repartees, and to those, we love, a
prerogative in that nature, above those, who are indifferent to us. Give me
leave to give some instructions to the beauteous Agaritha, and do you second
them by a respectful silence, which perhaps may prove a better Orator in your
cause, than your tongue. In saying this, he took Agaritha's hand, and led her
up to a Terrass, which afforded a pleasant prospect to the Sea, hoping by some
curious questions to gain from her a discovery of the subject of her
indignation; but Herennius understanding from the two Romans, that the person
who had made that discourse to him, was the famous Ovid, he foliow'd him up to
the Terrass. You are a Judge too renowned in the case of Love-differences, said
he to him, not to be feared by the guilty; and therefore I cannot give my
consent, that my fair Enemy should preingage you in favor of her cause; but if
you must understand what the crimes are wherewith the charges, me, and whereof
in effect I am partly chargeable, I had rather make an ingenuous confession of
them my self, than suffer her to aggravate them in the recital. That which you
are now going to make, said Ovid, is too criminal a secret, I fear, to find a
favorable Judge. Sit you down upon that stony bench, (added he, in causing him
to sit) and make a sincere confession to us of all your faults, and perhaps we
may prove so fortunate Advocates for you to this fair one, as to obtain your
pardon; and your story will be the most agreeable diversion, we can pass the
time with, till the arrival of those persons, whose company we have sent to
beg, to honor yours. Herennius would not give them the trouble of an important
entreaty, and Hortensius thinking that his Relation would be soon interrupted
by the coming of Lentulus, was satisfied to defer the sequel of Cepion's till a
little longer time; the company being all placed upon the Terrass, the charming
Herennius began his discourse in this manner.

THE HISTORY OF Herennius and Agaritha.
THis illustrious Lady, said he, pointing to Agaritha, has honored the Isle of
Lesbos with her birth, and is descended in a direct masculine Line from the
first Princes of Greece. I learnt my exercises in the Capitol City of this
Island, where the Father of Agaritha made his ordinary residence. I saw
Agaritha, and as it is scarce possible to see her, and not love her, my
youthful heart without resistance yielded up its liberty to the first of her
regards. The Nobility of her descent borrows no support from the favors of
Fortune, which has endowed it but with small possessions, and this did
facilitate the Suit I made to her Parents for their consent. Our Marriage was
concluded, and my felicity was no longer to be deferred, than to the happy
Minute, I should be able to make good what I had proposed. I took one of
Agaritha's chief Relations along with me to the Frontiers of the Getes, where
the scattered relics of all that small wealth, the Misfortunes of our House had
left me, was deposited. I fell sick in this journey, but as I had proposed
nothing, but what truth could attest for me, the Parents of Agaritha thought
her so well bestowed upon me, that they employed all imaginable diligence to
hasten the consummation of my felicity. The weakness my sickness had left upon
me, would not permit me to return to Lesbos, as soon as the impatience of my
love desired; whereupon the Grecian, I had in my company, seeing the will of
the Gods themselves, had dispensed with my duty in so fatal an occasion,
conjured by my ardent entreaties, engaged his faith to me, to re-instate me in
the possession of my Mistress: she had been solemnly betrothed to me before;
and I on my part renewed to him all the most sacred assurances, I was in that
circumstance capable to make. Upon this intelligence, my Mistress did me the
honor to leave Lesbos, to come to the place where the Malice of my distemper
forced me to attend her. Her short Sea-Voyage was fortunate; I advanced, as
well as I was able to meet her, and hoped in a few days to join her; when I
understood that a Party of the Roman Army had surpised her, and carried her
away Prisoner amongst many others, on whom they impose the infamous title of
Slaves. I leave you to judge, what a relapse this news reduced me to. I sent to
the Captain of the Slaves, to petition him that Agaritha might be exposed to
ransom, and I would have redeemed her at the expense of all that Fortune had
left me in the world. But my Mistress was a treasure above a ransom; she was
designed for the Emperor, and a Convoy was ready to conduct her to Rome. This
barbarous inhumanity heightened my former distemper to a perfect frenzy. I
put my self in the head of some revolted Getes, and forgetting I was of Roman
blood, I achieved such honor against the Army, Lentulus commanded, that I
rendered the name of Roselin, (which I assumed, and was the name of my Uncle by
my Mothers side, I both famous, and redoubted to the Romans. Love and Revenge
inspiring me with courage, I out-braved temerity itself. I attempted to set the
Prisoners at liberty, they were hurrying away to Rome; in which audacious
enterprise, I was taken my self, and designed for one of those memorable
Examples by which Lentulus hoped to conquer the obstinacy of the rebellious
Getes. You have heard by what means I was delivered from that danger; and how
Lentulus, who is really endu'd with a brave Soul, vigorously embraced that
opportunity, to reduce those Opiniatres by the principles of a generous
Magnanimity. He restored to me the name of my Ancestors, to extinguish that of
a Gladiator out of my thoughts, which I was ready to be branded with. He
offered me Employs in his Army; and if I had been only a Rebel, I might have
been the inseparable companion of his fortune and glory; but I was a Lover, and
resolved to sacrifice a thousand Lives, had I been Master of them, or free
Agarithas from the ignominious chains of her slavery. I durst not impart my
design to Lentulus, who pretended a great respect for my sister; and I was
afraid, that the kindness he expressed to me, would have caused him to have
opposed a bar against my dangerous resolutions. Whereupon I privately deluded
the obliging care, Lentulus had of me, and stealing in disguise out of his
Camp, sometimes committing my flight to Sea, sometimes to Land, according to
the best conveniences I could meet with for speedy travel, I at length arrived
at the Suburbs of Rome, and had by my diligence prevented the slow Motions of
the Slaves, who were not yet come; nor suffered to take long Journies, for fear
of impairing their Beauty, and Complections, by the laborious toils of his
disorderly Travel. The name of Herennius was not yet defaced out of the memory
of true Romans, and I had Relations in Italy, who I hoped, would not disown
their own Blood; I besides reposed great confidence in the favor of Lentulus,
if I should have occasion to make use of it; and above all, I assured my self
of the Justice and Equity of Caesar. I entertained my self with these pleasing
fancies all the way betwixt Tusculum and Rome, which was the Road, by which the
Slaves were to make their triumphal Entry into the City; when I discovered
coming forth of the Suburbs thereof a rich and magnificent Chariot, with a
proud Guard attending it: I stopped to take a view of it, when a glorious young
Lady, who was seated in it, putting her Head by accident out of the door, on
the side that I was of, happened to cast her eye upon me from whence she did
not remove it in a good space; and then expressing a gesture of admiration, I
assure you, said she to another Lady, who was with her, that this is the
original of my excellent Piece, I value so much. At thse words she commanded,
the Chariot to stop, and making me a Sign to come to her, asked me who I was. I
am a Roman, Madam, said I, though fortune has made me and my Country long
Strangers to each other. What profession are you of? replied she. I ought to
profess the Honor of a Roman Knight, said I, but through some misfortunes, the
recital whereof would require too long an Audience; my profession at present is
that of a Knight really Errant, who fears he shall never arrive to a happy end
of his Adventures.

A Cavalier, who seemed to have the conduct of the party that convoyed her,
approached the Chariot with a low and respectful bow, and humbly entreated the
Lady who spoke to me, to consider, that he should incur the Emperors
displeasure, if he did not conduct her to Tusculum in good time; whereupon,
with an obliging bow of her head, taking as it were her leave of me, she
commanded her Coachman to drive on. I went to some Slaves, who run by the
Chariot side, to inform my self who the Lady was, that had discoursed with me.
Who is she? answered they, with looks expressing an admiration of my ignorance;
Do you not know the Emperors Daughter? you have all seen the Princess Julia;
you know what dazeling Rays she darts from her eyes into those of all such as
behold her; the complaisant sweetness of her carriage, and the mellifluous
Charms which with her Words flow from her Lips. What concern, said I to my
self, can the Daughter of Caesar, have with thee, a Passenger, whom she
accidentally meets upon a common Road? Why should she make a stop to talk to
thee? Why should she ask what Country or Profession thou were of? It was not
Julia certainly, thou did see, it was a Vision without doubt; and what thou
did take to be a real Encounter, was nothing but a deluding Dream. I
understood by mine Host where I lodged, that the Emperor had commanded the
Princess his Daughter to retire to Tusculum upon a difference, which she had
had with the Prince Marcellus, whom both himself and the whole Empire designed
for her Husband. And a few days after I was informed by common report, that the
same Prince had cast himself at Augustus his Feet, to obtain a repeal of those
Commands; and that the same day the Princess was to return to the Court. I had
a desire to see her make her entry, and out of an itch of vanity, or more
properly infidelity, which I have a thousand times since accused with an
unfeined grief and repentance, I took care to appear more splendid and
conspicuous than ordinary. As she alighted out of her Chariot, the Prince
Marcellus gave her his hand, to conduct her to her Chamber. I pressed amongst
others to see her; she again took notice of me, and made the like Sign to me,
as she had done before, upon the Road to Tusculum.

This excess of Civility in the first Princess of the Universe, and toward a
person of no Consideration, nor Note, struck me with an admiration, I am not
capable to express. I insinuated my self into the acquaintance of one of her
Attendants, who was a Kinsman of mine Host, and he promised me to admit me to
to the sight of the Princess, at the next convenient opportunity: and one day,
when she was walking by the River Tyber, with no other Company than her Maids
of Honor, he came and advertised me of it. I hastn'd thither with speed, and
used all my endeavors to render my self remarkable to her; which was not
difficult to be effected. Julia, as you know, has an action very airy and free,
and her eyes, like Harbingers to her Greatness, take up all places where she
is, for their entertainment: They had soon found me, and their Princess asked
me, if I were not the person, whom she had seen upon the way, as she was going
to Tusculum. Yes, Madam, said I, I am the same, who charmed with your Bounties
All-divine, would willingly sacrifice my despicable life to the just
acknowledgments, my meanness shall always be obliged to pay to them. Preserve
your life for some worthier occasion, replied the Princess, smiling upon me, I
am no lover of bloody Sacrifices, and it would be a great loss to the World,
that a person of your Mien and Composure, should be snatched out of it in the
flower of his Youth. She seemed to be sensibly touched with all the passionate
passages of my Relation, and interrupting me, as I was repeating that of my
Sisters bold Enterprise; I cannot applaud, said she, this Masculine Bravery in
Women; it is so just a Propriety of the other Sex, that methinks, it is always
an unnatural usurpation in ours, what pretense soever you color it with. But, I
cannot deny, but the action of Herennia has I know not what of heroic in it,
which infinitely pleases me; and I will serve you for your Sisters sake. Come
see me to morrow, added she, seeing the Prince Marcellus at a distance, who was
coming to wait upon her. I solemnly protest, and too often have I made this
solemn protestation to the jealous and revengeful Agaritha, that the
supernatural Graces of that Princess, did with their luster, dazzle and charm
all the faculties of my Soul. But I call the Divinity of Love to witness, who
is, and ever was, my most adored Deity, that all the time I mention, I never
had any other regard for this Princess, but as I hoped by her favor to arrive
at a means to obtain the liberty of Agaritha; but I oon had cause to believe,
that the Heavens envyed me the pleasure I took in the thoughts of that hopeful
design; for I was told at the Slave-Office, which I visited every hour of the
day and night, that those which were expected from the Getish Camp, were
Shipwrackt; and that so inconsiderable a number of them had escaped, that it
was not thought worth the trouble of sending them to Rome. I asked with symtoms
of a deathful despair in my countenance, whether a beautiful Grecian, named
Agaritha, were in the Catalogue of the living, of the dead. The names are not
yet known of the ^ne, nor the other, replied a person, who belonged to the
Office; but if that Agaritha, you mention, be handsome, as you say, she is
certainly perished. I thought this dismal News would have put a period to my
life; the conformation whereof a day or two after, had almost induced me to
employ my Sword to effect what my grief was too slow in executing. This fatal
accident had totally raised the character of Juliaes Charms out of my memory; I
had no other thoughts than of restoring to my Sister an unfortunate Brother,
who was now the sole support and Guardian of her Orphan Beauty, and I left my
melancholy quarters to seek a convenience for my journey, when passing through
the Piazza, which is before the Pantheon, I saw the Princess, who was then come
out of that Temple, walking under some Trees, which in pleasant Walks, are
ranged before it. She discovered me almost, as soon as I had her; and
commanding her Servants to call me unto her; What is the reason, said she, you
did not come to me, as I ordered you? Alas, Madam, answered I, with tears ready
to start out of my eyes, I have no more need of the protection, you did me the
honor to promise me; Agaritha, for whom alone I thought to have taken the
presumption to have begged it, is no longer in the World. Is it possible,
replied the Princess, that any body should be so much concerned for the death
of a person, they defign'd for a Wife? You have not had time to practice with
Agaritha one of those Intrigues, which gives Love that firmity of settlement in
the Soul of Lovers; you demanded her in Marriage upon the very first motions of
your Love; and obtained her upon the first of your demands, did you not, of her
Parents? Yes, Madam, said I, interrupting her, with more transport than
respect; but the injurious Heaven forbid the Banes of my felicity. That Is
nothing, said the Princess, you have not had sufficient proof, or knowledge of
her, to desire her possession with that vehemence and ardor, you pretend; Do
not leave Rome, for Heaven seemed to charge me with your protection and
conduct, when it offered you to my view upon the Road to Tusculum; we want not
fair Ladies here, to whom you may devote your self, without the consent or
displeasure of Hymen. But, Madam, said I, if I may dare to presume to be of an
opinion repugnant to yours, I should affirm, that you impose upon me the most
rigorous Law, that Man is capable of being bound to: For can a Lover be
confined to a destiny more severe, than an irrefragable despair, of ever
possessing his Mistress? You are dull of apprehension, said Julia, I wish you
nothing less, than a rigorous destiny; stay in Rome, I tell you; and if you
please, you may add your self to the number of diverse young Gentlemen, who
without the stipend of a mercenary Service, are entertained in my Family. I
embraced the offer, she made me, with all the ^arks of an humble joy and
respect; and the chiefest employ of those places, was to exhibit an obsequious
diligence and assidnity toward her person. The first day that I was to give my
attendance, I was struck with wonder to find in the Princesses Closet the
Portraiture of a Cupid, which I had procured to be drawn by an exquisite hand
at Lesbos, and delivered to my Mistresses. She observed my admiration; you know
this Piece, I see, said she to me; and I believed the first moment I saw you,
that you could not be a Stranger to it. I know it most assuredly, Madam, said
I, but cannot imagine how it should come to the honor of being in the place,
where I see it. If the person that placed it here, said a Lady, interrupting
our discourse (whom the Princess had a particular respect for, and I knew
afterward to be Sulpicia) had imagined it would have produced the effects it
has done, would have been better advised, than to have brought it hither. These
words died the Princess Cheeks with a scarlet blush, and casting an angry look
upon her, Must you always be talking of that Man? said she to her; are you not
satisfied, that he has occasioned a quarrel already? But you will have him as
well present as absent, create a new one betwixt us. Ha! my dear Princess,
replied Sulpicia, in a rallying tone, if that which I say to day, attracts your
displeasure upon me, it must be for some cause far different from that, which
would have attracted it some days ago. Who can forbear, went she on smiling, to
smile a little sometimes at the pleasant manner, whereby we see Love play with
the Policy of Lovers? This person of so eminent experience makes you a present
of a Picture of Love, to the end, says he, that the representation of the God
of Love, should preserve in your thoughts the memory of the Lover: And for this
cause he conjures you to cast your eyes often upon the Picture; and because you
have too often complied with his desires, you how grow quarrelsome with me. You
will never leave this idle raillery, said Julia, clapping her hand before
Sulpiciaes Mouth; let us talk no more neither of the effects it has produced,
nor the party that gave it us.

The Relation of Herennius was here interrupted by one of Ovid's Slaves, who
came running up the Terrass with a more than ordinary speed. Oh! ye good and
mighty gods, cried he out, I give you thanks, that the News is not true -- Of
what News talk you? said Ovid; and what makes you interrupt us in this rude
manner? Sir, replied the Slave, pardon me, for I am yet quite besides my self.
I went along close by the Seashore, to see if I could discover any Marks of a
Combat, which I was told, had been newly fought there; where I found Tisienus,
who, methoughts had something of dismal and horrid in his countenance; he knew
me to belong to you. Go boy, said he, and bury thy Masters body, who has now
received the just r ward of all his Crimes. I was not able for a while to stir
any limb I had, at the apprehension of these mournful words, and seeing
Tisienus make hastily away from me, after he had spoke them, I endeavored to
follow him, to gain a clearer understanding of them; but he went so fast, and
my surprise had so disarmed my legs of their strength, that I could not
possibly overtake him. Fortune guided me hither, where, thanks to Heaven, I
find, that Tisienus has only made a trial of my love to my Master. Hortensius
and Ovid looked one upon another at this Relation of the Slave; which included
more than one Mystery, but they could not on a sudden penetrate into the
consequence; for one of Hortensius his Servants came all in a fright, to tell
him, that Lentulus was newly murdered in one of the Walks of the Wilderness,
and carried home to his house. Cepion ran thither, and the rest of the Company
followed him; where they found Herennia, Adiamante, and Junia, at the foot of
the Stairs. The young Herennius knew his Sister by the light of the Torches,
which displayed a glorious day over all the house; he was agreeably surpised
at so much a desired, but little expected Encounter. He ran to her with open
Arms, and incircling her in his tender embraces: Herennia, said he, my dear
Sister, have I found you in this barbarous Island! Herennia was startled at the
action of her Brother, but coming to know him, and the name of Sister, which he
pronounced, confirming the report of her eyes, Ah! Herennius! Oh! my dear
Brother, said she, bedewing his Cheeks with her overflowing Tears, in what a
deplorable condition do you find me? Her redoubled fighs would not suffer her
to utter a word more. They all went up together to the Chamber of the wounded
Lentulus. He had then fortunately with him a very skilful Surgeon, whom he had
brought from the Getish Camp: This man with such good success employed his Art,
that in a short time he reduced him out of an (almost) mortal swound, into
which his great loss of blood had cast him. He searched a deep wound, which he
had a little above his Heart, and was judged by him to have been given with a
Poniard, Herennia assisted his labor with a sorrowful diligence, which reduced
her to a weakness almost equal, to that, of the expiring Lentulus; and thinking
that in the countenance of the Surgeon, she had discovered the wound to be
mortal, she gave a loud shreek, and was dropping in a swound into the Arms of
Adiamante. Lentulus turned his languishing eyes toward the place, from whence
the cry was sent; and seeing Herennia ready to drown her laboring Soul in a
torrent of her own tears; It is not to me, Madam, said he, with a feeble Voice,
that you sacrifice those precious tears, but to the despite of having been
disappointed of a more precious assignation. Herennia redoubled her cries at
this reproach of her Lover, and turning her self toward Junia, see, said she,
at how dear a rate I purchase your friendship. When I understood by the return
of my Slave, that the Ticket, I writ to Ovid, came to Lentulus his hand, I
apprehended some dismal effect of our folly. I sought after Lentulus all day,
to free him from the disquiet, I feared that Billet would beget in him: But
alas! I could not find him, till his fury had fore-stall'd my designed
prevention. But tell me, cruel one, said she, casting a tender regard upon her
wounded Lover, tell me, has the character of my Love left no impression in thy
Heart, able to balance this weak shadow of an infidelity? What have I done?
What have I said, since the first moment thou have known me, that should induce
thee to believe, that it is so easy for my heart to turn Traitor, and abjure
its first principles? Ovid, who as soon as he heard himself named, had advanced
toward them, to inform himself on what occasion his name was introduced into
the Scene, addressed his Suit to the disconsolate Herennia; but she turning her
head away on the other side, and thrusting him from her with her hand, retire
out of my sight, I beseech you, Ovid, said she; your presence does exasperate
my afflictions; ask Junia an account of what you desire to know.

Lentulus's Surgeon finding that these discourses disturbed that repose, which
was necessary for him, desir d those, that were engaged in them, to defer them
to a more seasonable opportunity. All on a sudden were silent, and withdrew
into another Chamber, where they resolved to spend the night, being unwilling
to remove farther from the brave Lentulus in the condition they saw him.

The end of the Second Part.
THE ILLUSTRIOUS EXILES. The Third Part.
IT was not only in Thalassia, where the famous Ovid had an influence over all
the great Concurrents, which ennobled that before inhospitable Climate; but the
Court of Augustus it self was governed by his Genius, and though an Exile, as
he was, and like a Planet shot from his glorious Orb, there were few actions of
importance exhibited upon that grand Theater, wherein Fortune did not assign
him one of the principal Parts.

The Emperor had for some days so totally dedicated his disquiet thoughts to
his resentments against his Daughter Julia, that he had not time to make any
serious reflection upon the Combat of Crassus and Ovid. He regarded it at
first, as the effect only of some private quarrel; but a more intense
consideration afterward representing to his memory the hour and place of that
nocturnal Encounter, persuaded him, that nothing but Love could have so ill
contrived the circumstances thereof.

These thoughts possessed him with a furious indignation; for he imagined, that
if Love obliged them both to draw their Swords, both were equally guilty of an
audacious presumption, in making love to the Daughter of their Emperor: And not
being able to digest the affront, a Subject should put upon him, in daring to
cross a design, he had formed in favor of Marcellus: he gave command that
Crassus should be secured, and all his Papers and Writings seized, and brought
to him: They gave him no information of what he thought to have found in them;
but they discovered some other things of an equal concernment to his repose.

Amongst a great many Papers of Love-verses, which Crassus had dedicated to
Terentia, he found some fragments of a Letter, wherein he read the following
Lines. Employ all your possible endeavors to cure your friend of his Passion;
The Heart of Terentia is fixed upon an object, from which no power is able to
remove it. I dare not commit his name, to the hazard of Paper; but let it
satisfy you, that though I do not declare him to be the party you suspect, it
is one than whom the Earth cannot present a worthier to her affection.

The Emperor was highly inflamed at the sight of these Lines; he could not
apply to himself the expression of a Lover, or worthy to be beloved: for his
Passion for Terentia was now no Secret; and it could not be said of him, that
he was not one of those Lovers, which might be suspected.

He went musing, and biting the Lip into one of the Gardens of his Palace,
whither he commanded Agrippa to follow him; and after some moments of a
silence, which seemed to bespeak an awful attention, Did you never love any
thing, Agrippa, said he; and is the indifference, you profess toward Women, as
sincere, as you pretend? Agrippa blushed, and willing to divert the discourse,
The care of the Universe, Sir, said he, employs your great thoughts too much,
to leave a place there to entertain such a curiosity: Judea and Capadocia
petition you for Kings; Armenia is dissatisfied with theirs; and we are
informed by the Parthian Ambassadors -- Let us refer the Affairs of the Empire
to another season, replied Caesar, interrupting him, Terentia has betrayed me.
Some young fellow or other, who brings no other Charms with him, than the
variety of a new Lover, has made this ungrateful One forget what she owes to
the Master of the World; which corrodes my Heart with mortal resentments; and
it is a second trouble to me to be destitute of a person, to whom I may
communicate them; and I could wish to find in Agrippa a Soul so sensible of the
Passion, his Emperor labors under, that he might judge him worthy of that
confidence, he is willing to repose in him I hope, Sir, replied Agrippa, that
it is not so absolutely necessary for Agrippa to be verst in all the Mysteries
of Love, that without those Maxims his Emperor cannot judge him worthy of any
confidence: But, Great Sir, grant me your permission to tell you, that you do
an injustice to the Wife of Mecoenas; that she never loved any person but
Caesar; and that all appearances opposite to her fidelity, are either
Chimera's, or Forgeries. Read this, said the Emperor, giving Agrippa the Paper,
which had so much embroiled his thoughts; and when you have perused it, tell
me, if I have done Terentia an injury in suspecting her fidelity.

The sight of it put Agrippa to the blush the second time, who standing a
while, as if he had been in suspense what to answer; but at last assuming
courage, I am entering perhaps into a way, Sir, said he, to hazard the total
ruin of that credit, you are pleased to honor me with: for the Hearts of
Sovereigns, are places so tender and delicate, that he that presumes to touch
them, incurs an emiment danger of his own head; but Agrippa will rather
renounce his life, than behold his Emperor involved in a perplexity, which in a
few syllables he is able to dissipate; I must therefore beg your pardon, Sir, a
second time, to tell you, that you unjustly suspect the loyalty of Terentia.
And that you may not doubt the reality of what I aver, I am the person whom
this Paper advises to cure himself of his Passion. You the person? said the
Emperor. Yes, Sir, replied Agrippa, I am the same person; And perhaps this
temerity may plead before your Greatness, its justification in a moments
discourse, if you shall be pleased not to disdain it an Audience; Which was of
too sensible a concern to Caesar to be deferred. Wherefore entering into a Grot
that was near him, he signified to Agrippa, that he could not too soon
dissipate the sullen Cloud, which hung over him; when Agrippa began his
discourse in this manner.

THE HISTORY OF Agrippa.
I Shall not, Sir, justify before you my Passion for the Wife of Mecoenas: he
is my friend; he merits the particular esteem of all whom he honors with his
friendship; and though nothing could render him worthy of it, but the favor,
wherewith you dignifie him, that alone ought to attract to him the respect and
veneration of the whole Empire: But, Sir, you are sensible your self of the
Charms of Terentia, you are not ignorant of the effects they produce, and how
much a Miracle it would be not to forget in her presence all considerations
that ought to balance the power of her Beauty.

Ovid first caused my Soul to take a particular cognizance of that, which it
had always endeavored to conceal from it self. We were one evening walkking by
the Tyber side, where Ovid produced a new Work of his composure, and was
reading it to me; when Terentia, who with diverse other Ladies, had made choice
likewise of her Walk on the same side, past by us.

Oh! that divine Creature, said Ovid, transfixt as it were with admiration,
those enchanting eyes, that sweet air, those tempting lips, that charming
countenance, in fine, that perfect contexture, and epitome of all Beauty. You
pay but half a Sacrifice to that Divinity, said I, interrupting him, you ought
to have spoken of the vivacity of her Wit, that ingenious and pleasant
raillery, wherewith she seasons the most serious Affairs; that elegance of
Speech, and that Eloquence, which without study, and sometimes her own
knowledge, flows from her lips, with that natural grace, that our greatest
Orators may gather from them the chiefest Flowers, which embellish their Art.
It is very pleasant methinks, said Ovid, smiling in my face, to see you add so
glorious a varnish to the first draught of my rude Pencil; and I have believed
a long time, that a person of the temper of Agrippa, could not every day
converse with the Wife of Mecoenas, and not resign to her Charms the greatest
part of his liberty. You let your suspicions fly too far at random, said I, I
am so sensible that Terentia is the Wife of Mecoenas, that I dare not be
sensible of any Charm in her, inconsistent with that quality. The same reason,
replied Ovid, which you oppose to your love of Terentia, would be the chiefest
motive to induce me to attempt it. Mecoenas is a person worthy of Love, he
married Terentia for Love, and he is most passionately enamored of her; And
these, upon a just balance, are the true dispositions, which a Man of Merit
ought to desire in a Mistress; and methinks a temptation should invade the
sacred Augustus himself, whose Soul is so susceptible of the impressions of
Love, to experience the pleasures of unthroning a Subject of Mecoenas his
Merit. Let us speak of Caesar, said I, interrupting his bold discourse, but
with that veneration we speak of the Gods, without all profane applications.
The inclinations we remark in him, agree so well with the characters of an
heroic virtue, that we ought to reverence them in him, as some of its noblest
Properties; but that which oftentimes in a Subject may pass for a blameless
action, in a Prince assumes another Character; and for the former to contain
himself within the bounds of security, he ought not to suffer his Tongue to
touch any action of his Sovereign, which it may profane by an irreverence of
expression.

Ovid had too much apprehension to prosecute a discourse any farther, which I
had given such a check to; and so for a while, we diverted it to another
subject, and ended our conversation for that day; but my thoughts remained so
full of those Idea's, his discourse had imprinted in them, that it was
impossible for me to banish them from thence. The great Merit of Mecoenas,
which had served till then for a Bridle to curb the exorbitancy of my desires,
did now begin to spur them on, and indulge them a loose Reine. I with
impatience expected the hour, wherein I might see Terentia, and having by
chance surpised her, as she was bestowing some Caresses upon her Husband, who
left her, and was going forth, to wait upon your Majesty; I grew so jealous,
that I could not forbear to begin a quarrel with her upon it.

You do not consider, with what you reproach me, said she, smiling upon me; A
Woman is so unfortunate, when she is forced to counterfeit a Love, she is not
really sensible of; that for her own interest, she ought to strain all the
powers of her Soul, to ingraft that real sensibility in it. Why counterfeit
Love, Madam, said I, wise Ladies exempt themselves from that trouble, and
confine the duty they owe their husbands, within the bounds of an honorable
complaisance. A complaisance! said Terentia, what then without Love, and out of
the sole compliment of a pure complaisance, must a Woman tranfact all the
precious Minutes of her Life with a Man, receive his Caresses, and -- No, no,
Agrippa, these thoughts diffuse horror through all my veins; a Woman must
either have a Love for her husband, or resolve to sacrifice the whole content
of her life, to the tortures of a racking despair and inquietude. These two
extremes, Madam, said I, may have a medium; a Wife places an esteem upon that,
in a husband, which may really challenge her esteem: she may allow him a Love
too, if you will, such as we attribute to the Merits of a faithful Friend: But
as that kind of friendship does generally leave a vacuum in the heart, she may
make choice of a discreet and prudent Lover to fill it up, who balancing all
concerns betwixt her and her husband, may convert that ceremonious
complaisance, you made so ingenious an observation upon, into another species;
and though different from Love, yet bearing as near a resemblance to it, as it
acts without constraint, or repugnance. Madam, I speak of the heart only, said
I, seeing Terentia in some concern; and when one assigns that for the limit of
his conceptions, he may without temerity allow them a large Field to expatiate
in.

The arrival of some Ladies interrupted our farther converse, but Terentia gave
me to understand two days after in the Princess Julia's apartment; that she
had revolved the effects of it in her curious thoughts. Some Persons were
pleased to think well of the endeavors I employed for the re-instating the
Princess Scribonia in the good grace of the Empress. I told them, they deserved
as little praise, as they had cost me trouble. A little counsel, which the
Princess did me the honor to believe, was faithful and sincere, had
accomplished that great work. Your counsels, said Terentia, are of great force,
and Heaven seems to entail success upon them. That same Heaven, Madam, I fear,
replied I, fixing an intentive regard upon her, would check my vanity, should I
presume to entail a belief upon your curious remarks. For is it possible, that
my counsels are capable of the effects, you attribute to them? I know not,
replied Terentia, if in all other things besides, your endeavors may be so
happy, as they have been in reconciling the Empress to Scribonia; but be it
fortune, or design, I know by my own experience, that your counsels imprint a
deep character in some hearts, that give ear to them.

Who would not have believed, Sir, that these words were designed to encourage
my hopes? I retired my self, to digest them at liberty, into the Gardens of
Lucullus, where I found Ovid, who asked me, if I had not encountered some
Ladies in my walk. I had not seen any; and instead of an answer, I asked him
the reason of his question; The reason is, said he, because I have just now
found a Letter in the Cittron-Grove, which some Lady or other has dropped; and
in saying so he gave it me, where I read the following Lines: The more I combat
my Enemy, the more I despair of Victory, my dear Tullia; The reflections, which
ought to infuse courage into my Soul, disarm it of all resolution; and if the
arrival of some Ladies had not interrupted the converse, which I had yesterday
with Agrippa, I bad revealed to him all the secrets of my heart. I must abandon
it to its own inclination, which proposes nothing to me but a glorious fall;
but yet I hope to preserve my self so secure from the danger of the real
Precipice, that I shall need to fear no other reproaches, than those which my
virtue or loyalty shall raise against me; And if those should be seconded at
last by a just remorse, could that give me more distraction or trouble, than
the resistance I have hitherto made with so much glory and fidelity?

Judge, Sir, I beseech you, what the imaginations were, that invaded my
thoughts, at the sight of this Paper. I had oftentimes seen Terentia's writing,
and I believed it was her character. Are you, said Ovid, who perceived a
disturbance in my countenance, the Party, who sustain the attacks of the
combat, this Letter mentions? Or had it already succeeded to your glory? I know
not, my dear Ovid, replied I; but the Party, who writ it, is the only Person in
the Universe, I ever loved, or ever shall love. I do not ask you, who that
Person is, said Ovid with a smile, for I know you will name her to me without
my importunity, and not deprive a friend of so slight a satisfaction. I am
endu'd with all the qualifications, requisite in a real Confident; I am inured
to all the most delicate intrigues of Love; I participate in the sufferings of
Lovers, and my brains are luxuriant in invention. Why do you therefore scruple
to acquaint me with the secret? I know not how to set an estimate upon my self,
and I expect you should make it your request to me, to lend my attention to the
curiosity you have to impart to me.

It is hard for a Lover, Sir, to wave the occasion of discoursing of his Love:
I discovered to Ovid all the Cabinet-counsels of my heart. Your condition is
more happy, said he, than you apprehend it to be; Tullia entertains some good
will for me; and since it appears by this Letter, she is a Confident of
Terentia's, I dare promise you an assurance of a faithful intelligence. Let us
first said I, in order to the intelligence you mention, endeavor to discover
who that fortunate Lover may be, in whose favor Terentia declares herself.

Ovid would persuade me, it was my self; but I durst not flatter my hopes with
so erroneous a presumption. We recalled to our thoughts each individual,
person, that seemed to affect a diligence or devotion to the service of
Mecoenas; and not being able to fix our judgments upon any one in particular, I
referred the resolution of our incertitude to the reports of Tullia. I conjured
Ovid to give her a visit the same day, and went my self to give order for the
Just, which about that time I caused to be solemnized in memory of your
Victories over the bloody Assassins of the great Julius.

The Victor was to receive the prize of the Course from the fair hand of
Terentia, by the order of Mecoenas, by whom all occasions of signalizing your
glory, were no less ambition'd, than by my self: Never did his divine spoil
charm the eyes of Rome with so dazzling a luster. Diverse Kings, and Sons of
Kings, who assisted at that Triumph, cried out aloud, That the sole wonder of
Rome, was the glorious Wife of Mecoenas. I had the honor to reconduct her back
to her Apartment, charged with all the Transports of Love and Lovers Raptures,
and at my coming forth, I met Ovid. Methought he endeavored to avoid me, and
seemed troubled at my encounter. How now? Ovid, what means this strangeness,
said I, presenting my self to him. Have you any bad news, of which you fear to
be the Author? Neither good, nor bad, answered he, but only that Tullia and my
self have had a small quarrel; and I cannot wheedle the secret out of her,
wherein you are concerned. You have begun this quarrel very unseasonably, said
I; And if you had had any respect for me, you would have managed a Person with
more prudence, on whose interest, you know, mine have so necessary a
dependence. I must confess, I am in a fault, replied Ovid, and that was the
reason, I was desirous to shun you; but you now begin to have a sensible
apprehension of Love, I have a most passionate one for the daughter of Cicero,
and I suspect her to be guilty of a treachery toward me; and you cannot be so
void of judgment your self, as not to comprehend, that such a suspicion is able
to deprive me of it.

I was forced to take this excuse for full payment, and content my self with
casting some reproaches upon my destiny. But the next day after the Empress
gave a Ball, which was treated with a Noble Collation; where I perceived that
Ovid was not upon such ill terms with Tullia, as he had persuaded me. I
discovered them making Love to each other by private signs; Tullia passing by
him, gave him a secret pinch on the arm; which Ovid observing I had taken
notice of, took notice himself of the stolen favor; but in a Moment after, his
subtlety gave place to his Love; for when Tullia came to take him out to dance,
he could not forbear, by a passionate gesture, to return her thanks for the
honor of that obliging expression of her kindness toward him.

I could refrain no longer, then at the end of the Assembly, to exhibit unto
him, the Indictment I had drawn up in my distracted thoughts, against his
treason. I did not importune you for your assistance, said I to Ovid; it was
you your self, who without my solicitation, made a voluntary offer of it to
me. If you had had any private reason to repent your self of so generous an
action, you might with the same freedom have repealed it, and I would have
returned it back again to you, and not imposed upon you a necessity, of
offering me so unworthy an abuse; but I fathom the Mystery. You have taken your
self the advice, you not long since so frankly gave me, to love Terentia; Her
charms have made a conquest of your heart, and for that reason alone you have
thought fit to make a friend of my integrity, the subject of your Perfidy. You
do me a great deal of honor, replied Ovid, with a flattering kind of smile, to
regard me with an eye of jealousy; but yet as great as it is, it cannot seduce
my vanity, I am in despair of ever meriting it; and for no other cause did I
pretend a quarrel with Tullia, than that I might not be the Herald of such
unwelcom News, as I assured my self that would be, which should denounce to you
an Emperor for your Rival. An Emperor? cried I, starting back. Yes, said Ovid,
an Emperor; Augustus's greatness is enthroned in the center of Terentia's
heart; and you have not a Man for your Rival, who would sacrifice his life at
your feet, rather than dispute that glory with you. But, Ovid, said I, has
Augustus ever expressed any inclinations for the Wife of Mecoenas? All Rome is
informed, he has fixed them in another place. The Emperor, replied Ovid, owes
only to his own Merit the Passion, he has given birth to; which he has neither
improved, nor cultivated yet by any particular address; nay, he is wholly
ignorant of its effects, and it is believed that Terentia herself would more
than half die with confusion, did she suspect, he were the least sensible of
them. See here what Tullia writ to me the same day, you sent me to employ her
to gain the secret from Terentia. The Letter, which I found in the Gardens of
Lucullus, and you read, was lost by Cicero's daughter; and since this other,
which you may here peruse, I have had some converse with her, who gave me a
full account of all I have here represented to you; having said this, he
produced a Letter, of which the fragment that fell into your hands, Sir, was a
part.

Ye great Gods! What do you tell me? said Caesar, Can I believe you? And can it
be possible, that I made my self the object of my own jealousy? You may judge,
Sir, replied Agrippa, by the sequel of what I have to say, of the truth of my
report. I could not acquiesce in the sole testimony of Tullia; and as I
endeavored to purchase a clearer evidence of my Misfortune, I am able to render
your greatness a clearer assurance of your felicity.

Revolve in your Royal imagination, I beseech you, Sir, the deplorable
condition, the discourse of Ovid reduced me to: I considered you as my Master,
and glorious Patron, but still as an envied Rival in my Mistrisses favor: And
as under one of these forms you might with Justice command me to revoke my
presumptuous Love; under the other you banished out of my thoughts the Memory
of all respect and obligations I owed you, I darted a thousand reproaches, a
thousand imprecations at my Stars, ten thousand Murmurs against Heaven for
having formed you so amiable: I do not fear to declare these extravagances to
you, since I have now surmounted them; and the more violent my transports were,
the duty which triumphed over them, will, I hope, merit a more favorable
censure in your August thoughts.

Ovid would not leave me all that night; and though he were most sensibly
touched with my afflictions, yet he did combat them with such discourses, that
it might be wished for the delight of Rome, that he had still conserved a due
Respect and Memory of them. What do you think, said he, to oppose against the
Merit of your Emperor the coldness, which he yet entertains for the beauty of
Terentia? Alas! do you imagine, that this coldness will be still proof against
that tender Passion, which Terentia will not be able long to disguise under the
Mask of so violent a Constraint? She is the admired beauty of the Empire, and
Caesar has a piercing judgment; she cannot long remain exposed to the destiny
of loving by herself: And perhaps, at this very Moment, we are now discoursing,
the cloud, which must of necessity be shortly transparent, may be removed from
Caesar's eyes. He tells her the Universe has no fitter object for Caesar's
Love, than the immortal charms of the Divine Terentia: Then your designs, which
hitherto may pass only for innocent attempts, will become unpardonable crimes.
Be advised in time, and do not dispute the title of Terentia's Love, with the
Master of the Universe, whose heart ought to be sacred to you, since it is
stamped with the image of Caesar; and the least forfeit you shall make of that
obedience you owe him, will be chastis'd as a criminal ingratitude in a person
of Agrippa's quality.

Ovid showed himself but too true a Prophet in his Predictions; you have been
pleased to tell me since, that it was at that Just, where Terentia first began
to charm you: but as I was ignorant of any such matter, and my wound too new,
to receive a cure from the hand of reason, I had no regard to his too real
Divinations.

I tormented my self all night with such restless distractions, and being
informed the next day, by some Spies, which I always maintained about
Terentia, that she was to go to the Temple, you gave me leave to dedicate unto
Neptune, I posted thither with an impatient speed. The Sacrifice was not begun,
and whilst it was preparing, Terentia diverted herself by a walk under the
Trees, which in many pleasant Groves are ranked about that Fane.

You need not ask, said she, as soon as she saw me, what kind of devotion has
invited Agrippa hither; he knew that Caesar is preparing for his Voyage into
Asia, and is come to offer Sacrifice to the God of the Caerulean Empire, to
purchase calm weather for his own Emperor. And, Madam, said I, are you come to
purchase Storms and Tempests! I am too good a Roman, replied she with a
surprising blush, to offer up to the Gods such sacrilegious Vows. And too
clear-sighted, Madam, said I, to regard the glory of Caesar with ah eye of that
indifferency, as perhaps some other good Romans do.

Terentia was so discomposed with this little reproach, that it was a long time
before she could frame an Answer; but at length recomposing her self, you have
attacked me more than once, replied she, with such mysterious discourses: your
Advice against what I owe to Mecoenas, your flattering character, and your
diligence, cause me to suspect, some private end is the Mark, they are levelled
at. You now make your reflections upon Augustus, and may it not be possible,
that great Caesar may honor with a generous compassion the innocent
inclinations of his humble Handmaid?

I was now so disordered my self at this question, that for a quarter of an
hour, I lost the total use of my tongue, when Terentia with a serious look
making a descant upon the distraction, she saw me in, you are surpised, I see,
said she, to hear me propose, so unexpected a Problem to you. And perhaps you
will say, that my late Manner of conversing with you, has not prepared you to
entertain it: But Agrippa, the Passion I have for Augustus, has something in it
of so noble and so pure, that I can own it without the reproach of a guilty
blush: And I shall confess that my heart received the image of Caesar from my
tender years, that this impression has grown with me, and that the Emperor has
no engagements either in War, or Love, wherein it does not challenge a private
concern. And does he entertain the like for me? Speak, and do not keep my Soul
any longer in suspense; The purity of my intentions ought to leave no impure
suspicions in yours. I love Caesar, as we love the Gods; and I should believe,
I should be guilty of an impiety against them, should I love him otherwise.
Speak, Agrippa, and give me a clear explanation of that which the muteness of
your tongue, and the eloquence of your eyes, gives me some apprehensions of.
Oh! Madam, cried I, my eyes and my tongue are but the too fatal interpreters of
my thoughts.

Terentia did without doubt penetrate the sense of this Exclamation; she
blushed, and pretending the Sacrifice was ready to begin, she took the
occasion, and entered briskly into the Temple, leaving me without the power to
follow her. I had discovered in her eyes, a kind of, I know not what despite;
mixed with a reservedness and disdain, which I was no longer able to support. I
went home to my house, where I found your Orders to summon me to your presence;
With a feeble and languishing motion I paid obedience to your commands, and I
thought that day would have put a mortal period to the cause of it; for, Sir,
you commanded my attendance for no other, than to confide to me the secret of
your new Amor.

I did not render my self guilty of a treasonable Crime in opposing it, but I
told you at the same time, that I was deceived, if Terentia did not embrace it
with all the concerns of a reciprocal Passion: But this constraint was so
repugnant to my nature, that it ever apprehended with horror the necessity of
often renewing it. A little after I made my Expedition into Sicily, on which
the contemplative Judges of other Men's Actions took the liberty to spend their
verdicts at their pleasure; And I am returned, thanks to the great Gods, so
perfectly cured of my folly, that I hope they will inspire more dutiful
principles into me, than to dispute the Justice or Merits of my Cause, with my
glorious Emperor.

I had several times resolved to declare to you the secret Crime, my Love
tempted me to commit against you; but as that declaration would have only
served to have assured you of your felicity, (and that I found you had an
undoubted assurance of before) I judged it unnecessary. My Crime, Sir, is now
ceased with my Love, and therefore they both cease to be longer silent; and
here you have the whole secret of that fragment, which so much disquieted your
Royal thoughts, most faithfully unmasked before you. Judge now, Sir, I beseech
you, if your reason tells you, you have done Terentia justice, in suspecting
her of infidelity.

The Emperor attributed an entire confidence to the Relation of Agrippa, which
perfectly reconciled his jealousy to his doubts concerning the Paper, which
had come to his hand; but there was another, no less important, still inherent
in his inquiet imagination. The discovery of a new Rival ever begets a new
trouble in our fancy; and though in the height of its capriciousness he exhaled
complaints, when suited only with the resentments of a Lover abused, yet he was
not assured if he had not, since the first birth of his jealousy, some just
grounds to harbor a contrary belief. He imparted all his thoughts to Agrippa,
who endeavored to calm them, with the best arguments he was capable of, he had
made a most diligent inspection into all the concerns of Terentia, from the
first Minute he had entertained any for her himself; And the love of Crassus
had not deluded it, and therefore he conjured Caesar to believe, that he had
purchased no other advantage with all his assiduities, than a disdainful
repulse of his rejected suit. The Emperor, whose Love, was as unquiet, as
passionate, and desired only to find repose, was willing, to be convinced by
the reasonings of Agrippa: and testified no less acknowledgments to him, for
this conquest he had made of his jealousy, than he had done before, when by
those he had made of his most redoubted Enemies, he had established him in the
Imperial Throne of the Universe: And hastening to the Apartment of Terentia, he
was inflamed with impatience, till he had forced his unjust suspicions to beg a
submissive pardon of her injured Loyalty; but he was disappointed of his
design, for she was gone to visit Tullia, at her delicate Villa, which her
Father Cicero had left her near Tuseulum.

When these two Confidents saw themselves in a, capacity of enjoying each
others conversation with freedom, Terentia declared to Tullia the disgrace of
Crassus; and that she was informed by some persons, whom she privately
entertained near the Emperor, that he had uttered some expressions before them,
which his jealousy seemed to have forced from him. You know, said she, whether
this jealousy has any solid ground, or no to support it self; and whether I am
not able to apply an infallible remedy to his imaginary distemper, but he will
not vouchsafe to have recourse to it. He caused Crassus to be arrested; he
commanded all his Papers to be brought to him, and examined them, without
imparting to me the least inkling of his designs. What could he have done more,
had I been convicted of a criminal compliance? Oh! how unjust are Men? The most
accomplished among them become either Ingrates, or Tyrants, as soon as they
imagine they have gained the least interest in our affections, you do not
consider, said Tullia, interrupting her, at what Mark you level your
complaints. Jealousy is the infallible Herald of a violent Passion, and I
should have had a greater for Ovid, than I now have, if when I put his to the
test, I had found it of the same temper with Caesar's. I must confess, replied
Terentia, that a little jealousy is inseparable from a great love; but do you
understand, with what kind of jealousy I would have Augustus possessed? I would
have him jealous of his own Imperial Grandeur; that he should fear, lest that
should have a more powerful influence upon my inclinations, than the Merits of
his Person; and that being exagitated without intermission by that active
suspicion, he should employ the greatness it self, as an humble Suitor to me,
to lend him my assistance to destroy it: yet all this should not make me forget
the respect I owe to the grandeur of his Soul, and the illustrious character of
his generosity; but elevating my own Meanness to meet his Greatness at the
point, to which he should be pleased to debase himself be low his own sphere,
we would form a concurrence of spiritual desires, that should prevent the
Lethargy of long and languishing Passions. But alas! it is not this noble kind
of jealousy, but a sordid and injurious one, which Caesar is guilty of, and
with which he has already alarmed the ears of the World, without vouchsafing
to think mine worthy to receive from him the least whisper of it, and believing
me to be light, ungrateful, treacherous -- He believes you to be no such thing,
replied the daughter of Cicero, interrupting her, he only fears lest the Merit;
or Assiduities of a new Lover should make a breach in your heart; and as it is
to that heart only, to which he has confined his pretensions, the least
impression, any other should make there, he interprets, as an usurpation upon
his own Prerogative. If you had not limited your favors to so narrow a
circumference, Augustus would have thought himself more secure. There are
certain Marks and Pledges of Love, after which a Lover cannot suspect his
Mistress of unconstancy, without committing a mortal offense against her: But
the gift of the heart, is not of that number; there is no particular value to
be set upon it, but in the fancy of the Lover only, who thinks himself
possessed of it; and as a Woman is seldom tempted more than once, to make a
free donation thereof, and seldom wants the temptation of often violating it,
she leaves always an apprehension in a sensible Lover, lest she should be
moved by some powerful Motive, to embrace the latter, as being most obvious.
Oh! Tullia, cried the Wife of Mecoenas, I could be angry to see you frame such
gross conceits on so delicate a Subject; the gift of the heart is so far from
leaving any just scruple in the Souls of those that love, that it is only
capable to assure their repose. All Pledges of Love, which are not included
within it, are the effects of a weakness, which I think none ought to be guilty
of, if they can avoid it, and that one may be guilty of more than once, since
it is not voluntary and unconstrained. But that Love, whereof all the Passions
acknowledge the Empire of reason, has I know not what in it of so noble, and so
pure, that it will not admit the allay of any base or ignoble thought, and
would make a greater scruple of the least infidelity, than your Libertine
Ladies do of the greatest Crimes.

As Terentia had with these last words concluded her delicate distinctions, a
Servant came and advertised Tullia, that Varentilla and Fulvia, attended by
Horace, Virgil, and Cornelius Gallus, the Praetor of Egypt, were come from Rome
to wait on her. Terentia was come thither to entertain her unquiet thoughts
with that pleasant solitude, and was not then in a fit humor for a general
converse. But the Train was composed of too many illustrious Persons, not to be
received with all the demonstrations of an obliging respect and welcome. Fulvia
was daughter to that renowned Tutor of Augustus, whose glories with himself
were buried in the common ruins of the bloody Triumvirate: And the Emperor
desirous to repair in her the Misfortunes of her Father, made but little
difference in appearance betwixt her, and the Princess his daughter. Varentilla
was her Kinswoman, and had married the Head of the Claudian Family, which has
since given Caesar's to the Empire; and it is thought, that she preceded
Terentia in the heart of Augustus. The two Friends went forth of their flowery
Cabinet, where their converse was, and advanced to give a reception to the
noble company.

They found them in a Basse-Gallery, which opened with a stately Portal, and
was wainscoted with cedar, and hung round with diverse rich pieces, representing
the most Memorable Actions of her Fathers life. His famous pleading for
Roscius, which obliged him to fly into Greece, to substract himself from the
fury of Sylla; the applauses and congratulations, he received at Athens; his
triumphant return into his own Country, and his honor for preserving it from
the bloody attempts of Cataline: His journey toward Pompey, and that barbarous
death he sustained, which branded with an eternal ignominy the Posterity of
those that inflicted it.

Had the Painter, said Virgil, upon the survey of those pieces, consulted my
Memoires, he had not omitted the adventure of Milo. I caused it not to be here
inserted, replied Tullia, because I have heard some reports, that in that
encounter, the artifice of Hortensius triumphed over the eloquence of my
Father. It is a Fiction, said Virgil, he did not gain that cause, though he
gained no small honor by it; you were not in the World, when it was a witness
to that grand trial; and therefore you are ignorant doubtless, of the
circumstances of it; which I shall give you a faithful account of, when you
please to command it; and by it convince you, that your renowned Father, never
did any thing more remarkable and glorious.

The time was never unseasonable to lend attention to what Virgil had to say.
Terentia, with an obliging expostulation, complained of his unkindness, for
designing to reserve that Relation for Tullia only. And Virgil, who understood
very well the extent of that complaisance, we ought to exhibit to our
Sovereigns in the person of those, they have an esteem for, told her she might
command what she pleased, and he was ready to obey. The Company moved toward a
Walk, which represented a continued Arbor, or green Vmbrella, under which in
the most scorching heats of Summer, you could not be incommoded by the Sun.
Virgil placed himself betwixt the four Ladies: And Horace and Cornelius guarded
the end of each Wing, and so marching all abreast, Virgil began his recital in
this manner.

A MEMORABLE ACT OF Cicero.
IT is not so long, since the famous Cicero died, but that his glorious Memory
may be yet present, to the thoughts, and almost the eyes, of the persons, that
honor me with their attention. Few are ignorant, I suppose, how Claudius having
been surpised in a female disguise in the Palace of the great Julius, Cicero
publicly censured this licentious Audacity; and that Claudius being since
elected Consul, omitted no occasion to exercise a Mortal Revenge upon him for
this Affront. He persecuted him both in his estate and reputation, forced him
to turn Exile, and fly to Dirachium, and had perhaps made his Fury the bloody
Executioner of his Malice, had not Milo put a period to his rage, by putting
one to his life.

Milo had committed this Homicide in the just defense of his own Life, and the
Laws of all Nations, pleaded a Pardon for him; and to support the justice of
his Cause, he had made it a Client to Cicero. At that time there was in Rome a
fair Athenian, celebrated there under the name of Plautia, to whom the Orator
Hortensius dedicated both his love and eloquence; and who by the excellence of
her wit, and a thousand other admirable qualities and charms, had purchased the
Fame of a matchless Prodigy in her Sex.

Hortensius told her, for a piece of pleasing News, that he was chosen to
sustain the Accusation against Milo. Do you not tremble, said Plautia to him,
at the thoughts of encountering an eloquence, which has so often been
victorious? It is not the first time, replied Hortensius, that I have entered
the Lists against it. There are few causes of note, which are not divided
betwixt Cicero and my self; I pleaded against him for Antony, for
Asinius-Pollio, and diverse others. We were Antagonists in the Trials of
Lucius-Murena, and if I may without the opinion of vanity, repeat what Rome
herself has published, it was not Cicero, whom her loud acclamations proclaimed
the Victor. That was, replied Plautia, because in those encounters, you did not
plead for the condemnation of the Murderer of Claudius. Cicero will paramount
himself, and think it a supreme glory, to wrest out of the hands of Justice so
notorious a Criminal; and if you will be advised by a Friend, wave, if you can,
so hazardous an engagement.

I neither can, nor ought to wave it, replied Hortensius; I am chosen to demand
satisfaction for the blood of Claudius, I should betray it if I should be
silent; and besides, our profession has that advantage over all others, that it
may gain reputation, but lose none, though it lose a cause. If I should
surmount the eloquence of Cicero, I should purchase immortal honor; and should
mine receive a foil from his, it would receive no blemish in the overthrow;
our ardor and zeal supply the place of a prosperous success, and never Orator
yet was charged with the partiality or petulancy of a biassed Judge. I am not
of that opinion, replied Plautia, there are some qualities, which a person of
honest principles ought to dedicate his whole life to the acquisition of; the
labor they cost, ought not to deter us from the pursuit of them; and it is
more glorious to miscarry in that, than to think we can live with honor without
them. But Eloquence is not of that predicament, which has no motives to compel
us to addict our selves to its profession. It neither inspires us with honesty,
nor equitable thoughts, nor constancy or resolution in Adversities; but on the
contrary, it may corrupt and vitiate the candid temper of an ingenuous Soul.
For an Orator does oftentimes make it his sport and recreation to patronize an
unjust cause, and hopes he may easily persuade others to believe, what he seems
to believe himself. It is therefore nothing, but the choice of the Will; and
when it turns to the confusion of him that made it, it leaves him convinced of
his own ignorance, the baseness of his spirit, and the weakness of his judgment.

These words, pronounced by a person Hortensius most ardently affected, made so
strong an impression in his thoughts, that leaving Plautia, he went in haste to
find out Cicero. You are a Person of too honorable Principles, said he to him,
not to approve of the preference of Justice, before all the advantages one
might hope to obtain by force of a vigorous Eloquence. And it is a glorious one
for me, to be thought worthy of the honor of arguing an opinion against you: If
mine should be convincing, what immortal Laurels would Fame plant upon my
Temples? And should you refute it, I should learn by my defeat, to assure my
self of Victory in other encounters with the same arms which gave it me. But
Cicero, the advantageous success wherewith you see, I might flatter my
thoughts, ought not to efface out of them that just remorse, which would
certainly attend it. Claudius was a vicious Man, and Milo has obliged all good
Men, by freeing Rome from so corrupt a Member, by an action he was forced to
commit in the just defense of his life. I will not plead for his condemnation;
and either the error or partiality of the Judges, may, perhaps, overruled the
force of your reasons: I would not have you therefore expose Milo to that
danger; he stands justified already in my thoughts, and I shall be ready to
declare, that on the examination of the Fact, Justice obliged me to pronounce
him innocent.

The Enemies of Cicero pretend, that an itch of Ambition would not suffer him
to embrace this offer. He had already made some laborious reflections upon the
Cause, and assured himself of a victorious success; and would not, say they,
lose neither his labor, nor the fruits he expected to reap from it. But I
know, that was not the Motive; he apprehended, that he might be accused of some
juggle, or underhand dealing, if in the face of Justice, where the Murderer of
Claudius was brought to a public Trial, the Advocate for the dead Person,
should observe a wilful and suspected silence; and therefore he was resolved to
plead; and Hortensius, who feared the reproaches of Plautia, and saw himself
supported by the credit of Cato, to whom the dead Person was Nephew, used so
much artifice, that, as Tullia expressed it, he triumphed that day over the
Eloquence of Cicero. He caused false informations to be given to the Senate,
which obliged them to send some armed Bands to keep the People within the
bounds of their duty: These Soldiers being gained by Hortensius, did by their
insolences so disturb and interrupt Cicero in the most material parts of the
cause, that Milo was not only condemned to banishment, and a severe mulct set
upon his head, but likewise exposed to an eminent danger of his life.

I made my return just about that time from Sicily, where the generous bounty
of the illustrious Mecoenas had graced me with a considerable Employ. The
reputation of Cicero was not unknown to me, I had an ardent ambition to have
the honor of being enrolled in the number of his Friends, and Manlius presented
me to him the very same day, wherein he had lost his cause for Milo.

Whence come you? said he to me, as soon as he understood who I was; Go build
your self a Cabin upon the ruins of Mantua, and turn Heardsman there to some
wealthy Grasier, if you want ability to keep one your self; and bury your glory
in the smoking ruins of your Country, rather than breathe the corrupted Air
of this pernicious City; which triumphs now in nothing, but treachery and
injustice. The Senate, that once renowned Assembly, now tamely receives its
decrees from the Usurpers of Supreme Authority, wherewith it oppresses the
innocent, and justifies the guilty: Fly, fly, wise stranger, from a Climate
so barbarous and inhumane.

Manlius had heard what had arrived to him; what? Cicero, said he, does your
animosity against Claudius, survive the date of his life? And do you imprecate
Rome, because an unexpected revenge has honorably entombed his ashes in the
Urn? It is not Claudius, when I now consider, replied Cicero; for had he been
the dearest of my friends, the revenge of his death notwithstanding would never
have appeared to me the less unjust.

Then he briefly summoned up to us the Points upon which the justification of
Milo ought to have been established, and how Hortensius himself made a scruple
to sustain the Accusation against him: What! said Cicero, the Accuser of the
pretended Criminal declares him innocent, and shall the authority of Cato have
the power to pronounce him Guilty? Hortensius could not find amongst all the
querks and jingles of his profession, a pretense sufficient to render the death
of Claudius punishable: And because he was Nephew to Cato, the Senate denounces
it self the mortal Enemy of his Murderer? Ha! my dear Manlius, what Age do we
live in? I have just now sent Milo a Sum to discharge the weight of his
unreasonable Fine: which honor obliges me to pay, since he owes his
condemnation to the sole ambition I had to expose the equity of his cause to
the judgment of the world. Had I been silent, he had been free; and the ardor,
I expressed, to vindicate his innocence, has condemned it. I will retire to
some Desert, to expiate amongst dumb Animals, the crime of my Loquacity; and
Rome shall no more behold me in her Pulpits, till she become again what she was
in the days of our Fathers, which is as much as to say, she shall never behold
me more. Our Vices have exasperated Heaven; it has averted from us these benign
influences, which formerly rendered us virtuous, just and sincere; desolate
Rome draws near her ruin, since the Gods permit her to draw upon her crimes
their indignation; and I shall speedily prepare an Elegy to deplore her
Catastrophe with more reason, than Virgil has at this day to deplore the
desolation of his Mantua.

Manlius combated, with all the Arguments he could frame, this obstinate
resolution of his Friend; and though I was not so well known to him, to assume
the presumption of giving him counsel, yet I could not forbear to use these
expressions; Sir, said I, the more vicious you judge Rome, the more reason you
have to make your self a President not to abandon her. What will become of her,
if all the brave and honest Romans you are acquainted with, should put on the
same resolutions as you do, to proscribe themselves from their Country, and
leave her a prey to so many devouring Monsters? It is the duty of the virtuous,
to protect her, when public Vices attack her; and you must give an account to
the Gods for the impunity, to which your absence shall expose the crime of
Libertines.

Cicero was pleased to accept in good part my Remonstrances, and honor them too
with expressions they could not merit. But besides, that he was immoveably
fixed to his resolutions, he had so much incommoded himself by the liberal
disbursment he had made for Milo, that he had reduced his condition to a
necessity of spending some time in a Country retirement. He withdrew to this
place, which was not then what his own industry, and the curiosity of his
worthy daughter have rendered it since. Alas! I had cause to oppose my most
powerful reasons against this retreat, which has cost me so many sighs, and
melancholy hours; and my divining Soul seemed beforehand, to give me an
ill-relishing taste of the various misfortunes it prepared for me.

These last words of Virgil inflamed the curiosity and attention of those that
heard him, which would have obliged him to a second Relation, had they not seen
appear at the end of the Walk, the Emperor, the Princess Julia, the Prince
Marcellus, and the Illustrious Agrippa.

Tullia hastened to present her self unto them; and wholly surpised with that
unexpected honor, testified her acknowledgments by a confusion in her
countenance, which expressed as much eloquence, as one of her Fathers most
studied Orations could have done. The Emperor was naturally affable and
courteous, and had his thoughts been less perplexed and encumbered, would, in
obliging terms, have retaliated that obliging Air of satisfaction and joy,
which Tullia expressed in his reception. But they were wholly fixed upon the
Wife of Mecoenas; when discovering her at the farther end of the Walk, who
partly out of surprise, and partly disdain, had not advanced to receive him, he
left Julia with the Daughter of Cicero, and like a complaisant Lover, moved his
condescending Greatness toward her. The Air of the Campaign, Madam, said he,
approaching her, has already, methinks, rendered you singular, you take no
delight to follow the company; and had I followed your example, I had this day
in vain left Rome, to purchase yours. I know, the duty and distance I owe my
Emperor, replied Terentia coldly; and I shall not assume the confidence to
approach him, without his special command. Ha! Madam, said Caesar, interrupting
her, it is not such a cold respect you owe him, but one of a little more love,
and a little more sincerity. Forget he is Master of the Universe, but remember
that he has given you his whole heart, that you owe him all yours; and that you
cannot acquit your self of your obligations toward him, as long as you
entertain the addresses of Crassus, and encourage them by constituting him the
Guardian of your choicest secrets. I never considered the addresses of Crassus,
replied Terentia, but as an office of friendship, whereof your bounteous favors
for Mecoenas, and my self, have given Presidents to the whole Empire; and if
they are levelled at any other mark, I scorn to give them entertainment in my
thoughts. You are the most spiritual of all Women, Madam, replied the Emperor;
and it is not hard for you to captivate as well the understanding, as you have
done the heart, of a Prince, over whom you reign as Sovereign Empress. But,
Madam, said he, (showing her the Verses he had taken from Crassus) were these
confecrated to you without your knowledge? and if you accepted the Sacrifice,
could you without a crime flatter the audacious fancy of a Rival to Caesar?

Terentia was surpised at the view of these effects of Crassus's love: she
thought it had not been so durable, as to cause him to make such passionate
reflections. I know not, said she, whither these Verses were composed for me, I
never saw them before; and I really believe, some other Person to be the
Subject of them. But, Sir, though it were true, that a young inconsiderate
Person should be guilty of the folly of entertaining a Passion for me, could
Caesar fear a Rival of so small consideration? Upon what grounds, Sir, do you
raise your apprehensions? Upon the preference, the Merits of Crassus may
challenge over Caesar's? Upon the propensity, you have found in me, to violate
either my word, or my duty? Upon my natural levity, or the character of my
amorous inclinations? Oh! Sir, can you know me, can you esteem me, and yet be
capable of such injurious suspicions?

Caesar was willing to be convinced of his error, and hastily gave credit to
all, Terentia was pleased to have him believe: and whilst he was pleading a
Pardon for the injustice he had committed against her innocence, in framing an
unworthy suspicion of it, Agrippa was retired into the same Grove, where a
little before Terentia and Tullia had entertained their private converse. There
he broke open a Letter, which was delivered him upon the Road, and he knew to
come from Ovid. Horace, who had followed him, found him reading the Contents of
it, which advised him to an action which he had often had a design to execute.

A Man may know that Tullia is taken up with some extraordinary affairs, said
he to Horace; if you could have commanded the freedom of her conversation, you
would not have done me the honor, at this present, to have sought after any
other. I apprehend you, replied Horace; you railly me upon my libertine humor;
and you ingeniously reproach me, that Love is not the Divinity I sacrifice to.
A Person, replied Agrippa, who should only become acquainted with you by the
voice of public Error, would be apt, perhaps, to cast that reproach upon you;
but an intimate Friend to Ovid, knows how to give you your due character. I am
not ignorant of any of your Triumphs, and I can testify, that you are not less
favored by Love, than any other of the Diety. Ovid is a great Master in the Art
of Metamorphosing, replied Horace with a smile, and doubtless he took me for
the River Alpheus, or the Nymph Salmacis, when he charactered me for an
Amorist. He took you, said Agrippa, for his dangerous Rival, and he has found
so few that merit that title, that he could not confound them in summing them
up. I know you have stolen from him the heart of Tullia, and that she being
seduced by the gayety of your humor, has made the charming Ovid understand,
that he was not born to be always the first to dissolve the bands of an
amorous intrigue. You relate to me a pleasant Fable, Sir, replied Horace; and
you doubtless forget, that it is a famous Debauche, who has the honor to talk
to you. To punish you for your dissimulation, said Agrippa, making him sit down
by him, you shall recount to me without excuse, or delay, the particulars of
your Amor, which I was never perfectly informed of by Ovid; who, I observed,
could never discourse of it without trouble; and therefore I was willing to
indulge his vanity that satisfaction, as not to press him to so unpleasing a
recital: But since I know, you are able to surmount all troubles incident to
tender Lovers, I shall not observe that Punctilio with you. I know upon what
occasion the Emperor is come hither, and we may have the liberty of discoursing
above an hour without interruption.

Agrippa's Merits might so justly challenge the respect of the whole Empire,
and Horace stood indebted to them for so many favors, that it would have been a
piece of rude ingratitude in him, to have opposed the least delay to his
desires. He told him by way of a gallantry, that he was so inured to Victory,
that he conquered all he attacked; and by the command of Agrippa, keeping the
Seat he had placed him in, he began in this manner.

THE HISTORY OF Horace.
THE World has incurred an error in judgment, my Lord, in that it has made of
me; which believes that good cheer is the sole Deity I idolize: who have
neither gust, nor desires, but to delicious Novels; and only regard Love, as an
intermess, or preparative to quicken their appetite for the better relishing
voluptuous varieties of a luxurious Table. This draught does nothing at all
resemble me. Liberty is that I seek at Feasts, more than the delicacies of
their entertainments; and if a Man in the whole course of his life were endu'd
with a Soul so brutish, that it were capable of no other inclinations, than
what a gourmandizing appetite should inspire into it, I should be found oftener
at the private Tables of my Friends, than in their Halls at their public
Banquets.

These practices may divert a Man's thoughts from more serious Reflections, or
Employs, but cannot divest them of all propensity to generous actions, or noble
and tender Passions: And his reason is the more refined by them, since he does
not associate himself with his Friends, but to make a more open profession of
it: And a Man is so far from falling into those Vices, which infect his nature
with brutality, by this frank overture, that a Man is really more a Man, when
his Soul is totally unmasked of that dissimulation, which is generally
practiced by Persons of a more reserved converse.

I had made some remarks upon these distinctions in an Ode I composed in the
praise of a magnificent Banquet, made by the generous Mecoenas; and this Poem
was received with so much applause, that a Critic ought to have been very
audacious, that durst have censured it. Ovid gloried to be that audacious One;
and being one day in the presence of the Princess Julia, he omitted no kind of
Raillery wherewith he did not play upon me, for dedicating my genius wholly to
Bacchanalian Revels and Triumphs.

What do you find in it so ridiculous, said I to him? Is not the fertile Vine,
which is Mother to the delicious Falernian Grape, as worthy of the noblest
Idea's of a Poet, as the Flowers, you combine into an odoriferous Posie, and
therein present us with a Clita, or an Hippolita? This Allegory, replied Ovid,
has relation to a passion of the Soul, much nobler than that of a gluttonous
appetite; and it is more glorious for a Poet to teach Lovers the gentile Art of
Loving, than Debauchees, the most ingenious method of improving their
Debaucheries. Love, said I, surprises the frolic spirit amidst the jollity of
his Cups and Banquets, as it attacks the Melancholy in his solitary and sullen
retirements. The delight a boon Companion takes in being regaled, and a Lover
in being loved, have nothing of incompatibility betwixt them. It is only a
going in quest after Pleasure more than one way, and arriving at it by two
different Roads. They are two different Roads indeed, replied Ovid, and no Man
can ever so deceive himself, as to believe, that to arrive at the Elysium of
Love, he must travel through the sordid Vail of a brutish voluptuousness. It is
a rare way indeed to charm a Lady, to accost her with those nauseous and
brainsick Raptures, wherewith the drowsy Souls of the boon Companions, you
mention, are always intoxicated? Would it not be a commendable excuse, think
ye, when a Lady should desire her servant to pay a double assiduity and
diligence to her service, to oppose to her commands, a necessity of going to a
Bacchanalian Rendevouz? And do you think, she would not have great reason to be
highly satisfied with this obliging Compliment, I shall not see you to morrow;
I must spend the whole day in drinking with my Friends: where I shall encounter
a thousand pleasures, which as you are not capable to give me, you are not like
to share with me; and some pleasant Table discourse, or other diversions, will
abundantly supply the want of your company.

This satirical raillery of Ovid, which he heightened by his drolling way of
delivering it, and the Princess Julia's seeming passionately to espouse his
quarrel against me, did so nettle me, that I was resolved to study a revenge. I
knew he affected Tullia, and I found her a Person most worthy to be affected. I
designed, if it were possible, to disappoint him of the heart of that fair one.
I was not ignorant how sensible he would be of such a loss; and I was ambitious
to demonstrate to him by convincing reasons, that ingenious Debauchery is not
inconsistent with the charms of Love.

I was acquainted with the Daughter of Cicero, as one is acquainted with
Persons of Quality, whom they see in the Court either about the Empress, or the
Princesses. I applied my self with all diligence to gain a more particular
acquaintance with her. I endeavored to oblige her by my ready services, and the
first occasion I encountered, was at the Feast of the Bacchanales, which was
that year governed by my directions; I made all the Parts of it allude to that
Proverb of Cicero, Sine Baccho Friget Venus;
Without the help of lusty Bacchus, Love
Grows cold, and cannot our dull spirits move.


And allegorizing to the sense of the Proverb, I caused a Cupid to be placed
upon one side of Bacchus his Statue, and both of them to be mounted upon one
triumphal Chariot. They seemed to have made mutual Presents to each other;
Cupid was crowned with clusters of Grapes, and carried a great Glass in his
hand, instead of his Bow; and a great-belly'd Bottle served him for a Quiver,
for his Arrows, and Bacchus wore the Quiver and Bow, which Cupid wanted.
Diverse young Maids, habited like Painters, representing the Menades and Graces,
mixed one among another, followed the Chariot, and with a disorderly kind of
order exchanged employs with each other. The Menades distributed amongst the
People, those Gallantries, which it only belonged to Love to bestow; and the
Graces, officiously offered, to fill up full Glasses to any, that would receive
them.

You were then upon your Voyage toward Sicily, my Lord, and since Ovid has not
related to you the particulars of our Cor-rival-ship, you are ignorant perhaps
of that, which happened at that Feast. Tullia publicly declared, that she was
obliged to me, for giving so glorious a revive to the memory of her Father; and
whether Ovid was desirous to put a flurr upon this favor of hers toward me or
no, or only to railly me, I know not, but he composed a Poem, entitled, LOVE
IN A RAGE. Where feigning, that that God had framed Complaints against my
Sacrilege, he made him thunder out severe Menaces and Imprecations against me.

He had carried this piece of Gallantry to Tullia's house, when she happened
not to be at home; and had left it upon a Table in her Chamber, that she might
find it at her return. I came thither a little after Ovid was gone; a young
Slave, whom I had gained to my interests, told me, he had lately been there,
and showed me the Paper he had left behind him. The indignation I conceived to
see my self so much abused, raised the choler of my Muse, and snatching up Pen
and Paper, upon the same Title of Love in a Rage, I drew a draught of Ovid's
inconstancies. I folded up my Satyr, in the same form he had done his; I laid
it upon the same Table; and just as I had finished my Cheat, Tullia came in.

Ovid ushered her, and had told her by the way, as they came, that he had left
in her Chamber, a new emergency of his extravagant fancy. She thought to have
found, what he spoke of, in the Paper, which lay in the place of the other, and
snatching it up hastily, began to read, Love in a Rage,
Come Rage and Fury, bring your flaming darts,
Your Chains, your Arrows died in bleeding hearts,
All the immortal Tortures, which you forge
In your dire Shops, the Crimes of Men to scourge,
And armed with all the offensive tools of Fate,
The honor of my Altars vindicate.
A thousand just complaints each hour invade
My tender ears, by youthful Beauties made
Against the Ingrate --


These first seven Verses were copied word by word out of Ovid's Paper, which
he quietly gave attention to, but interrupted her at the eighth. You do not
read right, Madam, said he, it is not My tender ears by youthful Beauties made,
It is, My ears, and Heavens, by Youth and Beauty made,
To see themselves a Homage forced to pay
To Bacchus, and his Rendevouz obey.


Read it your self, said Tullia interrupting him, and tell me, which most needs
correction, your Memory, or my Eyes. He took the Paper, and finding the Verses
changed, was so surpised, that he knew not what to say. Are you now satisfied,
said Tullia, whether your Memory or my Eyes are most treacherous? Your Eyes are
faithful Judges, replied Ovid, and my Memory has not betrayed me; but here is a
Mystery, which I cannot unriddle. These words inflamed the curiosity of Tullia,
and taking the Paper out of his hand, she began again to read: Come Rage and
Fury, bring your flaming darts,
Your chains, your arrows, died in bleeding hearts,
All the immortal tortures, which you forge
In your dire shops, the crimes of Men to scourge,
And armed with all the offensive tools of Fate,
The honor of my Altars vindicate.
A thousand just complaints each hour invade
My tender ears by youthful Beauties made
Against the Ingrate; who being the forlorn
And doleful Objects of his treacherous scorn,
Do before my Altars the sad Victimes lie
Of broken Vows, and martyred Constancy:
So many powerful Charms did I impart
To this Ingrate, that the most stony heart
Was forced with melting sighs and flames to meet
The perjured Vows, he laid down at its feet.
The doctrine of my School refined his wit,
And in his Soul ingrafted Maxims, fit
To make it capable to be the Owner
Of all true principles of Love and Honor:
The pleasure of the senses, the transports
Of wit and mirth, the smartness of retorts;
An endless Mine of amorous desires,
A flame, to light, and quench, a Vestal's fires:
In fine I all my talents to him lent;
And how has he so vast a treasure spent?
He by his black Inconstancy has made
A thousand false Apostates in the Trade;
A thousand wavering hearts revolt from me,
By the example of his treachery.
Each injured Beauty now does fearful grow,
And every Lover for a Traitor go.
My name it self a terror does infuse.
How did not his disloyalty abuse?
The matchless bounties of a glorious Belle,
Whose name I for some reasons shall conceal.
[The Princess Julia, What have not Fulvia, Corynna, rare
Floricia, and Emilia the Fair;
Valeriu's two Sisters, Creon the Slave,
Done to oblige this most perfidious --?
Who caught all in the snares of harmless Love,
Did the effects of his foul treason prove.
When to an object (he designs t'ensnare)
Such solemn Vows he of his Faith does swear,
Of Homage, and of Love, that you would say,
Eternity, before it, would decay,
As if of Janus, or of Proteu's race,
Into two different shapes he parts his face.
One side does represent unto your eye
The zealous Picture of sincerity.
The other, like sly Renard, on you smiles,
To see what Fools Love catches in his toils.
Then in the cheat he triumphs, and his wit;
Nor fearing my scorned power, does judge it fit,
(As well as us) for nothing but to be
The scourge of Amorous Credulity.
Oh! worthy to the Rack to be condemned,
To which I all unworthy Lovers send:
May Malice, Rage, and Jealousy invent
Daily new tortures for his punishment.
May he lie languishing, and ever mourn
At Beauties feet, for nothing, but its scorn.
May nothing, but deluding hopes control
His best designs, and tantalize his Soul:
And to complete all his misfortunes, may
All Objects, which his smooth-tongu'd baits betray,
Knowing their error, break the enslaving chain,
And nothing ever from this hour retain
For the Ingrate, but horror and disdain.


It is not without cause, said I, when Tullia had finished the reading the
Verses, that Love is so much enraged against that Lover, since he appears to be
guilty of so many enormous crimes. Those, replied Ovid, briskly intertupting
me, who impose this Rage upon Love, are so little capable of understanding him,
that none ought to judge of his opinion upon their inconsiderable testimonies.
They were without doubt in an elevated vein, when they belched forth this
Satyr, which is the froth rather of the giddy fumes of a stumm'd bottle, than a
just reproach to Love. I know not what the persons are, you speak of, said I,
without seeming at all to be moved, but methinks they have delineated so lively
a draught of ingratitude, that they cannot be ignorant of the opposite virtue,
that they have Souls capable of noble passions; and that if they have found so
ingenious a way to divert a Mistress, and destroy a Rival, the froth of the
bottle, which has inspired this Art into them, seems to me to deserve a place
amongst the most politic stratagems of Love. To divert a Mistress, and destroy
a Rival? said Ovid, Heavens! Can that sort of People aspire to so vainglorious
a conceit? Do they not understand, that living only for themselves, Women know
not whether there are any such Animals in the World or no: That they regard
their pretensions to Gallantry, but like vanishing Dreams hatched in the
capricio of an elevated brain; and that a tender Lover, would think he could
not injure his Mistress more, than to suspect, she could have the least
complaisance for a person of that stamp. Be he of that stamp, or any other,
said Tullia interrupting him, I agree with you, that a Lady, who has a
pre-engagement upon her, will not easily yield a complaisance to a new Amor;
but if I had a Lover, I should not love to see him so much an Opiniator, as to
think, nothing else could please me: I would have him suspicious of every
thing, be jealous of the ingenuity of these Verses, apprehensive of some secret
design in them, and in fine create to himself a thousand little cares and
dangers upon Subjects of the least moment or probability. No Man upon earth,
Madam, replied Ovid, comprehends the use and force of the cares and inquietudes
you mention, better than my self. But a Lover, Madam, becomes oftentimes more
criminal, in applying them ill, than in not resenting them at all. We ought to
understand the temper of the heart, we endeavor to charm; and if it be true,
that Love derives its generous birth from the sympathy of Souls, the Person I
suspect to be the Author of those Verses, I shall never triumph over a
passionate and sensible Lover.

I could then neither refute this Prophecy, nor comprehend what Tullia thought
of it; two or three of the Ladies, who were cited in the Verses, came to give
Tullia a visit, who made an earnest sign to us, not to mention a word of the
premises before them. But the day after, my little Intelligencer came and
brought me a Letter, which she had gained by surprise from a young Grecian, who
served Tullia, and by whom she sent it to Ovid; I opened it, and read the
following Contents. I begin now to be enrolled in the number of your Cast
Mistrisses, your inconstancy makes those ordinary toures; and you cannot longer
love me, since Horace cannot make you jealous. My Women informed you, that he
was two hours alone in my Chamber during my absence; and you ought to have
suspected, that he employed them in changing your Verses; and so apparent a
design to undermine you in your negligent security you regard only as a
Poetical vanity. Was it your part to make so weak a remark? and are you not
ashamed to be fooled into so easy a persuasion of that, which it is mine, to
employ a thousand cares and stratagems to beget in you?

I thought it not expedient to allow Tullia the leisure of making in Person
these Reproaches to my Rival; I was doubtful of the success. Whereupon I begged
the favor of Cepion, who was our common Friend, but much more mine, than Ovids,
to take him along with him to Domitius's house, where he had designed a Treat
both of Munificence and Pleasure to entertain his Friends: and at this time,
Tullia leaving Rome to spend some days at this Villa where now we are, I
seconded the resentments which she had already conceived against him, with a
declaration of my own Passion for her. I had by a small gift or two above a
month before, engaged the Artificer to me, that made her Chariots; and I had
experience of his Fidelity not long after; for, by design, her Chariot broke at
the entrance into the Wood, which lies upon the right hand, as you come hither.
I had caused a commodious Tent to be pitched in that Wood, and prepared a Treat
in readiness not improper for the occasion, which was attended with a Set of
choice Music; and all things falling out as successfully as I could desire, I
was there at hand to help Tullia out of the perplexity she was embroiled in.
She was surpised to meet on the Road with so unexpected an assistance. I told
her, this was a preparation for one of those pleasant Debauches, which Ovid so
often upbraided me with, that I waited for some of my Friends, with whom I had
designed to recreate my self that day; but that I was highly obliged to them
for their negligence, since the Gods had sent me now much more agreeable
company to supply their places; and just as I uttered these last words, the
Collation was served in.

Tullia commended the elegancy of it, and told me, that if we made no other
Debauches than those, Ladies might be proud to participate of them; we pretend,
Madam, said I, so much to the honor of their companies at them, that they can
afford us no real satisfaction, or gust, without them. But Ovid is an Heretic
in our Mysteries, who never understood them in their purity. I have an ambition
to present you with a true draught of them, which you will find far different
from that you have already received from him. I gave a sign to the Music to
strike up; which they obeyed by an harmonious, yet brisk preludium, that much
revived the spirits of Tullia, after her little disaster upon the Road, and was
followed with a Consort of diverse voices, which sung these Verses: A train of
Servants trouble does create,
Who with their eyes devour us, and our meat,
Staring upon us like starved Harpy-Elves;
Be gone, and let us eat our meat our selves.
What? think ye, cannot we without a Spy
Upon us, eat, or drink? Avaunt, for I
Love Secrecy as much at bords, as beds;
Bacchus, as well as Love, makes jealous heads.


My Servants were ordered before to retire upon this Sign, and the Music went
on: Oh! how their absence, does our hearts revive!
Their greedy eyes, which looked, as they'rd etrieve
Each bit we eat, devoured us up alive.
Let Us speak, we are alone, let us freely vent
Our thoughts, our secret Love, or Discontent,
And banish Fear; for Bacchus must excuse
All those, who frolic at his Rendevouz.


Tullia seemed to be a little startled, when she saw all my Servants withdraw,
and the sense of the last two couplets confirming her surprise; Oh! cried she
out, I have now a clear prospect of your intentions; the hazard I now run of my
reputation, and the breaking of my chariot, are too much to be suspected, not
to give me a just apprehension of some design. Oh! Madam, suspected of what?
said I, of an innocent design, of making you a passionate declaration of Love:
Is this an attempt, which you ought to have a fearful apprehension of? You
abuse the confidence, Horace, said Tullia, I was willing to repose in your
Generosity; and had not I ingeniously suffered my self to be deceived, when I
was brought hither, you had not had now the opportunity of making Discourses to
me, so void of discretion, or sincerity. Madam, I call the Gods to witness,
said I, I never made any in my life, so full of ingenuity and candor; and if
you vouchsafe not to understand them so, you will do their Author a great
injustice, who loves you more, than ever any person yet could pretend to love
you. Neither the Corrivalship of so famed an Opposite, as Ovid, nor the
Prerogative he may plead to Antiquity, have power to discourage me in so
glorious an attempt. It is a whole Month, since I have snatched at all
opportunities of opening this presumptuous Declaration at your feet; but the
assiduity of my Rival has always countermined mine: till now Fortune has at
last be-friended my languishing impatience, with this blessed one out of his
presence. Receive then the humble Petition of my Love, without rigor, or
disdain; my Rival only comes to make repetitions with you, of what he has
preached in the Closets of all the Ladies of Rome. His method of making Love
can pretend now no longer to the charms of a surprise, or the glory of a first
offering, which are advantages mine comes attended with into your service; and
though you had no other design in allowing it a small apartment in some
bie-corner of your heart, than presenting an Associate, to Love, of my
qualifications, he has presented you with Graces enough, to merit from you so
generous an acknowledgment.

Just as I had ended my Discourse, Ovid surpised us with his unexpected
arrival, who having met (as he was coming from Domitius's) Tullia's Coachman,
who was returned to Rome to provide another Carriage (for that which was
broken) for his Coach, was informed by him of the accident which had happened
to his Mistress, and he was now come to compliment her escape. The
circumstances he found her in, could not choose but give him an unkind welcome.
The Pavilion, under which we were, seemed to be imboss'd all over with the
embroidery of divers-colour'd flowers; which joining their natural Perfumes
with many other rich essences, wherewith diverse curious Jarrs and Caskets were
filled, and placed in odoriferous ranks about it, seemed to render it an
Elysium, almost equal to that he had in his own Works prepared for happy
Lovers. The Music was some of the choicest, that belonged to the Emperor; and
the relics of our Collation declared, that without vanity it might pretend
both to Magnificence and Curiosity. But Ovid, who was not accustomed to lose
the possession of a heart, wherein he once had gained an interest, imagined
that the passion he had for Tullia, was a sufficient security to assure him of
the right he claimed in hers: And when he understood she had received no hurt
by the accident of her Chariot, he seemed to have no more concern for any thing
else, than when he used to find her alone in her Chamber: I was not wanting to
make Tullia sensible of this coldness and insensibility of his; you see, Madam,
said I softly in her ear, that the Protestations of Love, which are rendered
you at a Debauch, are more sincere than those you are wont to receive in your
private Closet; your Chariot broke by an accident, which only exposed you to
the hazard of honoring this place a few hours with your glorious presence; and
the Gods, by a special Providence, designed me for your assistance. Ovid has
surpised us together, and is not jealous; but I, Madam, I am of his shadow
only; and would willingly purchase at the too inconsiderable value of all that
I am worth, the felicity of entertaining you one moment longer without such
envious witnesses. Be you then, Madam, an impartial Judge, and declare, which
in your opinion, merits the character of the most sincere and the most
passionate Lover.

This discourse exasperated the thoughts of Tullia, which were already disposed
to harbor a prejudice against Ovid, who had returned no answer to her last
Letter; and as she was ignorant of the cause, she imputed that to him as a
crime, which was only an artifice of my Love. She beg^n to railly upon him
after a manner, which could not choose but trouble him, and I perceived at that
instant he was scarce able to digest it with patience. But he has since told
Cepion (who related it to me again) that he conquered that impulse of his
disdain, as a frenzy, which he thought would call his reason in question, to
have shown himself capable of it. How? said he to my Friend, could I imagine
that a Soul, who had been trained up by my Maxims to the Mysteries of Love,
should be debauched by Horace? The Gods seemed never to suffer me to awake in a
Morning, but to recount to my Mistress the dreams they inspired into my fancy
at Night, she finds that the devotion I have for her, causes me to pay a daily
one to the temple she frequents. She neither makes a visit, nor takes walk,
whereat my diligent observance does not attend her. My regards, my discourses,
the happy raptures of my Muse, all offer sacrifice to my Love; I neither think,
nor act, but to improve its interest with her. Horace is a Libertine, whose
whole life, like a Comical Representation, is divided only into diverse Scenes,
of Play, Banquets, Revels, Public Spectacles, and other lewd diversions. What
leisure could he find to cultivate a Love-intrigue? or what frenzy or capricio
could invade Tullia, to prefer such a Rival before me? This capricio, if it
might be called one, derived its birth from the converse of that day, I now
mention. Tullia has told me since, that she found the declaration of my Love
very singular; which I found means afterward likewise to illustrate, with two
or three Gallantries more, as unexpected, as the Treat in the Wood. We
accompanied Tullia home to this Villa; for I understood, that her Chariot would
return so late from home, that such a Convoy would not be unwelcome to her. At
a convenient place upon the Road, she was encountered with a Troop of
counterfeit Shepherds and Shepherdesses, with the sound of diverse Country
Instruments, with a kind of rustic triumph, conducted her home to her house;
and some of them disguised like Gypsies, danced before her after the
Gypsie-manner; and these divertisements employing her time before Supper, a Set
of Comedians, who pretended they had lost their way, and begged entertainment
there that night, took up most part of it, in representing the furies of Ajax.

I counterfeited the ignorant, and made protestations that I was surpised at
these comic Novelties; but this was too course a spun web, to delude a
judgment of Ovids perspicacity. He raged, he reproached Tullia, and
interpreting her denial of having given the least consent, or encouragement to
these rustical diversions a criminal dissimulation, he was almost arrived to
that point of jealousy, as Tullia's wishes could have exacted from him; but as
her innocence was wholly unworthy of his accusations, and he thought he
discovered the real marks of it in the motions of her countenance, he relapsed
into his old Lethargy, of a calm security and repose.

We returned both together to Rome, where some commands of Mecoenas detained
him much against his will, at the time of Tullia's sojourn in the Country. My
diligence was not wanting to give that the color of a negligence, which I knew
to be a bare necessity; and redoubling my bounty and instructions to the Slave
I had gained to my devotion, I played my game so well, that Ovid had no
opportunity of justifying his long absence, nor Tullia of receiving any Letter
from him; but was absolutely convinced, that he was the most cold and tepid
Lover in the world. As this error and remissness of Ovid's Love gained strength
daily in the imagination of Tullia to his prejudice, I endeavored as firmly to
fix in it an opposite character of my own. There did not a day pass, during her
absence from Rome, wherein I did not regale her with some novel diversion, or
other. I found out a young Grecian, who had a most excellent voice and method
in singing, and I presented her to her. I understood she had designed a day of
hunting with two or three Ladies more her Neighbors, I met them, as by
accident, at their Rendevouz, with a Pack of Hounds, whose beauty and harmony
far excelled any they had with them; and having entertained them with that
sport, in a greater perfection than they expected, I gave them a noble Treat,
to refresh the pleasant toils they had undergone in the pursuit of it. These
obliging Services, my Letters, my discourses, and the resentments of Tullia,
which neither the presence, nor diligence of Ovid endeavored to qualify,
wrought the effect I desired. In fine, my Lord, my suit was not displeasing to
her; and the first alarm Ovid took of it, was from two or three Strophes, I
had composed in the transports of a little debauch, which Tullia was pleased to
honor with her presence. I shall repeat them to you, and you shall judge
whither he had not some cause to be disturbed. Enchanting Circe, Bacchus's
Queen divine,
In whose fair hand a sparkling glass of Wine
Such charms creates, as ravish with delight
The glutted sense of humane appetite.
What a rich tincture (that does far outvie
The Ostrean purple, or the Tyrian die)
The juice of the Falernian Grape does fix
Upon the luster of those glorious cheeks!
Oh! how those Eyes out-sparkle that? And dart
Two flaming Globes into my scorch'd-up heart!
And teach us too that Bacchus has his Charms,
As well as Love; and does with powerful Arms
In his Debauches, frolic Beauty store,
To conquer what, it but attacked before.


I could wish, my Lord, you had been an eyewitness of the astonishment of
Ovid, when by the indiscretion of one of my Guests, he arrived to the knowledge
of these Verses, and that Tullia was the Subject of them. He went immediately
to give her a visit, and being neither able to give credit to the report of his
own senses, nor even the testimony it self of our Mistress; How, Madam? said he
to her, Is Tullia the Object of Horaces intoxicated fancies? Did she command
him to write Madrigalls for her? Was she sent, at the Bacchanalian Ceremony,
when his Good Fellow Muse was dubbed her Laureate? In a word, Does she love
Horace? What Mystery have you discovered in this adventure, so worthy your
admiration, replied Tullia? Have not the Gods been prodigal enough of their
bounties toward Horace, to render him an Object amiable in the eye of our Sex?
And am I the first of Women, whom his charms have surpised? But, Madam,
replied my Rival, I have long loved the adorable Tullia, and you have given me
leave to believe, that I was not hated of her: But, said Tullia, you neither
expressed a concern, nor jealousy toward your Rival; and Love cannot lodge in a
breast, out of which those two sensible Guests are banished. Ah! Madam,
exclaimed that afflicted Lover, if that were the only reason you could allege
for a ground of this extravagant severity, it would have long since vented it
self in a thousand reproaches, and so ill-humor'd a converse have had its
abortive birth long before this unhappy Minute: But you never loved me, a real
Love does never terminate in so excentrick a Point; no, no, you are not
unconstant, this pretended levity, is only the vizard-mark to your real
dissimulation. What? have I studied hearts so long, to be ignorant of their
character? Can a Mistress, like a Bird out of its Cage, fly from me, and I not
see which way she takes her flight? Love, ungrateful Love, get thee another
Panegyrist, provide thee another Historian, I am no longer able to trace thee
through thy mysterious Meanders, which are as blind as thy self; or, I should
more properly say, that thy chiefest Mysteries, are nothing now, but mystic
Chimera's. It is in Horace's power to leave Ovid destitute of a Mistress; thou
have no longer established Laws to govern by, since Fortune sits at the Helm,
and steers at her pleasure the Fate of Mortals.

Agrippa found this Exclamation so pleasant, that he was forced to interrupt
Horace with a loud Fit of laughter; I am so well acquainted, said he, with
Ovid's transports, that, as much a Friend as I am to his concerns, I believe,
as you say, his affliction would have proved my diversion, had I been a witness
to it.

It is not possible, my Lord, replied Horace, to represent to you the pleasant
extravagancy of it. He thought that the whole Adventure, had been only the
abortion of a delusive Dream; he came to me, and asked me seriously, if it were
true, that Tullia loved me; and whether it were not only a Project to render me
more obsequious and circumspect for the future; but when, by the air of my
countenance, and the cold reception he found from her, he was convinced, that I
had usurped the Throne, he had been so long in possession of, he vented his
rage in such vollies of imprecations, as better deserved to be inserted in his
Work, than all his Elegies.

Horace could no longer dilate himself on the circumstances of his triumphs;
for one of Agrippa's Servants came to advertise his Lord, that he thought the
Emperor expected his attendance. They found him with the Ladies in a spacious
Meadow, whose flowery head reposing it self betwixt two crystal Arms of Tyber,
was crowned with a rich Ballister of white Marble. The Emperor had purposely
drawn all the company to that place, to the end they might not discover, that
which was preparing to entertain them in another; and having detained them
there until the evening, he on a sudden surpised them with the most delightful
object their eyes were capable of.

All Tullia's house seemed to be enclosed in a case of stars, composed by an
infinite number of torches, which covered it over, that it resembled a Flaming
Castle, raised there extempore, by the force of some Magical Enchantment. The
inter-spaces betwixt the lights were formed with red canvas, stamped with
diverse figures, which by the reflection of torches placed behind it, represented
so many flaming Prospects. The Walk of the Gardens were filled with Pyramids,
and Figures, raised by the same artifice. And from the top of a high Turret,
which crowned the House, at a certain sign the Emperor caused to be given, a
thousand hissing Dragons and Serpents took their flight into the clouds, which
on every side presented, to the astonished eyes of the Spectators, the glorious
name of Terentia in characters of fire and flames.

But yet this Wonder was no Miracle. The power of Monarchs, as great as it is,
must subscribe to the Laws of Impossibility: For Caesar had only applied that
to this occasion, which he had long before prepared for another; But the
Mystery being unknown to the Ladies, Oh! Sir, cried Terentia, the Heavens
employ themselves on all occasions to work Miracles for you, and they have
certainly some supernatural design in this they here represent unto us. It is
rather you, Madam, replied the amorous Caesar, who are so precious to the care
of the Gods, as being the greatest Miracle in the whole Catalogue of their
Works, who has obliged them to Present us with this Scene of Wonders. The Gods,
replied Terentia, do indeed accumulate with their favors, when the hands of the
mighty Caesar vouchsafe to distribute them to me.

These discourses, or the like, having entertained them, till they came to a
large Portal, which conducted them into a fair Hall, they past into it under an
odoriferous Arch framed with the beautifullest Flowers, and richest Greens the
Universe could afford, where a Table attended them, laden with the variety of
the choicest rarities, wherewith nature could furnish it. A Ball, worthy the
Magnificence of Caesar, concluded this Royal Treat, performed by that
illustrious Company in a Room wainscoted all round with Looking-glasses of the
purest Crystal, which multiplying the Gallantry of so many noble Objects,
exhibited diverse representations of that, which at that time was singular in
the Universe.

The unexpected Arrival of Aurora, who, ambitious to be a Spectatrix of so
glorious a Triumph, peeped in upon them at the Window, prorogued this
illustrious Convention: Ten or twelve light Chariots richly gilt and figured,
conveyed them back to Rome; Caesar and Terentia mounted one: The Princess and
Marcellus, by his command, were placed in another: Tullia, (who would wait upon
her noble Guests to the Gates of the City) Fulvia, Varentilla, Agrippa, Horace,
the Princesses Maids of Honor, and the Officers of Caesar's Train, sorted
themselves, either according to their quality or inclination, whilst Virgil
alone, preferring the devoires of an entire friendship, before all the triumphs
and delights Tullia's house could satiate him with, followed Cornelius to
Tusculum, whither the presence of Caesar had obliged him to retire.

He was fallen into disgrace with Caesar, and had received a command from him,
to absent himself from his presence for ever. He went to Rome to make an humble
Address, and was desirous to interest Terentia in his Suit: And to confer with
her, he had followed her to Tullia's Villa; but the Emperors Arrival had
prevented his design; and obliged him, as I said before, to retire to some
neighboring place.

When he saw Virgil, he began to oppose himself, as earnestly as he could,
against this demonstration of his generosity and friendship. Return, return,
said he, my dear Virgil, to the place where I thought I had left you; and
affect not the company of an unfortunate Wretch, whose disgrace may prove
contagious. Sovereigns love to see the Acts of their Indignation authorized by
the Suffrages of Persons of Honesty and Honor; and you cast a reproach upon
Caesar, when you conserve a kindness for a Man, whom his displeasure has
condemned to his eternal hatred. Virgil is not a person so considerable in the
Empire, replied Virgil, as to deserve to have Spies to attend his Actions, or
Excursions. The Policy, you speak of, concerns only such, as either by their
Birth, or Employs, are destined to stand, as living Examples, before the
People. And what in a Person of that Remark and Quality would be held for a
necessary Prudence, would be condemned as a ridiculous Vanity in one of mine.
Your Honor is dazzled by your Modesty, said Cornelius, and you are doubtless
more considerable in the Opinion of Caesar, than your own. The Fame of a Poet
is oftentimes as necessary to signalize the glory of Heroes, as their own
virtue; And those, who now admire the Valor of Achilles, had perhaps never
heard of his Name, had not the Pen of Homer eternized it. These kind of
Flatteries, said Virgil, intoxicates the Reason, and by asses the Pens of the
greatest part of Authors; who fancy themselves to be the Authors indeed of the
Fate and Destiny of Heroes and Princes, and murmur against the small regard the
World has of their Merits, as a most criminal Injustice. But to frame a right
judgment of things, what do we serve for? In what are Princes obliged to us?
There was never yet a Poet so audacious, as to arraign the Vices of his Prince
living, and with his Scepter in his hand, at the Bar of Parnassus; and the
justest Praises he bestows upon him, are suspected of flattery and vainglory.
The contempt, or approbation of great Ones, does either depress, or elevate our
works; and we sing in vain their glorious Gests, if the Public Memoires give
us the Lie. These considerations alone, ought in my judgment, to degrade a
flattering Scribler of all Favor with his Prince, who may acquire more true
glory, than his purest Ink can fix upon him, by rewarding him for those good
intentions he stands in no need of. I would have a Person of Integrity be just
to himself in the first place, give each action its due character, and without
shaping one, as much for his own advantage, as his Princes, consider, that he
stands accountable for the Power, the Gods have invested him with, to none but
themselves, from the first Minute they ranked him amongst Crowned Heads. Would
it had pleased Heaven, cried Cornelius, to have imprinted this Maxim in my
Soul! I had then still been in possession of my Emperors good grace, and the
Government he honored me with. But the luster of my place, from whence I stood
towering over the heads of other Mortals, did so dazzle the eyes of my
understanding, that I could not discern the track, by which I climbed the
dangerous Precipice: and without considering, that not like the Sun, I was my
self the Author of those Rays, which my Greatness darted from its glorious
Orb, it appeared so boundless to me, that I persuaded my self it was absolute
and independent. And whilst a just apprehension contained me within the limits
of my duty, I set such a value upon my services, and esteemed them so
important, that I fancied they might challenge that injustice for their reward,
which was the sole effect of Caesar's bounty. But, said Virgil, interrupting
him, what caused you to commit so grand an oversight? The Emperor has always
testified so great a kindness for you, that though the Gods had not destined
him both for yours, and the Worlds Master, a Maxim of pure gratitude only ought
to have fixed all your endeavors to his service.

THE HISTORY OF CORNELIUS GALLVS.
LOVE, my dear Virgil, replied Cornelius, is a weakness, which has always
triumphed over the strongest resolutions of the greatest Heroes: That alone has
been the Author of my Crime; and from what alone I hope a pardon. You have
heard me discourse formerly of a fair Slave, which belonged to the Philosopher
Voluminous, and was made free by him, named Cytheris, whom you celebrated, in
one of your Ecclogues, under the name of Licoris; and who, I told you,
accompanied Mark Antony, when the Malcontent took his last farewell of Rome.

I have often since declared to you, with what an incredible grief I
entertain'n the news of her flight; and you your self were so sensibly touched
therewith, that in one of your Poems, you made your Muse the chief Mourner of
the dolorous obsequies of my Love; which ought not in justice to have been so
effeminate, since I was only deprived of the sight of an Object, which I could
not choose, but adore; for as to a passion, or inclination toward any other
person, she was wholly incapable of it; and her Soul was as insensible of the
Flames of Antony, as of mine.

But yet my jealousy could not be convinced of the contrary; and the scorn and
indignation, I conceived at the thoughts of another being preferred before me,
joined to the busy Employs of the charge Caesar had conferred upon me, in a
short time banished the Idea of Cytheris so perfectly out of my breast, that
methought no part of it lurkt behind to keep an unquiet possession.

She was now longer the grief of my eyes, or of my thoughts. I eagerly followed
my Sports and Recreations, and without distraction, dedicated my self to the
employs of my Charge. Which one day obliged me to assist in person at a Survey,
which was taken along the Nilus, for the the facilitating the famous inundation
of its fertile Streams: when one of my people came to me, and told me, that in
one of the inhabitable Islands, with which that River is checkered all over,
was heard the accent of an human Voice; and asked me if it were my pleasure,
that some one or other, should go and inform himself of the truth of it.

The person that brought me this intelligence, wanted not ability for a more
important employ; but a secret curiosity, the cause whereof I was ignorant of,
possessed me with a desire, to go and make it my self. I took a Bark, and boarded
the Island; when I was strangely surpised, for the first Object my eyes were
fixed on, was to encounter that same Cytheris, for whom I had had so ardent and
so ineffectual a Passion.

She was a little impaired in her Beauty; and five or six years space, wherein
I had not seen here, is able to change the air of any countenance; but my
Heart, through my eclipsed Eyes, discovered her. A sudden transport of joy and
fear, which at the same moment invaded my Soul, suggested to me, that it was
Cytheris, whom I beheld.

What new Theseus? cried I out, or rather what inhuman Tiger, has abandoned you
in this inhospitable Desert? Durst Mark Antony commit so barbarous a Crime? Or
Cleopatra so imperious a cruelty, as to lay such commands upon her effeminate
Paramour. And could the tame Gods hold their revengeful Thunder in their hands,
and behold the Sacrilege? Mark Antony, replied Cytheris, interrupting me with
a fair look, has not been the Arbiter of my destiny; I effected it my self, and
shall pursue it to the uttermost period of my life. Ah! Cytheris, said I,
ingratude never merited before such glorious expressions. It was enough for you
to play the cruel thief, to rob me of my Heart, and carry it in triumph after
that Ingrate, without interdicting me the just liberty of reproaching his
infidelity. Yqu never had a perfect knowledge of me, replied Cytheris coldly;
and your suspicions now are as imperfect, as that was before. I did not follow
Mark Antony; he did not abandon me; and if I had been capable of such a
weakness for one of the two, perhaps I should not have manifested it in his
favor: But a certain repugnance, which at first seemed to have no real
foundation, and which since I have discovered too just grounds for, caused me
to regard the prosecution of your Amor, as a most troublesome persecution. It
was that I fled from; against that did I endeavor to find a Sanctuary. Come, my
Lord, Come and take a view of that, the gods have here assigned me, and suffer
me quietly to enjoy without the distra^ion, or turbulent cares of the restless
World; which consideration may perhaps convince you, that the love of Wisdom is
the sole Passion my Soul has been sensible of.

As she uttered these last words, she conducted me by a little path, to the
most pleasant solitude I ever beheld. The Trees of one continued Wood, which
extending their spacious Arms to each other, like one large Umbrella, cover
over the surface of the whole Island, seem on purpose to open them in in this
place, to frame a delightful Walk for Natures diversion; which declining by an
insensible descent, invites you into a pleasant Meadow, equally divided in the
middle by the rapid streams of a Crystal Torrent. Flora, which seemed to have
chosen it for her rustic Nursery, had enameled it all over with a sort of
wild, yet beautiful Flowers, not common in those parts of Egypt; and the
industry of a certain old Man, who with Cytheris, and one person more, were
both the Subjects, and Sovereign of this charming Desert, had furnished it with
all necessaries for the support of human life. There were two or three Cabins,
which seeming to be built, more by advice of Nature than Art, with green Boughs
and Branches, made but a weak resistance against the inclemency of the Air.
There were likewise Beasts both wild and domestic; and a small Tract of Land,
which cleansed from Weeds, and other trash, furnished this little Family with
Corn, and all other Field, and Garden Provisions.

I fancied my self to be in one of those enchanted places, described by the
Poets; and looking sometimes upon Cytheris, and then upon the old Man (who
taking no notice of me, followed, I know not what pudling employment he was
then about) I began to rub my eyes, like one, who would endeavor to clear them
of some cloud or mist, that was before them.

You seem to be surpised, my Lord, said Cytheris, observing my astonishment,
to see that a treasure as this, lying even in the center of your Government,
and almost at the Gates of Alexandria, should escape your knowledge; To enjoy
this without disturbance or contradiction, was it, that I renounced the pompous
slavery, you offered me at Rome, and not to follow your Rival. Here neither the
rise nor the fall of Empires, creates in my Soul the passions of joy or
sadness. Here my liberty is neither attackt by fortune, nor love, and I breath
the air of this ^nhospitable Climate, perhaps with more true satisfaction, than
you in all your glory, do that of Alexandria. Here I make a sweet experiment,
that the Gods with a prodigal hand shower down all those blessings upon Man,
that may render him happy, when man is so prudent, as to limit his desires
within the bounds of of their liberality.

This excellent discourse begat in me such transports of love and admiration,
that I had not the power to Master them. I gave her a thousand tender embraces
within my incircling Arms; And oh! most divine Creature, said I, worthy the
adorations of the whole Universe, Come and restore to it that Miracle, this
solitude has unjustly robbed it of. You merit all the Empires of the World, but
the Emperor, who has the power to Inthrone you in them, wanting the perfect
knowledge of that Virtue, which may entitle you to them; Come at least and
represent in Alexandria the person of a glorious Empress; Come and reign an
absolute Sovereign over him, who reigns with absolute authority over the
Subjects of the Ptolomies. No, no, said Cytheris to me, thrusting me from her
with her hand, If the pleasure of the gods had designed me for the place, you
propose, they would have elevated me to it themselves; and so established my
Ancestors in it, that a just descent should have conferred it upon me, had they
not judged this condition more happy for me, to which they have now reduced me.
I have spoken to you only yet in the quality of a Lover, answered I, but now
you compel me to speak to you, in the quality of the Praetor of Egypt; which
obliges me to see Justice duly executed in this Province; and I should infringe
this duty, should I suffer a barbarous Island to entomb alive a person, whose
virtues declare to me, that she came into the World only to command it. Both as
a Lover and a Praetor, said Cytheris, interrupting me, you ought to submit to
my will. Love is never unaccompanied with submission, and the Praetor of Egypt
has no jurisdiction over a person of my Birth.

I was very importunate with Cytheris to draw her out of her Solitude, or at
least a clearer discovery out of her, of her intentions. But I was not able to
move her to grant either of my requests: she desired me to return again to
Alexandria, whither I carried my new re-inkindled Flame, which broke forth with
such violence, out of the embers it had bhen so long smothered in, that it was
impossible for me to stay there above a day or two, without taking a second
Voyage to see her. She showed me all the ordinary employs with which she did
divert herself. Voluminous, as you know, is a person generally accomplished with
all Sciences: who finding the Soul of Cytheris capable to receive all those
noble tinctures, he had a desire to infuse into it, he had rendered her an
absolute Mistress in all Philosophical erudition. It was this, which I found so
charming in her, when first I began to have a passion for her; and which
obliged Voluminous to enfranchise her. To this excellent ornament she had many
others; and had as great a care of her education, as if her Birth had been
known to him. She spoke naturally the Greek Tongue; played gracefully upon two
or three instruments; limm'd and embroder'd in perfection; And the old Man that
was with her, had procured all necessaries for her, to keep those admirable
Talents in practice.

Do you not think, said she to me, that these employs are sufficient to
entertain with satisfaction and delight the whole course of that momentary
being, allowed us here on Earth? And do you believe, that the glories and
pleasures of your Rome, or Alexandria, are more really pleasures and glories,
than those I enjoy in this solitude? Worldly diversions are the same to the
Soul, that shows, or spectacles are to the Eyes. They draw it after them, tire
it, but not revive it; they always leave a vacuum in it, which they cannot
fill; and as they continually distract it with new desires, so do they banish
from it all peace and tranquillity. But, Cytheris, cried I, transported with an
admiration of her virtue, how could you, being both of a Sex and Age so tender,
arrive so early to considerations so solid? And having attained them, cultivate
them in so wild a School as this is? Every person, replied the discreet
Cytheris, has inherent in himself those necessary principles, by which he may
attain to Wisdom. The skilfullest Artificer commits faults enough in his Art,
to convince him, he is not infallible; yet those faults themselves lead him to
perfection. Allow a man of that degree, modesty, and a desire of knowledge, and
you shall render him wise in his Element. All other sttates of life, furnish
those, that are in them, with the like advantages. For my own particular, I
have experienced two or three different conditions; I was born a Slave, nor
knew I, till after my Enfranchisement, hew far my birth ought to have been
removed from so inglorious an obscurity. From whence I learnt, that slavery is
no real evil, since I supported it without regret; and an illustrious descent
no real good, since I possessed it, and yet was not sensible of it. Antonies love
was a long time the sole felicity of Cleopatra, but not of Cytheris: And why?
because that kind of love has no real commerce with true felicity: if it had,
it would have wrought its effects in me, as well as in the Egyptian Queen; but
the extravagant imagination and fancy of that Princess, caused her to regard
that, as a great good, which mine represented to me, as a greater evil; and
those kind of imaginations do create the greatest part of the felicity, or
infelicity incident to Mortals. Possess them with the charming sweetness of a
private life, and this* mediocrity shall render them more happy than the
dazzling luster of Crowns and Scepters: Place before them for their Object,
Honors and Dignities, and they shall become the prey of an insatiable Ambition.
I have made it a long time my chief study, to combat within my self this
capricious folly, and I find, that a Sovereign Power, is not so real a
felicity, as a power within ones self, to regard the loss of it without regret.
Ah! Madam, said I, (for I made no scruple now to give her that title) tell me I
beseech you, from what glorious height you have stoopt to this humble disguise,
that I may pay my due adorations to that virtue, which causes you to despise
it. The state of my present being, is subject to great revolutions; fortify it
therefore with some eminent example, that if occasion should require, may prove
an Antidote for me against the envious Malice of never constant fortune.

I judged by the motion of Cytheris her countenance, that she was about to
satisfy my curiosity, when her companion came in haste to tell her, that
Ambiorix (which was the old Man's name) was stung with a venomous Serpent: and
that from the knowledge he had of such kind of wounds, he concluded he had not
two hours to live. Cytheris grew pale, and running with great distraction to
the Cabin of Ambiorix (whither I followed her) Oh! my dear Father, said she to
him, What misfortune has arrived to you? Is it as fatal as Phila causes me to
apprehend? And is it possible the gods will deprive me of your assistance and
conduct? What name was that I heard you pronounce, my Lord? said Virgil,
interrupting him; Was it not the name of Phila? I, replied Cornelius, the
person, who together with Cytheris and Ambiorix, inhabited that Island, was so
called. Oh! my Lord, added Virgil, speak I beseech you, Was not this Maid an
Athenian? And did not the Orator Antiochus her Father, to elude the effect of
some predictions, which were denounced to him, cause her to be privately
conveyed into Sicily; And did she not under the name of Plautia, make some
sojourn in Rome?

She is the same, you speak of, replied Cornelius, and whom you so lately
mentioned in your recital of Milo's Adventure. She gained an acquaintance with
Cytheris in the house, from whence we lately came; where Cicero detained her,
as a prisoner, to force her consent to marry him; and near which, his neighbor
Voluminous had another. Cytheris putting on resolutions, to quit Rome, for the
considerations before-named; Plautia conjured her to give her leave to
accompany her. They came into Egypt; and this conformity of their fortunes, has
combined them together in the bonds of so firm an Amity, that they are still
together in some part of the World, which my most curious search cannot
discover.

Oh! my Lord, cried Virgil, let us travel the whole Universe in quest of this
place. I can no longer lend attention to your discourse; and can enjoy no
felicity in any part of my life, but that I shall dedicate to the search of
Phila.

Would it might please the Gods, said Cornelius, pursuing his discourse, that
at the expense of never seeing my self more in the good grace of Caesar, I
might hope for a fortunate success of so glorious a quest: I would this very
minute commence it; but it has cost me already so many toilesome and
unprofitable steps, that I dare not any more attempt it. Yet I request you, not
to defer to declare the reasons you have to express so tender a concern for
Phila; and I shall willingly refer the rest of my Relation to another season.

Finish it, I pray you, my Lord, replied Virgil, I beg your pardon for having
interrupted it; I was not Master of my sudden transport; but my reason has now
reassumed its Seat, and I entreat you to tell me, what became of the wound of
Ambiorix. It proved mortal, as he himself foresaw, said Cornelius; and before
it wrought its last inevitable effect, he made a declaration to Cytheris,
which, though it charmed not my Love, yet it charmed my Ears: I shall not
represent to you, Madam, said he, that your birth challenged for your
Grandfather, the renowned King Viridomare, which so long defended the liberty
of the Gauls, against the usurpation of the Roman Tyranny: These
considerations infuse generally more vanity than true wisdom; and he can
entitle himself to essential Virtue, that can only claim it from his Ancestors.
But I conjure you to remember, that the Gods have endu'd you with a firmity of
courage, and a solidity of judgment above the ordinary capacity of your Sex:
That they have bestowed this Blessing upon you, not without mystery or design;
and that they will exact from you a severe account of the Talents, they have
given you. I made a faithful promise to the last of the Race, of the
Viridomares, your Father, and my Master, to instill into your tender Soul,
these laudable Principles. And now I shall dye with satisfaction, since I have
so fortunately acquitted my self of my devoir; but yet I have done nothing,
unless you crown it with a glorious perseverence. Establish the repose of my
Soul after my death, by an invincible magnanimity; conserve your self always in
such a state of Virtue, that you may be always a glory and satisfaction to your
self; And above above all, Remember to keep this Maxim for ever engraved in the
center of your Heart, that you ought to be the Heir of the Sacred, and
inveterate hatred of the Viridomares against the barbarous Romans; and that
upon this condition, and no other, you received from your dying Father, that
Benediction, which Heaven has decreed should propagate the felicity of Children
upon Earth.

These last words concluded his life, and cast Cytheris into an affliction,
scarce to be imagined, much less expressed. The eminent danger to which this
misfortune exposed her, alone, destitute of all relief, or succor, in a wild
Desert; and the suggestions of Phila, who represented to her, that after the
death of Ambiorix, she ought not to make a longer sojourn in it, without
calling her discretion and honor in question, caused her to embrace a
resolution of seeking another Sanctuary. I invited her to a house of pleasure,
which some of the Ptolemean Kings had built some few miles distant from
Alexandria, and the Governors of Egypt had preserved for their own. There I
learnt of her, that after the death of King Viridomare, who was slain by
Marcellus in a single Combat, the Prince his Son, whose Daughter she was, had
roved a long time from Kingdom to Kingdom, to implore their aid to recover his
own; and seeing that he courted it in vain, he had, contrary to the custom of
that Nation, applied himself to the study of Philosophy; That he had made
choice of Egypt for his retirement; because learning flourished no where then,
but in Greece and Egypt, and he was too well known in the first of the two.
That his Queen, who was then great with Child, traveling under the Conduct of
Ambiorix, to find him out, had been encountered by a party of the Roman Troops,
who made her a Slave, and sold her to Voluminous. That her Father had arrived to
the knowledge of her death, without knowing any thing of her being safely
discharged of the Burden she went with; and that being most most sensibly
touched with this last misfortune, he had confined the mournful Relics of his
life to that Solitude, from whence I had lately drawn Cytheris. That a few days
before his death, he had been informed by a Slave, which Voluminous used
oftentimes to send to search the Islands of Nilus, for Plants, whose Virtue he
was desirous to experiment, That his Wife had left a Daughter behind her, and
that Volumnus had caused her to be educated with great care and affection; and
that dying, he had strictly charged Ambiorix to omit no endeavors for the
regaining his Daughter out of the power of the Romans.

Ambiorix had with fidelity acquitted himself of this Commission, as I have
told you; and fortune so ordering it, that Cytheris should take her secret
flight out of Rome, the same day that Mark Antony left it, swelling with
revenge and discontent, I was possessed with a jealousy, that Cytheris had
accompanied. I am obliged hourly to pay the Gods a million of thanks, Madam,
said I to her, when she had ended her discourse, that the veneration and zeal,
you express for executing the last commands of your Father, has conducted you
into a Province, where my duty obliges me to reside, and gives me now the
opportunity to beg your leave to make a new Present to you of that fidelity and
service, I devoted to you from the first minute I beheld you. The veneration,
said Cytheris, which you interpret to be so favorable to you, includes more
than one consideration; and if that which chased me out of Rome, flatters your
desires; that which fixes me to a due resentment of my Fathers Commands,
forbids me to accept the faith of a Roman. You have made too admired a
progress, Madam, said I, in the School of Science, to be ignorant, that such
resentments are unjust. Hate the memory of Marcellus, who, in giving that
mortal wound to the King your Grandfather, gave the first to your dishonor:
Hate the name of Julius Caesar, who in conquering the Gauls, deprived you of
the succor of all your Allies. But what Crime have I perpetrated? I that was
not in being, when those Wars began, and who have ever adored you with a most
pure and ardent Passion? This Passion, replied Cytheris, cannot work a Miracle,
and make you no Roman, nor me not a Princess of the Gauls; these two
qualifications include a formal contradiction to all your desires. The same
contempt your Senate affects for the alliance of Queens, do I harbor for all
that is not of a Blood Royal. The contempt you harbor, answered I, ought now to
be extinct, in all the Nations of the earth. For as now there are none, that do
not acknowledge the Power of the Roman Eagles, there are none, that have not
espoused the Maxims of their Empire, and we see more Kings solicit now for
the honor of her Adoption, than we saw before dispute her Sovereignty. Those
Kings did not descend from Viridomare, said Cytheris; if they had, they would
have held their Authority and Honor more sacred. And if you desire from me a
sincere declaration of my thoughts, I have always had an esteem for your
person; I am not insensible of the proofs and marks of your affection; and but
too sensible of the despicable state, to which Fortune has reduced me, to
fancy my self in a capacity to reject the meanest dignity; yet Royal Blood can
never forget the channel from whence it flows; and I should disdain the Nephew
of Augustus himself, should he be offered me, under the title of a simple
Citizen.

These words, were so many mortal wounds, both to my Fortune, and my Reason;
and though Cytheris pronounced them, to no other end, than to extinguish my
ambitious hopes, yet I imagined they taught me the infallible way to triumph
over her. I caused my self to be served in the same state, as formerly the
ancient Kings of Egypt had been; I assumed their Habit, I commanded my Statue
to be erected in diverse places of the City, and in fine, committed all those
Follies, which have so justly irritated Caesar's indignation against me.

Cytheris beheld the first Sallies of my extravagancies with grief, and
employed all her power to restrain them. But the first error was succeeded by a
second. I saw her so sensible of the danger, into which I precipitated my self,
that I hoped she would endeavor its prevention, by favoring my desires: and
intoxicated with this frenzy, I gave an effuse rein to my criminal audacities.
Cytheris observing how I daily run from one extravagancy into another, was
willing, I suppose, to stop the mouth of all censures, that might impeach her,
of having contributed to them; and so stole one night privately away with
Phila, and left me plunged into the deepest abyss of despair.

I demanded her from those that could not restore her, and threatened such as I
suspected, had conveyed her away. I employed in her quest that diligence and
authority, Caesar himself would not have made use of, but on some special
occasion for the service of the Empire; I exercised unjust cruelties upon such,
as I sent after her, and did not bring her back to me. What shall I express
more to you, my dear Virgil? I loved even to distraction, and I have lost for
ever the glorious object of my hopes. My passion is not unknown to Caesar, and
perhaps when he shall understand by Terentia, that Love alone has been the
Author of my Offenses, he may grant it a Pardon, for what a formal and designed
Rebellion could not expect one.

The end of Cornelius's Relation, had brought them just to the Gates of
Tusculum; where he importunately solicited Virgil to acquaint him with the
cause of that transport he had observed in him, when he named Phila in his
discourse. But such important Concerns occur to us in Rome, that they summon us
thither; and we must awhile defer to make it appear, that Virgil did not
discourse of Love with such eloquence, without having had some experience of
its effects.

The End of the Third Part.
THE ILLUSTRIOUS EXILES. The Fourth Part.
SOvereigns are no less sensible of the offenses, which touch the Heart, than
of those, which wound their Honor, and Authority: And Crassus was as criminal
in the eye of Caesar, as the Lover of Terentia, as he would have been, as a
Lover of Julia.

He banished him out of all places, his presence was required in; and that he
might not want a pretense to leave Mecoenas behind him at Rome, whilst he went
to visit Tullia at her Country Villa, he commanded him to see Crassus depart
the City, before he returned to it.

Mecoenas was naturally obliging, and he received Caesar's Command with an
inward repugnancy; but not daring to disobey it, he endeavored the best he
could to sweeten the bitterness of it. He went himself to find him out, with an
intention to comfort him with all the real assurances of his faithful service.
But Crassus, whose breast was the Aetna of its own flames, attributing the
sight of Mecoenas to another cause, prevented his civility by this rough
Preface.

You may spare your self the trouble, my Lord, said he to him, to declare to me
the reasons of this visit, my small skill in Augury can divine them. Caesar,
who designs to give me a severe chastisement, for the presumptuous Crime I have
committed, in aspiring to the Love of Terentia, has commissioned you to be my
Judge. But, my Lord, when you shall understand, by what artifice I was
trepan'd, and by what an Ignis Fatuus led to the top of this lubricious
Precipice, on which I now stand, you will doubtless express more Compassion,
than Passion, for my deluded indiscretion; I must avow, I had not the power not
to adore an Object, the Gods had made so Adorable, that this Passion inspired
me with desires, that these desires were to be read in my languishing eyes; and
that both my eyes, and my tongue, have often pleaded the cause of my Love
before her. But I should have confined it within these limits, and perhaps have
conquered it too, had not some encouraged it by the flattery of vain hopes and
assurances.

Mecoenas was extremely surpised with this discourse; The Emperor had not told
him any thing positively of Crassus's Love for Terentia, doubting he might have
too jealous an apprehension for the Concern he should express for it, but had
made only some slight reflections upon the circumstances of the Combat betwixt
him and Ovid.

He changed color, when through the indiscretion of Crassus, he came to
understand, that either Caesar had been misinformed, or deluded his credulous
sincerity. And not knowing on the sudden how to deport himself, whether he had
best, like a prudent Husband, to pretend he did not well apprehend him, or else
to take the advantage of his error, and endeavor to draw a clearer discovery
out of it, of what so nearly concerned him, he continued silent for a while;
but at last his curiosity surmounting all other considerations, he suffered
this anxious Lover to believe, that in effect the Emperor had totally resigned
him up to his just resentments, and that nothing but a candid and ingenuous
declaration could qualify them.

THE HISTORY OF Crassus.
YOU need not employ either Promises, or Menaces, replied Crassus, to oblige me
to make the Declaration you desire; for perhaps my concern and impatience is no
less to publish it, than yours to hear it.

I shall not entertain you, with the repetition of the first beginnings of my
Love, which is as ancient, as my Reason, and has been devoted to Terentia from
the first moment my eyes, or it, were capable of being Judges of Beauty: but my
Admiration never took its just Measures, till at the Marriage of Domitius.

You remember, doubtless, that it was celebrated at Preneste, where the Emperor
treated the whole Court three days together: you withdrew your self one
evening from the rest of the Company, and came to take the Air with Terentia
into a Garden, where, of one of the closest Walks I was possessed before your
Arrival, I did not understand your first discourse, but as you passed under a
thick quick-set, which did separate us, I heard you say to Terentia.

You do me wrong, I never loved you more, than at this present; but do you not
know that all things have their season? This, too day, is justly due to the
visible transports of Domitius: and he would commit an offense both against
Caesar, and common custom, should he on the day of his Marriage with the
Daughter of Octavia, express a coldness or indifferency. A few days hence the
same custom will oblige him to another deportment, not but that he might be the
Master hereafter of as much real Love, as at the present, but he could not
again have the same opportunity to signalize and applaud the manifestation of
it; And nothing is more scandalous to the eyes of indifferent Persons, than to
see a Husband, who might command all seasons to testify his kindness to his
Wife, affect to make choice of the Public. Why this Policy, and why these
Precautions, said Terentia, interrupting him; Is Conjugal Love a Monster? And
is it not a Crime that deserves the loudest reproach, to see a Husband draw a
Curtain betwixt the eyes of the World, and his kindness for his Wife, and open
it to let in that of another? And ought that Love, which both Heaven and Honor
render legitimate, to be more shamefaced, than that which both Honor and Heaven
declare to be impudent? No, no, Mecoenas, we ought not to accuse Custom for so
grand an Abuse: The levity of Husbands is fed from a Spring, which (...) within
the Confines of their own Leudness; and (...) they establish those Laws at one
time, which they abolish at another, it is because their imaginations inspire
them with those Idea's before possession, which vanish as soon as their
appetites are surfeited.

You labored, as I remember, by a thousand endearing Arguments to refute her
jealousy, and using a thousand Caresses to plead for you, that her reproaches
were unjust, you drew from her expressions so tender, and so passionate, that
like Parthian Darts, flying backwards, they wounded the heart they were not
levelled at. I felt unusual motions, and being seized at the same instant both
with a trouble and transport, I had never been acquainted with before, I stayed
a long time after you in the Garden, out of which I came the most Amorous of
all Men living.

You encouraged this Frenzy the next day, in a Treat you dedicated to the
same Domitius, and the most noble of the young Roman Knights; I was one of the
number, and I could not forbear to express my admiration, that Terentia had the
goodness to honor it and us with her presence. Pray do not name a Wife, at this
time, said you to me, and call to our Memory those Devoirs, which the liberty
of this Assembly ought to efface out of it. When I am amongst you, I imagine,
that what is permitted you, is not prohibited me. I give the rein to my
Frolicks, I speak and act without constraint: And your expressions admonish me,
that I ought to be more reserved. What injury does my Mirth do you? Alas! why
do you endeavor to put it out of humor, by upbraiding it with the names of
Husband and Wife?

^was not the sole Person in the Company, that ^us'd her quarrel against you,
and told you, that such a Wife as Terentia, ought always to be the fixed
Object of your thoughts. This opposition exasperated you, and you made a
Satirical Invective against Marriage and its dependences. Not one of your
Arguments escaped my memory; and the next day I framed a Dialogue in Verse,
which I entitled, THE JVSTIFIY'D WIFE; wherein I demonstrated, that the
tepidity of Husbands did authorize and justify the levity and infidelity of
their Wives toward them. I never pretended to a Talent in writing, but that of
Poetry, is one of the first Miracles, Love works in us. Terentia finding these
Verses in one of her Pockets, into which I had privately conveyed them, and
reflecting that Ovid had the day before sustained the same Maxims at
Sulpicia's, conceited him to be the Author of them. She found him at the
Princess Julia's Apartment, whither I had the honor to wait upon her; where she
told him railingly, that he was formidable enough to Husbands in the merit of
his own Person, without the addition of his poisonous Maxims. Ovid, who called
to mind the late conversation he held at Sulpicia's, was obliged to make a
direct Answer to Terentia's imputation: which, the more it was pressed upon him,
the greater confusion it involved him in: For the same Morning he had sent
Sulpicia a Copy of Verses on the same Subject. And thinking that she had lent
them to Terentia, satisfied himself to tell her pleasantly, that he was glad to
see Ladies applaud Lovers in the method of their Addresses. This owning of a
Work, which I thought Ovid was obliged to deny, filled me with indignation. May
a Man presume, Madam, said I to Terentia, to beg a sight of Ovid's Maxims? I am
yet but a Novice in the Art of Persuasion, and should be happy to receive the
first Rudiments of that glorious Science, from so famous a Master. Let Ovid,
said Terentia interrupting me, give you what instructions he pleases; but you
must excuse me, if you receive them not from my hands; and I have put my self
out of a capacity of committing the obligation you desire; for I have committed
the Verses already to flames, you beg the sight of. You must give me leave,
Madam, replied Ovid, to doubt the reality of what you express; for had you
destined them to that punishment, you would have inflicted another upon your
self, which was not to divulge it; and one is seldom guilty of burning that,
which he religiously cherishes in his thoughts and memory.

This conversation was urged so far, and its intricate obscurity found my
spirit so ill disposed, that it extracted poison out of every flower of it. I
fancied Ovid was my Rival; and that he had prevented me in my design of
persuading Terentia to turn a fair Rebel to conjugal Sovereignty. A thousand
actions, which till then I regarded with an eye of indifferency, and in effect
were no other, now represented themselves to me in another shape. Ovid could
not exhibit her the least testimony of a respect, which I did not interpret as
a testimony of Love: nor could she allow him a favorable word, which I did not
construe for a remarkable favor, one day in the grand Cirque he dropped a piece
of a Letter, which I caught up; wherein I imagined I read that, which
certainly was not there, I could not disguise the rage this error ingrafted in
my jealous thoughts. I became his opposite in all things; I spoke as little
good of him, as ill will could afford: And when I raillied him, I did it with
that vehemence and roughness, which failed but little sometimes of being the
rude Ushers of a quarrel. Terentia took notice of it; and one day coming forth
of the Empresses Apartment, as I was leading her to her Chariot, Are you, said
she to me, Ovid's Rival? Or is there some other cause for the animosity, I
observe, you have, for him? You pike him upon things the most indifferent; and
always make your contradictions, the answer to all his assertions. I beg your
pardon, Madam, said I, there is one assertion I never yet durst contradict, and
we both agree that you are the most glorious beauty of the Universe. It was not
a piece of Gallantry, I demanded of you, replied Terentia, but the cause of
your contests with Ovid. You have divined it, Madam, said I, we are Rivals. And
may one make so bold, as to ask, replied Terentia, who this beauty is, that is
worthy to be the object of so noble a Rivalship? The most glorious of the
Universe, Madam, said I. This phrase is familiar to all Lovers, answered your
beautiful Spouse, who persuade themselves, that the common opinion ought to be
led in triumph after theirs; and ascribe the highest attributes of beauty, to
that, which they Idolize in their own imaginations. But that I may be the more
capable of judging, whether your Mistress does really merit that title, or
whether you do not take a prospect of her perfections through the optic of
fancy only, I pray acquaint me with her name. I have named her already, Madam,
said I; and the distinction I made of that, wherein I agreed or disagreed with
Ovid, has imparted you the whole secret. Terentia had a piercing judgment and
my languishing regards were no fit Sophisters, to delude it, She on a sudden
eclipsed the luster of those divine looks with a frown, which as often yet as I
think upon it, darts a horror through all my veins; and briskly mounting into
her Chariot, left me in such an agony and confusion, that I had not the power
to move out of the place. You came a little after, and surprised me in my
ecstasy: and seeing me in that posture, leaning against a Pillar, my
countenance changed, and my body almost as immovable as the Marble, that
supported me. You did me the honor to ask me, what it was, that had reduced me
to that condition. I know not what answer I made you, but it was doubtless a
very extravagant one; for you presently burst forth into a loud laughter, and
asked of some persons about you, if you had not the Mine of a very cruel Lady.
These words recalled my reason; and fearing I had inconsiderately divulged the
whole secret, I followed you toward the Emperors Lodgings, with an intent, if
possible, to repair so dangerous a fault: when I soon perceived by the air of
your countenance, that you had not discovered it. You began to raillie me with
a liberty, you could not have dispensed with, had my indiscretion betrayed my
offense to you, and in obliging terms begging the honor, that I would make you
my Confident, you made me a tender of your faithful service. Alas! I had need
enough of it; for never Lover was treated with such rigor, as I experienced
from the incomparable Terentia: She intercepted from me all opportunities of
speaking to her; she avoided all occasions of giving me her hand. I followed
her to the Temples, to the Gardens, to the Empresses, to the Princesses
Apartments. I could not surprise one regard from her; and if at any time
forgetting herself, she so much relaxed of her severity, as to suffer her eyes
to bestow a glance upon me, she would dart such flashes of indignation and
disdain from them into mine, that now the best of my hopes wandered but like
wild Borderers, on the brinks of despair. Phedra perceived the visible marks of
it, and gave me to understand, they had not escaped her curiosity. She would
put her hand before my eyes, when she saw them too intentively fixed upon her
fair Mistress. She would speak things before me, which I might apply, as
counsels to my self. One night Terentia having lost at the Princess Octavia's
Lodgings a Diamond-button, which her train hung in; Restore it, if you have it,
said Phedro to me in my ear; every thing that belongs to Terentia, participates
of the Magic of her eyes; and you need not add another dose, to the effects of
their powerful charms. These overtures of an ingenuous confidence, engaged
mine. I was one day in the Temple of Concordia, where your fair Spouse did
offer Sacrifice. Phedra, who attended her, pretending that the Sun incommoded
her, came and placed herself by me, and asked me softly, If I were come thither
to supplicate the Goddess, to reconcile the difference which was betwixt my
heart and my reason. They are not at variance, said I: And my reason is so far
from controuling the desires of my hear, that it daily more and more convinces
me, that the glorious Terentia is the only person in the world, worthy of its
Adorations. These are glorious words, replied Phedra with a smile; but amongst
persons of sound judgment, they weigh but little. When a Love disquiets the
repose, changes the countenance, and may, perhaps, ruin the Fortune of a Man,
Reason does not approve it. Alas! How ^ould it? Are you ignorant, what Terentia
is? What the Merit? What the Credit of Mecoenas? Ovid is ignorant of none of
this, said I interrupting her, and yet he presumes to love Terentia; and, if I
am not deceived, is not hated by her. Ovid? replied Phedra, surpised with a
seeming astonishment. I, Ovid, said I, Lovers are linx-ey'd; and the felicity
of that Rival may triumph over my stars, but not my knowledge: It is for him,
that I am despised; it is to him, that my despair is sacrificed.

I could not proceed any farther in my complaints, the Ceremony ended, and
Phedra was obliged to attend Terentia; but I retrieved her again the same
evening upon the banks of Tyber, where the Empress, and the whole Court, were
diverting themselves, for the benefit of the fresh air.

Your jealousy is not without reason, said she to me, as soon as I approached
her. Ovid is beloved of Terentia, and this obstacle will accompany all others,
your Love shall encounter. I thought this morning to have acquianted you with
some circumstances, but since you could reap no advantage by them, I forbore to
mention them: serve your self of this, I now offer you; and handle it, as the
most useful weapon, to vanquish your Passion. Vanquish it! said I, Oh? Phedra,
it is invincible. I have not delayed till now, I have long since summoned all
my Forces together to combat it; there is nothing another could say to me,
which I have not said to my self. But after a thousand attempts, a thousand
effects upon my self, one look, one word, one thought of Terentia, has in an
instant baffled all my strongest resolutions. And I find, that the Gods have
given me a Soul to no other end, than to make it her Slave and Vassal to the
last moment of my (...). Has Terentia then, said Phedra, engrossed to herself
alone all the charms of her Sex! She has beauty; and he that should deny it,
would forfeit his reason: But do you think, that agreeableness of humor,
vivacity of wit, and gayety of converse, are to be found in none of the Sex but
her? I know not, said I, what may be found in another, but in Terentia alone my
heart expects to find its entire repose and felicity. Assist it, generous
Phedra, assist it, to atchieve it, added I, pressing her hand tenderly betwixt
mine; you have both address and credit, employ them, I, beseech you, to save
the life of an unfortunate, wretch, who resigns himself up wholly to the
auspiciousness of your conduct. All that I sue for at the Shrine of that
adorable Deity, is only a permission to Love, and to declare it. Let her
confine this Love to the most scrupulous terms, the narrowest bounds, rigor can
invent. Let it lie and languish at her feet in vain, after the meanest favors;
it shall consent to any thing, so it may be licensed only to own it self before
her. Is this a grace of too high a merit, to be implored? And must I despair
ever to obtain it?

I observed that Phedra changed color oftentimes during my discourse, which at
this place she interrupted with a deep sigh, and not able to suppress some
rebellious tears, which against her consent started in a shower of Pearls out of
her eyes; you are an Ingrate, said she to me, with a voice quite altered from
its ordinary accent; and you might have perceived, how improper a person I am
for the Employ you design me. I should not have presumed to have pried into
your Love for Terentia, nor endeavored to have gained the opinion of deserving
to be made your Confident, had you been so indifferent to me, as to oblige me
to have lent you the assistance you desired. Recall to your memory my words and
my actions; take a re-survey of my languishing eyes, and my distracted
countenance; and reflecting with shame upon your past insensibility, employ me
no more, but in what you may oblige me, as I have endeavored to oblige you.

How? cried Mecoenas aloud, was it Phedra that made you these forward overtures
of Love? do you not misname her for another? and may I give an entire credit to
your words?

Reserve your admiration, my Lord, said Crassus, for its due season and place;
you are not yet arrived to that, which ought more justly to challenge your
exclamations. These astonishing expressions, which I could not in reason be
accused for not foreseeing, surpised me with so much confusion, that it
imprinted its lively effects in Phedra's cheeks, who observed it in mine.

She left me with eyes inflamed with shame and despite too, as I imagined; and
adding herself to the company of some Ladies of the Empresses train, abandoned
me to the liberty of ruminating upon my adventure: which I considered as
environed with so many perplexities and dangers, that I knew not what course to
steer, to avoid the rocks that threatened my shipwreck. I was not ignorant
either of the credit, Phedra held in your Family, or what a monstrous species
of fury, a Woman's malice, that sees her Love despised, does swell to. I
apprehended some funest effect of her revenge; and yet I was neither capable to
entertain, or counterfeit a passion, that might secure me from it: These
various reflections did for four or five days tyrannize over my distracted
Soul. And seeing Terentia's cruelty and disdain daily increase, I had a desire
to try, if absence might not prove a cure, or at least an antidote, against so
many contagious evils. This design was no sooner framed, but assaulted on all
sides with mournful suggestions, doubts, and incertitudes. My reason had no
sooner said, I will, but my heart answered, I will not. I could harbor no rest
in my eyes, no quiet in my breast: But reason at length triumphed over
irresolution, and I gave the necessary Orders for my departure; when, as I was
going to beg the Emperors leave to accompany Lentulus to the Getish War, a
Moorish Slave, who I knew belonged to Phedra, came and delivered me a Billet
from her. I imagined it had been fraught with new and troublesome declarations
of her Passion; and not willing to answer it, I thought to have returned it,
without reading: But a consideration of the respect which was due to a person
of Phedra's Sex, qualifying all others, I opened it, and found these Lines.
Will you go, you too hard-hearted, and too charming Ingrate? Is neither the
consideration of my tender passion of the pleasures it is capable to afford
you, nor that of my death, which shall certainly follow you, able to divert
your sullen resolutions? Alas! I must change my bottom, and steer a new course.
I promise you all my interest, all my credit, with Terentia. Allow them that
time only, which shall be necessary for them to operate their effects in. This
will be a dangerous enterprise, and cost me dear, but yet your absence would be
a much dearer purchase to me. And I had rather for ever endure the malignant
aspects of your ingratitude with the enjoyment of your sight, than hope to
forget them, by being deprived of it.

Was there ever any resolution, my Lord, so firm, that such an attach would not
shake the foundation of? I ran to the chamber of Phedra, and said to her, all
that either my Love, or my Acknowlegments could dictate: I cannot promise you
said I, that your rare goodness has conquered my passion; I should be guilty of
a grand untruth, should I flatter you with the hopes of such a Miracle: But I
assure you of a friendship so pure and so tender, that were there a veil drawn
before the secrets of my heart, you would mistake it for Love. The amorous
heats of persons of my age, are generally, like Passengers, fixed no where; and
draw after them a train of more real discontents, than pleasures. Let you and I
combine our hearts in the solid link of a more durable union. You shall ever be
the object of my whole esteem, and honor me always with yours. This is the
only Love, which is neither subject to discontent, or change. Phedra blushed,
and with her languishing eyes seemed to beg another kind of union; but again
confirmed the promises, she had made me in the Ticket she sent me, and I had a
few days after some ground to believe, that she was just both to them, and me.

I found Terentia's eyes disarmed of their flaming darts; she suffered me to
pay my attendance on her in the Gardens of Lucullus: she addressed some
discourse to me, which though it treated only of things indifferent, did
transport me beyond my self with joy and content. What Miracles have you
wrought already? My dear Phedra, said I, when I had the opportunity to
discourse her in private: The Gods have blessed your generous designs, and the
most obdurate rigor of Terentia, is not able to hold out a two days siege
against your batteries. What am I able to perform, that may merit a service of
this importance? Do not intercept from me the means of continuing it, replied
Phedra; you were never yet well acquainted with the humor of Terentia; it
includes as many Mysteries, as her Person Beauties: you must discover nothing
to her, but give her leave to conjecture your intentions. And this was the
track, by which Ovid arrived at that favor, he aspired too: which you must
likewise take, if you hope to attain to it: Let your Love employ all its
faculties, but its tongue, and leave to me the care of interpreting your
silence not to your disadvantage.

This counsel was the more difficult for me to obey, in regard Terentia
re-assuming her former frankness and gayety of humor in conversing with me,
furnished me with a thousand occasions of breaking the uneasy bonds of my
imposed silence. But Phedra, whose eyes were two watchful Spies over me,
disappointed them all. She would cast terrible frowns at me; she would
interrupt me, upon a bare apprehension, that I was going to give my tongue
liberty to discover my thoughts; and never suffering me to be the Master of my
own conduct, would force me to observe the Laws she had prescribed me, maugre
all my attempts to violate them.

I framed a complaint one day of the violence she offered me in a passionate
Letter to Terentia, which I delivered to Phedra for her, which she assured me
she had obliged her to read; I seconded that with another, to which I received
a Billet of three or four lines in answer. Phedra promised me, that in a little
time she would effect greater things for me. And a little after, a Ticket was
directed to me, which summoned me to a nocturnal assignation. Phedra brought
it, and when I had read it, Well, said she, have I not now, think you, dearly
purchased your stay in Rome? And do you not comprehend, that at the rate I have
bought it, how precious a value I have for it? I never yet doubted your
goodness, my dear Phedra, answered I; and I conjure you to believe, that there
are no acknowledgments within my power, which I shall not sacrifice to it.
Dispose of my life and fortune; exact the strongest proof imaginable from a
friendship, which ambitions nothing more, than so glorious a test. But, my
Lord, replied she, interrupting me with a languishing look, do you think that
this friendship, as perfect as you decipher it, is capable to enable me to
serve you, as I do, with tranquillity and repose? You employ my diligence, you
require convincing proofs of it; and from my hand you receive an assignation,
from her you adore; what could your revenge, or your hatred, commit more
barbarous, or more cruel? My dear Phedra, said I, sensibly touched with this
reproach, Would Heaven had given me the same command of my heart, as it has
given you of yours, I should then have sacrificed it to the same Deity you do.
But alas! I am an unfortunate wretch, who has no power left him, but to fill
your ears with complaints against the severity of his destiny; to arraign
himself before you of ingratitude, and offer up his life too, if you require
it, in expiation of his crime. You offer but little, replied Phedra, with a
sigh, in offering so much; and you are assured, that your life is but in small
danger, if that be the only sacrifice you intend to offer to the Deity you
mention.

In saying this, she led me to the Cypress Walk; into one end whereof, there is
a private descent by a back pair of Stairs out of Terentia's Closet. She told
me, that when you were gone at night to wait upon the Emperor in his
Bedchamber, one should come for me, when she left me; and by the Stairs I
named, conduct me to the Room, where Terentia should honor me with the
interview, I so much desired.

Do not disturb your self, my Lord, said Crassus, seeing Mecoenas change
color; for nothing was performed, of what was promised. I stood Sentinel two
long hours at the foot of a Cypress Tree; the least motion whereof, made me
shake, like the trembling leaves over my head, and struck a panic terror into
my Soul: when at length there came one to me, and told me, that you were
engaged at Play with Prince Marcellus; that you did not go that night to wait
upon the Emperor, and that our Assignment was to be adjourned to the next day.
I laid a thousand imprecations upon the first Inventors of Gaming, and the
practice of it. I threw as many more at my Stars, and went raving toward the
place, where you were at play, hoping at least to purchase a view of Terentia
in public, which was denied me in private. This expectation was no more
successful, than the former. Terentia was retired, and I was scarce entered,
when one of her Slaves came, and whispering Ovid aside, who was looking upon
the Gamesters, conducted him to her Ladies Chamber.

I am well acquainted with all the transactions of that night, replied
Mecoenas; and if you take your measures from thence, your suspicions are
chimerical, and you ought to efface them out of your thoughts.

They are effaced already, my Lord, said Crassus, and I am as well satisfied at
the present, as your self, touching the design for which Terentia sent that
night for Ovid; but I was then ignorant of it; and only apprehended, that he
was favored with the Assignation, which was promised me: that the appointment
was broken with me, to befriend him; and that my just resentments of so
inhumane an affront was designed only to advance the triumph of my Rival. I
went to seek out Phedra, to make my complaint to her; but I could find her
neither in her own Chamber, nor in any of her Companions; I thought she might
have been gone into the Garden, to look after me, and advertise me of what had
fallen out. I hastened thither, after I had made many turns in vain about it,
at last I perceived Ovid descending by those Stairs, which I had been told, was
the private Road of favored Lovers.

Can you wonder, my Lord, if I retained not the least spark of sound judgment
or reason, in a circumstance so capable to deprive me of it; and if I
endeavored to revenge upon Ovid, a treachery, which I could not call Terentia
to an account for.

Phedra writ to me the next morning, and highly blaming me for the rude alarm,
I had given her Ladies honor, assured me that it would utterly ruin me in her
good opinion; and that I should despair hereafter of ever receiving the least
favor from her: Did it not become me, either to cast out Complaints, or
Menaces? That a real Love was always attended with a zealous fear and
submission. I ran to Phedra's Chamber, to conjure her either to obtain a pardon
for me, or a sentence of death: She was gone to Helvidia's, and her Moorish
Slave left me in hers, whilst she went to call her. I was not then in an humor
to delude either my time or thoughts, with the search after Curiosities; but, I
know not what secret impulse moved me to cast my eyes upon an Escritoire, which
stood open by me; I examined it, and found in it a Letter, which at the first
sight, I imagined to be Terentia's writing. I opened it: But my Lord, How great
was my astonishment, when by the Style, and the Subscription, I found it to be
Phedra's. She gave therein an account of a Suit the Lacedaemonians had then
depending at Court, which I knew, had been recommended to her. She magnified it
in the favors you honored her with, her credit, her expectations; and in fine,
gave her self so natural a character, that I had never known her before, but
through a disguise. I pulled the Ticket and Letter out of my Pocket, which I
imagined Terentia had sent me, I compared it with that I had in my hand. The
Writing was much like; and to evince all my scruples, I found in the same
Cabinet, an Order to Phedra, written with your Wives own hand, which spoke in
the language of a Mistress to a Servant, and convinced me by the difference of
the Character, that it was none but Phedra, who had written to me. What a
Thunderclap was this to a man, who was totally absorpt in a deluge of Love,
and believed himsef to be fixed in his Mistresses favor. Oh! Phedra, cried I, as
soon as I saw her enter, you have trepan'd me, by a horrid act of treachery.
See here irrefragable testimonies to cast you; that under a pretense of an
unfeigned Passion, which you suborned to delude me, have exposed my credulity
to the rude treats of your Malice.

I was able to say no more to her; for the confusion I saw her in, had
converted all my suspicions into certitude; which raised mine own to such an
height, that it even conglutinated my Tongue to the Palate of my Mouth. When
the first pangs of this Agony were past, and from a Marble Pillar that propt me
up, I cast a glance upon the eyes of Phedra, which by the torrent of their
tears, and their dejected bashfulness, confirmed the Sentence of my misfortune;
False and ungrateful Phedra, said I to her, outrag'd with grief, What inhumane
crime am I guilty of toward you, that you should reduce me to the most
deplorable state, that humanity it self was ever forced to groan under? Was I
culpable, because your eyes thought me charming? Did I abuse your facility? Did
I encourage your passion, or expose it to public scorn? In fine, What
barbarism have I committed, that could induce you to commit so many Treasons
against me? You would have left me, replied she, and I had not resolution
enough to support your absence. I borrowed the credit of Terentia, where I saw
mine own insufficient. The invisible Powers above, are my Witnesses, that I
have not been wanting to any one particular of those devoirs, I engaged to you;
and that repugnant to the impulse of my own forcible inclinations, I would have
sacrificed them to your felicity, had it centered in me. But Terentia was
inexorable, and you resolved to leave Rome: What could an unfortunate Woman do?
who, influenced by the fatality of her Stars, regarded your absence as the most
cruel of all torments. But, said I, Terentia's rigor is mollifyed, she speaks
to me, and denies me no marks of a visible esteem. To what Magic, or Fancy, do
I owe this? To a Fancy, replied Phedra, I have suggested to her, that you had
withdrawn your love, and rendering your self to my importunities, addressed those
Vows to me, which were so displeasing to her. And I my self conceived the vain
hope to induce you one day to approve so chimerical a change. I flattered my
self with the thoughts of obtaining that by a sense of gratitude and
compassion, which your inclination could not grant me; and to gain time to
accomplish my design, I made use of the dexterity, I have, in writing two
different hands. And seeing the more Sacrifice my Love offered to you, the less
sensible you were of it, I resolved to owe that to a Stratagem, which I could
arrive to by no other means. I would have supplied the place of Terentia, at
the appointed Assignation, and in order to it, had disposed all things for the
best advantage to deceive you. I would have spoken to you from within a Glass
Alcove; from which you should have been placed at such a distance, that you
should not have been sensible of the cheat. But Love, tyrannick Love, denied me
even that imaginary satisfaction, of raising your transports under the notion
of another. For Terentia had cloistered her self up all the time in that
unlucky Closet, which I had designed for our Converse. What severer punishment
could you wish Heaven to inflict upon me, than that whereof I my self am the
fatal Instrument? I love, without hopes of being loved again. I have betrayed
the confidence of a Lady, which has highly obliged me. I have hazarded her
reputatition, the honor of Mecoenas, your own life and fortune. And I have
purchased nothing in compensation of so many Crimes, but the assurance of being
loathsome and odious to you. Cruel one! can you so much forget Man, and receive
a Tiger in your Bosom, as to object to me yet your unworthy reproaches? And is
the antipathy, you have conceived against me, so inveterate, that the sense of
my sufferings will never be able to extinguish it? I scarce heard these last
passionate expressions, for I turned hastily away from her, to go seek out
Terentia: and imagining that nothing could be of more tragical consequence to
me, than the errors, Phedra had treacherously involved her in, I would have run
all hazards, to have dispossed her of it. But since my encounter with Ovid, she
has always so sedulously addicted her self to Caesar, to calm his indignation,
that I could never gain a moments time to entertain her, I judge that Phedra
has not neglected, that, that I allowed her; and considering, what an
opportunity, I had to ruin her, has prevented me. But, my Lord, let her not
triumph over my misfortune, and in her glorious Treason. Alas! without its
artifice, I had designed to remove my self from Terentia's presence; and to go
into the Field, and there oppose the effeminate attacks of Venus with the rough
Arms of Bellona; nor ever to see Rome more, till Mars had been my Physician,
and cured my distemper. But the fraudulent Phedra has traversed my design; and
to satisfy the fancy of her capricious Love, which her Reason ought to have
surmounted, gave the occasion of that tumult and disorder, you saw the Court
in. It was she, who by fomenting my jealousy against Ovid, was the instrument
of that great Persons banishment. But time has at length convinced me, that my
suspicions were groundless, and that Phedra did only raise them, to be an
obstacle to my Passion: But had they not been unfortunately confined by my
encountering Ovid in the Garden, that Noble Personage might have been at this
hour in Rome; Caesar free from all resentments of jealousy, or revenge, and
Marcellus in repose; and you, your self, my Lord, ignorant perhaps of the
secret designs, I formed, to attack the Royal Fort of Terentia's heart. Guard
your self from a fury so fertile in fatal inventions, and assuring your self,
that she may act one day as much against your interest, as you see, she has
done of late against mine, preserve Terentia and your self from the Artifices
of so deluding a Sorceress.

This discovery and preadmonition had already produced the most cruel effects
in the heart of Mecoenas, as it was capable to comprehend. He passionately
affected Phedra; and his Love was the more violent, in that he concealed it as
a secret, from the eyes of the world. He resented with an incredible
dissatisfaction, the injury his Passion had received from the ingratitude of
this false one. And more enraged against Crassus, for the innocent attempt he
had made upon the heart of his Mistress, than the criminal one he had formed
against that of his Wife, he executed Caesar's Orders with a rigor not suitable
to the sweetness of his natural temper. Crassus was astonished, and could not
forbear to tell him, that he ought either to treat him with less mildness, or
execute his Commission with less authority. Mecoenas would not vouchsafe to
return him an answer; and understanding that Phedra had not accompanied
Terentia to Tullia's Villa, he ran, transported with jealousy, toward the
Chamber of that ungrateful one; but was intercepted by the way by the
Philosopher Voluminous, who was a Man in high reputation for his learning and
wisdom, and in particular esteem with Mecoenas, whom he acquainted, that he was
come not only to wait upon him, but likewise to entertain him with a Novelty of
importance. They retired together into a Closet, and when they were alone, what
an Age do we live in? My Lord, said the Philosopher, the debauchery of Wit and
Manners, triumphs over all Laws, contemns the counsels and advice of wisdom,
and converts into tears of compassion the unregarded documents of Prudence.
Ovid, who has received so many graces both from Caesar, and you; Ovid so
capable of all excellent notions and knowledge, if he would apply himself to
them; Ovid, in a word, to whom I have been so prodigal of my richest
instructions, has betrayed both Natures designs, and mine. Behold here, my Lord
the Legacy he bequeathed me some few days before his Thalassian journey, and
banishing all spirits of this character from the Court, acquit your self with
honor of the trust, Caesar has reposed in yours. Finishing these words, he put
into Mecoenas's hand a little Cabinet of Cedar, which Ovid, coming from
Domitius's house had left behind him, rather through oblivion, than design of
his. Mecoenas opened it, and the first Paper that came to his hand, contained
the following Verses. An Explication of the Pictures which adorn the Gallery of
Domitius.
For LIVIA.
Out-braving Marriage-Faith, and Sacred Laws,
I triumph over Hymen with applause,
And with the reins of an unbridled Power
Commanding Rome, and Romes great Emperor,
What she, though never so virtuous, or so fair,
Is that, who dares herself with Me compare?
For JULIA.
You see in Livia, what Grandeur can do;
Commit grand faults, and justify them too.
But Fate, whose maxims never comply with time,
Has new State-principles for me in store,
And has decreed it for my greatest crime,
To be the Daughter of an Emperor.
For TERENTIA.
Sculptors, Historians, Painters, Poets, cease
TO employ your Pens, or Pencils, to express
My Fortune, Charms, or Life: the world you know,
Does seldom prove so just, as to bestow
An equal character, on what so rare,
And worthy of its envy, does appear.
For VARENTILLA.
My Charms were once so powerful, and my Wit,
I hoped to have made the Universe submit
Unto my Laws; but those I Would heretofore,
Have now no more their luster, nor their power.
For TULLIA.
The Author nothing has to say of me,
But that for to be brief, he will silent be.
For SULPICIA.
Spectator, if thou do desire to see
The Portraicture of Romes austerity,
Cast on some other, and not this, thy eye;
But if thou have the curiosity,
To find the Soul here of a Man of honor,
This is the piece: fix thy regards upon her.


What manner of speaking is this, said Voluminous? Is the Soul of a Man of Honor
capable to make a Woman of Honor? That which the World entitles a Man of Honor,
does glory to be gallant, and favored of Ladies; but contrariwise, a Woman of
Honor declines the intrigues of Gallantry, and regards Chastity and Modesty as
the two Pillars that support all the other virtues of her Sex. What can Ovid
mean by the expression then? but that Sulpicia ambitioning only the qualities
of a Man of Honor, did not pretend to those of a Woman of Honor. What
Licentiousness? What Malice is this? I will wager, that Ovid would not have
said this of the Wife of Tisienus, but in revenge of that severity, which of
all virtues in a Woman, he ever expressed the least esteem for.

Whilst Voluminous was intent upon his Philosophical Ratiocinations, Mecoenas
was not less on his Poetical diversions: And after diverse Copies of Verses of
the same character, he lighted upon a piece of Prose, the first leaf whereof he
could not read without smiling, and asked Voluminous whether he had well
examined the Papers he had brought him. I examine them? My Lord, replied the
Philosopher, the Gods defend me from blasting my soul or my eyes, with reading
such no less dangerous, than scurrilous vanities; I only lightly perused the
Verses which concerned the Empress, and seized with the horror of their
blasphemies, came in haste to deliver the Criminals up into your hands. I have
supplied the defect of your curiosity, replied Mecenas, smiling all the time;
and that your zeal may not want its just recompense, I will teach you how far
it has transported you: and in saying this, he began to read the Paper out
aloud.

OVID's Apology.
I here pronounce the Sentence of Condemnation upon all, the Public lays to my
charge. I ingenuously confess, that I have always abandoned my Soul to its own
licentious inclinations, dedicated all the faculties thereof to the enjoyment
of the voluptuous pleasures of Love: And as the full satisfaction of the senses
does smother and extinguish the light of reason, the charms of Love caused me
to forget and slight the due consideration I ought to have had of the
indispensable Laws: but nature and my self are not guilty alone of this crime,
Men have contributed more to it than the Stars; and the false wisdom of
Voluminous did inoculate the first grafts of this folly into my Soul.

How? my Lord, interrupted Voluminous, has that scandalous Satyrist assigned me
a place too in his Sessions? What matter is it, answered Mecoenas gravely, a
great Philosopher as you are, ought not to be moved at the liberty of a
Poetical extravagance, and continuing his reading,

All the world, (went he on) knows this Voluminous: I entertained an esteem for
him upon the report Fame published of his wisdom; and being prepossest with his
character, I had a sensible esteem likewise for all, that he expressed in
relation to me. I could not without trouble digest his Censures upon my
Treatise, de Art Amandi: I went to visit him, with design to have some
conference with him. What would you have with me, said he, as soon as he knew
my name: I am the scourge of the voluptuous, the censurer of worldlings, and
the confounder of the proud. Have these qualities any Alliance with yours? And
can it be possible, that one Bond of commerce or friendship, can combine Ovid
and Voluminous together? It is so possible, replied I, without seeming to be
moved, that if you were not what you are, and that I were not what I am, I
would have nothing to do with you; what need have those, who are in perfect
health, of a Physician? And who would address himself to the wise, if he could
furnish himself with those Maxims and Instructions he comes to demand of them?
It is my part, who am wholly destitute of those Goods and Riches, to beg a
supply of them from you. Vouchsafe then to impart some of them to me, and
declare to me, if you please, by what Arguments you pretend to extirpate Pride
and Voluptuousness out of the World. By reason, replied Voluminous with a
serious gravity, I shall need to borrow none but from her, to convince a
reasonable Creature of their brutality; and that alone I grounded my Thesis on,
when I demonstrated, that your Art of Loving, was a contexture of pernicious
Maxims, an Academy of all Vice, and a visible depravation of the Faculties of
the Soul.

I raised my voice at this definition, and looking upon Voluminous with an eye
of admiration, how? said I, Is the Art of reducing into practice the reason of
a Man, an Art opposite to reason? And do I deprave the Faculties of the Soul,
when I teach Men the perfect practice of that, which is the visible mark of
their Being? The visible mark of their Being, exclaimed Voluminous: Do you call
that a Being, which according to your own Maxims, has no existence but in
another? Do not you engage a Lover to live more in that, which inspires him
with a Passion, than in that, which inspires him with a Being? Do not you make
his health, his joy, his repose, and oftentimes his honor, to depend upon the
person he loves? And has not a Being a more noble dependence than this? And
have not I then reason to conclude, that your Art of Loving, teaches a Man the
Art to return again to his first Nothing, from whence the Gods have been
pleased to draw and extract him?

This way of reasoning, as extravagant as it was, seemed to me very pleasant
and subtle; and caused me to have an esteem for his wit, though I could not
relish his Maxims. I prayed him to infuse into me as sensible a gust of his
Maxims, as they had done already an esteem of his Learning. But I am afraid you
will find it, said I ingenuously, a talk of more difficulty than you apprehend;
for I never yet found any solid pleasure or satisfaction in any thing, but a
reciprocal Love, which hitherto I have only regarded, as a subject worthy to
captivate all the Faculties of a Soul the Gods have accomplished with the
greatest perfections. I beseech you to manage this passion by your prudence for
my best advantage: And since it is not capable to bias my Soul, and divert it
from the secret inclination it has to Love, let it endeavor to choose objects
for it most worthy its consideration.

Voluminous was ready to caper for joy, when he heard me make this Proposition,
and promised me to sacrifice all his elucubrations for a happy success; and I,
for my own part, assured him of all the assiduity and diligence he could
require of me. In fine, we became inseparable. And the beginning of this Amity
charmed my Soul with a thousand pleasures and delights. He has a spirit
embellished with all curious literature: And does not affect the common method
of teaching, practiced in the Schools, but aspires to a more noble one. Her
reasons upon the principles of things, has made diverse experiments of
curiosity, and did discover to me a thousand new secrets in Philosophy, and the
Liberal Sciences: But when from these artificial qualifications, we descended
to the reason upon those of Nature; Alas! how great Strangers did I find the
sophystical Subtilties of this sage one, to these Notions? And how great a
grief did I conceive in my mind, that I had sacrificed so much time and study
to so empty a vanity? We one day, I know not how, fell into a discourse of the
Reign of Augustus, and the merit of his Favorites. Are you one of those
Sycophants too, said he, who are accountable to the Gods for the dissoluteness
of the Age? And encourage it by your Applause. What do you find so dissolute in
the Age, said I, interrupting him, Men labor to live with convenience and
satisfaction in it. Will you not allow, that every one ought to render to the
Gods an Account of those Goods he has received from their liberal hands? And if
you had given one of your servants a piece of Land to improve, would you be
pleased if he should leave one half of it covered over with bushes and briars,
and other trumpery? Men are properly the Trustees of Nature. It is for them,
that she daily labors, and is, as I may say, brought to Bed of such variety of
Productions: And they ought to use them with all grateful moderation. The Sea
offers us Fish, and we must employ our industry to catch it; the Earth presents
us with Fruits, and we must take the pains to gather them. Every Element, every
Season furnishes a Man with varieties, to render his life pleasant and
delicious. Behold the Maxims, cried out Voluminous in a passion, upon which the
vanity and gluttony of the Age are established. From the source of such
Epicurean Arguments, spring so many unbridled desires, so many licentious
debaucheries.

It is by this fanatical pretense of indulging themselves the use of Natures
bounty, that Men would oblige the Gods to create every day a new Sea, and a new
Earth, if the insatiability of Worldlings, were as omnipotent, as it is
boundless.

Here throwing the loose reins on the neck of his satirical humor, he committed
more unpardonable Errors in one hours discourse, than one of Venus's professed
Idolaters would have done in a ten years Love-intrigue. No state, no condition
of life escaped the lash of his rage. He taxed the Senate of remissness, the
People of blindness, the Court of debauchery, and the Soldiers of effeminacy.
There was nothing so sacred, which his tongue did not profane; Ladies of the
severest virtue were accused by him of dissimulation, the Priests of
hypocrisy, and even the purity it self of Vestals, blemished by the imparity
of his Censures.

What, said I to him, Are these the fruits of that wisdom you make so glorious
a profession of? Are detraction, disrespect and contempt of your Neighbor, the
Basis, on which you have raised to your self that splendid Title of a Reverend
Sage? And to demonstrate your self to be a reasonable Animal, do you accuse all
the rest of the World of brutality and folly? Ho! What is the World, replied
he, but a confused Mass, and contexture of brainsick follies? Does the Lawyer,
who consumes his litigious days in deciding Controversies, wherein he is
seldom concerned, merit the Title of a wise Man? Does not the Courtier, who
makes himself the Ape of all new fashions, and sacrifices his repose, his
health, and his estate, to the capricio of every new Mode, deserve to be
enrolled in the Catalogue of Fools? Does not the Madam, who by a thousand
affected vanities spins her self the web, wherein the painted Butterfly
ensnares her own liberty and honor, deserve to be called a Mad-ame, or Mad Soul
indeed? And is not the Lover, who lies whining at the feet of this Lady
Foolish, as great a Fool himself? Who is then, said I, interrupting him, a wise
Man in your opinion? My self, replied Voluminous, with a starched gravity of
countenance; who free from the engagements and tumults of the world, center in
my self my own repose, and my own felicity: Alas, said I, do you call that
chagrin and those virulent dregs of a phlegmatic Soul, which you so peevishly
vent against all other Men, a true repose? Does that satirical humor, which has
even devoured up in you all sense of humanity; which will not suffer my Muse
quietly to addict herself to the Noble Art of Loving, without attacking her
with loud reproaches, which represents the Universe to you, in the shape of a
Monster, composed of nothing but honor and deformity; and which under the
pretense of a petulant censure, does, without intermission, hound you on upon
all Mankind, does all this, I say, deserve the name of a calm tranquillity of
spirit? No, no, Voluminous, you do not carry a calm, but a tempest in your
breast; and the frothy effects of it fly up into your brain, and intoxicate
your reason. The opinion, you cherish, of your own wisdom, is an Arrogance,
more insupportable than that, of which you impeach the proudest Worldlings; and
they need not so strong an Antidote to preserve themselves from the dangerous
contagion of those soft pleasures, to which you declare your self a mortal
enemy, as they do from the venom of your injurious Censures. A Lover concerns
himself with nothing but what concerns his Love. All the Evils, which his
Passion is the Author of, flow both to and from himself; And he esteems himself
so much obliged to those, who give no disturbance to his innocent Amors, that
in recompense of the obligation, he gives a free pardon to all the miscarriages
of the Age; you on the contrary, being partial to your self, and obnoxious to
all others, think to avoid the imputation of a private ignominy and weakness,
by a licentious inveighing against the glory and authority of other Men.
Believe me, Voluminous, you were never wise. Wisdom is more modest, and more
prudent. You are more a slave to your passion, than the voluptuous Man, whose
scourge you glory to call your self, is to his: And to obey their peevish
instigations, you brand the Actions of Virtue and Innocence it self; and repose
that pleasure and satisfaction in this, which another finds in the regaling of
his senses.

Voluminous confirmed all by his ungoverned passion, that I had alleged against
him: and scorning to acknowledge himself convinced, he broke out of the lists
of the dispute, and launching himself forth into a wild Ocean of bitter
invectives, he possessed me with a greater contempt of his vanity, than report
had done before, with an esteem for his virtue. We parted ill satisfied with
one another. And ever since that day, he has used so zealous a diligence in
snatching at all opportunities of doing me an injury, employed in the effecting
it, Instruments so base and unworthy, and I have found his Soul so susceptible
of all sordid and mechanical impressions, that he has convinced me, that a
truly wise Man, is one diametrically opposite to Voluminus. I have always
professed as great a respect and esteem for the counsels of my Friends, as he has
obstinacy to have fixed me to his blind Errors: He has endeavored to make me
feel the malicious effects of his revenge, and I have generously pardoned all
his mischievous intentions: He thinks himself the only person in the world,
worthy of its admiration and praise, and I receive those, as a favor, it
flatters me with; and so by a consequent series of the like oppositions, I have
consecrated all the Faculties of my Soul, to the charms of that divine passion,
against which Voluminous professes so inhumane an antipathy and horror.

It was to have been wished for the diversion of Mecoenas, that this Comic
Scene had preceded the Tragical Relation of Crassus; it would have afforded a
very pleasant one to any person whose thoughts had not been embaras't with
other cares and distractions. The mistaken Saga swelling with inward rage and
despite, and not daring to give them vent, changed his color as often, as the
Apology did its style. He gave himself some secret Applauses, for having forced
Ovid to attribute a few to him in his discourse, and died his flaming cheeks in
their own blushes, when he considered in others, how severely he was handled by
him: And conjecturing by the frequent smiles of Mecoenas, which he could not
retain, that his shame was his diversion, he would suddenly grow as pale, as
Envy could paint him, with grief and confusion. But the illustrious witness of
these reciprocal Agitations, was scarce in a capacity to remark them. His Soul,
which like a Shipwrackt Vessel, was sinking in the turbulent billows of its own
cares, had no leisure to interest it self in the concerns of another. He took
his leave of Voluminous, and telling him, in an ironical complement, that he
would acquaint the Emperor with the promptitude and parity of his zeal to serve
him, he went hastily to the Chamber of Phedra.

He found her in a condition capable to disarm his choler: she had been
informed of Crassus's disgrace; she accused her self of being the chief
instrument of it: And this grief being joined to that of seeing her Love
disdained, involved her in a deluge of mortal resentments. Her eyes, whose
lively sparkling is generally one of the most powerful charms of beauty, were
seized with a languishing dullness, and seemed to implore the compassion of all
they were fixed upon. Her body, whose elegant proportion might challenge the
title of one of the most beautiful Structures in the world, was negligently
extended upon a Couch; which by her posture and dejectedness, she seemed to
have chosen for her tomb. Mecoenas regarded her awhile, without being
discovered; and his heart, which Nature had made the seat of compassion, not
able long to harbor so unnatural a Guest, as his new-conceiv'd indignation, he
began insensibly to yield to the soft impressions of the first: But then again
in the same instant recollecting his thoughts, and reflecting, that it was a
consideration for his Rival, and not for himself, that had reduced her to that
condition, unfaithful one, cried he out aloud, how dare thou testify so many
visible marks of an affection, which both a just gratitude, and the solemn
engagement of so many perjured vows, ought to have surmounted, or at least
concealed from the surmises of the whole world. Phedra turning her languishing
eyes to that side, from whence the voice came, and considering Mecoenas less,
as an exasperated Lover, then a powful Favorite of Caesar. Ha! my Lord, said
she to him, What will you do with Crassus? Shall he be banished, imprisoned, or
treated with more rigor? He shall not want punishment, since thou have so much
ingratitude, replied Mecoenas, Thy love has pronounced his condemnation; and
thou would doubt whither ever I loved thee, or no, if after what I know, and
what I am able to do, the Crime of Crassus should escape unpunished. He has
received the punishment, he merits, in me already, replied the weeping Phedra,
and the Gods could not make me more unhappy, then in having made me the unhappy
instrument of your revenge.

Consider me, my Lord, both as what I am, and what I ought to be; you love me,
you are one of the most charming, and most eminent persons of the Empire: To
you I owe my liberty, and to you I might have owed all, that your high credit
commands all within the extent of its Dominions: I do not love you; and I love
an Ingrate, who draws upon me as many malign effects of your favor, as I might
have hoped for benign ones from it. What can your revenge ambition more? Am I
not punished enough in my own person, but I must suffer too in that of Crassus?
But unjust and treacherous Phedra interrupted Mecoenas, What services, what
obligations have ingrafted Crassus so deeply in your Soul? How has he merited,
to see himself the object of all your love, whilst I am the subject of all you
ingratitude? How, has Terentia, merited my Lord, answered Phedra, to be only
the subject of your cold Caresses, whilst a poor Bond-slave is the object of
all your real Flames? You have not always had these considerations, ungrateful
one, replied Mecoenas: I have not always loved Crassus, my Lord, said Phedra,
and as long as this Passion did not combat that, I nourisht for you, my devoir
obliged me to observe all your desires, as a most inviolable Law; but since I
have changed the prospect, and with other eyes regard them, I find them not
more legal and just than my own. What reproach can you object to me for loving
Crassus? You that impute none to your self, for preferring me before the most
resplendent Beauty of the Empire? Oh! ungrateful Creature, said Mecoenas,
interrupting her, you turn those weapons upon me, which you ought to convert
upon your self: for since I have preferred you before Terentia, you ought to
have preferred me before all the persons in the World. And calling to mind the
Sacrifices, I have formerly offered to all your desires, they ought to convince
you of the injustice of these, you now cherish in opposition to me. Alas! my
Lord, replied the amorous Phedra, as they were too powerful to be convinced by
me, so the power they acted by they did not derive from me. And do you think,
that I expected a detachement from your reproaches, before I summoned all the
forces of my Devoir into the Field? No, my Lord, if the strongest opposition
could have conquered this Passion, it should not have led the unfortunate Slave
Phedra through Rome in triumph after it. I have represented all the
engagements, I have to you, with all their heightning circumstances, to the
consideration of my gratitude; and scorning to entertain such mean thoughts of
your love, as to believe that that forced you to do for me, what you did, I
stamped the character of an obligation upon the least of your favors. But, my
Lord, the most endearing obligations cannot alter Decrees of the Stars; and
though I must always acknowledge you for a most illustrious Benefactor, yet
cannot cherish the same tender esteem for you, as I do for the the too
ungrateful and too charming Crassus.

This discourse forced so many mournful complaints from the amorous Mecoenas,
that he had not ended them before he was informed of the Emperors return: and
being unwilling to be surpised in Phedra's Chamber, he retired out of it in as
much confusion as he had first entered into it: he could not resolve to digest
the bitter Pill, he had been forced to swallow; nor so far renounce all his
hopes of reducing the ungrateful false One back to her devoir, as to alarm the
Court with the so exotic a Novelty. He calmed, as well as he could, his
thoughts, and his countenance: gave some minutes attendance upon Augustus in
his Chamber; and not judging it seasonable to publish yet the secret of this
Intrigue, he retired to his own Apartment; where leaving him and the rest of
the Court to their repose, we will return again to Tusculum, to examine what
passes there betwixt the disgraced Cornelius, and his noble friend Virgil.

They were no sooner in a capacity to unbosome with freedom their thoughts to
each other, when Cornelius calling the beautiful Phila to his remembrance,
conjured Virgil to relate to him the particulars of the Intrigue, which had
been betwixt them. Lovers use willingly to talk of their amorous Advenventures;
wherefore Virgil suffered no long importuning; and deducing his discourse from
a somewhat remote head.

THE HISTORY OF Virgil.
AN illustrious descent, said he, is a gift of Fortune, which entails no
hereditary glory upon the receivers; it costs them neither study, nor labor,
and it is so far from deserving the title of Merit, that it is oftentimes an
obstacle to the acquiring it: But yet, my Lord, it ought to be confessed, that
though it be not the reward, it is the luster of Virtue, and that illustrious
qualities shine not in their native splendour and orb, but in a Subject of an
illustrious Title.

I labored a long time under this injustice of Fate, and it was that which
caused me to take my leave of my Country, more than the flaming ruins of
delightful Mantua. Its destruction destroyed none of my riches, nor my
dignities: My losses by the Fire were not so great, but that a small Cott was
able to repair them: But the obscurity of my birth, eclips d all the luster of
my Talents; and as I valued my self more upon the nobleness of my deserts, than
of my descent, I was very willing to exchange my native Air for any other,
where my person might be better known, than my extraction.

You know, my Lord, how this design succeeded; I was favored by Mecoenas, and
presented by him to the Emperor; and within a short time, obtained the place of
Supervisor, for the transportation of wheat, and all other grain, wherewith the
Isle of Sicily supplies Rome. I was ambitious to show my self worthy of the
Employ I was honored with; and I not only dedicated all my cares and diligence
to advance the fruitful harvests of every season, but likewise to improve them
to an advantage, that Island had never before been sensible of. I taught the
Inhabitants a new, and more beneficial way of tillage; I gave them many
wholesome Precepts for the increase of the health and fecundity of their Cattle:
This method, which no man had taught, or practiced before me in that place,
rendered me familiar and in high esteem with persons of that calling. They
would come and consult me upon all their affairs, and I have a thousand times
admired, to see what pleasure Nature takes to repair in them by ingenuity and
industry, the injustice Fortune has done them by a blind partiality. My Lord,
says an old Man, in whose innocent converse I took great delight, one day to
me, What is this Fortune, of which I have heard you discourse so often; you
call Her sometimes unjust and capricious, and at other times you reverence Her,
as a Goddess; and, in effect, you have enrolled her in the Catalogue of your
Deities, and dedicated Temples to Her in Rome? Tell me, I pray you what
Authority has She over Mortals? Does She send them into the world? Can She take
them out of it? Or maintain them in health in it? She does not do any of all
this, said I, she cann^ destroy the World; but she furnishes it with
Commodities, without which, it would be less to be desired, than death it self.
But, replied the old man, she has furnished me with none of the Commodities,
you speak of; my labor, is the only Commodity, I subsist by; which is scarce
able to feed and cloth me, and yet I live contented. If you live contented,
said I, you are one of fortunes Favorites, and she has given you all that she
can give you. But, replied he, all that she has given me, would not render
another perhaps, so contented, as I am. Young Coridon, who is so handsome, and
who has so many Commodities, is always mumuring against Fortune. His rich Uncle
Melibeus, dotes on him, and maintains him like a Lord; and yet how comes it to
pass, that he, who has every thing that I have, should continually be making
complaints; and that I, who have not half of what he has, should live contented
with my condition? How? said I, From hence that he to the abundance, he has,
covets more; and that the little you have does fully satisfy your desires. It
is not fortune then, replied the old man, which is able to create either out
discontents, or our joys; we need not court her either in Heaven, or upon
Earth; we need not raise Altars, or Temples to her; since all our felicity
consists in being contented, with what the Gods have bestowed upon us. I am
glad I have learnt so excellent a Lesson to day: I shall remember it, when I
hear Coridon make his complaints, and I shall not fail to tell him, that he
ought to attribute to himself, not to fortune, the dissatisfaction he finds in
his condition.

This Coridon had addicted himself to a very solitary course of life; and
though he lived in a near neighboring Village to my house, I had never seen
him. I had a curiosity to understand, what it was, that obliged him, to frame
those continual complaints. He came one evening with some of his Companions
into a Meadow, where I was walking: and as soon as I saw him, I was convinced,
that it was not without reason, that they called him, Coridon the Fair; for I
had never beheld a more charming Beauty. I asked him, that since he was only
born a Peasant, and yet commanded all conveniences such a life could furnish
him with, Why he was always railing against Fortune? You ask me a great Secret,
my Lord, said he, fetching a deep sigh, and if I could impart it to you, it
would much lighten the burden of these afflictions, I groan under.

His Uncle came to us, as he had finished those last words; and desiring me not
to give ear to his idle discourse, made a sign to him, to retire: Why do you
chase him away? said I to Melibeus; you should have suffered him to tell me,
what it is that troubles him. Perhaps I could administer him some wholesome
Physic for his distemper: Alas! my Lord, replied his Uncle, What can he tell
you? He is a Lunatic, who is neither capable of declaring to you the cause of
his complaint, nor of any advice that can be given to moderate them. He spent
his first years at Athens, where he applied himself to nothing but the reading
of Fables and Romances, which have depraved his judgment. He hatches strange
Chimera's in his fancy, and nourishes them up in his folly; and seeing me
refuse to flatter his brainsick humors, he will oftentimes go and address his
complaints to Rocks and Trees, as if they were capable to understand and
relieve him.

This frenzy of this beautiful Youth, moved me to compassionate him. I sent to
a famous Grecian, who professed Physic in Syracusa, for his advice, and desired
him to employ the best of his skill, to reduce his distempered Brain to its
native strength and vivacity. The Grecian returned me a learned and
satisfactory answer; prescribed the use of certain Simples, and assured me of a
favorable success. I went to find Melibeus, to communicate his advice to him;
and as I was in the midst of a little Wood, which I was to pass thorough to go
to the house of that good man; I thought I heard my self named; I lent a
diligent attention, and heard one say;

Consider into what a gulf of dangers you would have precipitated your self,
had not I, by the suborned disguise of an imaginary folly, found a means to
preserve you from it. Virgil has a curious and piercing judgment; he would have
soon discovered the secret, you are so much obliged to conceal: And that
perhaps may be the misfortune, which they have possessed your Father with so
strong an apprehension of: And if Heaven had not opportunely sent me to your
relief, one moment of indiscretion might have rendered the precautions and care
of eight entire years, wholly ineffectual, Oh! cruel precautions, answered the
person, to whom the other spoke; I am able no longer to enslave my self to
them. This base disguise, the prolongation of my banishment, the rustic
employment to which I am forced to apply my self, and the secret repugnance and
antipathy I have against them, accomplish the the Prophecy, which they
endeavor to avert from me; they advanced it, in seeking thus to preserve me
from the menaces of it; and the disasters, which the Stars threaten me, are not
so much to be apprehended by me, as those, wherein the provident care, as you
term it, of Antiochus, does daily involve me.

It is strange, replied he, who had begun the discourse, that the prudence and
affection of a tender Father, such as Antiochus is, should be suspected by you,
of cruelty, and indiscretion. Do you think, that he has not maturely weighed
the reasons and consequences of his proceedings? Your resignation has hitherto
been his joy and his glory; And I wonder, that having not above five or six
months to suffer, those should become more insupportable to you, than all the
former years of your confinement.

My tender age, replied this person, and the hopes I had to enjoy in a short
time my enlargement, did, as it were, skreen its horror from my eyes; but since
Antiochus declared to me in his last Voyage, that it was to be continued to the
seventeenth year of my age, I was seized with such violent transports of grief
and impatience, as my firmest constancy, was not able to triumph over. The
liberty which the young Shepherds, with whom I am forced to consort,
licentiously indulge themselves; the amorous persecutions of old Nerysa, and
the tender complaints of young Daphne, expose it every moment to the extremest
Test. I am not able Melibeus, any longer to keep my tongue prisoner, as you
keep my person; and it is time now that the World should hear me speak that
under the notion of Phila, which you force me oftentimes to utter amongst our
Shepherds under the name of Corydon.

I was so attentive to this discourse, that the same Nerysa, which Corydon had
just then spoken of, came to the place where I stood, and was within two or
three paces of me, before I discovered her. I laugh oftentimes, when I think of
this Creature. She was the Widow of Pollio, whom you knew, at your first coming
into the World; and having retired her self into Sicily, where she had a fair
Dowry, she became so besotted with the Charms of Corydon, that she both forgot
her age and her honor, to become a young Votary of Cupid. She went dressed like a
young Country Girl. She made one at all youthful Sports and Pastimes of the
Shepherds and Shepherdesses: and crowning with Garlands of Flowers that head,
which she had thatcht for many years with purchased Hair: She would play as
wantonly with little Dogs and Monkies, as if she were just then stepped into that
age, wherein such childish gallantries may pass for an ornament. She asked me
what curiosity had invited me thither, and what it was that I leant so diligent
an ear to? To your praises, Madam, said I, which declare, that in this Habit,
you would force the youthful Paris to pay a homage to your Charms; and serve
for an original to copy forth the beautiful Shepherdess Enona by. You are a
Flatterer, said she, with a smile (which envy would have been apt to call a
grin) I do not aim by this dress, to attract the admiration, or envy of my
neighbors; but one knows not otherways, how to divert themselves in the
Country; and besides, I owe this slight complaisance, to the kindness of the
Shepherds, I live amongst, who with so much care and respect, solemnize yearly
the day of my birth. So giving me her hand, and leading me to a Castle, toward
which the Wood, we were then in, by a pleasant Walk conducted us, she entreated
me to stay, and be a witness of the innocent diversions, which her neighbors
were preparing for her. We entered into a Hall, which was suddenly filled with
young Fellows, and Country-wenches, who brought every one a small Present,
suitable to his ability; and attended with diverse rustical instruments,
presented us with a very pleasant Ball after their Country fashion. The young
Daphne, Niece to Nerysa, (whom Corydon had mentioned before in the discourse, I
had overheard) had by the command of her Aunt, rankt her self amongst them,
and chosen two or three young Girls for her Companions, whose pretty
simplicity and innocence, might have raised emulation even in the most admired
Beauties of Augustus his Court; but both my eyes and my attention were so
eager'y fixed upon the counterfeit Corydon, that I had no more left me, to
bestow upon any other Object.

Never did Beauty receive less advantage by address, nor address more glory
from Beauty, than in this incomparable person. I admired, how that being a
Girl, she was able with such dexterity to perform the exercises of the contrary
Sex: and in a moment after, I wondered as much, how in the disguise of a Boy,
she could preserve the glory of her own, with so much sweetness and modesty.
The old Nerysa devoured her with her eyes; and pregnant with a Passion, that
every action seemed to labor to be delivered of; she asked me with a transported
countenance, if that Youth did not merit a Fortune more noble, than his birth;
and what I would say of that person, who to repair the injustice, fate had done
him, should raise him to one worthy of himself? I would say, said I, that that
person would give a most excellent testimony of his judgment; and that if I
were born a Prince, and could find a simple Shepherdess, accomplished with so
many Charms and Perfections in her Sex, as Corydon is in his, I should make no
scruple, to make her a Princess. Nerysa hugged me in her Arms for this answer,
and highly extolling it, for a rare principle of equity in me; I have the same
sentiments, said she, as you have; and were it not out of a chimerical
apprehension, that I should incur the censure of the scandalous World, I swear,
I had long since invested him with all my possessions. It shall be so yet, went
she on; as if she had finally determined it: your learned discourses have quite
non plus't all my scruples; and you shall see in a short time what a veneration
and respect, I have for them: Not that I was ever fond of Marriage from a Girl;
nor had I ever entered into it, but by the express command of my Father; and I
had a natural aversion to co-habit with Pollio in any other way than as a
Sister with a Brother; But I make a conscience of suffering Corydon to be
buried in the obscurity, wherein he was born; and I shall hereby demonstrate to
the World, that it is oblige men to the practice of such acts of justice, that
the Gods have created such differences in their fortunes.

I could have derived a pleasant diversion from her extravagant follies, had
not I began to feel in my self an incroaching Passion, which filled my Breast
with chagrin and disquiet. I attempted several times, dancing the Dance, to
draw the counterfeit Corydon aside, and discover some of my thoughts to her;
but old Melibeus, did watch her so narrowly, that I could gain no opportunity
of speaking to her, but in his presence. I fetched many a deep sigh for grief;
and seeing all the rural Squadron retire, and I not able to effect my design, I
returned in a melancholy humor toward my own House, thorough the same Wood,
by which I had come before; when I could hear old Nerysa in a furious tone,
thundering out terrible menaces against her young Niece Daphne. I desired her to
tell me what it was, that had provoked her to so much indignation. What is it?
said she, staring upon me, like a Woman half distracted, this young Slut, which
I have bred up from the Cradle, as tenderly as if she had been a Daughter of my
own, and to whom, thanks to the Gods, I have ever given nothing, but examples
of virtue, prefers her own giddy-brain'd inclinations, before my virtuous
Precepts. I found her just now making a thousand Caresses to Melibeus his young
Nephew. For Heavens sake tell me my Joy, went she on, giving the Girl no time
to make her an answer, which of my actions does authorize you to live with me
in this debauchery? I do not disallow of innocent Recreations; and being not
yet arrived to those years of gravity, as to renounce the pleasures of Society,
I profess, I cannot reconcile the gaity of my humor to that air of severity,
which entombs many women alive at the age of four times ten within their own
houses, as in a Vestal Cloister; but Virtue, you know, my Lord, will shine in
what Orb soever you fix it. I consecrate my self wholly to solid and essential
diversions: Take example by me, foolish Girl, to comport your self, and force
me not by your impudence to send you back again to the Wilderness, from whence
I took you. I endeavored the best I could to appease the fury of this old
Tygress, and being conscious to my self that Daphne could not be guilty, but in
intention only; I desired, Nerysa not to suffer her affection to her Niece to
be seduced by vain surmises. Vain surmises! cried she out; I am neither
distracted, nor blind. I saw with these eyes this young Minion follow Corydon,
as he went out of my house; I had a curiosity to see what they intended; I
stole softly after them; and I heard Daphne reproach him, because in the Dance
he had not vouchsafed to cast one look upon her; call him ungrateful, and beg
his Heart of him, with expressions, that cause me to blush at the very thoughts
of them. That famous Fabler, had a great deal of reason on his side, when by
his tale of the Cat transformed into a Woman, he demonstrated to us, that
Nature will be always Mistress. Corydon was born upon the Dunghill of a Country
Village, and will smell of it as long as he lives: He has no sense of a
generous ambition, and instead of endeavoring to please me, or reach at
Riches, Glory, or Dignities, he runs creeping after this young Slattertaile,
which has not a penny, but what my charity will bestow upon her. It is not for
her Beauty, (run she on, giving a fresh loose in the fury of her Carreer) set
aside a little snout-fair Paint of youth, which will sooner or later decay, and
a little breeding and bonne grace, which my care and charges have purchased her,
I have without vanity a more mature judgment, and am more desirable than she.

I applauded all she said, and being touched with compassion for poor Daphne,
who was with so much injustice suspected of a crime, she was not capable of
committing, I offered all the reasons to the rage of the old Vixon, which I
thought might appease it. Corydon came to understand what I had done, and
acknowledging my generosity, came to give me thanks for the good office.

It was not a bare point of generosity, lovely Shepherd, said I to her, but a
Motive more powerful, that commanded those small services, you set so high a
value on; and I shall expect for all others, I shall consecrate to you
hereafter, a recompense worthy of their Merit. Alas! My Lord, replied the
pretended Corydon, with a sigh, what recompense can you expect from a poor
Shepherd, which Fortune has chosen to be the object of her scorn, and who being
as destitute of wealth, as of credit, is capable to pay no other recompense for
a favor received, than that of impotent vows and acknowledgments? The
acknowledgment you offer, fair Corydon, said I, is not so inconsiderable, as
you imagine it; you have a heart in your power to dispose of, and I would
purchase it at the whole price of my Soul, if you would impose no higher upon
it.

The fair disguised, died her cheeks in scarlet, and stepping back two or three
paces, seemed by that eloquent motion to tell me I had forgot, to whom I
addressed my discourse. Moderate your astonishment, said I, Beauty can
challenge no particular Sex for its object; and though you really were, what
you seem to be, I might usurp the privilege without exception, to admire that,
which Nature has framed so admirable. But, charming Corydon, you are conscious
to your self, that I have a more solid foundation to raise a Temple on to the
Divinity of Love: and without giving a clearer explanation to my thoughts, I
constitute your self the Judge to denounce, whether the Divinity, I mentioned,
may not claim the sacrifice of my heart, with as much justice, as if he were
the most resplendent Beauty of the Grecian Empire.

A Courier arriving from Mecoenas with private Orders, whom I was obliged to
dispatch in haste, interrupted our longer converse; but I omitted no stratagem,
nor assiduity, for the renewing it again with the first opportunity. Love is a
subtle poison, which in a moment passes through our senses to our heart. I
spoke, I urged, I discovered to her what I knew of her condition, and how
miraculously I came to the knowledge of it. In fine Corydon, or I should rather
now say, Phila, told me, that a learned Astrologer came to Athens, when she was
not above seven years old, had gained the acquaintance of her father, and
assured him, that if he did not conceal her from the eyes of the whole world,
till she had attained to the 17th year of her age, her life should be
unfortunate, and environed with innumerous disasters; and on the contrary, if
he observed the precaution he gave him, he should see his daughter one of the
most fortunate persons that ever came into the world.

Antiochus persuading himself that these Predictions were infallible, (added
the fair Phila) caused a rumor to be spread abroad of my death; and having
committed me to the charge of old Melibeus, who had formerly been one of his
Servants, he has concealed me for these nine years in this Island, in the
disguise you now see me: And I, perhaps, should have supported it with more
constancy, if the loathed caresses of old Nerisa, and the continual
expostulations of young Daphne, had not quite exhausted my patience. I abhor
that old amorous piece of decrepidness, and I tenderly affect her deluded
Niece. Hatred and disdain solicit me to expose one to open confusion, and
love and friendship privately to undeceive the other: But I dare not obey
either of these temptations. Melibeus is continually suggesting to me, that the
felicity, or infelicity of my life, depends upon my secrecy: he has so often
inculcated this to me, that I have now no power to doubt it; and I give as
sacred a belief to the predictions of that Astrologer, as I should do to the
voice of Jupiter himself: And I tremble with ho^or, to think, that as I am now
speaking to you with so much frankness, I perhaps advance that cruel destiny,
which they so carefully study to avert from me.

I encouraged Phila against the vanity of her apprehensions, and finding a
heart in her, which as unpracticed and as young as it was, might easily be
induced to receive the impressions of a passion, I endeavored to manage this
favorable conjuncture of Beauty and innocence to the best advantage. I
insinuated my self into the good opinion of Melibeus. I never spoke to his
Nephew in his presence, but my discourse was an absolute harangue of virtue,
and obedience to Parents; And though I oftentimes took up this theme as much by
accident, as design, it so strongly enchanted the fancy of the old Man, that he
would send Phila purposely to me for my instructions; and assured himself that
she was in as great security under my conduct and charge, as in his own.

Oh! ye Gods! what an age of felicity did every moment then of my life include!
It was in those auspicious days, that I composed those passionate Eglogues,
which you took so much delight to read; the laws of my duty complied then with
the desires of my heart; and I received as much applause from Mecoenas, for my
Government in Sicily, as I did satisfaction in the actions by which I purchased
it. The day approached, when the disguised Phila was to pull off that
Vizard-Mask, which had so long clouded from the eyes of the world her native
splendour; and my estate, I now thought, was grown considerable enough, to
challenge the assent of Antiochus. But blind Love does oftentimes want the
foreseeing eyes of prudence; and we did not weigh in her impartial scales, the
dangers to which the vigilance of our watchful Spies might expose us.

The flames of Nerisa seemed to borrow new supplies daily from the coldness of
Corydon: she persecuted him with a Love, that at length degenerated into an
open fury; and finding that he grew every day more and more rebellious to her
raging desires, she imagined that my counsels blew the coals both of his
disdain, and her own shame. I carried my self, as a person indifferent, toward
the rural Beauties of our Neighborhood: And as none could divine, that the
counterfeit Corydon had caused in me this indifferency, all interpreted that a
default of Love in me, which was properly the excess of it. Nerisa believed
that I instilled pernicious Maxims into the Soul of Corydon; and acting the old
Dragon, who was the Keeper of the Hesperian Garden, she with never-sleeping
eyes watched this golden fruit of her heart; and one evening surpised us at a
private Cabal, which we held under the overspreading Canopy of a thick quickset
Hedge, that proved a treacherous Skreen, to intercept from us the sight of that
old

Dragoness: Ha! my Lord, What think you, was the discourse, we entertained
those few blessed minutes with, of such importance, that Nerysa could not have
expected any of so great? I was blaming Phila, for not forcing her inclination
to express a little more complaisance for the error, she saw her involved in.

She may do us a displeasure, said I to her; she has a great interest in this
place; and Melibeus Rents the Estate of her, he lives in; for which you ought
to pay her the small acknowledgement of a little fein'd complaisance. Make all
her fantastic discourses and addresses, your sport and diversion. Ha! Virgil,
said she, I shall never be able to extort from my self that complaisance, you
plead for. I could heretofore with more equity, and less trouble, digest the
follies of Nerisa; and as long as her discourses, only invaded my modesty, and
reason, I suffered them with patience enough: But since now they begin to
invade the confines too of my fidelity, they are become wholly insupportable to
me. I know, that my heart is not suspected to be what it is; and if you frame a
right judgment of the state of it, Nerysa cannot properly be called your Rival;
but she is really so in intention, though not in effect: and mine are so pure
and so delicate, that even the blind error Nerysa cherishes in her abused
thoughts, seems to blemish and asperse them.

Would to the Gods, it were lawful for the World, said I, most beautiful
Shepherd (for I would not use my self to call her Phila in private, for fear of
being surpised with the mistake in public) to pay to your Idea, the homage
and adorations, it owes it, under what form soever, it shall design to
represent it self: The excess of your fidelity, give me leave, to call my
injury; since my whole stock of love is incapacitated thereby, to repay one
half of the debt, it imposes upon me; and should Cupid Mortgage all his Demains
to supply my inability, I should still be in arrear to so matchless a Bounty.
Converse with Nerisa with the same innocence, you did, before I knew you. And
the minutes of bliss, she will rob me of, shall furnish me with a sum of
vexations, that I beg you to accept in part of payment of that infinite one,
for which I stand indebted to you; and as then you shall take care not to
decline all diversions, to enjoy my company alone, I shall be able to impute a
tender reproach to you, that you did not that for me, which I would have done
for you. Oh! most ungrateful person, replied the generous Phila, Do you think,
that those vexations, which you account to me in part of payment of the debt
you boast of, will cost me nothing? Is not your absence, think you, as
insupportable to Corydon, as Corydon's is to you? And do you judge, though the
unequal temper of our hearts should not render us both of one weight in those
Scales, that the company of Nerisa ought to be obtruded on me, for a diversion?
This Nerisa, I say, who many lusters ago pruned up with all the advantages and
charms of youth, durst scarce pretend to the title of Tolerable; and who at an
age; wherein the most radiant Beauties suffer a total Eclipse, and become types
of ugliness and horror, imagines Heaven has blessed her with the supernatural
Gift of enchanting all that look on her. Did you ever behold anything more
extravagant, than the Habits and Dresses she affects?

I am ready to fancy sometimes, that those insensible things are indu'd with
reason; and to be revenged of her for depriving them of that right and
privilege, they enjoy in all others, by a malicious kind of artifice increase
her natural deformity. Are the apish toys and vanities, wherewith she
endeavors to disguise her decripedness; the scandalous inclination of her
heart, which ready to take leave of the World, and drop into the Urn, cannot
yet take leave of youthful desires; and that insatiable rage, which causing her
to forget the respect she owes to the memory of Pollio, makes her stoop to her
own disgrace, and in the face of the whole World, infamously court a poor
contemptible Shepherd? Are these, I say, qualities, to induce me to regard
these hours, as a pleasure and diversion, I should dedicate to the loathed
Amor of Nerisa?

Phila had scarce pronounced these last words, when I thought I heard a noise
very near us, and indeed it was Nerisa; who having listn'd to our discourse,
and not able any longer to be Mistress of her patience, flung away in a fury;
which alarmed us with the effects of it. I made haste to discover, what it was;
but being forced to fetch a great circumference round, before I could find a
place to look over the Hedge, Nerisa had conveyed her self away with such
speed, that I could not catch a sight of her. She sent that very day for
Melibeus; and having severely checked him for a criminal negligence, or consent,
related to him the amorous Dialogue, which had past betwixt us. This
intelligence did not produce in the spirit of Melibeus the effect she expected;
He knew, I might love Corydon without violating the laws of nature; but judging
that I could not be enamored with the counterfeit Shepherd, but I must be
made acquainted with the secret, which so much concerned her, and by that means
frustrate all the precautions of Antiochus, he dispatched away an Express to
advertise him of what had happened. Antiochus made all have imaginable to come
and snatched his daughter out of the jaws of those imminent disasters, which he
apprehended her to be threatened with: He arrived privately at the house of the
old Shepherd; and whilst I was taking a progress to Syracusa, whither Caesar's
orders had commanded me, he robbed me of my felicity, and Sicily of its glory,
by conveying her out of it. Consider the destruction I was seized with, when I
was informed of this cruel Rape, which Antiochus had committed more upon my
repose, then the inclinations of his Daughter. I presently sent for Melibeus,
and omitted neither entreaties, nor menaces, to extort a real confession of the
truth from him: But he with with an obstinate loyalty conceall'd the fatal
secret, and making several solemn protestations, with a dissembled frankness
which deluded me, that he was both innocent, and ignorant of any design
relating to Phila, possessed me with a strong apprehension, that Nerisa, had by
violence secured her in some place or other. I run to her, and demanded her of
her, in terms that neither had respect to her Sex nor Quality; and arraigning
her lustful Ardors, and Designs, before the Tribunal of her Modesty and Honor,
I raised her impatience to the highest pitch of fury. She had the same
jealousy and suspicion of me, as I had of her; and thundering them forth in my
ears in vollies of reproaches, as extravagant, as unjust, upbraided me with
that, which none was able to do, but her self. Melibeus, said she, has
doubtless checked his Nephew for effecting so unnatural a correspondence with
thee, and thou fearing that his sharp reprehensions should dissolve that
shameful Intrigue, has conveyed him away thy self; and in the mean time with an
audacity and impudence, which merits the chastisement of the Gods, does charge
me with a violence, infinitely more justifiable on my side, than on thine.

This erroneous frenzy of Nerisa, drew some sighs from me; and I had suddenly
after a fresh subject to renew them. Melibeus received intelligence that
Antiochus died in his return with his Daughter to Athens; and his death having
advanced on him with such speed and violence, that it allowed him not the time
to write to Melibeus, he knew not in what part of the World to begin his search
for her. This misfortune triumph't over all the glory of his former discretion
and prudence; he complained of the cruelty of his destiny, and made an open
declaration of that, he had till then concealed with so much care, and
fidelity. This Novelty surpised all Sicily, and attracted upon me so many
mournful condolements, that I was not able to support them, whereupon I
resolved to exchange that now unpleasing Climate, for another, that might not
recall the memory of Phila so often to my thoughts, as the objects would do,
that I should behold there.

I came to Rome, where I grew familiar with Cicero, as I told Tullia yesterday:
He was well pleased I should come and visit him in his voluntary Exile, I came
one day to see him, and being told by his Servants, that he was gone forth to
take a walk in that same Wood, out of which you saw his Daughter and Terentia
come to receive us, I hastened thither; and with an eager curiosity, examining
all places to find him, I happened to cast an accidental glance upon a young
Pine Tree, as I past by it; and fixing my eye more intentively upon it, I
discovered some Ciphers engraved on the Bark of it, which were, methought, of
too youthful and too amorous a character, to intrude themselves into the
solitude of Cicero. I read them, and as soon as I had found him, I begin now to
believe, said I to him, that the reports which fly about Rome, have something
of truth in them, and that you do not court this Retirement for your Mistress,
but in reference to some other. Cicero seemed to be a little troubled at my
Compliment; but presently recomposing himself; These are Fables of my Wives
invention, said he; who willing to cast a blemish upon the just reasons, I had
to repudiate her, alleges a chimerical Amor for the ground and color of her
reproaches. Was it to give a color to this Fable? answered I, smiling, that
your Wife came hither privately to carve Ciphers upon your Trees, intermixed
with crossed Darts, and other Gallantries, which I find so ingenuously flourished
upon your young Pines? Cicero seeming to take no notice of what I showed him,
confessed his guilt by a sudden blush; and this second surprise, confirming
what the first had hinted to me, he thought, I believe, that it would be to no
purpose for his lips to deny that, which his eyes had declared to me already.

It is not to be denied, Virgil, said he, with as much tenderness as confusion,
that my age, study, and my vexatious resentments for the public disorders,
have not the power to secure from me the invasions of that passion, wherewith
you reproach me. Love neither respects the gravity of years, nor the juncture
of affairs; and as long as we possess Hearts animated by Life, we ought to
fear, that we may be robbed of them by Love. I reposed a most entire presumption
in the Maxims of Nature; nor could I believe, that at the years of that
discretion, werewith the number of them ought to have inspired me, I could have
been capable of the wanton flames of Youth. But I find that the Politics of
age, transcend those of Eloquence; which causes the Soul to participate of the
weakness of the Body: And methought, that in the vigor of my youthful years, I
had one of greater courage and proof, than I have now, against the attack of
that Passion.

I was too sensible my self of the power of Love, to wonder at the effects it
produced in Cicero. I attributed all the applauses, he could desire, to his
aged frenzy; and this approbation winning his confidence, he invited me to see
his Mistress. But, my Lord, how incredible do you think, was my astonishment,
when I saw it was the same Phila, whom I so passionately affected? The ripest
wisdom, or the firmest courage would have wanted resolution to encounter such a
surprise. I made a loud exclamation, which was able to make a clear discovery
of my heart. Phila's admiration was not inferior to mine, and Cicero's being
as great, as that of either of us both, he gave us the liberty of entertaining
one another with a long discourse, not having the power to interrupt us.

How Phila? said I to her; Are you become the absolute Mistress of your own
disposal? Is the prolongation of your disguise expired? Were you not informed I
was in Rome? Were you so near it, and would not send to acquaint me with the
place of your residence? I neither knew of your being in Rome, replied the fair
Phila; nor, had I imagined it, would it have been possible for me to have sent
to you. The restraint I am confined to will scarce suffer me to believe, that
there is any such place as Rome in the World: and you ought to acknowledge that
Love has wrought a great Miracle in your favor, that you have obtained the
privilege of seeing me, or speaking to me. It shall never work such another,
since this is so little in mine, interrupted Cicero; and whereas this first
intrigue of my confidence, has proved so fatal, I renounce for ever all
temptations of exposing it to a second: And having said this, he made a sign to
an old Woman, who was Guardian over her, to withdraw her into an Arbor, which
was near us; and measuring the Walks with long and hasty paces, expressed so much
grief and vexation in all the motions of his person and countenance, that I
began to fear some funest effect of his rage.

How? Cicero, said I, is it you that inveigh with such zeal and violence
against all invasions of the public liberty, and commit one of such horror and
barbarism your self? What prerogative can you challenge over this person? And
by what authority do you pretend to usurp a right to enslave her to this
unworthy condition? By the authority, which Parents may usurp over their
Children, replied Cicero: Antiochus dying, with his last breath, bequeathed me
all he was ever Master of: and since the Prerogative, he has given me over her,
is become so incompatible with your desires, I advise you, as a friend, to use
your early endeavors to suppress them. Phila is my right only; I received her
as a Legacy from her Father; and that you may not suspect, that I tyrannically
usurp a power, which I have no title to, see here, said he, drawing a Paper out
of his Pocket, the last Will and Desires of that good man. I read the Writing
he put into my hands, and found that Antiochus, after he had magnified by many
endearing expressions, the friendship contracted betwixt himself and Cicero,
during his sojourn in Athens, in the time of Sylla's Tyranny, declared, That he
consigned wholly to him the tuition and guardianship of his only Daughter;
advertised him where he should find her in Rome under the name of Plautia, and
desired him to take her to Wife, since his divorce from his own, gave him the
liberty of a second Marriage; or else to choose a Husband for her, with the
same freedom and authority, as he should have used himself, had Heaven
conserved his life. Do you judge now, went he on, that whither after what I
told you, at the beginning of our converse, I shall not take care to see the
last Will of my dying Friend executed with all fidelity? Can you be so vain, to
conceive any hopes of ravishing Phila out of my hands, or the power of my
desires? And do you imagine, that if I could have been able to have subdued
them, I would not have done it long since for my own consideration, rather than
now for yours.

I combated the design of Cicero, with all the vehemence, and all the
eloquence, love could inspire me with; and not that day only, but many more
following also. I omitted neither entreaties, nor arguments to oblige him to
restore Phila to her native liberty, and that of choosing a Husband for her
self. Methought, they began to make some impression upon his relenting
obstinacy; Great Souls will always at last reassume their own character; and
the first weakness, they are capable of, are but, as sudden storms, which as
suddenly pass. But the flight of Phila destroyed in a moment all these glorious
hopes; and though, to do Cicero justice, I am obliged to say, that he was ready
in favor of my inclinations to impose a violence upon his own, yet I must
likewise declare, that he has been the fatal author of all the calamities and
discontents, my life has ever since been forced to groan under.

It is not Cicero alone, whom you ought to make the subject of your
accusations, said Cornelius, I am acquainted with all the particulars of
Phila's flight; and though she always conserved that which concerned you, as a
most nice secret, from my knowledge, I have some cause to apprehend, that a
Rival who lay conceall'd, has done you more injury, than that which openly
professed himself to be so.

Cornelius could not have the opportunity of explaining this Mystery to Virgil;
for the arrival of Crassus (who having taken his last leave of Rome, and
understanding that this Praetor, who was his particular friend, was to lodge in
Tusculum that night, had taken it in his way) interrupted their farther
discourse. They comforted each other in their disgrace and sufferings; and
projected those designs, which a little after sent them both away to visit
their Fellow-Heroes in the Isle of Thalassia.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Henry Herringman.
Folio, Large.
SIr William Dugdale's Baronage of England, His Origines Judiciales. His
Monasticon, Anglicanum.
Beaumont and Fletchers Plays, all that were formerly Quarto and Folio put
together into one Volume. Davila's History of the Civil Wars of France. The
History of the Council of Trent, Written by Father Paul, with his Life, and the
History of the Inquisition, added to it. Sir William D'Avenants Works. Dr.
William Howells History of the World to Constantine the Great. Henry the
Eighth, Written by the Lord Herbert. Parthenissa, a Romance in six Parts,
Written by the Earl of Orrery. The Art of War, by the Earl of Orrery. Clelia, a
Romance, in five Parts.
Small Folio.
Mr. Abraham Cowley's Poems. Philip de Comines. Madam Philips Poems. The Earl
of Orrery, four Plays. Blounts Law D ctionary. De la Valle's Travels. Paula
Paruta's History of Venice. Grand Scipio, a Romance. Ben. Johnson's second
Volume. Sir Robert Howard's four Plays. Astrea a Romance. Dom John de Castro.
Bishop Andrew's Lectures. Howell's History of Venice. Mr. Tho. Killegrew's
Plays. Olaus Magnus. Wall Flower's, a Romance. Pinto's Travels.
Quarto Books.
Mr. Robert Boyles Philosophical Essays. Mr. Robert Boyles Tracts. Blounts Art
of Making Devises. Dr. Charlton's Stonehenge. His Natural History. His
Immortality of the Soul.
Civil Right of Tithes. Sir Will. D'Avenants Poem to the King. Mr. Drydens Poem
to the King. His Dramatique Essays.

Large Octavo.
Mr. Robert Boyles, Reflections. His History of Colors. His Style of
Scriptures. His Seraphick Love. His Theology. His Account of Reason.
Lord Bacon's Essays. The Life of Buscon the Witty Spaniard. Bergerack's
Letters. Lord Brook's Remains. Broome's Horace. British Princes. A Poem. Sir
Robert Howard's Poems. Sir John Denham's Poems. Cato Major.
Carter's Heraldry. Conversations of the French. Sir John Suckling's Works.
Characters of the Passions. Crashaw's Divine Poems. Carew's Poems. Dr.
d'Espagno's Essays. Differences of France and Spain. Duke of Guise's Memoirs.
Dr. Donn's Poems. Epicurus's Moralls. Discourse of Gods Judgments. Hudibrass,
first and second Parts. Henry the Fourth, of France. Written by the Bishop of
Rodez. Human Industry: or, The History of the Manual Arts. Human Soul. Poems by
Sir Tho. Higgons. Hero and Leander, a Poem, in Burlesque. Pastor Fido, by Sir
Richard Fanshaw. Journey into Spain. Idea of Painting, by Mr. Evelyn. Mr.
Dryden's Annus Mirabilis. A French Grammar, called, The Princely way to the
French Tongue, Composed at first for the use of her Highness the Lady Mary, and
since taught to her Royal Sister the Lady Anne. By Monsieur Peter de Lanie,
Tutor for the French to both their Highnesses. Mystagogus Poeticus. Sir Tobias
Matthews Letters. Moral State of England. Quevedo's Visions. Englished by Roger
L'Estrange Esquire. Reflections on the Poets by Mr. Rymer. Verstegan's
Antiquities of the English Nation. Voyage to Athens, giving an Account of the
Ancient and Modern State of that once famous City, with the Life of this
present Emperor Mahomet the Fourth, and the Ministry of the Grand Vizier
Coprogli Achmett Pacha, and the most memorable Passages at the Siege of Candia.
Mr. Waller's Poems. Yelverton of Religion.
Small Octavo.
Game at Chesse Play. A Relation of the Dutch War by the Earl of Castlemaine. A
Relation of the Siege of Candia by the Earl of Castlemaine. Marriage Asserted.
Kellison on the 55th Psalm. Horace's Odes. Bishop King's Poems. Mr. Waller's
Dido and Aeneas.
Large Twelves.
Hool's Greek Testament. Historical Remarks of Holland. Sir Walter R^wleigh's
Ghost. Relation of the defeating of Oliver Cromwell, and Cardinal Mazarine,
about their taking of Ostend by Treachery. Present State of Tangier and
Argiers.
Small Twelves.
Balsack's Roman. Mr. Boil of Air, Latin. Jesuits Politics.
A Catalogue of all the Plays Printed for Henry Herringman.
By the Duke of Newcastle
Humorous Lovers. Triumphant Widow.
By the Earl of Orrery.
Mustapha. Henry the Fifth. Black Prince. Tryphon.
By Sir William D'avenant.
Siege of Rhodes, in two Parts. Playhouse to be Let. Unfortunate Lovers. The
Wits. Love and Honor. Law against Lovers. The Fair Favorite. Man's the
Master. Platonic Lovers. Albovine K. of Lombardy. The Just Italian. The Cruel
Brother. News from Plymouth. The Distresses. The Seige.
By Sir Robert Howard.
The Committee. The Surprisal. The Duke of Lerma. The Indian Queen. The Vestal
Virgin. The Blind Lady.
By Mr. Wicherley.
Love in a Wood. The Dancing Master.
By Major. Porter.
The Villain. The Carnival.
By Sir George Etheredge.
She would if she Could. Love in a Tub. Sir Fopling Flutter: or, the Man of
Mode.
By Mr. Dryden.
Indian Emperor. Royal Martyr. Mock-Astrologer. Granada, two Parts. Sir Martin
Mar-all. Marriage-a-la-Mode. Love in a Nunnery. All for Love. Maiden Queen.
Wild Gallant. Rival Ladies. Tempest, altered by him. Amboyna. Aurenge Zebe.
State of Innocence.
By Mr. Shadwell.
Sullen Lovers. The Humorists. Psyche. The Vertuoso. Royal Shepherdess. Epsome
Wells. The Libertine. Tymon of Athens, Altered.
By Mr. Killegrew.
The Princess, or Love at first sight. The Parsons Wedding. Claricillia and
Clorinda, or Love in Arms. In 2 Parts. The Pilgrim. Thomasso, or the Wanderer.
Two Parts. Bellamira's Dream, or the love of Shadows. In two Parts.
Claricillia. The Prisoners.
By Madam Phillips.
Pompey. Horace.
Plays by several.
Cutter of Coleman-street. By Mr. Cowley. Mulbery Garden. By Sir Charles
Sydley. Adventures of five Hours. By Sir Samuel Tuke. Pompey. By several
persons of Honor. Hamlet By Mr. Shakespeare. Mackbeth By Mr. Shakespeare. Love
in the Dark. By Sir Francis Fane. Sir Sallomon. Mr. Caril. The Usurper. Roman
Empress. The Coffee-House. The Major of Quinborough. The Women's Conquest.
Amazon Queen. Sir Francis Drake. Pelius and Thetis.
Plays in small Twelves.
Amorous Phantasme. Loves Kingdom. The Enchanted Lovers.
Novels in Octavo.
Scarron's City of Romance. The Drudge or the Jealous Extravagant. The Loves of
Charles Duke of Mantua, and Margaret Countess of Rovera. The Ephesian and
Cemerian Matrons. The Husband forced to be Jealous, or the good fortune of
those Women that have jealous Husbands. The Loves of several Philosophers and
great Men. English Adventures, in two Parts. By a Person of Honor.
Novels in Twelves.
Don Carlos, Prince of Spain Prince of Conde.
FINIS.

