THE MEMOIRES Of the Life, and Rare ADVENTURES OF Henrietta Silvia Moliere.

As they have been very lately Published in French. With Remarks.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1671.

A Fragment of a Letter, Translated out of French.
I Bring along with me a This Book of her own Life.
handsome Lady of your Acquaintance, who threatens to make me go further; She
has a strange longing to see her self at Paris again. But I question it very
much, whether she will obtain that of me, as to make me venture so far: besides
that, my business will soon call me back to Thoulouse; I cannot so easily go
into a place where I have had the folly to suffer my self to be put in Print.
Knowing you have more prudence than I, I leave it to you to cut off any thing
you think superfluous. But let us speak of another thing. What a troublesome
man your Boook-seller is? to ask that of me An Epistle.
you speak of. Can he do nothing without it? With what should I make him a
Preface? I have no more to say to the Readers; And I have done all, when I have
abandoned them my Story. I do not see that this Book has any great need of
justification. For if I have been forced to name some persons that are living
still, I am persuaded there is not one amongst them all, who will not willingly
pardon me the Liberty I have taken: However, I Will be the Book's warrant for
that respect; I am glad of what you write, that it shall be put to be examined
by very able men. Take heed only, that those able men be not too serious; That
will, perhaps, help them to find many more faults in it, than otherwise they
would. A man must be a little waggish, for to read Badineries; Waggish things.
They must at least be read waggishly, to take pleasure in them. I make an end
here, for I am staid for to make an end of my breakfast. Fare well.

You are the most obliging Person in the World. Were I but at leisure, I should
not conclude this Letter, without making you a thousand complements, to
testify my thankfulness for all the civilities you have showed me.

The Bookseller to any Body.
TWere too much for a Translater to pretend to give you a Preface, when the
Author her self does confess, that she had not wherewith to make up one. I Will
give you none therefore; And if you must needs have one, I pray go to any other
Book of old, or lately Translated; there you will find Preface enough, which will
serve to read before this story as well as before those things it is pieced up
to. However, if you can find in a Dialogue the gust that most Readers find in
Arguments, Advertisments, and Prefaces, I am content to put you here something
to that purpose. The Translater, and a Friend of his, are speaking together.

T. To the Reader.


F. Say you so? And why should this be for the Reader, more than the rest of
the Book?


T. Because all Readers are ready to run in haste to the point in hand*


F. Therefore you would stop them.


T. And therefore we call them by their names of Reader, to the end, that they
may hear us, and mind what we are to say. But pray, Sir, tell me, How do you
like your Friend in this new garb? Do not I look as if I were in Print?


F. Fie, Fie, no.


T. Sure I do. Though to tell you true, I do not love it of all things: For a
man to have his elbowes drawn behind his back, his Arms sticking to his sides,
and his hands busily employed about his Belt, his Wastcoat, or his Girdle,
bowing neck and shoulders.


F. It is a very fashionable behavior; why should you blame it?


T. What makes you think I blame it? I do but draw the Copy of it. And I tell
you again, I fancy I am so my self.


F. The Readers will say you are very foolish.


T. Every body is free to speak that pays for it. I know this Age is not
easily pleased, and I am not more easily persuaded to labor much to please
them.


F. If you would, I am confident you cannot do it, for you do not know how it is
^o be done.


T. May be not.


F. I Will tell you then. The same way that men have gone these many thousand of
years you must go still. Let alone writing and reading; Never think to charm
the World with Books, which can but divert them a little at the best; Be
humble, make much of the present time, of your self nothing. Lie boldly, suffer
gladly, endeavor to do any thing that delights others, and profits you. When
thus you have scraped a good deal of that yellow metal, and therewith made fast
a Noble House, and fruitful Land, and set up an excellent French-English Table
for so many days of the week; you shall be sure to please the World, provided,
there be but few that know it.


T. I see what I must do to please the World: But what is to be done to please
the Translater? You say nothing to that.


F. I have nothing to say to that; You desired to know how you should do to
please others, and I have told you: Must I tell you also how to please your
self? Fare you well, I am for Silvia.


THE ADVENTURES a Of the Life of Henrietta Silvia Moliere, To Her Highness of
--
IT is no small comfort to Silvia, b Madam, in the midst of all the ill
Resorts, by which her Reputation is slandred every where, to see that your
Highness is desirous to know what Apology she can make for her self. She has
all the sense that ought to be had of that; and lest it should appear
otherwise, she is ready to obey the command you have laid upon her, to give you
the pastime of a faithful Relation of her harmless Errors. Not that she has
any hope, that she shall ever be able to blot out of the minds of most men,
the cruel prejudices they have taken against the whole conduct of her life:
this age does not permit her to flatter her self with the thoughts of
prevailing against so great Calumnies. Yet, if I may use your Highnesses own
terms, a time will come, when men shall not be willing to judge so criminally
of others by themselves, by reason their manners shall not be so extremely
corrupted, and guilty, as they are now; and then, perhaps, more faith will be
given to what I am going to write for her justification, then to what her
enemies can say to traduce her notions.

I will not hide so much as any of the most foolish Adventures, wherein she may
have had any share; for I wish your Highness may divert your self with them, at
the same time that you will have compassion on Silvia for other things. c

In the first place, she never knew well who she was; all I am certain of is,
that she is not a person of an ordinary and vulgar destiny: that her Birth, her
Education, and her Marriages, have been the effect of many extraordinary
Accidents, and Adventures; and that if she had a mind to set out her Life with
the luster of a fabulous descent, d it would be easy, without doubt, for any
body to enlarge upon it, as finely as ever has been done upon the like
occasion; and draw her Pedigree in a way that would look something Heroic.

She was called Henrietta Silvia, by the order of her Mother her self, as I
have been told. Henrietta, without doubt, for some private reason best known to
her self; and Silvia, because she was born by a Wood side, commonly called, the
Wood of Silves. She had the name of Moliere, which has stuck to her by
custom, from those that took the care of her breeding, who were so called
themselves.

She is tall, and of good mien; she has eyes black and sparkling, well opened,
and well cut, and such as seem to mark, that she has enough of wit; let any
body else judge by what follows, whether she has, or no. Her mouth is great
when she laughs, but very little when she does not; yet it is the misfortune of
that part, that she laughs always. She has good teeth, a good nose; her neck
and breast like her complexion, that is to say, admirable; and though I should
run the hazard of being noted as partial and presumptuous, I must add, Madam,
that there are very few in the world can compare with it. But it may be I am
too tedious in drawing her Picture thus piece by piece; any body may imagine
with themselves, that she is almost an accomplished beauty from head to foot.
Such as have seen what she gives leave to see, will be my witnesses, that I use
no paint in this draught; and such as have never seen her, may believe, if they
please, that I do but sport with them, and flatter my subject. Yet, I hope,
they will be better pleased with the fancy of a handsome, then with that of an
ugly Woman, if they be not very ill humor'd: however, I tell your Highness
nothing but the truth.

I hope I may be excused naming the Family Silvia came of, after what I have
said already; It Is possible, that after the reading of her story, her true
Kindred, if they find her not unworthy of them, will strive to make their
charity go beyond that of some worthy persons she is beholding to; and one day
discover the whole mystery of her Birth, to the end, that it may be added to
the rest of the Adventures of her Life; which when it happens, I will pass my
word to your Highness for something of ^llustrious; for she can feel her own
heart, and is not easily persuaded that an ordinary man should Father such a
Woman as she is.

However, I have been told for certain, that she first saw the light in a
Hamlet bordering upon a Wood, two or three leagues from Montpellier, near the
Sea. Four Men, with two Women, did bring thither the Person that brought her
into the World, in July, in the Year One thousand six hundred forty and seven.
They landed in a Boat, which was immediately burnt upon the shore; the reason I
know not: they went unto the next house they met with, which did chance to be
that of a poor Woman that nursed her own Child. Silvia's Mother, whoever she
may be, had not stayed there one hour e're she was delivered of a Child: That
of the Country Woman, was put to another Nurse, and the newborn Silvia given
her, together with a sum of Money. The night being come, all the company
vanished away. The next morning, the Country Woman, who had been lodged
somewhere else for that night, found the Child's Mother gone with the rest in
the dark. If you ask me, whither? I know it as little as any thing else; I wish
I knew it, for my own satisfaction rather then that of any other besides: yet I
ought to have reckoned that of your Highness in the first place.

Silvia was nursed, and bred up in that hamlet until she was five years of age,
without being owned, or laid claim to by any body. About which time, the Duke
of Kendale chanced to come a Hunting upon that Coast: He came into the Cottage
of the Nurse, to shelter himself from a sudden storm and shower of rain; the
Child's prating, and her pretty carriage, e did please him well, thinking that
he did see something in her which was not of a Country Girl. He did ask, who
she was? heard her fortunes; and upon that, turning himself, with a smile, to a
Gentleman that waited on him, Behold, says he, a great cruelty, thus to forsake
a poor Child. I have a conceit, that this Child may come one day to be a very
handsome Woman; I will take care of her breeding, that I may see, whether I
shall be mistaken in my conjecture. And, really, from that moment, to the hour
of his death, the Duke never suffered her to want any thing requisite for her
Education. Nay, he was so careful, and so punctual in it, that when it came to
be taken notice of, it gave occasion to several persons to say, that Silvia was
beholding for her life unto the Duke; which some interpreted maliciously. Yet,
I have been assured by others, that he was not her Father; and that the
occasion of Hunting had brought him by a mere chance into that Hamlet, where
the storm, as I have said, had made him pitch upon the Nurses House among the
rest, though it was not the nearest on that side he came in. I can say no more
of that, and Silvia shall be no kin to the rest of his Heirs, without they will
have her. It Is now enough of that.

First of all, the generous Duke took care to put the Child out of the Country
Woman's hand, intending to give her to some that were like to have a better
success in her breeding. There lived then at Pezenas, in Languedoc, a f
Financier, whose wife was a good friend to the Duke; and the man himself was
beholding to him for all the fortune he had in the World: A Child of theirs,
much about Silvias age, and of her sex also, was then kept at one of their
Farmers; and being dangerously ill was given over by the Physicians, so that
nothing could be expected but her death every hour: it was no hard matter, as
soon as she was dead, to set up Silvia in stead of her; and to let the World
think, after she had been removed into some other place and hands, that she had
been cured with the remedies that were given her, and was well recovered.
(Observe, I beseech you, Madam, what paths Fortune was pleased to lead Silvia
to her Adventures.) That exchange was made cunningly enough. The Financier
carried himself as handsomely therein as could be wished. Thus she became Sister
to a Son that he had; and a considerable sum that the Duke bestowed on him did
inspire into his soul all the tenderness that was necessary to oblige him to
personate a fatherly love to her.

It is possible your Highness would not be too much tired, if I should begin
Silvia's story, by that which may render her childhood as suprizing as the rest
of her life.

She had a pretty little air of gallantry, which did almost accuse her
Benefactor of being her Father. She had wit, vanity, and courage enough, and
such a readiness to take the true accent of all manner of Languages, as that
the Financier's Son, having men about him to teach him those things, she was
able, in a little time, to learn with him, besides those in fashion, the Dutch
Tongue it self. She had also a very great passion for hunting; and what few
Women will do, at ten years old, she did slight all the divertisments of her
sex, to give her self to riding, shooting with a Pistol, or with an Arrow, and
the like exercises. It is not impossible, but so extraordinary inclinations may
have occasioned some pretty little Adventures, were I willing to remember them;
but my intention being to speak only of that that has been seen or talked of
in the great World, I must let those things pass, whereof there were no
witnesses but of small consequence.

All I need say, is this, that she knew all that while no other Father or
Mother, but the Persons she had been given to; and that it was very late, e're
she came to be cleared of that error. The Adventure that undeceived her is of a
new kind, and deserves to be recorded.

The Financier's Wife was a good handsome Woman, and had a great deal of wit.
The g Marquis de Birague, a man besides the Nobility of his Line, full of great
and fine qualifications, and such, in a word, as though Silvia could not then
consider him as much as he deserved, because he was a a married man, she would
be glad to have such a Gentleman to her Servant, now that he is a Widdower.
That gallant man, I say, did often see the fair Lady Moliere; for so she was
called that Silvia was trusted to. Her Husband, on a certain day, found them
both asleep one by the other, in a little Wood belonging to one of his
Country-Houses, at a time when they thought he had been far enough, very busily
employed about the affairs of his charge. I cannot very well say, how the Lady
did clear her self in that surprising engagement. h It Is like her Husband was a
discreet man, and would make no uproar of a private business. Some days after
Silvia did perceive that her pretended Father did meditate some kind of
revenge, and that in his soul he did reckon i to have made her go halves with
him in that affair.

To tell your Highness all the particulars of this intrigue, and of the manner
that he did use to make her understand his ends, it would be too tedious.
Silvia was waggish, and full of caresses, for those that she thought she did
belong to, although for all the rest she was one of the proudest Girls in all
the World. Thus when he begun to show her some extraordinary good will, she did
receive it with a thousand endearments. And this having lasted a while, the man
was so taken with these little badineriesk, to which she gave way with all
manner of freedom, as well as innocence, that he became, e're he or she either
was aware, the most enamoured man in the World, and then resolved to carry on
further that business.

He took her a Hunting along with him, that was her bait; and having cunningly
severed her from his Wife, and the Marquis de Birague, which possibly, on their
side, were very glad also of an occasion of being alone; he did so well, that
they two found themselves alone a pretty good way into the Forest. The very
place did invite them to alight, and was really very fit to favor the
resolutions of such persons as should have been both of one mind. The trees
had so prettily entangled, and twisted together their shady branches, as to
make it a natural vault; and a running spring, two paces off, made a pleasant
little noise; the Wood was very thick, deep, the shades with a great silence
round about. In a word, Madam, Monsieur de Moliere was a witty man, and had
pitched upon a place no ways unfit for the design in hand. At his request, and
after his example, Silvia alighted off her Horse; and seeing him lay himself
all along upon the moss and grass, she did the like hard by him, without the
least suspicion of what fell out afterward. Her Father drawing a little
nearer, and close by her, and embracing her with much of tenderness, began to
reveal a secret to her, which she would never have been able to think of, and
so told her the whole story of her Birth. Next, he did set forth the
obligations that she had to him, and those she was like to have; in that being
resolved still to bear the name of her Father, he made her sure of all his
Estate, which was left to her by the death of his Son, who had been killed
lately. Many more things did he add, to commend his love to her; and the l
refrein of all this was, that lest Silvia should be spotted with the vice of
ungratefulness, she must answer his passion by the like; that he would be sure
ever to love her with the greatest discretion and secrecy in the World; and
that this commerce of theirs should not hinder him from finding her out, very
speedily, a considerable match.

Your Highness may judge, how Silvia was surprised and amazed at this news. She
was indeed the more concerned, and the more troubled with them, by reason the
man, after he had made an end of his speech, that she might be sure he said
nothing but what was really true, did begin to raise higher his ordinary
caresses, whilst the difficulty that he found in the opposition that was made
him, did still inflame him the more, He fell on his knees before her,
expressing a thousand extravagancies; and though she had told him, that nothing
but a remnant of that respect and kindness, which had settled it self in her
heart by use, did keep her from vindicating her self from his insolency; he
went on with it, even to that point, as to offer to use his strength against
her. Then it was that she became furious indeed; she got loose out of his arms,
she ran to her Horse, and drawing a Pistol out of the Holster, she threatened to
kill him, if he did not let her alone. He would not do it; but his brutish
passion turning into a madness and rage, she saw him come up to her like a
Satyr, swearing that he would have his desire of her, she let the Pistol go,
which wounded him with two bullets in his belly. These were her first cruelties.

It was a business intricate enough for one of Silvia's age, that which she
found her self engaged in: to be all alone in a great Wood, to have laid down a
man upon the ground, to think, how she should escape? whither she should go?
and not to remember so much as the way she came into that place. She was indeed
so frighted at the thoughts of all this, that she was near to have fallen
backwards, at the same time, with that unlucky man. Yet she was not long in
that disorder, necessity awakening her reason, she took a quick resolution, and
got on horseback, not liking to stay there, because she found her self
incapable of telling a lie if she should be caught. The wounded man being more
touched with the perplexity he saw her in, than Silvia was with his danger,
with as loud a voice as he could, bid her take to the left hand; and she went
that road with full speed, without knowing whither. She might have gone far
enough, but that she met in her course with the Marquis de Birague, and the
Lady Moliere, who having talked together at their ease, without killing one
another, as Silvia and her Father had done, were probably coming to join with
them, being lead by the sound the shooting of the Pistol gave. Good Lord! what
was then her surprisal, and her distress, when to her first disgrace was added
as a threatening of a present punishment, the fear of a Wild Boar, which being
hunted came to cross her way, almost upon the legs of her Horse. Yet, in
spite of all her amazement, she laid a hand to her other Pistol, meaning to
have stopped that Beast: And such courageous motions, if I may say it by the way,
are the surest tokens that she has of that generous blood, from which it is
possible that her own is derived.

Birague, who saw at a distance what she was going to do, suspected that she
came with that full speed to encounter the Wild Beast upon her passage, and
with a loud voice calling her back, and accusing her of temerity, did gallop up
to her, at the same time asking whether Monsieur de Moliere was in good
earnest, thus to expose a Girl to so great danger? So far he was from
imagining to himself any thing of what was happened. Silvia having no time to
lose, told him, without any further information of her business, That she knew
him to be a Gentleman, and a Person of Honor; That she had some secret of
importance to Communicate with him; and that whilst she should speak to him, he
would do well to advise Madam Moliere to go seek her Husband a little further,
into a place where he lay very sore wounded. She had scarce made an end of
these words when the Lady came up to them; upon the news that was told her, she
took instantly two Forest-keepers that waited on them to lead her to the place.
Silvia took her time to tell the Marquis that it was she that had done that
mischief; and at the same time begged of him, that he would put her into some
place where she might be safe. The strangeness of the thing, and the opinion he
had that the wounded man was her Father, made him break out at first into some
reproachful words, which did express the excess of his astonishment. But
Silvia, loath to conceal any longer her story, and being an enemy to all that
might then be useless to her; He is none of my Father, said she, with some
sowerness to the Gentleman; and this is no convenient place to make this
mystery better known to you. If you intend to do me Service, once more, said
she, put me where I may be safe, and I will afterward fully satisfy you upon
all the questions that you can make me. As she spoke thus, a Gentleman that
belonged to Birague, came up Riding after them; the Marquis commanded him to
lead Silvia to his Castle of Sersac, where his Lady was; himself going after
his Mistress.

She was then come up to the fatal place, and as though the maxim of our age
were true, that a Woman may have a Gallant, and love her Husband never the
worse for that; I have been told, that no affliction and desolation ever befell
any other body, comparable to that of the Lady, when she saw her Gentleman
wallowing in his own blood, and that it was almost an impossible thing to part
them. Detraction indeed, not sparing the most holy and pious Actions, was not
able to make a good construction of that excess of Love, and gave out, that
these so long and obstinate embraces of a dying man had some secret aim,
tending to hinder other people from stanching the blood that ran all that
while; and that his danger might thereby be increased. Yet for all the
persecutions that good Lady did act against Silvia; and though this very thing
might really occasion the death of her Husband; I will be so just to her, as to
believe all she did was with a good intent.

The poor man was taken up with much ado, and carried into the next Village to
have his Wounds dressed: Then they asked him, how he came by that hurt? and did
all they could to make him name the Author of it, yet all in vain. He answered
only, that three Masked men, who would carry away Silvia, had set upon him. The
Marquis of Birague himself, who being already informed by Silvia of the
chiefest part, and by telling him of it, did hope to know all the secret, was
not able to wrest it out of his mouth: that made them give over troubling him
any further, and apply themselves only to have him transported into the Town.

In the mean while, Madam, the silence and discretion of that unlucky man,
whether it was an effect of his shame, or of some remnant of his Love to Silvia
did save her in the opinion of all people, had she had but strength and courage
enough to dare show her self after such a deed. For the Marquis coming home at
night, told her that all the World had taken her flight for an effect of the
fear that the supposed Ravishers had put her in: And he himself countenancing
that imagination, could think no otherwise of that Accident, then that she did
chance to hit the Financier, when she would have shot at the Thieves; but
another misfortune happened, which soon discovered the mystery; I must give a
particular account of that to your Highness.

Silvia had been put into the hands of the Lady Marqueeze of Birague, in the
Castle of Sersac. The Marquis came to her to that place after he had taken care
to set the mind of his Lady Moliere in some rest. Silvia was really moved when
she heard the consideration that the Wounded man had for her; and though she
did no ways repent her of having saved her own honor at the cost of his Life,
she could not forbid some tears to fall from her eyes; for having been forced
to come to that. She first did bemoan the trouble, and the sad condition she
found her self in: then she told the Marquis all along what had past, together
with the story that the Financier had made her* all which did surprise him
infinitely: For he had always been persuaded with the rest of the World, that
Henrietta was that man's Daughter; and the Lady Moliere, who had often trusted
her own person, body and soul into his hands, had never trusted him with that
secret. n

The strangeness of that Adventure did absolutely win the o Cavaleir to Silvia;
far from blaming her action, He gave a thousand praises to it, and made her as
many protestations of faithful service; in a word, Madam, he spoke to as a man
may speak to a Woman that he thinks handsome, and as one who begun to know
Henrietta was no longer the Daughter of his Mistress, I can say that, without
doing him an injury.

She did from that very moment perceive it well enough, and was troubled at it:
but having need to draw some body to embrace her present interest, she forbore
to commit a second Crime by exposing her self to be known a Murderer in
revenge of the hopes that the Marquis might conceive to her disadvantage. Far
from being so scrupu^ous, she did return him thanks for his generosity, and had
for him all the complaisance that she might in honesty have; and I dare say,
such a conjunction of affairs was necessary to make Silvia take a declaration
of Love without anger, so great an enemy she was then, and had till that time
ever been to it.

She was two days in Birague his Castle, without hearing any news from the
Town, but what he sent her by a Gentleman of his: And to that hour there had
not been as yet any danger for her. On the contrary, the fear they were in at
home, lest she was fallen into the hands of those Masked men, did redouble
their sadness, and their moans. But it was not so the day after, when the fever
that took the Financier had made him speak, and talk idle in his raving before
he dyed. He had very near discovered the whole business; and taking his Wife
for Silvia, whom he did call for every moment, he had reproached her with the
Pistol shot; They understood by some other broken discourses that Silvia was
the person he meant. The whole House was presently set in an uproar thereby;
the people began to accuse her, instead of pitying her as they did before; and
with the greater violence did they proclaim War against her, by reason that the
only Son of the Family, whose Sister Silvia was thought to be, was dead, as I
have said before, and she was left the only obstacle that kept back the
Husband's Kindred from becoming his Heirs in a considerable Estate. The Lady
Moliere her self, notwithstanding all the considerations by which she was tied
to Henrietta, for the Dukes sake, whom she did not hate whilst he lived, and
upon the account of some other engagements, did think that it would not become
her any longer to let Silvia go under the name of her Daughter. It may be also
that another policy gave her a ground to consider with her self that she would
prove a Widow much more fit to marry again when it should be known that she
had no Children. In a word, she was resolved to let Silvia be gone and perish;
and nothing was in all likelihood so easy as to undo her. The Duke of Kendale
was dead e're since the year Sixteen hundred and fifty seven; And that gallant
Duke, whose generosity perhaps did not always like a noise best, had not
acquainted many more people besides the Financier and his Wife with what Silvia
was; lest, as I presume, it should be known, what Charity he had in using her
as if he had been her own Father. But Silvia's good fortune did not forsake her
in this occurrence. Monsieur de Birague being desirous to lay many obligations
upon her, during the space of some Months, did use so many, and so successful
endeavors in that affair, and in another that fell out afterward, that it
gave time to the same good fortune that formerly led the Duke of Kendale to the
Cottage of the Nurse, to bring yet a great Lady from Flanders in the
Low Countries, to take as special care of Silvia as if she had been her own
Mother.

When Silvia began to be suspected, all was like to have been set on fire about
her; but the Marquis preventing the storm that was gathering, did represent to
his Mistress, that for a thousand reasons, both of Interest and of Honor, it
would be better for her to protect Silvia than to undo her; and these reasons
being backed by the sensible and powerful charms that were in the person of
the Cavaleir that spoke them, were at least thought solid of the fair Widow,
if they were not so indeed. Thus at the end of a few days, and after some
forged Adventures, to excuse her absence, and to set a pretense for her return,
Monsieur de Birague brought her the news, that she was free to go out of Sersac
Castle. As she presently resolved to do, and so went to put her self into a
Nunnery a League distant from it.

The Marquis did afterward contrive a thousand things to have the occasion to
come to see her there without putting his Widow to a jealousy; The relating
of which, perhaps, would not be unpleasant; For he did build, as I have said,
very much upon the obligations that Silvia was like, in time, to have him: He
never mist an occasion to persuade her that he had left loving Madam de Moliere
upon any other account but that only of using his best endeavors with her to
persuade her to wrap up for ever into a silence all the things that Silvia had
occasion to be afraid of. He did write to her sometimes so pleasantly upon that
subject, when he had no sufficient pretense to visit her, that the Lady Abbess,
with whom Silvia had contracted a very strict Friendship, did thereby share
with her in one of the best sports in the World; most chiefly when he sent them
word, that the anguish of mind, which Silvia's indifferency caused him, did get
him an incredible tenderness from his Widow, who interpreted it to a
redoubling of his love to her. But let us go on further, and say this only by
the way, That Silvia lost her self by the folly that she had to please that toy
of an Abbess, who would have her to answer Birague. The Letter fell, I know not
how, into the Widdow's hands. By the reading of which, she did acknowledge her
self guiltless of that languishing condition she had pitied in a man who made
sacrifice of her to another Idol. This put her into a madness and fury; her
jealousy from that time did swear the ruin of Henrietta; and she resolved at
last to chastise her unfaithful Lover, by awakening that business which lay
asleep. In vain did he bring all the reasons imaginable to appease her, and to
take out of her mind the thoughts that he should be so deeply in love with
Silvia. She had strength enough to dissemble her displeasure, till she did
surprise the answer that he was to make; but this was far worse than the
Letter. There was bloody railings against her, whom he made a fool of, and did
so insult upon, as that all her love was turned into an extreme impatiency of
being revenged of both. To that end she began to publish the secret of Silvia's
Birth, and to give proofs how she did belong neither to her nor to her Husband.
The Novelty of the thing did presently raise a great noise in the Town. The
Kindred of the dead man met again together to advise about the means they
should use to destroy her. All that the Marquis of Birague was able to do for
Silvia in this Alarm, was instantly to get on Horseback, and e're they should
think to lay hold of her, to secure her himself. To that end he took her out of
the Cloister, and concealed her in a strong place belonging to the Countess of
Englesac, the Abbess's Sister, which was not above a League distant from the
Convent.

The Countess of Englesac is a Widow of great Honor and Virtue, and very
devout, as well as magnificent, and one that loves to live with her Friends in
all manner of honest pleasures. She had, when Silvia came to her House, two of
her Daughters with her, and a Son, that I may term the most accomplished
Gentleman in the Kingdom. Fine eyes, a mouth as handsome, or more; an air of
greatness with him; a shape that was at the same time free, high, and full of
Majesty: a readiness and address at all manner of Exercises, beyond the reach
of a parallel; a gallant wit, a Princely soul, the Valor of an Hero, are the
least commendations I can give to that Person. Let your Highness excuse this
Character of him from the very hand of Silvia, to whom he has been dear enough
to deserve yet greater transports than this: And he is now the man that must
have the greatest share in all the rest of my Relation.

Silvia received in that Noble House all manner of assistance, and of good
usage during the hottest persecution of her Enemies. And all the Family took it
as a point of Honor to protect her in so extraordinary a disgrace, which they
termed the effect of an Heroic Action, rather than a base and cowardly
Murder, as the Lady Moliere would have it. And at last, the Court being then
in Provence, they did obtain Silvia's pardon from the King, with all manner of
Advantages against her Adversaries.

But Fortune, who did not intend Silvia should long remain without Crosses,
that she might the oftener have the pleasure to relieve her, would not suffer
that favor to last long. The Marquis of Birague, who had really set his mind
upon her, and was an intimate Friend to Madam of Englesac her Son, did so
frequently speak to him of Silvia, and of the pleasure that a man should reap
from the being beloved of her, that the young Gentleman believed him, and soon
began to look upon her for himself. His eyes did tell Silvia of it, who was not
insensible of his pain; and she may, without blushing, confess it, since she is
like to be sufficiently justified of that by what follows in her story.

It Is fit that your Highness should know how the young Gentleman began to
declare himself.

The Countess of Englesac upon a Sunday in Lent had a Sermon in her Chapel,
wherein a Monk that preached it, did with extraordinary eloquence enlarge
himself upon the deceitfulness and uncharitableness of the times; pretending
that Wild Creatures had a greater kindness, and were more true to one another
than men among themselves. As the Lady was very devout, she did not forget to
speak of the Sermon, and make it the Subject of discourse at the Table, asking
Silvia and Englesac, and the rest of her Children, what they thought of it. The
young Earl was no sooner up from the Table, but he went to his Chamber, and
presently after came back to Silvia, desiring of her that she would let him see
her S. Heures, that is, her Book of Devotion; and having scarce opened it, he
returned it her with these words; There are a great many Truths in this Book,
and those of very great importance. Yet all Truths are not fit to be known of
every body; therefore keep those to your self, I pray. Silvia understood not
his words, but she could read in his Countenance that he meant something which
he did not express: Therefore longing to open the Book, she went to her
Chamber, and locking up her self, she found in the Book a little paper, with
these words in it.

I know not whether to blame or pity those that say there is no Charity nor
Love amongst men, and that they know not what is become of them, when it is so
clear both that you alone deserve, and that I have for you all the Love that
can be imagined in the World. It Is much indeed, but not too much; and if I
could part with some to any body, 'twere only to you, and upon that account,
that I hope I should be no loser by it, but rather gain more, if it were
possible to add any thing to that I have already.

I shall not trouble your Highness with many notes of that kind, as the Authors
of Romances use to do. This story being true, I must add only, that the young
Lover in his Lady's Hours met very happily with his own, which was so like the
Shepherd's Hour, as the French call it, as that when he came to call for an
Answer, whereof he had the opportunity that same Evening, he found that Silvia
had more faith for what he writ, than for what the Preacher said. It was not
long e're Birague did perceive this love, and thereupon grew jealous, and so
infinitely jealous, as to resolve to admit of no regard, and make no reserve,
to get his revenge on Silvia, and punish her for having preferred that
Gentleman to him. Yet Silvia did excuse him upon that account, that it may be a
Lover when he is a loser does not think himself in the common use bound to more
civility, whatsoever examples all the Romances in the World can bring to the
contrary. Those be fine speculations. But it is the defect of humane Nature,
that nothing can be reduced to practice either in Morals, or in any other
experiments, which comes not very short of the Rule that right Reason does
prescribe to it. The Marquis gave notice underhand to the Countess of the love
of her Son, and made her think of what dangerous consequence it might be to her
Family. The Lady, who did not want ambition, and who had reason enough to be
ambitious, her Family being one of the Noblest, and of the Richest in the
Kingdom, was not slack in that business. She took a fit opportunity to draw
Silvia into her Closet, that she might speak with her in private; and having
told her, that she knew her to be so wise as not to be in danger of ever
yielding to any act of folly, and so just and acknowledging, as not to be
desirous to make her advantage of the folly of her Son; concluding, that she
desired her that she would so cut off all hope to her Son, that he should
forsake the design he had lately engaged in. Do not you be angry, said the
Countess to Silvia, seeing that her discourse had made her blush, that I speak
to you so freely. It Is because I love you dearly, and would never forgive my
self, if for want of giving you timely notice, you should engage in any thing
that might oblige me to desire your abfence, and to complain of you.

A secret pain, which succeeded Silvia's blush, had kept her eyes down till the
Countess made an end of her discourse. And although she did foresee that she
should have much to do to observe what she was going to promise; Yet, lest the
Countess should resolve to put her away, she passed her word for what that good
Lady would have her. It was not long e're this resolution did vex the young
Earl extremely, who was not able to imagine with himself the cause of the
alteration that he saw in Silvia. A hundred times he would have asked her what
occasion she had to do so? But still she was so well observed, sometimes of
Birague, sometimes of the Mother, that she durst never speak with him, for all
she was near as desirous as the Gentleman to have done it; whilst the good man
taking it for a slight of him, grew so desperate upon it, that he fell
dangerously sick.

And in this place, Madam, I could wish your Highness would please to dispense
me of the Law that I have made my self, to say many things in few words, and
give me leave to be less short in the Relation of that Love which is yet dear
to my memory. But I fear Silvia may be deceived in that hope she has that she
shall give your Highness an account of things that will please you, whilst they
may, perhaps, please none but her self, who is still concerned in them. What a
folly it is for a Woman to be in Love! And how unhappy must she be that has
Honor and Virtue both with Love? what a sufferer was poor Silvia during the
days that her Lover kept his Bed, and she was not suffered to see him? What
pains did he suffer himself whilst he did not see her? I believe the spite he
took of it was that that made him get up the sooner, out of the desire he had
to reproach her with her hard-heartedness. I remember the very words he told
her in that spightful humor, which he did conclude in himself was the best
grounded in the world. The Countess of Englesac was employed on a certain day
to entertain the Duke of Villars, and the Bishop of Aggde, who came together to
visit her. The Chevalier des Essars, a worthy Gentleman, and the handsomest man
in his Country, was come along with them.

And, as I have said already, that the Count of Englesac had two Sisters, the
Eldest of which the Chevalier made love to; I think the Duke was come thither
on purpose to find a way to match them together; and I cannot tell what was the
reason that the Match was not concluded. However, whilst the Mother was talking
in a great Room with the Duke, the Bishop had put the rest of the Company in
mind of going into a Gallery, and all went to sit down at the end of it.
Silvia's young Earl came thither also to sit by her; and having first sighed
very deeply that she did not look upon him (for she durst not do it, by reason
his younger Sister did hold her on the other side, and leaned fooling on her
shoulder) he told her softly, with a tone full of spite; You will have me dye:
I can see it well enough; yea, you will have it so, and it is easy to see that
you would have been pleased if you had seen me dye of my last sickness; But I
shall live long enough yet to reproach you with your inconstancy oftener than
you would have it.

Silvia not answering him any thing, but on the contrary, lest his Sister
should hear what he told her, turning her shoulder to him, and making a show of
fooling with her whilst he spoke. This provoking more and more his anger, he
went on with these words; You are, I must tell it you again, the most unsincere
person in the World, thus to hide your self from me. And you are no less unjust
whilst you punish a man that you will not hear speak for himself. Whatsoever
does fill the room of your heart, which was only due to me, I hope it shall
have but a short joy of it. By my destiny I can foresee that of my Rivals,
none of which can pretend to be more happy in you than he that did love you
more than any man else in the World can do; and for ought I see, more also than
you deserve. To this he added so many reproachful words, that Silvia had much
ado to keep her tears from appearing, and to answer him; she covered her face
with her Fan, and taking her time when the Chevalier des Essars had obliged the
young Lady Englesac to turn her self toward him, she told that desperate
Lover, looking side-wayes on him, these words; Be silent, do no longer afflict
me. What I do I do by mere force, and constraint. I am the most unhappy Woman
in the World, and I do wish I had never seen you. She rose up from her seat
presently after these words, taking his Sister along with her, and went away;
resolving to avoid a commerce, which could not be otherwise than hurtful to
them both.

It would be too hard for me to express the perplexity of mind, and the trouble
wherein that loving Gentleman found himself upon the hearing of this news. He
knew very well, for all he said, that Silvia was sincere, and that she must
have very pregnant causes, and reasons for what she did, since she did speak to
him in that manner. Yet she had not said enough to his mind, and nothing could
satisfy him but another interview, to clear himself of the doubts which he was
left in. What did not he do to obtain it?

It is almost incredible, Madam, and it was such a thing as was still worthy of
Silvia, who was destined to see, and to occasion all manner of extraordinary
effects. He set fire to one part of the Castle, because he could devise no
other way to disperse all the people that seemed to be hired to vex him, and
his Love, but by obliging them to fear something of worse than their meetings.

The Countess of Englesac will possibly wonder, when she shall read here the
true cause of this Accident, which otherwise she might probably have been for
ever ignorant of. Such was the passion her Son had for Silvia. And she
sometimes spoke a greater truth than she was aware of, when to express the
trouble occasioned to her Family by Silvia, she said, that fair Lady had
brought fire into her House.

Silvia indeed was never so surprised as she found her self when she saw that
perplexed Lover come into her Appartment, where he fell on his knees before her,
whilst the rest were saving themselves almost in their shirts, for it was in
the night; And when hindering her from running away with them, he confessed to
her, that he had caused that disorder on purpose. Fear nothing, said he, there
is a ditch full of Water betwixt us and the fire; You may be safe here, and
never stir from your Chamber; Deny me not one moment to hear me, when I do
sacrifice all to so dear an occasion.

Silvia did what he desired, and heard him, whilst she was making her self
ready. Being convinced, that he must be in great need of speaking with her, who
for that purpose only had set his House on fire. She told him the reason of all
the cold usage he had found by her of late, in her feigned slights, and the
discourse she had had with his Mother; and lastly, the promises which she
thought her self obliged to make that Lady, lest she should take a resolution
to part them.

The Lights he got by this Conference did him all the good in the World. And
lastly, Madam, after a quick deliberation about what measures they should keep
to deceive their Overseers for the time to come. She saw her Gentleman so well
pleased, that he would not for a great deal, not to have burnt a piece of a
fair Building.

Mean while the fire which was seen afar off had Alarmed the Neighboring Towns
and Castles round about. The Marquis de Birague being but four or five miles
off, was none of the last that perceived that it was our Castle which was on
fire. He got his Horses sadled, and rid up in have to us. Not finding Silvia
among the other Ladies in the Park, where they were fled, he ran every where to
know what was become of her; He went up to her Chamber at last, and was like to
have surprised there the Earl of Englesac. But as the Marquis (to whom indeed
she was then extremely obliged) did as he went call her with a loud voice, and
made much noise, that gave time to the Earl to hide himself. Silvia did escape
that danger, by counterfeiting her self to be in a swoon, that so she might be
excused for staying behind. And by enduring some kisses, that the Marquis took
on her cheeks, for his pains of carrying her away in his Arms; She did abide
it, and made no show of coming to her self again till she was a pretty way out
of her Chamber, so that the cold Air might seem to have done it.

Since that time the brave Earl, and the fair Lady did live together with a
great deal of care and circumspection; and the better to conceal their Love,
they feigned to hate one another mortally. They laid this plot, and went on
with it with discretion and cunning enough, pretending for it the most probable
causes that was possible for them to invent. Birague was so glad of it, that he
was the first person deceived in it. Englesac's Mother was the next, and to
that degree as to chide her Son for it, and seek out a thousand ways of
showing her love to Silvia, to comfort her as to the hatred of that Gentleman,
and to assure her of her protection against him. In a word, they were happy,
had they but been content with this precaution.

A man of Quality of that Country, about that time fell in Love with Silvia at
a Visit that he made to the Countess of Englesac; For though she had no
intention to entangle any body else into her Love, and was content with that
she found in Englesac, yet it is very hard for such persons as have set their
hearts at rest, and enjoy the happiness that Silvia found her in, to forbear
being extreme civil to others, and showing them that complaisance and good
humor by which they are caught on a sudden, before either party be aware of
it. The Earl, who knew wherein lay the true charms of Silvia, would have her
make as if she had liked his Love well. This was too much subtilty. That
Gentleman became deeply in Love with her, did often write to her; and the Earl,
by a youthful imprudence, took a fancy to make him an answer in Silvia's name,
wherein the humor of making a sport on it caused him to take the Liberty to
make her speak amourously enough. This undiscreet Rival, as scarce any man can
forbear to be otherwise when they think they are in favor, and even when they
do not think so, showed this Letter to a Friend. That Friend told it another;
This told it to Birague, who believed it to be Silvia's hand, and complained of
it very much to her. She did chide the young Earl for it, seeing the wrong that
Letter did her; But he acknowledging his error, and thinking to mend it by a
greater fault, took a resolution to discover that himself was the Author of
that writing; and that he had made only for to put a jest upon his Rival. In
conclusion, a very great mischance was occasioned by these follies.

Not long after the Chevalier des Essars gave the divertisement of a Ball (or
Feast with Dances) as the custom is in France, to the Elder of the Ladies of
Englesac. There was a great Assembly, and very good Company, which the nearness
of the Court had occasioned to meet at the Marquis d' Ampus. The two Rivals
were there; and having picked a Quarrel, I know not how, they agreed to meet the
next Morning about a Town, called Villeneufue: Their Combat was bloody, two
Seconds were killed upon the place, and the Earl's Adversary very much wounded.
This business had two very sad effects. The one, that the King having renewed
his Edicts against Duels, there was no safety for Silvia's poor Lover to stay
any longer in France. And the other, that when the true cause of that Duel came
to be known, the Countess of Englesac could not but see clearly, that the
hatred betwixt her Son and Silvia, was but a trick they had jointly contrived
to put upon her.

Nothing at that time could have happened to Silvia of worse consequence than
that. For as she was the visible cause of all that trouble, and of all those
disorders that the Countess was fallen into with her whole Family. That good
Lady the very next morning commanded her to be carried away into a Cloister, at
the same time strictly forbidding to let any body come to her, till she were
resolved to take the Vow of a Nun. Besides the affliction of being thus closely
shut up, Silvia had another in this occurrence, which was, that the Cloister
she was locked in was not that where she had been before, and where being
acquainted with the Abbess, the Count of Englesac his Aunt, she might have
found some society in her company. But it was a Convent; Good Lord! what
Convent? That did rather look like a ghastly Prison than any thing else. She was
kept there two whole Months, and in the mean while her dear Earl of Englesac
was making his escape into Piemont; where the fairest Ladies doing their best
to get his Love, did justify the tender inclination Silvia had for him.

At the end of those two Months the King came to Avignon in his return from
Marseilles, and whilst he staid there a little while upon the occasion of the
Citadel of Orange, which he did not like to see in a posture of defense, and
strongly fortified, in the heart of his Kingdom. All the Gallants of the Court,
during that while, did spread themselves every where; and the Parlours of the
Religious House had a share in that inundation of Courtiers. In that Universal
rejoicing of the little people of God, who were very glad to admire the
Gallantry of so many worthy Gentlemen, and in their persons to Honor their
great King, Silvia was used with less severity. And although the Lady Englesac
did not consent to it, she was sometimes suffered to see the World at the
Parlour, that she might not have an occasion to accuse the rest of her
Companions.

I cannot forbear telling your Highness by the way, that this passage of the
Court through Avignon gave such a joy to the youngest of those Recluded Women,
as that they could not hear that the Governor of Orange should surrender the
place by composition, but they would make a thousand imputations against the
cowardice of that man, and thought him worthy of the greatest punishment, for
not stopping the Kings Journey for a whole year, by a stout resistance.

Birague not having forsook the fair Silvia, and still ready to put on afresh
for his ends, took this opportunity to continue to offer his Service to her.
And a little while after, by the means of a Gentleman, to whom Englesac had
sent some Letters for her, she had an assurance that she was still beloved,
where she liked best. Nay, one of the Nuns, to increase her felicity by a new
Subject of joy, did the same day Prophecy unto her, that Love would in short
draw her out of Captivity. It Is true, that for a good while she was not able to
apprehend how that might be done. It seeming to her that she was kept so well,
and so close, as that without her Lover should come again to set fire to her
Prison, it was almost an impossible thing for any body else to encompass. The
Wall indeed of a certain little Garden might be climbed over, but the Superior
had always the Key, and it was not possible to get into it, but by her leave.
These were the things that Silvia did oppose to the hopes the Nun would have
given her: But she replied not to any, she said only, that it would be as she
had told her; and that she ought to be at rest for any thing else.

Three days after, the Duke of Lorrain, whose Treaty of Peace had been
concluded at St. Jean de Luz, came Post to meet the King at Avignon. This
Prince, still more gallant than unfortunate, and a Worshipper of the fair Sex,
as well under the veil, as in other Dresses; after his Complements at Court,
went to increase the number of those that used to attaque the Parlours. The
Duke of Guyse that was then, followed him afterward; and this Prince sticking
more to the company of Silvia than that of any other; she did presently imagine
that the Prophecy had some regard to him, and that he was the man by whose
means she was to get her Liberty. He did really follow her so close from the
first to the last day; and showed her his Love and respect in so obliging a
manner, that he gave her, not only the hopes of her Liberty, but even of a
great Fortune, if she would but hear him. And more than this; She could not
forbear thinking, that she should in a short time see all things accomplished
when she heard that the Duke had had the goodness to speak to the Queen Mother
about her business. But her good Fortune was stopped there, and went no further
for this time. The old Countess of Englesac having some notice given her by her
Spies, of the Duke's designs, had prevented the good mind of that great
Princess. She had given her such a pernicious Character of Silvia's conduct, as
made her guilty of all the misfortune of her Son, and of all the trouble of her
Family, of the last bloodshed, and of the breaking of the King's Edicts. The
Marqueeze des Essars, and even that of Ampus, went also to teIl the Queen that
nothing could be done by her Majesty that were of greater merit before God,
than to keep that young Lady close shut up. This was enough to set the Queen
extremely against Silvia. The Duke of Guyse could not prevail to have her
removed, nor to get the least favor for her; the Queen refused him absolutely,
though with very good Grace; telling him he was somewhat too gallant an
Intercessor, to expose a young Lady to the danger of being so extraordinarily
obliged to him. He made a second attempt the next day, and set on again on the
same errand, being assisted by Monsieur de Lorrain, and by a certain Princess,
which did offer to be surety for Silvia. But the Queen could not be removed
from her resolution. Yet some Friends having made a charitable party for
Silvia, it was muttered abroad, that if she were desirous to get her Liberty,
she must buy it with marrying Old Cabrieres, who had offered Madam of Englesac
to take her.

The Duke of Guyse would himself be the Messenger of this news, rightly
conceiving, that if Silvia should hear it from any body else, the answer that
she would give to it, without any more, would render useless, and vain all his
former endeavors. And he was not really very much mistaken in that, for she
had much ado to hear that proposal from the Duke's own mouth. And seeing that
he did seriously apply himself to make her apprehend of what Advantage it was
very often to a handsome Woman to have a Husband not altogether worthy of her
Love; and in whose defects she might find a more than reasonable dispensation
from conjugal duties; Out of a gay and foolish humor, which she was in at all
times, she found more subject of mirth and laughter, than of affliction, in
that the great hopes which she had conceived of the Duke's negotiation were
vanished all away of a sudden; she therefore answered him smilingly, that he did
but jest, and that she had rather have heard him speak for himself, than for
that Old Husband he did offer her. The Duke began to laugh as well as she,
finding a certain charm and allurement in her folly, which engaged him still to
love her the more. Thus the business was ended, and the Prophecy had no other
effect on that side.

The Nun, whom Silvia did acquaint secretly, and as a friend, with all these
passages, could see very well the error she was in for want of construing her
words right. For she did not mean, when she said, that Love would set her free,
that it should be that of any of those Princes. But being discreet, she did not
think fit to display unto her more particulars, till she did see all things in
a disposition to favor the good success of her Prophecy; and when she knew it
was time to do it, she discovered the whole plot to her.

During those moments of Liberty, which the Nuns did enjoy at their Parlours,
against the Rule of their Order, since the coming near of the King, which was
done only to Honor that great Monarch with something of extraordinary.
Fouquet, a young Gentleman, extremely full of wit, had tied a Friendship with
that Nun of Silvia's acquaintance. She was Daughter to the last Baron de
Fontaine, who (after the political custom of the greatest part of the French
Nobility) to enrich his Son had made an offering of her to a Convent. This poor
victime had many times protested against her Vows. Her Brother also was dead
since her being shut up, and she was extremly vexed to see a fair Estate, to
which she was the right Heir, go away into the hands of two Aunts of hers.
Fouquet finding some charm in her company, could no more than she bear with so
great a Tyranny; he had promised her his assistance, and love improving his
power every moment the more in these two Lovers, by reason of the grate that
withstood it, Birague still blowing the fire (For this plot was not laid
without him;) That Gentleman had at the last resolved upon the carrying the
Lady away. They had weighed every thing, and put all in a readiness; the Key of
the Garden they had got, and counterfeited it, and a Tourreere (she that keeps
the turning-box in a Nunnery, through which things are conveyed, and the people
both ways unseen) was in the plot, for all things are possible to Love, that
wishes it self rid out of a Convent, and hopes to be set free from the Vow of
a Cloyster-life.

The night that the execution was to be, The Nun opened the whole mystery to
Silvia, and asked her if she would be glad by the same means, that Fouquet
should free her from the hands of her persecutors. At first she was surprised
with that proposal; and could not like absolutely of such proceedings; yet
after she had made some further reflection upon the condition that she was in,
which was like to last long enough if she did not take hold of the occasion
that offered to set her self at Liberty; She was content to meet the Nun in the
Garden about midnight: which was performed very cunningly; they had staid
hardly a quarter of an hour, when they heard the signal agreed on with Fouquet,
who when they had answered him; began to set his legs over the Wall, and come
down the row of Trees, that were set on it; whose Pails and Stakes being none
of the strongest, made a noise as they brake. Silvia was then terribly
affrighted, and it may be said, ten times more than the Nun, though she did in
effect run much lesser hazard. Fouquet perceiving it, did all he could to
settle her mind, and to encourage her; and lest they should lose time, he begun
to set his fair Nun on her way.

I wish I were able to set out clearly to your Highness that rare and pleasant
way he took to carry his Ladies over the Wall; It being unsafe to take their
way by the broken Stakes. He bowed himself down, resting with his hands against
the Wall, and so had them one after another upon his back. Then would he raise
himself up by degrees, with the Lady thus got on his shoulders, and she holding
fast in the mean while of some Iron hooks that were in the Wall. Next he
ascended upon a great stone which lay at his feet; Last of all, the Women put
their feet a top of the Gentleman's Head, from whence they were able to sit
upon the Wall. Being got thither, a kind of a Vallet de Chamber, (who needed
not to reach so high on his side, by reason the ground was higher,) did receive
them on Horseback; The Ladies had Hats given them, which they put on, together
with long Cloaks, to hide their Petticoats; And in that Equipage they Rid like
Horsemen out of the City, which did not use to be shut up at night since the
King's coming into those parts.

They had gone on a good way e're Silvia was able to know whither they were
lead; And she turning in her mind a thousand thoughts, sometimes pleasant
enough, sometimes very sad, was continually reflecting upon the sad effects
that this carrying of her self, and the Nun away might have in time. The
Marquis de Birague, whom she knew to be a man of intrigue, watchful, and ready
to take all Advantages, was none of the things that troubled her the least, nor
no Enemy to be slighted. And she would sometimes say to Fouquet and his Nymph,
that of malice had begun to mention him to her; You shall see that man will
turn himself so many ways, as that at last he will find us out, and spoil our
affairs. Why, why? would then say the Nun, I take Birague to be a gallanter man
than so, and I could trust him as soon as any body. Fouquet, who as well as the
Nun, did betray Silvia, would add to that, that really Birague was a very
honest Gentleman, and fitter to serve a Lady than to put her to any trouble.
True, said Silvia then, if he were less concerned for his own Interest, and
would not desire still a recompense and payment for every small obligation that
one may have him; But I never saw a man so tiring, and that goes more
straightly to his end than he does.

Thus the good company went on their way, Fouquet, and his fair Prize giving a
thousand Commendations to Birague. And Silvia not concealing any thing of what
she misliked in him, whereat they were ready to burst with laughing; And
calling to their Vallet de Chamber, they would jeer him for being asleep. You
may judge, Madam, whether they might not divert themseIves, and be merry, since
the Vallet de Chamber was no other than the Marquis of Birague himself, who had
made this plot with Fouquet, and was carrying Silvia to one of his Houses; But
the case was a little altered when they alighted; The Nun, who was indeed less
afraid of men than Silvia, said then to Birague with a loud voice, Come on,
Noble Vallet de Chamber, will you please to light down, and help this fair Lady
to do the same? But Silvia cried out so loud, as that it might have been heard
at a great distance, when some lights being brought to the door she saw the
face of Birague; and the Company had enough to do to settle her spirits from
the fright that she took at that sight: Why then would say that poor Gentleman,
who was really afflicted to see Silvia so hard set against him; Had you rather,
in good faith, be still in the Cloister, and lie open to the revenge of Madam
of Englesac, and all the effects that in time it was like to have brought upon
you, than to think your self a little beholden to me for your Liberty? Fouquet
and his Lady did much help him to persuade Silvia to show her self less wild,
and more acknowledging of his intended good Service. And she was at last, with
much ado, prevailed upon to pardon them that treachery. Next, they advised all
together, what measures they should take to avoid, or prevent the ill
consequences of that Escapade. w Silvia, and the Religious Woman went both to
bed together; and the Gentlemen thought fit to return to Avignon before day,
that they might both show themselves there, and hear the news of the Town: And
so went in at another Gate than that they had gone out by.

It was scarce break of day when the Alarm began to be very hot in the
Monastery. The news of the Lady's flight was spread abroad in a moment. An
Aunt of the Nun, which was then at the Court, did complain very highly of the
Nuns, saying, they had given their consent to the flight of her Niece. The Lady
of Englesac fearing lest her Son, of whose pardon she had still some hopes,
should take the opportunity of marrying Silvia somewhere out of France, spoke
yet with more earnestness than any body; And did even implore the Queen's
Justice. Her Majesty suspecting the Duke of Guyse had a hand in the business,
did look less kindly upon him all that day: The Duke, who was very innocent of
all, did protest that he had no share in it: And desiring to remove all
suspicion from him, seat some of his own Servants to seek after the Nuns. So
that Silvia and her Camrade were not a little busy, being embark't into an
affair of that consequence, and having so many set up against them. All they
could do was only to let things slumber a little, and slip out of the discourse
and memory of men, whilst the King was reducing Orange; and in the mean while
to comfort themselves the best they were able in Birague's House.

It has not been the Opinion, nor the talk of the World, that those two
Gentlemen were, during that time, as wise and sober as the strictest Monks;
Every body has been inclinable rather to believe they made use of the
opportunity, and did enjoy those Goods which Fortune seemed to offer unto them.
Yet Silvia cannot but do them that Justice, as to profess, that never men were
more respectfull, nor more modest, that in the condition wherein she saw her
self, and full of fears, and terrors as she was, she did not hope they would
have been so discreet, and so temperate. And that it was then that she began to
set a greater value upon Birague then she had ever done before: Let any body
else that will, be as just to her, as she is to the Gentleman.

Silvia and the Nun did not stay long in that House. For the King a few days
after had the Keys of Orange delivered to him, and having set a good number of
Pioneers to demolish the Citadel, he went all along the lower Languedoc, till
he came to the Isle of the Conference, where the Infanta was to meet him.
Fouquet, who wanted neither wit nor Friends, did think fit to make use of the
passage of that little Army, which commonly does compose the attendance of
Kings, to ride away with less suspicion out of a dangerous Neighborhood. He
put the Ladies into Chariots of Baggage, dressed them like Merchant's Wives
following the Court, and the word being given to take on the right hand, when
they should come beyond Carcassonne, he had them carried to Thoulouse, under
pretense of going thither to take in Provisions for Monsieur, the King's
Brother.

The Lady President x of -- I know not what, I have forgot her name; A good Old
Widow, and a Cousen of the Nun's, who had never approved of her being forced
to take the vows of a Religious Life, received them both into her House; And
taking presently in hand the defense of her Kins-woman, brought her cause to
the Parliament, of whom she desired a Warrant for her Niece to have the liberty
of her Person, that she might pursue the dissolution of her Vows. She obtained
it at last, after a long time, and much ado; And Fouquet, although he had been
put almost to all the trouble, did not reap the fruit of it. But I need say no
more of the circumstancs of that story, which now has nothing to do with that
of Silvia.

Being come to the Old President, she did not think her self much safer there
than in Birague his House. It may be she was less; For Fame, that Monster, that
grows bigger and bigger as it sets forward, had spread the noise of her Story
as far as Thoulouse, and drawn her Character in far worser colors than those
the Marqueeze of Ampus, and the Countess of Englesac had made use of, to ruin
her, with the Queen. Several came every day, without knowing who she was, to
tell her Stories, or Fables rather, of her Life, which did not a little vex the
poor Lady. On the other side, the Old President seeming to suspect somewhat of
the truth, though Silvia went only for a Maid that waited on the Nun, was not
very well pleased to see her in her House; It was much worse when her Cosen,
thinking to do Silvia good Service, did open the whole Mystery unto her. She
took exception against those assiduities of Birague; And the jealousy of the
Marqueeze his Wife, which did now proclaim every where, how much she did
suspect the familiarity of her Husband with Silvia, gave another onset to the
business. The watchfulness and diligence that the Countess of Englesac did use
for to find her out, went still beyond all the rest of her persecutions. The
good Old Woman was afraid lest any body should come to her Cousin to be
informed of what was become of Silvia. For the Nun was now no longer concealed;
and it was easy for any body to think that being both missed in the Convent at
the same time, they had gone out together, and knew something one of the other.
All that caused the good Woman, under a fair pretense of being careful of
Silvia's Interest, to advise her to go out of Languedoc as soon as she should
be able.

Silvia understood what she meant, and took it for granted, that she must be
gone, and that it must be so; but yet found her self in a strange perplexity of
mind, not knowing any further which way to go, nor how to dispose of her self,
as having no Friends, no Kindred, no Acquaintance that she could think of; So
that the only refuge that was left to her, was to resign her self again to
Birague's discretion. He offered to carry her to Paris, and never to leave her.
But his passion was to be feared, and his Company was subject to too much
suspicion. What to do? in so intricate an occurrence! Her good Fortune still
took care to rid her out of this.

When the Lady Moliere did formerly proclaim against Silvia, intending to
revenge the Death of her Husband; The news of it had been spread up every
where. The story of her Birth had been read as a curious piece in all the
Gazetts, and News-Books. A Duke of Kendale mixed therein did set it out
extremely; The noise of it had gone beyond the Frontiers, and most remote
Borders of the Kingdom. The Marquis de St. Estienne, one of the Commanders
under the Prince of Conde, being still at Brussels, gave it as a novelty, and a
piece of curiosity to one of the most charming Ladies in that Country, who was
a passionate Lover of fine Adventures; and this was a means, and as it were,
the first step to Silvia's preservation.

The Marqueeze of Sevill (such is that Lady's name) whose Ruelle y has ever
been full of what the Low Countries have had of most choice and accomplished
Gallants, was a Lady of a most exact and delicate Shape; z Who had been
formerly very young, and very handsome; and in whose physiognomy something of
Princely might be seen. She had infinitely of that fine wit which took so much
in France, before the fashion was of being 1 less formal and curious in
discourse and behavior both, and you could in nothing oblige her more, than by
imparting to her some witty intrigue: Princes, Marquesses, Earls, and Barons
have had the good luck to please her that way: And not so much as a Brother to
the 2 Secretary of Commands to the Prince of Conde has escaped being entangled
by her into some Adventure not unworthy of her great wit.

Your Highness will not think this Character free from guilt, when you see by
the rest of my story that this Lady has bestowed a great deal upon Silvia, and
done her much good. But who is able to conceal from a Friend, so rare and so
fine a Picture? It would rather be a Crime to hide it, considering chiefly that
the Person her self would take it kindly from us; So far she would be from
being against it, if she were living still.

I will therefore add, that the Duke of Kendale being young and handsome, was
her first Hero, When she had leave to go through Paris, upon her way to
Catalonia, whither she was going to meet her Husband. That six or seven years
after, when that Duke was Lieutenant General of the King's Army in those parts,
she was like to have 3 confounded him with pleasant Adventures and Gallantries
in the very bustle of the War and Arms (though never so cumbersom.) There was
not a day that she sent not to him; and she made use for that of incredible
subtilties; she would often put on a disguise to go and meet him in his very
Tent; So that one time among the rest, she was taken for a Spy, and carried to
him by the Soldiers. The Duke, who had been extremely taken with her in the
year 1645, or 46, was not ungrateful to those new tokens of so particular an
esteem. It Is said, that he did return his thanks to her by all the complaisance
that might be expected from him; And they that desire to find a reason for
every thing may assure themselves, that if it were not merely Hunting and
hazard which brought him into the Child's Cottage, in 1652, He must have come
thither upon the desire of the Marqueeze, who might have heard something of the
extraordinary Birth of Silvia; and who having compassion on her, had without
question engaged that charitable Lord to do her good. But I stay too long upon
this digression; let us come up again to our Subject.

The Marquis de St. Estienne did then, according as I have said above,
entertain that Lady with the Relation of Silvia's Adventures; And she being
naturally very compassionate to gallant infortunes, presently took a fancy to
relieve Silvia; Whether this was a continuation of that tender pity which the
Marqueeze is thought to have had for her, in 1652, or the effect of a more
casual commiseration, which she had of the famous destiny of an unknown Person;
Yet Silvia must still acknowledge her self bound to her for it.

To this effect the Marqueeze began 4 to make show, as if she had the
curiosity, which otherwise she was not like to have, of being present to the
interview of the two Kings on the River of Bidassoa, and to see the Ceremony of
the Infanta's marriage with Lewis August. She took her way by Land, from one
end of France almost to the other; And that she might have an occasion to come
and hear of Silvia in the County of Venaissin. 5 She gave out, that she did
intend to meet the Court in those parts.

At that very time Fouquet and Birague were stealing, and carrying away the Nun
and Silvia; The Marqueeze came to Avignon the very next day after that
expedition; which gave her still a greater mind to find out the Person she was
in search of; For her Noble heart did measure the esteem that is to be made of
people, according to the more or less Adventures which they had gone through.

Yet Silvia's being stolen away, and lost out of the eyes of the World, was a
thing that mixed a great deal of melancholy to the satisfaction the Marqueeze
had to find Silvia thereby the more worthy of her care and affection; And
really, it would have vexed any body, being come so far of purpose to see an
unknown Person, at the end of so long a Journey, to miss her. She was
continually amongst those that were most deeply concerned in those affairs,
that she might make her own Advantage of what should come to their knowledge.
For that same reason she sought to be acquainted with the Marqueeze d' Ampus;
Renewed her old friendship with the Duke of Guyse, whom she had formerly known
in the Low Countries, when he was following his Loves there; and she had great
hopes to engage him to reveal unto her a secret, which he himself knew nothing
of: So that she made him almost mad with the desperate persecution she made him
about the flight of Silvia.

But all that care and trouble was fruitless; The Court removed from thence
e're any body could tell which way the stolen Ladies had gone; The Marqueeze did
attend it as far as the Isle of the Conference, and could hear no further of
the Subject of her own Journey. The King's Marriage was not like the Conclusion
of a Romance, where all the Heroes must have a meeting together; That was
rather the cause that she could not think of going to Thoulouse, to seek for
Silvia; For she went away e're any thing was known of the retreat of the Nun,
with whom, afterward, it was thought that Silvia might be.

At last she was upon her return homewards, full of confusion and discontent,
telling every where as she went, to all the people she met with, the lamentable
story of Silvia, and the ill success of her labor in so tedious a Journey;
Sometimes her Gentleman Usher 6 did perform that Office whilst she took some
Rest, when an unexpected, and unlookt for Adventure accrewing to so many
others, gave the Marqueeze all manner of satisfaction.

The Countess of Englesac not failing to send to Thoulouse, as the Old
President had foreseen; and the Person she sent showing an Order from the
Queen, that Silvia should be taken, and shut up, wheresoever she should be
found; It would not have been safe for Silvia to balance, or waver any longer
betwixt the offers that Birague had made, and falling into the disgrace that
threatened her. She had accepted of them, and was gone to Bourdeaux, under the
conduct of my Lady Pratt, a Kins-woman of Birague, with an intention to stay
for him there, whilst the Lady took care of some business she had in that
Parliament. Silvia was afterward to trust her self upon his word into
Birague's hands, and so go to Paris, where she resolved to put her self into a
Cloister of her own accord, the very next day after that of her arrival. What
does your Highness think happened then? The Lady Pratt and Silvia went to Lodge
at Bourdeaux just at the very same place where the Marqueeze of Sevil had took
her Lodgings the day before. Silvia did see her; A certain je ne scay quoy did
strike into the minds of both at the first sight; And whether it was an effect
of sympathy betwixt her that was the scope of Adventures, and she that did aim
at them, or that a more secret spring did move them both; From that moment they
begun to look and wonder at one another, and to be desirous of knowing more
each of the other. Silvia told it the Lady Pratt, who found yet that they had
some resemblance.

Both Ladies having those dispositions to a correspondence, at last, resolved
upon a visit. The Lady, who did use, as has been said, to tell, or get her
Gentleman to relate her story to every one she met, who had the mien of
Illustrious Strangers; as Silvia, and her Guide, left them at night her Servant
to inform them of what she was.

Judge you, Madam, what was Silvia's wonder and amazement, when she heard her
name in that Relation, and when the Gentleman added, that the Marqueeze was
come expressly from Brussels to adopt her, and carry her away into Flanders; and
that she would give half of her Estate to know where Silvia was.

At the first she thought her self discovered, and could not imagine what
should be the reason of that Ceremony, with which they came coldly to speak to
her of her self, without it were for to make sport, and play with her a little,
before they did show the Order they had to stop her. To be short, Silvia not
knowing as yet the true Character of the spirit of that Lady, could see nothing
in that occurrence that did look natural and ingenuous; She had thereupon the
worst night that ever she past in all her life; And for all the hopes that the
Lady Pratt would have given her, who made a better Judgment of it, she could
not keep her self from trembling at the thoughts of the friend of Madam
Englesac till it was day.

It Is true, the excess of her trouble was somewhat alay'd the day after, when
the Marqueeze came to render them a second visit, which was as soon as she was
dressed. My Lady Pratt, who certainly has a very gallant wit, begun to dive
into the humor 8 of so extraordinary a Person; And after many questions she
thought fit to return her one story for another, and to let her see that Silvia
was the very same person of whom she had so tender, and generous a compassion.
For my Lady Pratt had a fancy, as it might very well be, that the Relation of
the misfortunes of Silvia, which was made to the Marqueeze by St. Estienne, had
inspired into that merciful Lady a Motherly love toward her.

In effect a greater joy could not be imagined in the World than was her joy,
when she heard Silvia's name, and that manner of finding her, or rather,
lighting upon her by so great a chance, endearing her still the more to that
Noble Lady; her transport was so great, as that they could not be parted for a
long while, and Silvia was like to have left her life for joy in her first
embraces. Two days after Silvia did resolve to make use of that Adventure, and
not to stay for the Marquis of Birague, who out of the spite that he took at
it, lost in time, the remembrance of Silvia's Charms, and renewed his
Friendship with the Widow Moliere; Though some people may blame him for that,
yet Silvia her self did not; But rather said, that the Marquis was not the
first man, who being much in Love, or else taking himself to be so, after an
ill success with the subject of his desire, had sought for some satisfaction
elsewhere.

Silvia did thank the Heaven for a succor so unexpected, and so seasonable,
and necessary a favor; And left Bourdeaux few days after with much more
content, and less fear than she had come to it. The Marqueeze did bestow a
whole World of Commendations and caresses on her by the way as they went, and
gave her such tokens of an earnest, and pressing tenderness, that at the last,
she could not forbear to look upon her as upon one that was her true Mother.
Yet she did not like Silvia should call her so; But told her, that her face
would not give consent to a truth which was acknowledged by the heart. And
really the former of these two had till then, for above five and twenty years,
preserved it self in such a flower of Youth, as rendered the quality of a Mother
inconsistent with so much of Youth and Beauty. Thus Silvia was obliged to keep
within the name of Sister, wherewith she was content, and thought her self too
much honored. At last, they came to Paris, and there they staid till after the
magnificent Entry of their most Christian Majesty's.

In a space of time so considerable, and with such a Sister, spent in Paris,
whither in that conjuncture the curiosity of the show had drawn the eyes of
strangers from all the parts of Europe; Your Highness will easily conceive,
that there might have happened to Silvia many things worth the mentioning; But
whatsoever happened, she was not concerned in it; All went to the Marqueeze of
Sevil, of whom she had desired that she might be seen but of few people till
they should come to Brussels. I must except only, that a Friend of the Duke of
Guyse, coming in a disguise to see her, did offer with many protestations to
make her a Sovereign Princess, if she would; That the next day after, she
refused to take at his hand a pair of Pendents, of great value, which he would
have presented her with; and that she did choose rather to uphold the
unfortunate Love of her banished Englesac, than give way to a man that made her
so fine proffers: Besides this, nothing of extraordinary did happen unto Silvia
in her passage through France. I need not name that Gallant 9 of Silvia's.
Madam, your Highness knows very well who I mean, and that he resolved
afterward to be revenged of her, by rendering himself to a young Lady that did
not prove so scrupulous as Silvia.

A month after she came within sight of the walls of Brussels; her new Sister
carried her in, as if it had been in a kind of triumph: She was there for above
a fortnight the subject of an hundred Relations of Adventures, every one made
by the Marqueeze her self in choice words; all the gallant and complying People
of the Court 10 did recieve with respect and faith the Reasons that she was
pleased to give, for adopting of Silvia to her Heir. Some did exaggerate unto
her the likeness of their persons, the more to show the justice of her action:
but I cannot well say, whether this did please her as much as the rest.

To be short, Silvia, Madam, was there two years in the midst of the Spanish
Courtship, and Gallantry. But lest I should prove troublesome to your Highness,
by too long a reading, and that Silvia may also take a little breath; I leave
the Relation of what befell her there, of most remarkable, and of the rest of
her Adventures, for the next occasion that she shall have of writing to your
Highness. I am

Your Highnesses most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, H. S. D. M.

Notes on the first Part.
(a) THe Memories: I have chus'd rather to call this the Adventures, than
History, Relation, or Memories, as the French Title is; because I see that in
the whole the Writer of this Relation does chiefly insist upon extraordinary
things, such as are termed Adventures, and does not follow every particular
passage of the Life, as the Memories are wont to do. Every body knows that
Adventure in Romances, and even in common language, is taken for the unexpected
good or bad success in any affair: The Adventures of five Hours are full of
that; Yet some are of opinion that Adventure has not been long a very common
English word in this sense; in which it is French properly, as what they call
Dire la bonne Aventure, is in English, To tell some body His good Fortune. But
it is more in fashion to say Memories than Adventures; and the mode in speaking
right or wrong, as well as in dresses, is a Tyrant that will be obeyed.

(b) Silvia. In the alterations that I have made (as for example, in this
particular of speaking of Silvia, as of the third person, whereas the French
makes her speak in, the first all along) I should not need to justify my self,
nor give you any account of what I do, if I would but desire you to put your
self to the trouble of suspending your judgment, till you have gone through the
Book. For then I am sure you will find that I have some reason on my side: yet
I must entreat you, in this occasion, to undergo that penance, if you read
this with the spirit of a Critic; Else I hope you will find it as smooth every
whit, to say, Silvia did, Silvia said, as I did, or I spoke thus: Some indeed
will have it, that when you read any thing that is very pleasant; as for
example; the burning of the Castle, and Silvia's being carried in a swoon out
of the House in the Arms of Birague; her being in the Closet with Englesac: It
is more pleasant still to have it in the first person, by reason of an
application, and a certain interim that the Reader takes in it: But when the
case is altered, and that Silvia is locked up in another Closet with the Old
Countess, or guarded in the Cloister, or stripped of the Prince of Salmes his
Clothes, as you shall see in the second part. Then, I believe, some had rather
it were She than I. It Is sometimes your fear, and sometimes your pleasure that
rules you; 'twere hard to serve them both at once; I have took care that you
might not be offended. Do your self your best to be pleased.

(c) Lin. 13. In the first place. I have omitted here of purpose two or three
lines of unnecessary complements to her Highness.

(d) It would be easy, etc. Here I have quite altered the thing. The French
says, If I would borrow the luster of some Romantic Heroina, There might be
found men in the World, as some are found already, that would labor to
countenance the fable of her pedigree, and by that render her true story more
dark, and more doubtful. Silvia aims at persuading her Highness of the truth of
her being the Duke of Kendale's Heir; and I desire to do the best I can to
divert you.

(e) Her pretty carriage. The French has, Mes petites fassons. That Is very
good French; but the English would not be so, if one should say My little
fashions. Thus the French say, Il a assez bonne fasson. He is well enough
behaved. Vous faites bien des fassons, vous faites trop de fassons. Whereof the
English is, You make too much Ceremony. Thus you see how French and English
fashions will differ sometimes.

(f) A Financier. The King's Treasure and Revenues, in French are called
Finances, which was the Old word for all manner of money, and more especially
for Tribute-money, from the word Finer, to pay; from whence the English, Fine.
From the word Finances they are called Financiers, that are either Treasurers,
Controllers, Intendents, Super-intendents, or Farmers of the King's Customs,
Rights, Demain, etc. as Moliere was in the Province of Languedoc.

(g) The Marquis de Birague. I find it easier, and better English too, to let
alone the proper names of persons; and even those that are used in France, to
distinguish the Rank, and condition of people, than to alter them. Take it
therefore for granted, that I will do so for the most part. Only excepting
Englesac, who being the Hero of this Story, I have thought fit to bestow on
him the English Title of Earl.

(h) It Is like her Husband, etc. That has been added, and the rest of the story
does justify it to be true. It makes me remember a most witty passage in the
Joconde of la Fontaine, which runs thus.

Tous deux dormoient, dans cet abord
Joconde
Voulout les envoyer dormir en l'autre monde.
Mais cependant il n'en fit rien
Et mon advis est qu'il fit bien.
Le moins de bruit que lon peut fair
En tell affair.
Est le plus feur de la moitie.
Soit par prudence ou par pity
Joconde ne tua person.
D'eveiller ces Amans, il ne le faloit pas
Car son honneur l'obligeoit en ce cas
De leur donner le trepas:
A ton remords je t'abandonne,
Vy Mechante; dit il tout bas.
(i) To have made her go halves, etc. The French, may be, is not so happy in
that expression, De me fair partager le soin de cette v^ngeance. To share the
care is somewhat too ambiguous; yet the other is not immodest, though a more
significant, and fore-warning word.

(k) Badineries. Waggishnesses. I know it is very much a-la-mode, to use dry
French words in an English discourse. But besides the mode, I find this reason
for that, that there is no Language in the World, but may help another with
many most proper expressions, which cannot be rendered into it by any
circumlocution, much less word for word: Which made an ingenious, and
speculative Gentleman tell me once, that it were to be wished a Collection were
made of all those words, in all the Tongues that are known among us; In two or
three times that one reads them; by the sense, and their connection with
others, he will understand the meaning, and apprehend more than can be
represented to his fancy by any other way. Yet I find it necessary to give a
near signification for the first time, lest it should cause an interruption in
your memory, if you were put to look elsewhere.

(l) The Wood, etc. This has been added as a grace to the Story, or what you
please.

(m) The result. Le refrein. says the French, Refrei^ properly is the burden
of a song, or Ballad, the last line or two of the first Stanza, which are taken
in again in every other. If any body thinks that I am too curious and nice in
picking up words, let him, if he be a Stranger, take this from me, that the
English Tongue is capable, not only of as great a strength, but also of as much
fineness, and delicacy of expression as any other that is, or has been used in
any Age; And if he be an Englishman, I hope he will not put me to the trouble
of making an Apology for my love to his Natural Tongue.

(n) Had never trusted him with that secret. Of which the reason may be, that
she would not give him occasion to suspect any thing of her former intelligence
with Kendale.

(o) p. 69. The Cavalier. It Is a French expression, cannot well be Englished by
any single word. The French, when they mean a Gallant Gentleman, will sometimes
say of him, c' est un Cavalier de merit, un des plus accomplis Cavaliers que
je connoisse; and as the Italian and Spaniards, Cavaliere, and Cavalero: It is
taken alone for a person of fine and gentile parts, in opposition to rude, and
ill behaved people. Thus they say, Cela est fort Cavalier, Cela est un peu trop
Cavalier; That is to say, Gallant, Cavalier-like.

(p) p. 81. To his Mistress. The French says, a sa Dame. But his Lady, in
English, does signify his Wife: A Mistress, and une Maistress, are the same
thing always, but not Lady, and Dame.

(q) p. 90. Whom he made a fool of. I know not how to render more
significantly, The French, Il la traittoit deplaisante duppe. If any body
knows, let him.

(r) p. 95. Transports. The French, emportment, is still better; but still I
come short of my desire, and I know not how to mend it.

(s) p. 102. Her Heures. Her Hours, I would have said, but then it is no
English in that sense. The Roman Catholics in France, call certain
Prayer-Books, to be used so many hours a day, Mornings and Evenings, their
Hours. Which every Body almost knows that reads French. I write this for those
that do not know beyond their Native English.

(t) p. 147. The Ladies of Englesac. I hope most of my Readers have heard
already, that in France, the Sons, and Daughters of a Noble Family, are, when
spoken of altogether, as in this place, called by the Name, or Title of their
Father; as les Messieurs, les Demoiselles, de etc. Although every one has a
particular Name or Title of some Land, or Dignity, by which they are called. So
that here is not meant many Countesses of Englesac. But the young Ladies, which
are called Demoiselles as long as unmarried persons, of the same place whereof
those that be married, are named Ladies.

(u) A Tourreere. I spell it for the English pronuntiation. Touriere in French,
is she that keeps the Turning-box in a Nunnery, through which things are
conveyed, and people both ways unseen.

(w) Escapade. A word the French have borrowed from the Spaniard, and both from
the Italian; The English Escape is so like it, as well in the pronuntiation, as
in the sense, as that I have great hopes it may easily be understood. Yet I
think I may, for more security, tell you, that Escapade, in French, is properly
a wanton and unruly Action, done of a sudden, after which one may come to
himself again, and be sober; And it does not of necessity imply a flight, or a
running away, though here it is applied to signify it.

(x) Lady President. The French are so civil to the Ladies, as to bestow on
them the same Titles, whether of Office, or Dignity, that their Husbands have.
Madam la Chancelliere. la Mareschalle, l' Ambassadrice, la Surintendente. Yet
mark, that it is only in Offices that give Rank and place.

(y) Whose Ruelle. The Bedside in any body's Chamber is called la ruelle du
lit; Which at the Lady's Bed-Chambers being made pretty wide, and serving for
the best Companies to sit in, is no longer called la ruelle du lit, but la
ruelle sans queue; sa ruelle, speaking of such a Lady's Bedside. On en parle
dans toutes les ruelles: c'est l'entretien de toutes les ruelles. Il regue dans
les ruelles.

(z) Exact and delicate shape. I cannot forbear teaching you still some French;
In that Language, I render here an exact and delicate shape, une taille fine.
The word fin is of late applied to many things in conversation with elegancy,
and is of the finest use, and very much of the Court. They say, Avoir le goust
fin, un discernement fin, Delicate, in English, Le fin de l'affaire, the
chiefest point in that business; le fin de la langue, the greatest delicacy of
a language. Il pense finement les chooses, His wit gives a delicate, and happy
turn to every thing he says. Sometimes fin is the same thing in French as well
as in English, with delicate. Une raillerie fine, is exactly the same with une
raillerie delicate. Though, to tell you the truth exactly, la raillerie fine
may be used among all people; the raillerie delicate, sounds like something
that has a Relation to great persons, whether for use, or application. But I am
afraid this is French for the French, and few strangers will reach it. Un
che^al fin, is an ordinary expression, to signify a handsome Horse, and of a
good breed.

(1) Less formal, etc. I must tell those that are curious of the French Tongue,
that the French word is Concerte'. Whether I do sufficiently express it or no,
I leave it to the Connoisseurs in both tongues.

(2) Secretary of Commands. Secretaire des Commandments. It Is the usual
appellation for such as write upon small occasions to distinguish them from
Secretaries indeed. They are only at the Queen's, and Princes of the
Blood Royal.

(3) Confounded him, etc. I pray tell me, what is accabler d'aventures? Elle
pensa l'accabler d'aventures. I have no English word for accabler in that
gallant sense more likely to do my business than that I have used. Accablement
indeed might be rendered in two or three words, as, Il est dans un accablement
estrange, for one whose spirits are ready to sink under the burden of many sad
events.

(4) To make show, etc. The French is, Elle se fit une curiosite. Which is a
very Courtly, and fashionable expression: But not altogether fit for this
place, where, the troth is, that the Marqueeze had no intention to have gone to
the Marriage, but as a pretense to find out Silvia. Se fair une curiosite etc,
is to have a mind to, etc. Se fair des chagrius, To be really chagrin and
melancholy, not to pretend to it. Se fair des plaisirs, is to take pleasure.
Se fair honneur de quelque chose. Se fair un merit, Se fair des affairs.
Is all real, and no pretense.

(5) County of Venaissin; Whereof Avignon is the head; belonging to the Pope,
as every body knows.

(6) Gentleman Usher. The French says, Son Escuyer: Ladies have as good a
right to their Husbands Arms and Titles as can be. Some Arms were wont to be
carried before great men by their Escuyers, Shield-bearers, therefore have the
Ladies their Escuyers also; whose employment, is in France, to give the Hand or
Arm to their Lady's; for the fashion of walking before them is not known in
France: though indeed it shows grandeur, if a Lady has besides him that walks
before, another of greater Quality to help her as she goes, else not. For
safety is to be preferred to a show.

(7) To make sport. Pour plaisanter, says the new French expression: that is
to say properly, to droll, or Jest, when it is no time to do so; or else, when
others think it is not, because they cannot like their raillery.

(8) Penetrer le tal^nt, To dive into the humor. More of our new expressions:
Talent, is here the mind, the humor and nature. A mere Tuscan word: The
Spaniards also say Talante, and sometimes Talento, as the Italian, for
affection, mind, desire, etc. But when we say in French, avoir la talent, etc.
Il a de grands talents, Il a un grand talent pour les langues, it is the same
as to say, inclination toward it, a genius for it; they say also, Il a de
grandes ouvertures pour les sciences, in the same sense.

(9) Gallant. The French says Soupirant, which indeed is more proper, because
a man may Soupirer, sigh for a little while, and give over. But to be a Gallant
to a Lady, implies that a long time and labor has been bestowed on her.

(10) Did receive with, etc. This is what me Author calls adora les raisons, a
new expression again. To adore, or worship reasons, would not sound so well in
English, though never so new.

(11) Courtship. Fleurettes, is the French word; which every one knows to be
what is called in English, to tell tales, to tell Stories.

Eurip. Hec. (...)
(...).
FINIS.
THE Memoires OF THE LIFE AND RARE ADVENTURES OF Henrietta Sylvia Moliere.

Written in French by her Self.

BEING The II, III, IV, V, VI and last Parts.

LONDON: Printed by J.C. for W. Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar,
1677.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THe Reader may be pleased to take notice, that whereas the Translator of the
First Part had a peculiar humor, with what reason I know not, to render his
Expressions in the Third Person throughout, though in the Original they are in
the First, and may be as genuinely and truly made English; This Notice is
given, to avoid Confusion and Mistake, that the remaining five Parts are
expressed in the First Person, according to the Original, and as properly and
truly as if in the Third; and no doubt but it runs more smoothly: and so is
continued throughout all the Parts, and the History of Sylvia's Life perfectly
Completed, by adding these Five Parts to the First; which First Part is also
to be sold at the same place with these.

THE ADVENTURES AND MEMOIRES OF Henrietta Sylvia Moliere. PART the II.
THe first Visits that I received at Brussels, were from the Prince of Aremberg
and the Duke of Arscot, Princes truly meriting the greatest esteem, whose Noble
Qualifications might deservedly shine in the French Court. The Duke de Crouy
followed them; the Prince de Ligne, the good man Don Antonio of Corduba, and a
thousand more imitated them: And in fine, the Governor himself, who in spite
of his majestic Gravity, came off the most dangerously wounded of them all.

I cannot pass over in silence one particular passage which the excess of his
Passion prompted him to.

As he tenderly affected me, and was persuaded that his Age wanted the
assistance of his Liberality to conquer my Heart, he took up a resolution to
assault me by those means, and began to personate the accomplished Gallant. I
was much pleased with the sight of a little Chariot of his, which seemed to me
a very commodious and new Invention. Next day he bestowed a visit on me; and as
I was discoursing to him concerning it, he said, Will you be pleased to play
with me for one of them against any other thing? To which I replied, I will;
but what shall I stake in play against your Excellency that can amount to that
value? He said, all that he desired, was only a little of my Favor: and I
(who ever had an inexhaustible stock for all persons of Integrity, drolling
with my accustomed gayety) as soon took him at his word, and played for the
Chariot. He lost it; nay, farther, I won the Horses, Charioteer, the Lacqueys,
their Board-wages, even to the littering the Stable for three years. The next
morning he made me play again, to the end that I might lose my Stakes; and
indeed I did so. That very Evening he demanded payment by a Note writ in
Spanish, which was indifferently well penned, but when he found that the word
Esteem in my French did not signify the same thing as he intended in his
Spanish, he re-engaged me to play, that he might be revenged of me; and
recovered his Chariot, Horses, Charioteer, Lacqueys, and the Litter of the
Horses; and I never set eye on him afterward.

But yet this did not prevent my being visited by some other persons of that
Nation, who had as great love for me; and among all those, the ancient
Gentleman Don Francisco de Gonsales of Meneza, a person of Quality and Courage,
twice a Widower, and now to be married the third time, was he that resolved
upon the conquest of me with the greatest obstinacy, and in the end
accomplished his design. He sprung from the Illustrious Family of Meneza, of
whom the Histories of Spain and Portugal speak so advantageously. The desire he
had to serve his Prince in the Low Countries had transplanted him thither,
together with his Estate: it is true, 'twas alleged besides, that the love he
bore to a former Wife, which he married for pure Affection, did contribute
thereunto as much as any thing else.

I looked upon my self, on my own part, destitute of Parents, at least any to
my knowledge. I had received no intelligence of the Earl of Anglesac for three
years elapsed, though I sent several Letters to him that used to write to me on
his behalf, whilst I was cloistered in the Covent at Avignon. On the other
hand, the Marchioness of Sevil, although my intermarriage with a second Lover
seemed in her opinion to infringe the Laws of Heroic Adventures, did
notwithstanding so far recede from her severity, as to advise me not to lose
the Aged Spaniard. What shall I say? His annual Revenue of 50000 Livres, and
his Jewels, opened my eyes, and contributed to this persuasion, that Englesac
had quite blotted me out of his Remembrance. I lent an ear to his Proposition
of Marriage; all was concluded, and the Ceremony completed in less than ten
days. The Good Man presently afterward furnished me with the Train of a
Princess; he provided Frenchmen for the most part of my Domestiques; and in
the end omitted nothing to render me happy, at least as to outward appearance.

But, Madam, could so great a Fortune arrive without an allay of Trouble?
without doubt it could not; that would have been directly contrary to the end
which, it seems, I was born to. In the midst of so great felicity, which
created Jealousy in some, and Satisfaction in others, I met with one
Misfortune that poisoned all that followed for a long time after.

Englesac, whom I believed faithless, or rather indeed in his Grave, came to
Brussels three or four days after I was Married. This poor Gentleman (whose
love continued still as vigorous and fervent as ever, notwithstanding that by
the Artifices of his Mother, it so fell out that he had not heard a syllable
from me for the space of three years) had been at all the Princes Courts in
quest of me. He from Savoy went into Switzerland, had penetrated into the heart
of Germany, and continued some Months at the Emperor's Court; he returned by
-- he saw your Ladyship, Madam, and received from all the Princes of your most
Illustrious House a thousand Marks and Ensigns of Goodness. In conclusion,
being pregnant and full fraighted with hopes, which he had from time to time of
obtaining his Pardon, he reapproached Paris by the Low Countries, that he might
be nearer his friends, who undertook his affairs at Court. What was the first
Object that was presented to his view as soon as he lighted off his Horse? His
Mistress remarried; O God! O what a spectacle was this for him! Being struck as
it were with a Thunderbolt at this sight, after he had recounted to himself
the particulars of this his Disgrace, he would for grief have thrown himself
upon the point of his Sword; and had effected it too, but that his Vallet de
Chamber was too nimble, and prevented it. This faithful and affectionate
Domestique withheld him, and diverted the impetuous torrent of his first
Commotions: And next day being informed that the Marquess of Meneza was yet
destitute of some French Officers, he firmly recomposed his Spirit by the hope
that he gave him of putting him very suddenly into a condition to reproach me
with Inconstancy. In fine, he put it into his head to embrace this opportunity,
whereby he might come to be near me. The Amorous Earl, who gave ear to nothing
but Revenge, disguised himself sufficiently to make him fit for such an
employment in a place where he was Incognito; and the old man Meneza, who
desired to have all his Servants gentile, found him immediately to be for his
turn, and entertained him. I was never struck with greater astonishment than
when, looking upon this new Steward of the Household, our Servant, I found him
to be the unfortunate Anglesac.

Alas, Madam! I still tremble at the very thought of it. That secret power that
enchains the Hearts, and always fixes them on the object they love, maugre all
the crafty Contrivances which Fortune makes use of to cause a separation
between them, forced me to change color twenty times in a minute; and treated
me with so much Barbarism, that being unable any longer to resist its violence,
I was fallen into a swoon insensibly in the Arms of the aged Gonzales. It was
then very happy for me that I was married, and that this accident might be
imputed to something else which prevented his Jealousy, feeding his fancy with
another imagination to his advantage; for assuredly that had produced the most
mischievous effects imaginable. I came to my self again, but resolved to stay
no longer in sight of this Imprudent, who was almost in as bad a condition as
my self; and entreating the Marquess to cause me to be put to bed, I lay there
all that day distracted with the greatest Inquietudes that could possibly
afflict a person of my spirit and temper.

I had then, and indeed always, a sense of Virtue, whatever the Obloquie of a
corrupt Age and the malice of my Enemies dare tattle to the contrary. So that
this unexpected Rencounter with a man I had formerly loved, and that I could
not yet hate, did cruelly divide my Resolutions, and rend my Soul in pieces. I
would not have had him arrived at Brussels, and yet I was joyful to find him
there: sometimes I was offended with him because he did thus expose me to
apparent Dangers; then again, that he should debase himself so much, as to
submit to so mean an Employment. Methought there were a thousand other ways,
both to see and converse with me; besides, in this very action I designed to
search out the undoubted proof of the strength of his Love, and did admire at
those Enterprises which that Passion is capable ^o make us attempt.

I continued* with such thoughts as these, till diverted by the Marchioness of
Sevil, who understanding my Indisposition, was come to see me; and this was the
reason that I thought no more of them till night: Then I desired the Marquess
Meneza to leave me alone, under pretense of taking Physic, but it was in
effect to impart all to a Confident of mine, a French Female-servant that I had
retained about two years in my service, and to whom I used to unbosome my self
of all my Secrets. I asked her advice, and she was not less embroiled than I;
yet we took up this resolution, that I should speak with the Earl as soon as
possibly I could, for fear if I should treat him ill, he should make discovery,
by some over-bearing Griefs, of that which 'twould be of greater importance to
conceal from the old Marquess: for his Spanish humor was greatly to be feared,
if he had had the least suspicion of the truth of the matter. Merinvil (that
was the name of this Maid) took upon her this Commission; and on the morrow,
pretending some Orders that she had from me to give to the new Steward, told
him, That I knew him again very well, and upbraided him with the Peril which he
had brought me into; and withal added, That he should take great care to do
nothing that might give the least ombrage to Meneza, and that I would take my
own time to afford him a private Interview as soon as was possible.

If ever an Inamorato passed from an excessive Melancholy to extreme Joy, after
all was thought to be lost, 'twas this poor Earl, who gave himself the liberty
to interpret the Promise I had made him as extensively and advantageously as he
pleased; and he appeared more brisk by half than before, during those two days
which were requisite to find out a way to discourse him in private. But his
Mind and Countenance soon altered, when after a moments entertainment he
understood that it was to oblige him to leave the Low Countries, and to require
his departure as the last demonstration of his Affection for me. The Marquess
de Meneza, by good fortune, was at that time engaged at play with the Marquess
of Castle Rodrigo; for otherwise I know not what we should have done without
being surprised: This aged Husband of mine, not being able to breath one moment
out of my sight; and the Earl having been in a Swoon by my Bedside an hour and
better after that I had acquainted him with my intention: Add farther, Madam,
add to your Command (said he, a little before he fell into that weakness) that
I shall go and carry my Head to France; and to pardon you the remorse of an
Infidelity, that I durst not be so bold so much as to suspect in so spacious
and generous a Soul as your own, I must stifle the Remembrance thereof with my
own Blood.

These words pierced to the very Heart of me; but I was then much more
troubled, when I saw him grow weaker and weaker. Merinvil went out of my
Chamber to prohibit the entrance of all persons whatsoever, pretending that I
was at rest: which fell out very successfully; and I my self, when I saw this
too amorous Man somewhat come to himself again, put him with all speed into a
Closet, the Door whereof was at my Beds-head, till we had found whether we
could let him out of my Appartment without danger.

And it was time: for I had no sooner shut the Door, but that the Marchioness
of Sevil came, and would have entered the Chamber in spite of Merinvil, saying,
That I must not sleep thus in the Daytime, and that she had something of great
weight to communicate unto me, the relation whereof would conduce more to my
health than that unseasonable Repose I then took. It was to acquaint me with a
new Adventure with which she had perplexed a French Gentleman called the
Chevalier de la Frette, to whom she wrote daily under the name of the Invisible
Lady, and he also returned her an Answer without any knowledge of her Person.

I hearkened to her with incredible distraction and impatience; and was somewhat
the more out of humor, because a little Lap-dog of Bologna, which I, not
thinking of, had shut up in the Closet with the Earl, did bark at him till he
was ready to die, and afforded me strange murdering apprehensions: not but
that the Lady probably would have been rather ravished than scandalized to see
me so faithful a Lover, and have envied my Fortune, than have inveighed against
it. But I had always reason to dread the usual Indiscretion that accompanies
Heroic Minds, having made it my observation in the perusing of Books, that
they would always relate the History of their Lives and Fortune to the first
unknown persons they met with, without the least precaution; and I did
apprehend, that among those persons from whom she could not forbear the
relation of mine, there might be found some one or other that had been very
well acquainted with me.

But in conclusion I avoided the trouble, calling for my Morning-gown, and led
this dangerous Marchioness into another Closet upon a specious pretense, to
give Merinvil an opportunity to let Englesac out of the Closet; which she did
accordingly.

But in vain did we take all this trouble upon us, and to no purpose did we
take our measures to hinder the Marquess his discovery of any thing during the
Months time that the Steward did resolve with great obstinacy to dwell with
us. The Sieur de -- who had retired to Brussels since the disgrace of Monsieur
Fouquet Superintendent of the Exchequer, who came to dine (the greater our
misfortune) at the Marquess his Table, with several other Frenchmen: and as de
-- was a person of great Merit, and excellent Company, who knew all persons of
Quality whatsoever in France, and besides had been particularly intimate with
Englesac, in a Journey they took together from Bourdeaux to Paris; he no sooner
saw him come into the Hall, to order the Service at Dinner, but, taking him for
one of the Guests, he cried out aloud, Ah Monsieur le Comte d'Englesac, you are
then in this Country, are you? Ah! what good fortune is conferred upon me by
one of my best friends? and with these words he ran to embrace him.

I was not then there, and 'twas well it so happened; for it had been far worse
if I had taken notice of the Earl in that equipage. He gently disengaged
himself from the Arms of de -- yet with a blush, and pretending he believed
that he put this trick of Gallantry upon him only to divert himself: He minded
the covering of the Table, as if he had been nothing less than the person that
de -- took him for. De -- himself could not sufficiently admire at this
mystery, or at the extraordinary resemblance of this Steward and the Earl of
Englesac; for this action began to make him dubious. The whole Conversation at
the Table was only upon this during Dinnertime, insomuch that several
Questions were proposed to the Steward: I my self, who had had time to be
pre-acquainted with this accident, and to be composed before I came to seat my
self at Table, did like the rest; so that all seemed well in appearance, and we
did believe that nothing more vexatious would befall us.

But it was no easy matter to put a trick upon a Spaniard, who had too often
heard the story of my Life repeated, and been pre-possess'd with the Earl of
Englesac's love to me. Meneza politickly disguised his Sentiments till all
people were withdrawn; and when he saw himself single, reproached and menaced
me a thousand times; told me I was unworthy the honor of Alliance with one of
his Birth and Quality, and a hundred other things more piquant, which gave me
to understand, that he intended not to stop there. I did not only find my
self in a fearful condition as to my own particular, but also for this unhappy
Gentleman, who for fear of discovering all, would now absent himself less than
ever, and of whom I knew very well they would be cruelly revenged, if they
could be certain that he was Englesac.

He denied it constantly with extraordinary obstinacy; he profer'd the
Justification of it by his Parentage, and did so, and pressed even the Marquess
that he would satisfy himself: He added, tha it was the Artifice of -- to
banish him his service: in fine, he made such ado about it, that one might well
believe 'twas truth that he said; so industrious is this fond Love to preserve
the Reputation of the party beloved.

But however, 'twas impossible that my Reputation should ever recover of that
mortal blow received upon this occasion: and though the Earl a few days after
left Brussels with all speed, without acknowledging any thing; the bad usage
that I received daily from my Husband from that time, made me believe that it
was not without some ground. The Railleries in private of -- who took a pique
against Englesac because he did not confide in him, did contribute to farther
persuasions; and the curiosity of some, who came into the world only to
disturb it, and who discovered the Earl's Lodging when he arrived, did spoil
all at last.

From this Source, Madam, it is, that so many cruel Impostures flowed, whereby
they designed ever since to obscure the clearness of my Innocence, and the
purity of my Actions. It was not to be imagined, that I should not have a share
in the design of an incensed Lover, who had run the risque of all to gratify
his Jealousy and Despite. Upon this consideration, the world has taken
occasion to misjudge of what so grand a Misfortune did oblige me to undergo: to
avoid what might ensue thereupon, they would also draw these consequences as to
what is passed; and say, that 'twas not without reason that the Countess of
Englesac had so persecuted me. To conclude, my Name was become the execration
of good people, and the Fable of all the Courts in Europe, even to the
publishing of it in Print, and composing Romances of my Life, which contained
not one word of truth. But let us wave the Apology, and return to the Rehearsal.

Englesac then made so great a noise, that Meneza was almost over-perswaded, or
at least feigned to be so, for his Honors sake; but he entertained him no
longer in his Service, and commanded him not only to quit his House, but to
depart the City: which he did rather in respect to me, than that Jealous-pated
Don; and after that went into Holland, as I have already informed you. I
received nothing but evil Treatments from my Husband, and lived under that
Tyranny till the month of January in the year 1664, at which time being
ascertained of his ill will toward me, and that he would carry me by force to
one of his Houses, and cloister me up, I resolved not to wait till that
violence should be offered. The Frost had made the way very passable; I took
all my Jewels, which were worth almost a hundred thousand Crowns, and went out
of Brussels to meet with Merinvil about five Leagues off, being both habited in
Men's Apparel: besides, the night approaching, which was clear enough, we rode
Post, and arrived at Nancy through Luxemburg.

As Soon as I was departed, there were several rumors of my flight; and they
were a long time in quest of me, where I was not to be found, because our
Disguise, together with the assistance of the Night, did hinder them from
discovering the way that we traveled: Nay, they were also of opinion that this
Part was not acted without the Contributory assistance of Englesac; and they
went as far as the Hague to upbraid him with opprobrious Speeches and Menaces,
although he had been above eight months in a languishing condition by a
Quartan Ague, and not in a capacity to dream of such an Enterprise; and that as
much time was almost elapsed since the poor Gentleman had heard any news of me.
But I will acquaint you with the effect which that produced, in its proper
place.

When we were arrived at Lorrain, I did not think it convenient to show my self
too publicly, because I was not unknown to his Highness. Besides, we, at least
Merinvil, could not so well personate those persons we represented, but that
such a Prince as he, who did make it his business, might easily dive into some
of our secrets. I was content to continue for some time Incognita, and at Board
at Cavigny's, a man of I know not what humor, who for our Money entertained us
for what we seemed to be; and we played sometimes with a handsome Girl that he
had, who, if I mistake not, was taught to love a man, by my good Complexion.

After all this, and when we were persuaded that the heat of Meneza's diligent
search was over, we resolved to enter France by Champagne. I went under the
Name of a Young German who came to see the Magnificence of this Kingdom; and
Merinvil under the name of a Frenchman, whom I had entertained in my Service.
Nothing was more facile, than for us thus to blind the whole World: I was
Mistress of the High Dutch from my very youth, and did infinitely affect a
kind of broken French when I could not avoid speaking it. No one questioned
but that I was the young Prince de Salmes, whose Name I at last assumed,
knowing (...) there was one of that name which passed all over Europe; and
being arrived at Court, I was not fearful to salute their Majesty's in that
Quality, as well as all the Ladies, and the major part of the Lords also.

In a short time I had gained my self I know not what strange Reputation of a
very gallant German, and a dangerous Gentleman among the fair Sex. It would be
too laborious a work to enlarge my self hereupon, because the report spread
abroad concerning my Talents and Abilities, did expose me to great and weighty
business, and I do also intend to divert your Highness therewith; but I must
first of all give you an account of some other particulars, which follow
successively in the Series of my Story.

The first Rencounter worthy our cognizance, which we made one day at Champagne
very early in the morning, was an Adventure at least as extraordinary as any
that ever befell me. We had scarce walked two Leagues at the going out of Troy,
coasting about the Holy Sepulcher, a stately Fabric belonging to Vilacert, but
we discovered afar off a Cavalier upon an Ascent: he seemed at first to manage
his Horse; and in a minutes time after we perceived that he had turned short to
make toward us with full speed. Have a care, Madam, said Merinvil presently,
it is a Robber and an argument of it is this, that he posts it cross the Fields,
that he may the sooner overtake us. I had reason to be fearful of my Jewels;
and I aver, that though I seemed to bear it out pretty courageously, and
thought that one man durst not attaque two, as we seemed to be, yet I was in a
great deal of trouble. My Consternation was redoubled when Merinvil showed me
the way which we must gallop to reach the House of Vilacert. I perceived the
Gentleman did still pursue us. The poor Girl was ready to drop down dead, and
thought I was robbed in earnest, especially, when to add to our unhappiness, a
little River which opposed our passage, gave him, that we feared, time to
overtake us.

And who do you think, Madam, in the interim, was this redoubted Knight? A
Woman in Man's apparel, like our selves; but in a greater confusion than we,
begging our excuse and pardon when she did approach us; and the Horse threw her
out of the Saddle as soon as he stopped behind ours. When she seemed to us to
manage her Horse, she had then much ado to rule him; and when he took his
course cross the Fields, 'twas because this wonderful Brute had discovered our
Horses; and being accustomed to travel always in Company, champed on the Bitt,
and made haste to join with them, and not break so good a custom.

Merinvil and I looked upon one another; and after that an obliging charity had
succeeded all our fears, we did relate smilingly to one another some follies
upon the account of this adventure which ended so comically. In fine, we came
off pleasantly enough, but that Merinvil, out of Inadvertency, called me Madam;
and that drew upon me one thing far more vexatious. It had been better for us
that this new Adventuress had been what we really thought her to be.

'Twas Jealousy, as we soon after understood, that had disguised this Woman,
and conducted her with some design on the Borders of the Land of the Holy
Sepulcher. In all probability those that she waited for did not live very
remote. As Soon as she understood my Sex, her distracted Fancy made her forget
the hurt she had by her fall, and was employed without doubt to represent me as
her Rival that disturbed her Repose and Fortune; and changing her behavior,
all of a sudden, she said with a Countenance paler and paler; I was well
assured before, that my false-hearted Lover had deserted me for another. And it
appears that she had rather the Face of a Man than a Woman. I did apprehend I
could not discover the mystery soon enough; but the Hazard has outdone all my
Cares; and it is not probable that he proffers me so fair an opportunity
without design.

Come, said she, raising up her self in a fury, and drawing her Sword
aukwardly, you must have my Life with Monsieur such a one, or else I must enjoy
both. She named this Monsieur such a one distinctly enough by his Name; but I
was so attentive to the remainer of the Story, that I could not remember it.

Whether I was surprised or no, Madam, I leave your Highness to judge: but
however, I stood more in admiration, than fear of the Adventure; and ruminating
on it in my mind with a kind of Raillery, I desired even then the society of
the Marchioness of Sevil to be a Witness of this last Miracle; for in the end I
found my self innocent, and did not question but I should speedily persuade
this enraged Lady, that she did mistake me for another, continuing to speak my
High Dutch, and bad French; but for one reason* that I will tell you, it was
that which made her believe she was not deceived in the person. In fine, I was
compelled to stand upon my defense to save my Life, which she had no intention
to spare; and this was the occasion of that news that in those days run
throughout the Court, that two Ladies fought a Duel in mourning for their
Lover. The thing was true, and the world was cheated only in Circumstance. But
we must put a period to the recital of the Combat.

Well then, we designed to hurt one another; Merinvil, instead of helping me to
disarm her, which was the easiest thing in the world to do, thought it best to
cry out, though 'twas to ill purpose: These Cries drew a Company of People
together. La Roche, Gentleman of the Horse to Monsieur de Vilacert, was on the
other side of the Water mounted, who posted thither; seeing that, he called
(though to no purpose) to Merinvil to separate us, and she had not the courage
to draw near; he galloped to find the Key of the Haven of the River: Some
Gentlemen overtook him and followed him. It was requisite that I should make a
quick dispatch, to avoid the mischievous discovery that might otherwise happen:
This Necessity re-doubled my Courage; and passing at my Adversary who was
retreating, I gave her an Estocade in the middle of the Body, which made her
fall to the Earth; but yet I have since understood she did not die of the
Wound. After this I remounted, and that soon enough to be a sufficient distance
off before these Gentlemen could pass the River.

All that I could learn of the Subject of this Rencounter, but a long time
after, and by accident, was, that this Gentlewoman was the Daughter of a very
honest man, who had sometime been Governor of the Bassee, her Mother carrying
her and one of her Sisters to Court, where their Beauty had attracted the
greatest Gallants there. This person was not ungrateful to a most accomplished
Cavalier for his Services; she was informed that he made his Amors to a Woman
of Holland lately arrived in France, and that he lived with her in some of his
Rural Retirements, and kept her in Man's Apparel. The violence of her Jealousy
did counsel her to surprise them in the same disguise; the Wife of an Officer
of Troy was assistant, and furnished her with her Equipage. I have told you
the rest; and my High Dutch, which she understood not, did persuade her the
more that I was the Holland-Rivaless.

In pursuance of that, we came about ten or twelve Leagues off of Paris, where
Merinvil had a Godfather named St. Canal, and did endeavor to engage him to
follow us in the quality of my Governor. 'Twas an old Soldier, ill furnished
with the Goods of Fortune, and sufficiently unfurnished in his person. Merinvil
had the length of his Foot so exactly, that he condescended to all we desired;
and eight days afterward we brought him to Paris; There, as he was wise enough,
he provided Lodgings for us forthwith at a Citizen's house where he was known,
that we might as well have leisure to take better Measures which we were to
keep for the future, as to be the less exposed to meeting with troublesome
people, which would be almost impossible to avoid in Great Houses.

But it is in vain to imagine that Prudence can bear up against Destiny: the
first person that I met with, as I was going to Supper, was the Lady-Abbess,
Sister to the Countess of Englesac, with whom I had so frequently heretofore
made sport about the Letters of the Marquess de Birague. A very importunate
Affair which she was to solicit at Court, had for some time withdrawn her
from her Cloister; and her good Character or Repute made her lodge at the same
(being a very civil) house, which we had taken up part of, upon other
Considerations. Yet she did not know me, although the ancient Sympathy of her
good will toward me, under this my German habit, continued me as great as
ever; and perhaps it had been no great difficulty for me to permit her to
return without her divining my Disguise, if I had not been so foolish as to
divert my self with her Imbecility and the Esteem she had for me. For, Madam, I
was beloved, and that with an excessive Passion; and should I give you a
relation of all the passages between us for some time, it would not be any ways
offensive to you. But, why should I not acquaint you with them? possibly your
Highness will be pleased with the diversion, and that will do no great injury
to the Lady-Abbess.

At first sight indeed I was much astonished to see her, and was put to the
blush; but the Lady, who was well accomplished, did me the favor to fancy
somewhat more pleasant in that change of color than the cause thereof; and
looking with a brisk Eye, and a sufficiently handsome Mouth, she said, to
encourage me a little, Ah! the Comely Gentleman! Come Sir, come, I look upon
Madam de Madane to be the most happy Woman in the World, who entertains such a
Guest as your self. Then she came and took me by the Hand to seat me at the
Table, and from thence forward did daily embolden me as much as was possible.
On my part, I had the curiosity to understand to what excess of Esteem and
Amity my good Complexion could lead a person of her profession, and the day
after I made advantage of her kindnesses. I did pay her several Visits, and she
proffered to teach me the French Tongue exactly; to which purpose she did every
morning oblige me to answer a little Love-letter which she sent me from her own
Chamber to mine. There was nothing more courtly than those Notes; yet mine,
though clothed in a meaner Garb, in her opinion were pregnant with Sense. In
fine, Madam, we became so charmed with each other's Conversation, that I know
not what obliged her one Night to cry out that I read the Comedy of des Facheux
with her. Ah, dear Sir! said the Lady-Abbess, the most vexatious of all
vexations, is a third person which disturbs two good Friends, when they would
never desire to be more than two in Company. And another time, discoursing of
other matters, she told me, That multiplicity of Laws was never made for
persons of Wit and Spirit; that there was need but of one Secret to violate
them undetected; and that then there was no more punishment for us, but that
all the difficulty lay in putting this Secret in practice.

As to the rest, I do not relate these particulars, but as a Specimen of her
shrewdness, without pretending to draw from thence any dangerous Consequences:
for I my self, being willing to make this slight inference, needed only to
press her a little to find out several other of her Weaknesses; I found the
quite contrary, that there was nothing more solidly virtuous. She did indeed
well to indulge her self that becoming Liberty of talking and loving whatever
she fancied; which is, as it were, permitted to Ladies when they are
over-witty: but she was a mortal Enemy to all dangerous Consequences; and for
pretending one time that I would serve my self in spite of her, of these
occasions which she in my apprehension offered me designedly, I had almost lost
all her esteem. I was forced, like a Fool, to betake my self to Laughter, and
make her sensible I was but a Woman, to obtain a Pardon for that Insolence.

To say that she wished me no great hurt hitherto, I being the cause that so
long a resistance, and so great virtue, had edified but one Woman, that thing I
durst not put forward: for she appeared too much out of order after I had told
her my name; but at last she recalled her gentile humor, to answer my Raillery
with other more witty reparties. We renewed our ancient Friendship; I gave her
a particular of what had befallen me since I was deprived of the honor of
seeing her; she bewailed my condition, promised me concealment of all that was
to be kept silent; and as she was ever Generous, profer'd me once more a
Retirement in her Abbey, till I had reconciled my self to my Husband; but I
durst not recommit my self a second time to the Influences of the Air of her
Country, which did so disagree with me in my younger years; besides, I always
dreaded every thing that might cause my re-approach near the Countess of
Englesac.

Thus you have the whole History of what happened to me in this Citizen's house,
where I yet for some time associated my self with her, without any new accident
upon my account. I said the Relation should not be troublesome, nor do I
believe that it has offended your Highness.

In conclusion, the Abbess returned, and I finding my self well pleased with my
manly habit, which deceived the very Hearts of Ladies, and in which I had also
affronted some of my Husband's Emissaries, I desired no other Asylum; I thought
my self more secure in the very heart of Paris, than if I should take upon me
to seek for refuge elsewhere in an Equipage proper to my Sex; and from that
time forward I resolved to pass for the Prince de Salmes.

St. Canal's Hair stood an end, Good man! when I made this Resolution known to
him, and that he understood I had already communicated this Impostor to my
Hostess and her Daughter upon a mistaken presumption. You will destroy us all,
said he, being altogether dismayed, and do not imagine that this will prove a
new Labyrinth of Perplexities and Adventures, from which you will never be able
to disintrigue your self; that which has proceeded from the Mouths of two,
three, or six particular persons, will not be approved of by those in the wide
World that you must converse with. And besides, what will become of you if the
true Prince should arrive when you are here also? He opposed my design with a
thousand other reasons, which his fears suggested to him, as well as my own
Interest; but it was to no purpose for him to be disturbed at it, and to add
Threats withal, that he would return and leave me if I proceeded any farther. I
was ravished with the hopes of being more closely concealed, whatever he could
say; and that which did farther prevail with me, was, that I should by this
mean^ divert my self very pleasantly.

I appeased him, and made him take up a resolution to run the risque with me.
He hired me a House, which I furnished; he chose me Lacqueys, and that carried
somewhat of Splendour with it. I visited, and was visited: I behaved my self in
all places like a person of great Fortune, in imitation of an infinite number
of young inconsiderate Courtiers, who are often nothing less than what they
pretend to. I went also to the Court, and was well received: I learned at the
Marquess of Sevil's enough of the House I would be of, to prevent all Mockeries
whatever.

But I soon smarted for the delight I had taken in all these kind of
Confidences, by the troubles which St. Canal had predicted. The first whereof
was only perplexing, because it was too Gallant, and deserves to be related to
you with all its circumstances, since it was Love of my own creation occasioned
it, and that I have promised your Highness to expatiate upon that Subject.

The King, resolving to Regale the Queens and Ladies at Court, with the
pleasure of some Festivals worthy his Magnificence and Gallantry, invited them
to his Enchanted Palace at Versailles. He commanded the Spiritual Duke of Saint
Agnan, who officiated then as Chief Gentleman of his Chamber, to contrive the
Plot of a Ball, or rather of all those Festivals together: And this Lord had
taken for his Subject the Palace of Alcinous, which gave occasion to its Name,
as the Pleasures of the Enchanted Island. I was invited as a Foreign Prince,
and besides as a young person, and a Gallant.

The Pastime began with the Course at the Ring, and I would willingly give a
cursary description thereof. They adorned a Round with four grand Green
Porches, and a thousand other Rarities, to which four spacious Alleys were
adjoining between very lofty Palisadoes; never any thing seemed to the Eye more
Proud and Magnificent. After all the Courtiers were seated, the King,
representing Roger in Ariosto, appeared about six of the clock in the Evening,
followed by the Gentlemen that were to run at the Ring. His Armor was after the
Grecian manner; his Cuirass made of thin Plates of Silver, imbossed with an
Embroidery of Gold and Diamonds; his Casque covered all over with Feathers of a
flame-colour; and thus he mounted one of the stateliest Steeds that ever Eye
beheld, whose Harness also did shine with Gold and precious Stones. Monsieur
the Duke, who personated Rowland, came afterward alone. After that, there was
seen an Apollo in a Chariot not to be described, having the four Ages at his
Feet. Time, as it is usually portraicted, was the Chariot (...) and four Horses
that were of a pale Gold-colour, of admirable shape, covered besides with large
Foot-clothes powdered with golden Suns, and harnassed all over the Forehead,
drew this Machine. A long Train followed him; then came the Gentlemen's Pages
with Lances and Devises: after them a company of Shepherds charged with several
pieces of the Barriers, which were to be set up for the Course. They run at the
sport till night approached.

The Night being come, a prodigious number of Flambeaux of white Wax, with
above 4000 small Candles enlightened the place: There was heard a most pleasant
Concert; and whilst the four Seasons of the Year were charging the delicious
Messes that were to be served up at their Majesty's Table, the whole Retinue of
the Sun danced within the Round an excellent Ball. Then came the Spring, and it
was poor Madam du Pare that represented it; she mounted, with a Horseman's
dexterity and grace, a Spanish Gennet. The Summer on an Elephant. Autumn on a
Camel: And Winter on a Bear came after, with a Train of an infinite number of
persons, who carried on their Heads large Basins for the Collation. The first,
covered with Flowers, and made interwoven like Baskets, were carried by
Gardiners; the others by ^^^ers; those of Autumn by Vintagers; and the last
were pieces of Ice covered with others, born by Old Men all frozen, to cool the
Liquors. Pan and Diana, at the noise of another Concert of Flutes and small
Bagpipes, besides, brought all sorts of exquisite Viands, some being the fruits
of her own Houswifery, and the other of her Hunting; and all that upon so
surprising a Machine in the form of a Rock, shadowed with variety of Trees,
that one would believe it to be an absolute Enchantment: for you might see it
carried up into the Air, without understanding the art which caused its motion.
The Controlers General, who went under the Names of Abundance, Joy, Property,
and Good Cheer, did as suddenly cover the Table of a new invention with all
these things; and all this done by the hands of Pleasure, Sport, Laughter, and
Delight, which were so many disguised Officers. Was not this truly Royal,
Madam? and is not your Highness delighted with the rehearsal thereof? But this
is not all; for I must tell you how these noble Spectacles did afford me matter
of perplexity.

That which I have given you a description of, was but the Divertisement of one
day, and they continued the Festival Solemnities all along more gallant the one
than the other, from the Seventh of May to the Thirteenth day: judge you,
Madam, what this must needs be; sometimes Music of all sorts, new Feasts,
Lotteries, other Courses at the Ring, artificial Fireworks; all this was there
seen, without forgetting the Great Ballet of the demolishing of Alcinous his
Palace, which was performed in the Floating Islands on the little Round; and
was to my fancy the curiousest thing, and an Enterprise most worthy so Great a
Monarch.

The second day, as they were acting the Comedy of the Princes d'Elide, I was
seated between two fair Ladies; one very Proper, Morose, and Coy; the other
Frollickish, or rather Wanton, which discoursed a thousand foolish things to
me, and obliged me to tell her some also. I could add that I would do it, if I
were not ashamed of such filthiness; but yet I am engaged, and these things are
too considerable a part of my History to suppress them; your Highness will
accept of them as they ought to be taken, and I will, if I can, write them so
likewise.

After I had sufficiently cajoled, and demanded such favors which I thought
would never be granted, that foolish Girl took me by the hand when the Play was
over, and whispering in my ear, Go, said she, come and lead me back you are too
comely to be denied any thing. This happiness, which would have charmed any
other, put me into a fit of trembling, and I made her a very untoward answer,
and how could I do otherwise? I did not put by this Pass, but quitted her
as soon as she spoke, as if I had believed she would have played the Droll with
me, withal telling her, that though I was an absolute German, I could see when
they intended to make me ridiculous, and that I should find more sincere fair
ones in other places.

The Lady to revenge her self upon me for this coldness, in a true kind of
Mockery consulted the day following to cause the grossest untrue contradictions
in the world to be sung of me, which however were not so taken by others; for
they made me pass for the most redoubted Gallant of the Court. Next day there
was a great Challenge of running at the Ring, which the Duke de St. Agnan won
against Monsieur de -- and on the which he had composed certain Verses
dedicated to the Ladies; hereupon a drolling Wit said, That this Duke had done
nothing in being Conqueror of the Great -- if he were not mine also, and all
this with its Allusions and Mysteries. In short, in few days I was accounted so
dangerous a Cavalier, and so expert in Courtship, (but in the mean while let us
say withal, Madam, that if all those that have the same Repute have not a more
just Title to it, it is a thousand pities) and they had contracted so good an
opinion of me, that besides the bruit which reached the ears of the true
Prince's Parents, I had another Task, to answer to a thousand fair Curiosa's,
of whom my necessary Ingratitude made so many troublesome Enemies.

But the newest and most terrible Adventure was, that the other of these two
Ladies, which I told you looked so grave and scornful, had not a Heart less
sensible; and after several tender conversations that we had together at the
Queen's, she endeavored more obstinately than any of the rest to discover
whether what was reported of my Gallantry were not a false rumor. She gave me
to understand the esteem she had for me; at first, by proffers of her Service
upon all occasions offered; then by her amorous Notes, that the most
Phlegmatic German of that Nation might have apprehended them; and finally, by
word of Mouth by one of her Women, which took away all pretense of pleading
Ignorance.

I must not Romance; I thought my self undone, she was not a Lady to be treated
by me as I had done several wealthy Gossips: There was some danger after all
this her forwardness, not to answer directly and readily to her desires; and
her She-confident had endeavored as much as lay in her power to make me
sensible of it beforehand. Nor besides durst I discover unto her my Sex; there
had been no prudence at all in that, my Secret might have been committed to
ill-disposed persons; and the very vexation which the Lady her self might have
conceived, to see one of great importance to her self made known to me, would
possibly have made use of it to do me an injury.

Another circumstance did also greatly alarm me, which is, that she understood,
I know not by what means, that I was not the real Prince de Salmes, and that
she did not thereby only discover the sole reason of her Love. To what
resolution was I driven at last? to feign a kind acceptance of the great
Honor she conferred upon me, and to be impatient till I came to the fruition
thereof, and then to leave the Kingdom with all possible speed, before the
expiration of those three days which she allowed me for preparation, though I
know not for what reason. I consulted St. Canal, who was more astonished than I
as soon as he heard it: He told me I must not waver, but be, and I was, in a
readiness next day to execute this resolution, if the unexpected meeting with
the Earl of Englesac, who had at length obtained his pardon, and was arrived at
Paris that very night, had not given me occasion to alter all my Measures. We
must acquaint you with the things that happened in this Rencounter, as well as
the rest of the passages.

I used to steer my course every morning to a Gentlewomans house, where they
reported that the fair Madam de Luidre attracted me: others were persuaded that
it was the most charming Lady Mademoiselle de Fiennes; but that is little
material to my present Relation.

As I was going thither the very evening that I had received the Message, for
fear they should find me out to tell it me, I met at the very first the young
Earl of Englesac, with the Chevalier de Lorrain, the Marquess de Villeroy, the
Prince of Monaco, the Gallant Benserade which your Highness so much admires,
and some other persons of Quality, very much altered in truth from what he was
at Brussels; for he did Laugh, Sing, was no longer in Love, or if he were
amorous, it seemed at least that it was not at all of me.

And although he was not obliged to kill himself with Melancholy in my absence
any more than hitherto I had done in his, and that perhaps also he thought he
might to no purpose have tormented himself in continuing faithful to me: I was
however infinitely surprised to find him so disengaged, and this astonishment
was the reason that I did not accost the Ladies with my usual good Address.
Englesac, who was newly arrived, covered all over with Dust, to see this Man
that was of so great Reputation, was not less supriz'd when he cast his Eyes
upon me, and had like to have spoiled all in framing ridiculous Imaginations
within himself: for he confessed to me since, that he fancied they had
disguised me on purpose, as a piece of Court-Gallantry, knowing how much he was
enamoured with me; but what a show might that have made as to outward
appearance, and especially in that place where we were at that time?

But that which perplexed him far more was, that he boasted he was particularly
acquainted with the young de Salmes in Germany, which was certainly true; and
having condescended, as I may so say, to come thither this evening upon no
other account, but only to complement him upon the fame of his valor, he
intended to make his address to him only. The Adventure was pleasant; he
exposed me, if he believed 'twas I, in not pretending to know me for the Prince
de Salmes; and I, on my own part, had betrayed my self, if my confusion at the
sight of him should continue; yet we departed both in good time to our
advantage, doing both of us our Devoir. Methinks I still hear that foolish
Complement he bestowed on me, embracing me as if I had been the Prince; which
he intermixed with such and so many Transports, that, to prevent the mischief
which was ready to fall upon us, I was constrained to make greater
protestations than otherwise I intended, and to give him to understand in one
or two words, of what Importance it would prove for him to act well this
disguised humor.

When we came from thence, he went into my Coach, to re-conduct me to my
appartment; and your Highness I presume will dispense with the Relation of all
that this transported Lover did say through excessive Joy, who was not so
disengaged from my Bonds as I believed him to be. I never in all my life saw a
man more pleased and Amorous; the Tears, Sighs; the Alasses, the Exclamations
of Joy, the Deviations and Hesitances in discourse; and all this to prevent my
doubting that there could arrive a greater felicity to him, than to see me once
again: he had continued the prosecution of his Follies till next morning, if I
would have permitted him.

But yet this did not root out of my mind the Resolution I had made to quit
Paris as soon as possible, to avoid the misfortunes that threatened me; and I did
interrupt him, to make him my Confident herein. What think you of it, said I,
and what would you advise me to do? I am very much turmoil'd, said he, and I
foresee much trouble in flying, as well as residing here. If you depart, this
Marchioness knows that you are not the Prince de Salmes; she is stored with
secret Intrigues, and wants but a will to procure your prejudice from some
other hand, not only before you depart the Kingdom, but wherever you shall
arrive. Also if you stay, I do verily believe that you will be exposed to many
great perils. She is taken for a Virtuosa, and they, when they have once run a
risque, so as to communicate their Secrets to one that may discover them, leave
no Stone unturned to put them quite out of danger. The least thing you can do,
is to discover your Sex to her, to prevent those private Ambushes; and when
once discovered, one of these two things will happen; either good use will be
made of it, or it will be divulged. If it become divulged, Meneza will as soon
be acquainted with it, and send to have you carried away by force, without a
possibility of justifying your self against the apparent reasons of his
Complaints. If the Lady makes good use of it, I shall not be a jot the less
deprived of the enjoyment of your Society here as frequently as my desires will
prompt me to it, and the opportunity that proffers it me. The Reasons of
Decency and Convenience will plague us to Hell. (You may judge by this, Madam,
what pretension the Earl made.) In fine, this Fondling added (whose fresh Joy
did obstruct his Affliction for my Perplexities) All this is very cruel indeed;
and if I were not afraid of being guilty of Infidelity to you, I should rather
go and disengage your Honor, by satisfying the Lady under your name, and in
your place, till we should be at leisure to take other, Measures.

This fancy of his created laughter in me, because that in truth 'twas the
best expedient; and that he should say, if he were not fearful of his breach of
Faith to me; which I think, in effect, had been to do so, if a person more
subject to Jealousy than my self had been Judge of it, and would have laid the
whole burden upon his Shoulders. It may be as to the remainder, they will
accuse me of too little Nicety; but to speak freely, I never could admit of
certain Jealousies, which in my opinion seem to be too deeply engaged in the
Senses: the assurance of an undivided Heart has hitherto, and shall ever
satisfy me. Everyone has his method of Love, and I believe I am more dainty
than the daintiest of them all, by loving in this manner. An Infidelity! I
replied very nimbly, really, Sir, I pretend not that it is possible for you to
be guilty of, whilst I am wedded to a Husband: I desire nothing of you, and you
are free to bestow all you have upon whom you please. We pressed this
Conversation even to extravagance; and as long as we found an humor or
occasion of Raillery. Then at last the conclusion was, that maugre all the
Remonstrances and Protestations of St. Canal, who out of mere fear was returned
home, I should consent to this obliging Cheat to be put on the Marchioness, and
without dissimulation, Madam, now that I am grown somewhat wiser than I was, I
admire at my temerity in that particular.

The Earl was a comely person about my pitch, and might pass for me in a
business with a Lady that had the precaution to admit of no Lights during the
exercise of their Pleasures, and which had not so much time at command as she
would willingly have to gratify her Lovers. I informed him with every
particular of the most minute Circumstances of all that befell me since I
appeared at Court, that he might not commit any ridiculous mistake. When he
returned, he gave me an account of the Transactions between them. (O how
confident am I to relate all these things to your Highness!) These mutual
Instructions of Nocturnal and Diurnal Secrets continued for some time. In fine,
the Intrigue lasted till the Ladies Husband, having, I know not by what means,
intercepted some of her Letters with the Answers, written in my own hand, grew
extremely Jealous, and put Spies over us. Now, Madam, we come to the
unravelling of so many Comedies as I have acted.

After this Jealousy had continued fifteen days, the Marquess as yet not
believing that he had sufficient reason to convince his Wife of unchastity* the
King had an ambition to bestow a new Regalo on the Ladies, whom he led unvailed
to the Plain of Trevers, clothed like Amazons. My Marchioness, that fancied not
splendid Pleasures, returned to Paris, and imagining that Monsieur her Husband
would not leave the King as he had said, she wrote to me she was alone, and
desired my Company to play with her. I went thither trembling all the way, not
for fear of what befell me upon the account of her Husband; (for I did not
foresee that) but lest she should ask me to play at some Game, which I was
unacquainted with; nor was this without reason: I had had a shrewd task to
undergo, if the Husband had not entered the Chamber just as the Lady was urging
me with earnestness to make the best use or our Solitude; and I could bring
none but very weak reasons to defend my self. I know not whether the surprise
of his arrival did possess me with more pleasure than fear.

He had hid himself, by the Instruction of one of his Domestics, in a place
where he might hear all; and having been too palpably convinced of our
conversation by our entertainments, void of all patience, he was coming to
sacrifice us both to his Honor. The Marchioness, who heard him first, as he
came through the Hall, cried out aloud, and running full speed into the Garden,
one Door whereof answered to her Appartment, shut it upon her self, and left me
solely exposed to the fury of her Husband. In the interim she secured her self
in a Nunnery, which was opposite to another Door of the same Garden. As to my
own particular, I thought my last hour was come; for this man being the more
enraged by his Wife's escape, came to me with Sword mounted, saying, his Eyes
sparkling with indignation, Ah! Traitor, thou must dye. All that I could do,
was to put by his Pass as well as I could, till he changed his resolution to
kill me on the place, for another of suffering a more lingering and cruel death.
He disarmed me; and calling his Servants one by one to treat me the more
rudely, commanded them to disrobe me; it was perhaps to flea me alive, for the
Cook was there also among them.

Judge you, Madam, what a shame it was for me, when notwithstanding all my
resistance, my Tears, and Protestations, to make this Jealous-pate sensible
that I was never capable of doing him that injury which he imagined I was
already guilty of, these butcherly Fellows began to tear off my Clothes, till
my Neck appeared bare to them: but in fine, there was no more to be done, and I
was also very happy in that they did perceive I was but a Woman.

The Marquess could never appear in a greater confusion than he was in at that
present; and changing suddenly his Choler into profound Sorrow, that he should
offer to treat me (as he said) so fair a Creature so roughly. Ah! said he with
a loud Voice, Madam! What was your intention? and why have you compelled me to
be Conscious of so heinous a Crime? He begged my Pardon on his Knees, sent back
all his Servants, came and closed my Hands with a gentle squeeze, beseeching me
to forgive him what he had so lately done; he kissed them a thousand times: and
yet I my self, during all these passages, did scarce know where I was, so much
terror and confusion had siezed me. To conclude, Madam, he added many specious
Protestations, to give reparation for my discontent occasioned by him, if I
would but inform him who I was; and told me, that he believed himself a Lord
great enough to perform that; and, in a word, he grew so mild, that in any
danger of my Life, where I should have thought to have found my self a minute
sooner (I must tell your Highness this piece of foolery also) the greatest
hazard that I ran that day, was not that of being killed only.

But the best part of the Adventure was, that when the Marquess was hereby
convinced of the fidelity of his Wife, he thought himself obliged to go and ask
her Pardon also, and to laugh with her at this his Extravagance. The poor Lady
did not know what Interpretation to make of the Story he told her, and thought
he had invented it, to shelter his Honor from the noise that he had newly made
to no purpose: Yet in short, she knew very well it was not a Female that had
charmed her every night. The Oaths wherewith the Marquess endeavored to
persuade the Religious woman that he spoke truth, seemed to her but as so many
Snares which he spread to entrap her; but when several of the menial Servants
testified the matter in hand, and reported what they had seen with their own
Eyes, she looked like one dropped out of the Clouds. The Husband for his part
knew not what to think of the obstinacy and terrors of his Wife, and they were
both of them just at their Wits end.

But now I must bid adieu to my Secret from that very moment. What Promises
soever the Marquess had made me to be mute and never discourse it, too many
people knew it, so that it could not be longer concealed. The Rumor was spread
all over the Court, which gave way to much Raillery, and great Astonishment;
especially among those Ladies that thought otherwise of me. Now I was forced to
take upon me again the Equipage of my own Sex; for I had not Confidence enough
to continue any longer in Man's Apparel after this. I stood at last in need of
all the subtlety imaginable, to invent Romances that might satisfy the
Inquisitive, and hinder the knowledge of my true History. I gave it out, that I
was the fair Marchioness de Castelanne, which had not long since so Tragical an
end; and that I was willing thus to fly the persecution of my Husband's
Brethren, who were in quest of me, designing nothing but my Assassination.

But all my Contrivances could not long shroud me from the last blows that
Fortune intended me; for every one recollecting himself by degrees what search
my Husband had caused to be made for his Wife in France the precedent Month of
January, did immediately thereupon conjecture, that I was rather the
Marchioness of Meneza than of Castellanne, which many people could not discern
in the Symmetry and Proportion of my Face.

The Count of Englesac's fixing of himself near me, the remembrance of what
passed between us, when we met with one another at the Royal Palace with the
young Ladies, and what they had learned of his Love and Duel, all this
contributed very much to the Suspicion: and in fine, many other Circumstances
carried the report of those Accidents which had befallen me, even to the
knowledge of the Aged Meneza, who lay languishing through Grief and Distempers
at Brussels; and as soon as he understood it, wrote to the Queen Mother, to
supplicate her Majesty to send me back into Flanders.

The House of the Duke de Guise was then my Sanctuary; and the Earl of
Englesac, thinking that I could not be safe enough in any Cloister, did rather
choose to trust me to the Generosity of the Duke, who knew me, and had proffered
me both Silence and Protection. It Is true also that he gave me great cause to
commend him for his Treatment; and if he intermixed some Efforts to persuade me
to return him thanks some other way than barely by words, yet he left me wholly
at liberty to do it, or not. I was infinitely surpised when I saw this Prince,
earlier than usual, enter my Appartment, and say unto me with Tears in his
Eyes; It Is death to me, Madam, to come here to disturb your Repose; but a
plenary Power commands me to see you take Coach, and to commit you to the
Custody of three Ladies, who are appointed to conduct you to the Queen Mother,
who will see you You must not flatter your self, Madam, continued he, seeing
that I received this News with a kind of indifferent Indignation, as if I had
divined the principal thing which they concealed from me; I believe it is to
carry you back to your Husband at Brussels. I wish to God that the Traitors
that discovered the place of your Residence had been in the center of the
bottomless Abyss or that I my self had been dead before the detection of this
Treachery. He Crowned all these melting Expressions with Tears, which this
Noble Prince, if I mistake not, could command at pleasure. And I replied, Your
Highness jests with me, and I am better fortified than your self; I merit not
the Affliction which you take upon you for a thing which is indifferent to me.
I have endeavored to avoid my Misfortune, but could not effect it; my Destiny
has more Stratagems than I have Policy. Well, Sir, I added, we must satisfy
the Queen, and expect my better Fortune. She is not the most constant thing in
the world as to my Concerns; and though she never bestow on me
durable-Kindnesses, yet she never permits my Mischances to be long-lived.

He lent me his Hand to the Coach, which I saw guarded by twenty Flemish
Troopers; and I thought the despicable Earl of Englesac was ready to implunge
himself into despair in the Hall where he was, whence he durst not follow me
but with his Eyes: yet whether I had in truth some grandeur of Spirit
extraordinary, or some secret Precognition or Foreknowledge that this Disgrace
would not be of any long continuance; I seemed to have no farther commotions; I
took my leave of all those who were present when I entered the Coach, with a
smile; and placing my self with my Merinvil, who proved faithful to me all
along, they made me travel the Road to Flanders; but we were not far beyond
Peronne, before I spied on both sides great probability that I should soon be
freed from that trouble which I foreknew, on the one hand, because Englesac,
being resolved either to ruinate himself, or set me again at liberty, having
gathered together a great number of young Gentlemen masked, he like a Lion,
pouring in upon the Troopers that guarded me, compelled them to free me, which
they did very happily. This poor Earl, having taken me behind him, to separate
me from my Enemies with the greater speed, conducted me to a Castle belonging
to one of his Gentlemen. On the other, having since that privately sojourned
fifteen days in that Castle, I perceived, in the very same Road, looking out of
the Window, a Retinue, whose Livery I thought I must needs know; and in truth
it was that of the Marchioness of Sevil, who came Post to Paris to seek after
me, and to acquaint me that the Marquess de Meneza was deceased; this last news
of my recovered Freedom having accelerated his Death.

The Earl took Horse to meet her; and I cannot express to your Highness the Joy
that ravished him, when he understood the occasion of so precipitate a Journey:
he had scarce the patience to advertise her that I was safe in that Castle, and
to conduct her thither, for haste to come and acquaint me with what they had
told him. He was wholly transported, making signs to me by waving his Hat,
running full speed, and crying out as loud as he could, Cheer up, Madam, cheer
up, your Misfortunes are drawn to a period; for the Jealous Gentleman is dead.
The Marchioness of Sevil arrived a little after, who confirmed it to me; and
from that very day the Earl of Englesac embracing the Knees of the Marchioness
of Sevil; Ah! Madam, said he, assist me, I beseech you, in the regaining of my
dearest Mistress, that so many Misfortunes have deprived me of for so
considerable a time. This Transport could not be more advantageously managed;
for it touched the Marchioness home, and assaulted her Weakness. She wept, we
all wept; and the conclusion was, that after the time of mourning was over, she
would bequeath to me a great part of her Estate, that the Countess of Englesac
might the better approve of her Son's Marriage with me.

Here, Madam, you have one part of the History which you earnestly desired me
to instruct you in. The fear that I have to fatigue your Highness by too prolix
a Reading, forces me to refer the recital of what even'd to me after my
Espousals with the young Earl, to another opportunity.

In the mean time, I most humbly supplicate your Highness to believe that I
have related nothing to you but Truth: That I shall be ever ready to disclose
to you my most private Errors, and what injurious construction soever my
Adversaries would put upon them. Appearance, which often deceives, has been all
the Crime in my Conduct.

Your Highness most Humble and most Obedient Servant, H. S. D. M.

THE ADVENTURES AND MEMOIRES OF Henrietta Sylvia Moliere. PART the III.
IT might well be judged, Madam, that we were in a state of Tranquillity and
Repose, after we had tasted of the Generosity of the Marchioness of Sevil; and
with these persuasions, I avow to your Highness, that we relished already the
most ravishing Transports of Joy, when they succeed the most tedious Griefs.
Our thoughts were wholly employed about the Consummation of that happy
Marriage, even before the expiration of the accustomed time of Mourning; we
delayed the time, as if all things had depended solely upon our selves.

But we reckoned without Fortune, who was none of our Friends. She had made a
vow that the Earl of Englesac's Adventures should deservedly run parallel with
mine before he should be happy; and in her opinion he had not as yet met with
sufficient Crosses. She would make him deserve by an infinity of other Troubles
to be my Hero, and that that should make me fall into new Extravagances. I am
persuaded the relation will divert your Highness no less than what you have
already perused; my Fate having hitherto taken care to have me ill, but
pleasantly treated.

And first, Madam, at the same time that we projected such fine things, there
must needs be a separation between us of 200 Leagues distance and better; nor
was this the most terrible Adventure that could happen to Lovers.

The Earl's friends affirmed, that 'twas necessary he should go to Languedoc,
to amuse Madam his Mother, who had not seen him since his return to France;
whilst I should travel to Brussels with the Marchioness of Sevil, to demand my
Dower, and justify my former Conduct as well as I could. There were also some
other reasons that required it; for 'twas not the way to make the best
advantage of the death of a Jealous Husband (who seemed to leave this world on
purpose to withdraw us from a nice business) to be convinced that he could
carry me away by force, if he should continue near me without success. He took
leave of me drowned with Tears; and that very day we traveled one from the
other by different ways, where we begin the Third part of this Romance.

For my own part, I had not so much trouble as I thought, to obtain the favor
of those of Brussels. They remembered my frollickish humor without malicious
Reflections. They had well weighed with what Innocence I could be able to
endure this counterfeit Steward in my Husband's house, who entered not by my
consent or approbation. Besides, they did imagine to my greater advantage, what
an Aged Spaniard, who thought himself convinced of the infidelity of a Wife
from sixteen to seventeen years of age, could possibly resolve against her; and
no body thought it strange that I endeavored to avoid a tedious punishment.

In a word, my Disguise in the habit of a Man, was attributed to the necessity
of absconding my self from a Husband, who was a potent Lord, and had long Arms:
and as for my Adventures, 'twas said that I did not seek them; nor did they
look upon it as a thing inconsiderable, that I, sporting with Fortune, who
played the wag with me, should extricate my self, chargeable with so few
suspicions; and I say so few, Madam, because they imagined, and that not
without cause, that the absolute necessity of concealing my self, had engaged
me to be prudent, as well as my innate virtue; and permitted me at the most
only to make other women to miscarry.

Besides, the major part of the Flemish Ladies, I say the most rigid, did not
look upon me with a more evil Eye: They did not so much as open their Mouth,
but only to bemoan my Misfortunes. Nay, I am apt to believe, that to plead my
Justification thoroughly, I put some of them in the way to justify my former
proceedings; for the Countess du Cardonnoy did as much five or six days after
my arrival, and fled in Man's Apparel from her Husband's house, who Treated her
too inhumanely. You may possibly have heard all the particulars of that Story,
for the Lady took Sanctuary in your Highnesses Country.

Yet I did not procure my Dower without a Suit at Law with my Husband's Heir,
who was his Nephew, and called Meneza also: besides, it had proved an intricate
business when he grew Amorous, and which would have continued a long time e're
I could have accomplished it, if a Brother of this Meneza, who was Governor of
several places in West India, under the King of Spain, had not been so
audacious as to declare himself King. This News coming luckily to the Marquess
of Castel-Rodrigo, with Orders to secure all the Relations of this new
Monarque, the good Gentleman was taken into custody; which tended somewhat to
the advantage, or, at least, expedition of this curious Enterprise: and this
was all that I met with in this Country.

As for the Earl of Englesac, he was not so happy in Languedoc. The Marquess de
Birague, who was resolved not to lose his pretentions, was very industrious,
from time to time, to inform himself of all News. He was not ignorant of my
good or bad Fortune: He knew that I was taken away by violence, and suspected
the Author of it. He understood that my Husband was dead: and, I know not by
what means, he had discovered that the Earl and I had promised Marriage
(probably 'twas by his friend Monsieur de la Frette, who was told it at
Brussels.) But at length, to break the neck of all our designs, he saw him no
sooner arrived, but he put it in the head of Madam his Mother, to marry him
with a She-Cousin of his, Birague by name.

The person was Illustrious, and the name of Birague correspondent: Her Estate
great; for she was an Heiress; and the Wit and Beauty of the Lady was much
greater, which rendered her not only worthy of the Alliance of the Countess of
Englesac, but of a Prince himself; so that I had no mean Rivaless.

The Earl soon understood the Stratagem, which was the more intricate, because
the Marquess did revenge himself on him by all the apparent tokens of highest
esteem, and that in effect that Marriage had proved a kind of Fortune to him,
if without the enjoyment of me there could be any for that faithful Lover.

Besides, as passionate as he was for me, he wanted not good Conduct; he raised
this storm only feignedly. He was not so great an Heretic as some are, who
make it an Article of their Creed, that when a Man is amorous of a Woman, he is
prohibited to play the Counterfeit gentilely with others, and that he must
grossly offend them all, to make trial of his Fidelity. Besides, he was not a
man that could do a public injury to a young and fair person by a denial. And
on the other hand, he could not do it without extremely provoking his Mother,
who was a severe Lady. What was his last resolution, think you? To see his new
Mistress, and to make his Amors to her: he behaved himself herein, as many
true-hearted men do, who judge it no great crime to dissemble with Ladies, what
risque soever he runs, by that means falling in love with them; and all this in
expectation of an opportunity to break off with them handsomely. He believing
also, that it was not necessary for him to afflict me, by giving me to
understand that he was obliged to have recourse to his dissimulation, he wrote
nothing to me about it; which occasioned a great confusion.

Birague, the most experienced Lover in the world, and the most perplexing
Rival, two qualities inherent in him, which are no more to be disputed, than
that of a brave and accomplished Gentleman: For in truth, he is such as I
Characterize him to be, he has a Nobler Spirit than all the Heroes in History,
put them together: He is one of the most Complaisant Gentlemen in the whole
Universe, when he is not unfortunate in his Love; and truly I shall not be
disturbed if he should hear that I do him this Justice, to publish his rare
Qualities, to the end that he may the better excuse the Complaints that I shall
make of him in this ensuing Story. Birague, I say, who knew that de la Frette
at Brussels held a general Correspondence of Intelligence by Letters with the
Ladies of Montpellier, and with some others of his Neighbors, did not fail to
make them write to this Gentleman about the Marriage which was in agitation.

La Frette, who frequently visited the Marchioness of Sevil, who had the
goodness to flatter her self that it was upon her own account, acquainted him
with this Novel; then he communicated it to me very cunningly, and with a
design the more malicious, because he thought that would disturb me, and
revenge himself of me for my cruelties. I speak thus, Madam, because he was as
yet one in the Catalogue of my Lovers, and that my Malevolent Stars had such an
Influence as to persuade him, as well as many others, that I must not be seen
without being beloved, or at least, without being told so.

You may pretty well guess what I did then divine, understanding this news,
which I did not suspect the Ladies of Montpellier to have a hand in: besides
that it was not barely invented; yet for all that, 'twas somewhat irksome to me
at first to persuade my self that it was so; but at last my Capricio joining
with my Misfortune, I was so offended with the Earl, that without any farther
examination of matters, I desisted altogether from writing to him. The
Marchioness of Sevil, who was so fond as to disclose all her Secrets to her
dearly beloved Monsieur de la Frette, went also, to complete my Misfortune, and
made him her Confident of this effect of my Choler; and he looked upon it as an
happy occasion, to supply the Earl's place in my Affection, if he could
redouble the causes of my Defiance of him. He intercepted and suppressed some
Letters he sent to me, which probably might have undeceived me; and wherein he
acquainted me, that my Silence was death to him: and I really believing that he
did not care for writing to me any longer, fell into a grievous disorder, and
was made a Prey to that Passion which I concealed not without difficulty. In
fine, I would needs go to reproach this perfidious Man with whatever came into
my mind, before the face of his new Mistress. All the reasons that the
Marchioness and Merinvil could allege to dissuade me from it, did, much ado,
defer my departure for some days.

I had but one pretense to make, that I might take this Journey the more
plausibly; and having found it out, I parted with him and all my anger at once;
or if you had rather have it so worded, with all my Jealousy; for I really
think it was so: but I must tell you what this pretense was.

I have discoursed to you elsewhere of the goodness of the Noble Duke de
Candale; and I have acquainted you, that entreating the Sieur de Moliere, one
of the Receivers in the Exchequer-Office, to adopt me, he had inspired strange
paternal tenderness in this Man by virtue of his Money; the pretense took
original from thence.

I always looked upon that Money as lost, and thought it a very rash thing to
demand Restitution of his Heirs, not dreaming in the least that the Duke had
the pre-caution to take security for it. But the Marchioness, who was always a
meet help to me in my exigencies, recollected her Memory as to this particular
business, and informed me, that there was formerly some Writing sealed, which
she did not well remember, about this Mystery. She told me farther, that the
Duke himself had deposited it in the hands of a Friar belonging to the
Chartreux of Villeneufe, Procurator of the house at that very time; and that
this Chartreux had made a promise to return me the Money if it should happen
that my Father the Exchequer-Officer should not make the best advantage of it.

This Discovery rejoiced me beyond imagination; not so much for the benefits
that might accrue to me thereby, as that this would be my true Passport to
Languedoc; and returned the Marchioness Thanks with many repeated Embraces: and
to the end I might testify my acknowledgement of so great a kindness, I did
not amuse my self to discompose her with Questions, by what Interest she was so
well informed heretofore of all these passages; nor what was the reason she
never told me a syllable of it, from the time that we met together at
Bourdeaux. After this I took my intended Journey, accompanied all along with my
faithful Servant Merinvil, and an ancient Man, who was my Gentleman Usher. And
what are we, Madam, when we are overtaken with any Passion? I never came soon
enough to any of my Stages; I would have had a Coach that should have been some
flying-Chariot, or I my self Wings, to be at Montpellier with the greater
speed, where my Desires were lodged before my arrival.

However, at last I reached the place, and could have rested satisfied with my
diligence, if it had not proved unsuccessful: for I was soon assured when I
came thither, that the Earl of Englesac was not in that Country.

The anxiety of my Mind for not receiving any more Letters, and the rumor
that Birague had purposely spread abroad of some new Passion that I
entertained; his Jealousy, Spite, and Anger, which were as vehement on his
part as my own: All these together had forced him to leave his Mother and
Mistress rudely, without bidding them adieu. He took Post for Flanders, to come
and upbraid me there, at the very same time when I came with the like intent to
Languedoc; and had left no other hint with his Servants of the cause of his
departure, but some suspicion of a new Duel, which had already forced tears
from all persons interessed.

How great, Madam, think you, was my Amazement when I arrived! not when I
understood all these circumstances; for I was not acquainted with them, till
the Earl had instructed me with them at his return; but when I heard it
reported that they knew not what was become of him!

And to heighten my discontent, the Marquess de Birague met me that very day at
Montpellier, and coming to see me, he put it into my head, that the pretense of
this Duel was taken from the bruit of my coming, that he might not be engaged
to apologize for the Marriage. The Imposture took, and I believe'd it; although
if I had made but some slight Reflections upon it, I had soon found his Story
impossible. My Affliction was extraordinary; but I omit discoursing of it, to
turn my thoughts again upon the malice of the Marquess de Birague. When I
reflect, Madam, upon the means that he used to persuade me what he pleased, I
could not forbear crying out, It is the greatest mischief that can oppress a
Lady, to have such a burden as a second Lover like him, and not to be able to
love two men at one and the same time.

Yet his expectation was frustrated, in thinking to transport me to the
extremity of anger against Englesac, which tended only to increase my
adversion against himself, whom I accused as the Author of all my
Disparagements.

I was forced to exclaim bitterly, maugre the resolution I had taken to feign
that I came not thither to see the Earl: O how I am absolutely destined to
constant Sufferings! Then looking on the Marquess, with a menacing Eye, and
full of Tears; Be gone, Sir, said I, and secure your self from my presence;
your only Treasons, your Remisness solely have made me lose Monsieur Englesac,
if it be true that I have lost him; and you are too audacious to come
notwithstanding this, and insult over me with your Visits, after that you have
been the cause of all the miseries of my Life, after you have rendered me the
Fable of the whole World.

He was very much astonished, and did not expect this roughness from me. He
blushed, and looked pale at some other passages in my discourse: He knew not
how to answer me, he was so distracted; for which I ask his Pardon, now that
nothing more does engage me to be his Enemy.

I came again to my self a little after I had been thus violently transported;
which fell out so luckily, that it appeared only to him, and so was not
divulged: he would not be too impetuous with me, having not as yet lost the
hope of reducing me one day to a Compliance with his desires; and the day
following I departed to go to the Chartreux and demand my Writing; which I
found, and had, and returned back with it to put it into the hands of those
that belong to the Palace, to commence a Suit about it; which did amaze
abundance of people, who dreamed of nothing less. I was visited, fawned upon,
and menaced by the parties interessed. They proposed an accommodation, which
was begun, broken off, and renewed; and at last I was satisfied by my Debtors
in process of time. But that is too foreign to my Subject, and therefore I
leave it.

I charged my old Gentleman Usher with the care of these slight Interests; and
my anguish rendering my sojourning in the City grievous, I left it, in order to
my going into the Abbess of Englesac's Covent. I was too happy in finding her
still to espouse my interest vigorously, and that I perceived by her I might
discourse with her sometimes about my unfortunate Amors; for she was my
Confident, and I here is, and she never could blame her Nephew for the Love he
bore me.

Yet for all this, I was there the three or four first days, without being
capable of any consolation upon the account of the Infidelity which I thought
was offered me. Nay farther, I had the displeasure to see my Rivaless come
thither, to feel a strange palpitation of the Heart at the sight of her, and to
find her in my opinion very worthy of Love. See had taken an occasion to visit
the Abbess with Madam de Englesac, whose Sister she was; possibly out of more
curiosity to try if I were as beautiful as I was represented and so out of Envy
to Triumph over me.

It Is true, I had reason to believe that, at least, I had put her in as great a
fear; for she seemed not less perplexed than my self. She never opened her
Mouth to answer what the Lady Abbess said, but 'twas a trouble to her. And we
did nothing but examine one the other very disdainfully, and by turns, from the
very Head to the Foot; at such distance were we; and so Jealous had the
reciprocal anger of each other rendered us, when we found there was cause of
Fear on both sides.

I shall hardly ever forget this Interview, which alone was a sufficient
Recompensation for all the Vexations that I had already undergone; and if I may
so speak, the Damsel did very well to die of the Small Pox presently after, to
escape the Revenge which I might have had of her; for I could not resolve to
pardon her, being so beautiful as to be capable to balance my Lover.

But besides, Madam, the death of my Rivaless was a Rencounter worthy of my
self; she found her self seized with the Small Pox a little after her Visit,
and bore the affliction of that disgraceful Distemper, the terror of all fair
Ladies, very impatiently. She had been sick nine days without any great danger;
and they might easily have made it a Cure: but calling for her Looking-glass,
and perceiving she was deformed and pitted; What shall I do, said she, in this
world, since I have lost all my Beauty? She would take no farther course to
save her Life; resolved absolutely to die; and departed some few days after,
like a true Heroina. Yet she did not gratify my humor herein, without a
vexatious purchase thereof. For, whilst she was alive, I learned that the Earl
of Englesac was returned, being heated with the report of her Distemper, and
resolved to marry her with all speed. If your Highness be astonished at this
sudden alteration, I will unriddle you the Aenigma, and disclose the reasons
that he thought he had to return in this manner.

The officious Marquess de Birague was the first that brought me this news; for
he was the Messenger of all my Misfortunes; I was ready to die at the relation
of it: After that, it was confirmed to me by a man that I sent purposely, who
returned me this answer: That the Earl, understanding he belonged to me, would
not so much as vouchsafe to see him. I was then within a small matter quite out
of my Senses; I went out of the Cloister in spite of all the Remonstrances of
the Lady-Abbess, to go and meet this perfidious man in person. I entered, to the
amazement of all that were there present, the House, nay, the very Chamber
where this sick Lady lay, and was guilty of all the actions that could speak me
fondly foolish. And, to tell you the truth, this did not contribute any thing
to the regaining of my Reputation: for this is not the way to establish one's
self in the minds of others: and it is sometimes doing worse, provided that one
knows not how to counterfeit the prudent Woman discreetly.

O! how I was afflicted, Madam, to say no more, when I saw him there on both
his Knees by the Bedside acting the part of a dying man with my Rivaless: When
I saw him take her by the Hands, lying on the Clothes, and kiss them, praying
for her Life with warm Tears, which he shed the more, and with the greater
delight, because he saw me there present; and heard him swear, that if the
Small Pox should make her the most deformed person in the world, he should love
her still more than the greatest Beauty; I believe I had killed them both, if I
had had Ability suitable to my Will, and that from my very entrance I had not
been outraged, upon the first assault that was offered.

The sick Lady, who soon perceived the miserable condition that I was in (and
it is probable pitied me) eyed me very earnestly, as if she had somewhat to
impart to me; and seeing that I looked upon her with a fixed aspect, elevated
her voice as high as she could to speak to me. Shake off your trouble, said she
to me; I deliver up to you with all my heart what my Life and Parents had
almost deprived you of. Then putting by gently the Earl of Englesac with her
Hand, and moving him a little toward my side, as if she would oblige him to
turn about; Go, Sir, go, said she, it is too great Dissimulation, too great
Cruelty toward a person that is so deeply in love with you: Marry her, and
permit me to die quietly.

The Lady d' Englesac was very highly offended at these her last words, Marry
her; and without any farther consideration, her son led her presently away, not
so much as affording me a Look, to let her see at what a rate he contemned me,
I know not what she might have answered. He went out of the Castle, and I after
him, led back at a sufficient distance by the Marquess, who never wanted an
occasion to persecute me, but discoursed to me at that time, though I heard him
not.

I say nothing of my Actions since that day to the time of my Reconciliation
with the Earl, which did not happen till above eight days after the death of
Madam de Birague for that was only a time dedicated to Mourning. But this is
the ground of that horrid Transportation, which made him take this course, to
punish me in espousing this Kin^ woman of the Marquiss's.

He rode Post to Brussels to accriminate me; and staying one night at Paris to
rest himself, he heard by accident, that the young and true Prince de Salmes,
lately arrived in France, was lodged at the Apartment of Brissac, whence he
newly came. It was this Prince whose Name I assumed the year before, and the
same whom Englesac thought to Compliment when they brought him to the
Gentlewomans Daughters in the Palace Royal: for, as I have said elsewhere, they
knew one another in Germany.

They must needs renew their acquaintance and sup together that night; and
among the Messes that were served up, we Ladies, who are discoursed of every
where, made up one for their entertainment, during their Repast. The young
German had studied the humor and temper of the Court-Detractors, thinking them
to be the greatest Gallants. Nor was he of opinion that he had made sufficient
advantage of his Travels, if he had not taken delight to discourse, upon all
occasions, of some good Fortune that had befallen him, and made them believe
that he was intimate with all Ladies who were of a ticklish Repuation: He heard
me mentioned, to my misfortune, among those that made up the Chronicle. They
told him at Paris what had passed under his Name, and at Brussels also all that
was known of me; as the Issue and Circumstances of my Proceedings at Law, my
departure for Languedoc, where I went to manage a Suit at Law, and some other
little Secrets, which might induce him to suspect that he had particular
conversation with me; and as he remembered, that the Earl was concerned in the
Intrigue, I was the first with whom he thought himself obliged to entertain
him, for his better confirmation. He told him with a smile, that he had known
me as well as himself, and that I had made him a most gentile acknowledgement
for the good Offices which were done me by the usurpation of his Name during my
Disguise.

What a strange Adventure is this, Madam! What strange News was this, for a
Jealous and Tired Gentleman, who staid at Paris only that night to take a
little Rest? Do you not also admire at the madness of most young Men, who
usually rend our Reputation thus in pieces, when they know not so much as of
what Complexion we are? for I vow to you, Madam, that this Prince de Salmes had
never set eye on me, and that I never knew him for above fifteen Months
afterward, and that by an Adventure at la Place Royale.

The Earl was not as yet in a capacity to suspect me of Remisness: But hearing
a Story well managed, (for they did make it one) related by a young German
Prince, the most faithful, sincere, and true-hearted Nation in the whole World;
and calling also to mind the report of my Gallantries, which reached to
Languedoc, he was satisfied that I was criminal; and the indifference that he
believed I showed for his Letters, to many of which I never returned an answer,
did contribute to this his persuasion.

He counterfeited the displeasure that he took at this news; and when the time
came that they must take leave, he went to bed, where he remained till morning
furiously enraged both with me and the German. He has protested to me since,
that he was tempted above a hundred times to go and poignard this indiscreet
Man in his own Chamber, and so to save the Marquess de Trechateau the labor of
killing him two or three years after, as he did at Nancy.

I wept bitterly when I had from his own Mouth this grievous Manifestation,
whereby I understood all these things; and I made an Oath never to forgive him
the outrage he had done me in suspecting of me. But what cannot a Lover do that
is beloved and penitent, and accomplished, as the Earl of Englesac was?

He came often to the Abbey to beg my pardon, at least to be so well advised as
to prevent such mischiefs for the future; and what shall I say? in short, he
knew so cunningly how to regain me, that in spite of Fortune, to whom I
resolved to afford, if there were occasion, a new Subject of Discourse, both
concerning her and my self. The Curate of Nice stood our friend in this
Rencounter; and the next day in the morning I took my leave of the Abbess, to
attend my Bridegroom at Paris, where we intended to be privately married by the
Archpriest de la Magdelaine. And our Design, Madam, had taken effect, if that
the Demon Birague had not met with us, whose Company was not at all desired. He
understood, I know not by what means, that the Curate of Nice had betroathed a
young Gentleman and an indifferent handsome Lady. He advertised the Countess of
Englesac, that her Son endeavored still to amuse her with dissembled contempts
of me, expecting to hear from me in order to our Matrimonial Conjunction. The
lady, according to her custom, did fly out into great Passion, threatening to
break off all; and I, who was too vainglorious to dispatch the Marriage till
all was agreed upon, would not permit the Earl to proceed any farther, though
he came Post to find me out with that intent: and I was content to make trial
of the credit of my Enemies, by the sole chance of what they would do against
the Espousals. It Is here that I promise my self Adventures, and that your
Highness will blame me, and possibly laugh too in blaming of me.

The Countess of Englesac lost no time in going to Paris, where she arrived
almost distracted, and threatening all the Curates with Death that should have
the impudence to think of our Intermarriage. It were endless to endeavor to
acquaint you with the Circumstances, all the Transports of this turbulent
Woman, and all the tricks that she put upon me; it is sufficient to tell you,
that her chief care was to spread abroad everywhere the Romances which I
acquainted you withal in the Second Part of those Memoires that they had writ
of my Life; and that immediately made them think ill of me, who possibly
otherwise might have been gained to be of my Faction, if not prevented hereby.
It was somewhat worse too, if possible, than that infamous Satyr, where the
too-fair Lady d'Olone is unworthily decried by fabulous Stories, to have
pleased, without doubt, some person which did not at all please her. To my
first Misfortunes, and my innocent Intrigues, which they did traduce me for,
the Lord knows how, they added farther, that Monsieur the Earl of Soissons,
Messieurs d'Armagnac, de Sault, and de Louvigny were Heroes concerned therein:
However, I call them to witness whether they ever knew me or no. Monsieur the
Duke de Beaufort, and he of Nevers, did walk with me by turns, the one at
Bouteux in la Ville l'Evesque, and the other, I know not where: Nay, Fortune
her self, where I never set foot, did complain of my Prophanations; and, having
learned who I was, would not permit me to remain three days among those Holy
Pensionaries. What a horrid Reproach was this? In fine, Madam, all was full of
such kind of Lies, or Praises, Pests at best, and the reading thereof did so
much the more injure my Reputation, by how much those things ordinarily please
and insinuate, and that what was true, seemed to vindicate all the rest.

After all this the old Complaints to the Queen Mother were renewed, who was at
last tired to hear of nothing but my overforward pranks for almost six years
continuance; she immediately fell into a great Passion of Anger against me, at
least as great as so good a Princess as she was capable of, which never happened
but upon the account of Virtue; and from thence proceeded the private Orders to
discover my Retreat. For the Earl and I were at first concealed, to find out
what course they would take in this affair. This also was the reason that he,
to secure himself of me, would lead me into I know not what place, if they had
forced me out: and finally, the very detaining of the Earl, who (being informed
of this scandalous Report, and not able to withold himself from showing his
Grief even at the feet of the Queen her self, where he indiscreetly pretended
to justify me) found that the Order was also to secure himself.

He was detained, and, together with the news which was almost as soon brought
me as done, I had the misfortune to fear that it was not for that only that
they had secured him, because there were several other Rumors about it at the
same time. But what did I do, Madam, think you, when this was told me again?

I perciev'd certainly that they sought nothing more than my ruin, and that I
had no more to do but to confine my self to my retirement, which was safe, to
avoid falling into the hands of my Enemies. They did not think of coming to
find me out in that place, which I will forbear naming with your Highnesses
permission; for I have promised so to do, and you could never divine it. It Is
enough to tell you 'twas a Monastery of Men, and that I was in a decent habit.
Nay, I might have taken also Measures for many other things, there being no
want of idle persons, who were ready to serve me in any thing.

But it was unworthy a person of my Character to think of her own safety, when
her Lover was so persecuted, whereas that should have turned to the advantage
of both. An ordinary Spirited person, a Woman that had not begun her Life as I
have done, and which would not be so much as suspected to have any relation to
the Marchioness of Sevil, might have buckled to such a base Condescension: But
I, Madam, scorned any rest till I was assured of that of my dear Englesac. I
resolved to go and present my self at the Louvre, now it was my turn, to
destroy my self with him, or to save him; and I went to seek out the
Queen Mother even at the very Val-de-Grace ('it is true, that it was well I did
commit that piece of folly) to demand the Death or Liberty of my Lover, and to
acquaint her with many other melting and urgent particulars.

Madam, said I, throwing my self hastily at her Feet, all bedewed with Tears,
and calling my self by my Name, to the great satisfaction of some curious
persons, who were there present, I do not appear here to supplicate your
Majesty's better opinion of me. I can at another time better justify my
Innocence, which I have hitherto preserved, notwithstanding all my Misfortunes:
if your Majesty would give me leave, I could bring in my defense the example of
those of your Court, whom bare Appearances, or Revenge it self, have destroyed;
and the number of them are but too many. I could say, that it is sufficient for
the most part, to have some extraordinary qualities, but unsuccessful; and that
will be occasion enough for Impudence thus to injure us in our Repute without
any scruple, and that in this corupt Age Detraction spares no body. That some
of Madam Englesac' s Friends, who dare not here espouse my Quarrel before your
Majesty, cannot but know what they say of her Ladyship, who when she flatters
her self with the opinion of being reputed a Vertuosa by every one, a rash
Stranger that knows her only by Name, (and I have had this Misfortune in my
Lifetime more than once) has, it may be, made her his scandalous Heroina two
hundred Leagues off, comprehends her in the recital of his Fantastic
Intrigues. To conclude, Madam, I could not want Reasons enough, but something
else inspired me with the boldness of presenting my self to the sight of an
incensed Queen. They torment, and violently force away the Earl of Englesac.
All the fault in this unfortunate Gentleman is, that he could never so much as
bring my Virtue in question, and that he was more clear-sighted than other
people. I come to offer self to all you can desire of me, and to sacrifice my
Liberty for his; for doubtless he was only deprived of it because I was at
Liberty. I come, if it must be so, to renounce him for ever, and confess the
Calumny by rendering my self Prisoner. I beseech your Majesty only to have pity
of him, and that you would give your Commands that he may live undisturbed.

I accompanied this noble Transport with many other Ornaments which I do not
mention; and it seemed novel, and proved successful: for the Queen was hereby
diverted. She said, smiling to all her Retinue, that this was the Act of a
tender and faithful She-lover. This did embolden some of her young Ladies to
speak something in my behalf, and created at length a good inclination in her
Majesty to be kind to me. She did aver, she did not wonder that a person so
accomplished as my self could be Innocent: and said, she could not restore my
Lover to his Liberty; but that she would grant me my own to defend my self: and
added farther, with a most obliging cast of the Head, a kind of Prayer, that I
would vindicate my self if possible.

God knows the vexation that this News brought to the Countess of Englesac, who
thought her self freed from making any farther pursuit in order to my
Destruction. She was almost desperate, and would willingly have made more
trouble, but all her malice signified nothing; and besides, something, I don't
know what to call it, which speaks for me in my Physiognomy, had already almost
gained the Queen Mother, because the good and Virtuous Lady -- was still of my
side: She loved, said she, passionately beautiful Women; and the envy she had
for the Vermilion of my Lips made her become one of my Friends, that she might
at some time have her fill of kissing me. What will your Highness think of this
Effort of my Beauty? This Entry, I say, having gained on my side so
considerable a person as she was, 'twas impossible for the Countess of Englesac
to succeed any farther in her first Designs; and she must deal with me the
usual way, that is, go to Law, which she did.

Then, Madam, there began between us a great and long Litigious Contest; but
less dangerous by far than the evil Offices that I received by secret Calumny,
for I was forced at the least to tell my reasons. I was presently appointed to
appear before I know not what Judges: then the Parliament took notice of the
business; the Council knew of it too in their turn; and in one of them I had a
Counselor that was in love with me, of whom I have somewhat to say.

The Marchioness of Sevil, who came to Paris from the first beginning of the
Storm, defended me like her self. The Countess de Bossu, who staid there in her
return from Rome, joined also the Credit which her desert and noble Adventures
could gain her in France, to other powerful Recommendations; and at last every
Party made a Cabal. The Ladies de Ville-Savin, de Bercy, and D'Escures; two
others who were Presidentes^es, and a great number of Vertuosa's of all
Qualities, with whom Scandal had lost me, were for the Countess of Englesac, at
least I was told so. I had for me all the Ladies that pitied me in their
Relation to them, and who would willingly have made it apparent in my
Justification, that whatsoever had been said of themselves, might prove as
false as what they had said of me. The fair Mareschaless, among others, did do
me greater service than any other person.

I had come to my ends with my Enemy, Madam, my fair Sollicitress having ever
had a great ascendent upon theirs, if what they did for me had not proved
unfortunate by my own fault, or rather that of my common Destiny.

At this time when all went very well, that they began to murmur against the
Vertuosa's, and that they said they took too much delight in persecuting the
Innocent; nay farther, when I was almost half Justified for want of proof
against me, this evil Destiny did procure me some ridiculous Adventures, which
increased the Informations, and had like to spoil all. The Counselor, as I
said, who affected me, had part in some; and Monsieur the Earl de -- in others.
I will relate them to you in course, and in few words, that I may come the more
readily to the rest. I begin with my Lawyer.

He was a man of a Brown Complexion, about 34 or 35 years of age, handsome
enough; and who believed also that Nature had not made him to divert himself
only with French Ladies. He was one of the Judges whose inclination or temper
persuades them, that it is not a crime against the duty of their Charge, to
make the Ladies purchase, not Justice, (for that were execrable) but the
expedition of their Business, by some kind of Favors.

This being supposed, I was not to be one of the Fortunate in Suits at Law, of
whom he would take no Fee; and indeed it was not his intention, he only
trusted me. This foolish Fop, whose Extravagances would fill a Volume, had this
among the most pleasant of them. He thought I should never love him
sufficiently, if I were not satisfied that he was a brave fellow; and in this
humor, one Evening when we were to run a Course, he had appointed three men to
attaque our Chariot, and to fly as soon as he should be upon the Defensive part.
The Bravery had succeeded well, and even beyond his expectation; for before
these pre-appointed Robbers came to exercise their Courage on him, three
others, who had made no promise to fly, had robbed us in good earnest, and he
fell upon them with all the courage of a man that despised his Life: it was in
truth the way to be beaten, and that in a pitiful manner, as it happened; but
no matter, at least his Valor, which I supposed to be real, had deceived me;
and this good effect was a reward for the blows he received. But here, Madam,
was the cruel Return of all, and which in the end destroyed the great Hopes and
Reputation, both of the one and the other.

As I had taken this Advocate for a perfect Amadis de Gaul hid under a long
Robe, seeing him still in the hands of others whom he soon put to flight; the
Watch which was then set throughout the City of Paris, seized on these
pretended Robbers. They took them for the very Thieves indeed they looked for,
and that came just then from stopping the Coach of the Daughter of the Holland
Ambassador, the now Wife of the Complete Marquess de Rassaw. They dragged them
to Prison, and the miserable men were forced to own the whole Stratagem in
their own defense, and my Misfortune did contribute to the truth of it without
the least scruple; and the Satirical Wits drew from thence as soon what
circumstances were thought fit, which was of bad consequence both to my Cause
and Judge.

In fine, Madam, this gave occasion to Madam d'Englesac, first, to refuse it,
then, to make good use of the Adventure, to reinforce and give some
countenance to those Scandals which they began not to hearken to any longer.
Did your Highness ever hear of a thing more worthy of Laughter? In the interim
'twas a great mischief to me.

But the Affair that the Count de -- had intermedled with, had something in it
that was more cruel and fantastical; and I know not indeed whether it will seem
probable to you, though there was never any thing more real.

Two fair Ladies, whom I will not name, or rather, which I am going to name,
for your greater diversion, since your Highness has heard of them heretofore by
other means. It was the Lady Baroness de Saint Friar, and the Lady de Feronne.
These two Fair ones were tired with that Man's continued Disgrace, of whom you
desired to hear somewhat in your last Letter, whether it were Acknowledgment or
mere Humane Weakness that interessed them in his Misfortune, they resolved to
make it their business to put an end to it: To put up their first Addresses to
Heaven; (and I think that does always prove the nearest way) and if that did
not avail them, to steer a quite contrary Course, to fly to the strength of
Charms; and those not the Charms of their own Beauty, as you might possibly
interpret it, I say, Madam, those of the Black Art.

I would not hazard the safety of any person by discovering the secret of these
admirable Magicianesses: It was to take I know not what, which they were made
believe the young Foal brought into the world with it, when first cast upon
it is Forehead; to prepare it with certain Ceremonies; and this as they fancied
would prove an admirable and unavoidable Philtre, which was cunningly to be
given to Soldiers, and to the Captain himself, if required; and the Captain
and Soldiers would as soon as they had received it run about the Streets, and
offer themselves to do all whatsoever one could desire them. The Towers seemed
(pardon the expression) to fall, and the Gates too off their Hinges of their
own accord, to set those at Liberty the Ladies had a mind should be
discharged. I will not amuse my self to desire you to compassionate them for
this simplicity, nor to tell you that however these Women passed for Wits, for
fear of enervating my Narrative too much.

There was required also toward this a Mare, and here it is that the young
Count de -- begins to have a part in this mysterious business: That which they
made use of was his; one of his Grooms for the lucre of ten or twenty Pistols
had turned him out of the Stables, and thought he should be acquitted if he
pretended to find him again a few days after.

The Scene where this Comedy was acted, was in the Stable of a Carman of the
Port, in a little Street that joins to Pont-Marie. The two fair Ladies had
privately conveyed themselves thither one night, without Attendants; and they
had drawn me in also treacherously, by hiding from me their real Design. We
had already spent the Night in setting ridiculous Watches about the Mare; which
did frighten me, and made me suspect that my Friends were grown foolish. We
were to continue this extravagant Ceremony till the time of the Birth of that
precious Animal, and for what reason I have quite forgot. They inclined me also
to believe I should see other things more Novel; when at last, I know not by
what mischance, to our cost, the Earl of -- was advertised that his Mare, whose
loss he bore very impatiently, was carried to the Carter's. He came thither all
in a rage, accompanied with the Marquess de Phimartin, and the Count de Signac,
who out of their friendship to him were not much less heated with anger than
himself. ('It Is true, that that Choler could not withstand the new Passions
raised in them by the Rencounter of three such accomplished Ladies as we were.)
He surprised us at this fine Exercise, which appeared to him and his friends to
be a true Incantation upon all accounts, and that in the end had all the
Consequences 'twas capable of. The noise spread it self abroad, if it were not
by the indiscretion of these young Lords, who were become our Lovers (and this
I must not forget, the Count of -- loved ever after the Baroness of Saint
Friar; the Marquess of Plumartin, the Lady Feronne; and I my self had a share
in the Earl of Signac, who will have a part when it comes to his turn in the
enlargement of this Story: I shall be at the least as much importuned by him as
the Marquess de Birague.) If, I say, it happened not by the indiscretion of
these young Lords, it was by that of their Retinue who followed them. And at
the same time, though I had the least hand in it, yet they did not forbear to
charge me freely with the whole, and to add to the rest of my famed Qualities,
that of an Honest Sorceress; pardon me for this gross and unpleasant Word,
which I could not here pass over.

You may judge, Madam, the farther Injury that that might do me above all,
being it was raised by the Countess of Englesac; for she was not scrupulous of
Sacrificing the Honor of both the other Ladies with mine, to obtain her end.
If one would believe the Flourishes she added to the Adventure, they might
accuse me of somewhat else than Magic, and Monsieur the Earl of -- and his two
Friends, had been revenged upon the place for the Innocent Felony which we had
caused to be made of the Mare, by other effects, which Gallantry terms also
Innocent Felony. These Gentlemen, who had always the Repute of the most Honest
and Wise Courtiers, ceased to be so for our sakes only. And our Faces, that
usually command Respect at the very time when they inspire men with Desires,
did us no service at all in a Stable. Nay, she said what was worse than all
this, which I dare not acquaint you with; but this mischance had been
inconsiderable, in that it only had like to have lost my business at Paris, if
it had not tended to embroil me with my Lover in the cruellest manner in the
World, as I am going to give you to understand immediately.

And though the Countess of Englesac had a strict Eye over him in that place,
which was his Bastile or Prison, yet he was truly informed of all passages.
Besides, his Mother did not fail to send him this distracting news; he had them
confirmed to him by the same persons that instructed him from time to time what
he had a mind to learn. Those of his Acquaintance, who were not suspected by
the Lady d'Englesac, and visited him sometimes, did turn the matter probably
another way very proper to persuade him: and that happened, which I conjectured
would never happen more, after the clearing of the last Artifices of Birague,
and the vanity of the Prince de Salmes.

In short, the Earl at least suspected my Conduct, or way of Living. What do I
say? My Mischief was so great upon this sad and dismal occasion, and Jealousy
must needs produce such strange changes in the mind of this poor Earl, that he
took it for granted his Love had ever hitherto blinded him: and in the
Indignation which this bred in his Heart, and which the Lady d'Englesac did at
length believe, he did and signed all that she desired without, contradiction.
He begged of her to set him at Liberty, to fly from me, to separate himself from
me, with the same earnestness he would have sought me out, if I had been
guiltless. He obtained it. There was at that very time a War between England
and Holland, and many Illustrious Cavaliers had made a party in the Dutch Army,
and he went among them. I was told of it the very day; and through my excessive
grief, it had like to have proved the last day of my Life.

What Discontents had I! what Spleen against the gentile Advocates, who would
counterfeit brave Gallants! What Hatred for the fair Baroness of Saint Fere,
and Madam Feronne! What Imprecation against their impertinent Magic! What Fury
against the Master of the Mare and both his Friends! I would acquaint you with
all these effects, if I had not greater Curiosities to impart to you. For,
Madam, this Scandal came not unaccompanied; and to complete all my ill Fortune,
the Marchioness of Sevil bethought her self of turning Amorous, in her old age,
of a youth between seventeen and eighteen years old, and to desire him in
Marriage of his Parents. I told her indeed, to little or no purpose, that if
she could not avoid being passionate in Love, she might make choice of other
remedies, and that she should remember that God pardons all, and men nothing at
all. (This, to speak truth, was a little idle; but how could I express my self
otherwise to such a fond Fool?) 'Twas to no purpose to represent unto her the
interest of a decent Decorum of her carriage, both upon mine and her own
account, that she was about to commit an unpardonable crime. I could not at all
prevail with her. 'Twas not her fault that it was not effected. And all the
means that I used to withdraw her from it, did only serve to embroil my self
again with her, who was my sole support; and such a confusion too, that may be
would have proved irreconcilable, if there had not been between us, as I always
thought, a stronger Tie than that of Sympathy and Friendship.

But what think you, Madam, of these last Capricio's of my Misfortune? Being
Intrigu'd with almost all my Acquaintance that could serve me; with ^y
Advocate; with the Ladies that solicited for me; with Birague, a long time
ago; with Signac, almost as soon as I knew him; for he had not the patience to
wait till he was beloved, and I had given him his farewell with the hazard of
creating a great Enemy to my self. In fine, evil treated also by the Lover
beloved; and abandoned, if I may say so, by a Mother, since 'twas by the
Marchioness of Sevil: Could I since stand in fear of any new Disgrace, at
least, if it were not my Death? True, and I soon had the terrible trial of it.

I sent a Messenger with Letters to the Earl of Englesac, to plead my
justification in all things passed; who returned, and told me there had been a
bloody Battle between the English and Dutch, and that this my dearest Love was
swallowed up by the Waves. That Battle was fought in June 1666. He went aboard
the same Vessel the Prince of Monaco and the Count de Guiche did. And after
dreadful Exploits performed, (for that is a proper name for them) and that he
had like a Lion seconded these two Illustrious Voluntaries, who possibly fought
as he did, stirred up by Honor, composed of somewhat more than ordinary, and
performed Exploits beyond men; in short, he perished, endeavoring to save the
life of the former.

This Prince being surprised by the burning of a Fire-ship, whereunto the heat
of the Battle had thrust him forward too vigorously, he threw himself into the
Sea, thinking to make a Shallop, and so was drowned among broken Masts and
Cordages that hindered his swimming. The Earl of Englesac, who was ever an
admirer of the Prince de Monaco for his Valor, as well as the Count de Guiche,
leaped from another Vessel into a Shallop to help him, and did so too; for by
this means the Servants of the Prince had an opportunity to lay hold of their
Master, and pluck him out of the Sea (and may be this passage would surprise
grateful Spirits, who never knew well who they were engaged to for the best
part of so great service.) To conclude, he had honorably Crowned his former by
this last Action: But the Shallop he was in split at the same time, and sunk to
the bottom with him; and fresh Ships coming, and riding in the place where he
was shipwrack'd, 'twas not questioned but that he was irrecoverably lost.

But 'twas no such thing as yet; nay, it would be unjust, and unprecedentable,
that the chief Hero in a History, who ought to resemble a curious Fable,
should be really dead before he had finished his Adventures. We will raise him
again if you please, when time shall serve, and find that the Waves did but
waft him up and down many places of the Sea, till by the mercy of Romantic
Destiny, that sported with him, as well as my self, he was taken up by one of
the English Frigates.

In the mean time, Madam, what dismal news was this for me, when they informed
me that he was dead after this manner? Your Highness cannot imagine the grief
that seized on me, unless you have some time or other been as passionately in
love with some one man, as I was with the Earl d'Englesac; and you are too
prudent to be so overborn with Love. Yet I would desire you to think of one
part of my regret upon the sincere averment that I make you; that as this
unfortunate Gentleman had been always dear to me, so I did then adore him,
maugre the injustice he had done me; and that accident only made me more fond
and desirous of a Reconciliation. I grew furious; this only Expression
discovers exactly the condition I was in. I was almost in the mind to go and
revenge the Son upon the Mother, and do my utmost endeavor to discompose her.
It Is true, it is reported, that she her self was afflicted so far, as to be
almost in the same despondent condition with my self: In fine, this mischance,
instead of choking up all the Seeds sown by the disinteressed in the person
that caused them, did only serve to animate us to a Prosecution at Law. The
Countess of Englesac pretended to bring full proof of the Actions of my
scandalous Life, and to seek her Revenge in my Punishment: I would have mine in
a public way of Reparation. We stuck close to this Design, which could not
otherwise prejudice us. We were obstinate for all our Presidents, who judged
this would prove ineffectual, and who endeavored to dissuade us from it
seriously and in earnest. (They were the same persons, Jurandon and Grasset,
which your Highness made choice of since that, to take care of your Concerns in
France, and with whose management I believe you will be well pleased.) In fine,
the whole Court wondered at our Contests, and it was an unmatchable Suit at Law.

But here possibly I have made too great a stay upon a passage not diverting;
and to do that, I must return to the pleasant Adventures which frequently
happened afterward. The thought and apprehension of the certainty of the Earl of
Englesac's Death, was a new original cause of it. It gained me new Courtiers,
and recalled my old ones. The Mar^uiss de Birague, and the young Count de
Signac, among others, began to renew their Pretenses more vigorously than ever;
nay, my very Counselor came and found me out, ^o tell me, that though I had
quite lost my Re^utation in the Eye of the World, he would ^ot for all that
shake off his Passion, but prose^ute it so far as to espouse me in private, if
I ^pprov'd of it.

I thanked him, as you may believe, with ^uch civility as I thought suitable to
so passionate a Compliment. I told him, I did in that the more applaud his rare
Prudence, that if by chance I could be in a capacity to love him, after the
loss of the dearest thing in the whole Universe, I should not resolve to be
married to him, but in private; the Adventure of the counterfeit-Thieves having
defamed him as much for a man, as it had me for a woman: And you may judge,
Madam, whether this was over-pleasing to him. The poor man returned with such a
confused and passionate Transport of Anger, that I doubt not but he desired
with all his heart once more to be my Judge, to make me lose my Cause.

But this was nothing in comparison of what befell me by the Jealousy that
Birague had of young Signac; which in my judgment was a trick of a man of
Spirit, and a second Comedy. It Is said, 'twas the effect of what he had gained
by the reading of Astrea, where there is just such another piece of malice; but
whence soever he had his design, it was a thing well contriv d, and very
pleasant.

I confess that I did live with the Count de Signac somewhat more familiarly
than with the Marquess. Whether he had more Merit; (but that I do not pretend
to decide) or whether he was more Sportive Comely, or Young; and this last
Qualification does many times go very far. In fine, whether he had not given me
such causes of Aversion for him as Monsieur de Birague; or that I stood less in
awe of him, I freely permitted him to visit me: His little mutinous Passions
did not displease me, and seemed to be of no consequence: And in that
melancholic humor, which an irreparable loss had implunged me, I was not
angry with him for coming to me from time to time, and stealing away some hours
from my cruel Amusements.

Birague was fearful that his Familiarity, and my Complaisance, would be
seconded by my Marriage, which he intended for himself. Now, Madam, knowing
well that it would be impossible to conquer me by any other way, he did in
conclusion resolve to love me for his Oath's sake, and you will see a great
proof of it by and by. He had not as yet desired the Communication of the
Secret, as Monsieur the President did, and I could have been willing to
satisfy him in; yet if what I tell you in this particular does astonish you,
because the Lady Marchioness his Wife was still living, I must acquaint you
that she had labored a long time with a chronique Distemper, which she could
not possibly be recovered of: This poor Marquess reckoned, that I could no
sooner resolve to marry him, but that he should be a Widower at the very same
instant.

Birague, I say, who would have been desperate if Monsieur Signac should win me
from him, who had endured all that can be for the space of six years and better
in not being beloved, did ransack Heaven and Earth to supplant this dangerous
Rival. And understanding at length, by one of his Spies, placed by him about
me, that I was to go with this young Count to a Conjuring-woman or Astrologess,
what you please to call her, a cunning Woman, as they say, called by the name
of the Dame Voisin, and to whom all the unfortunate Fair ones of the Court, and
many Lovers besides, (for all the whole world is guilty of this weakness, and
well may, for I my self have been guilty of it) to whom, I say, all the fair
Court-Ladies in Love (for the itch of understanding what things are past, and
the future, has not much Influence upon any, but such as are in Love) made no
scruple of going to ask her some consolation; and now he fancied that he had
found out the true Secret of obtaining his designs.

He was with that Woman a day before us, whom he persuaded that she would do no
injury to her Profession, if she did consult him only for the answer she was
to give me. He described me to her very exactly, that she might commit no
ridiculous mistake. He told her what was passed, and instructed her what to say
and predict of me; and among other things, That I must disengage my self of
Signac, and bid him defiance; That I must marry a Widower, whom I should know
by certain signs: you may imagine to what all this tended; and it was in
effect what that woman told me, when we were with her, after (according to her
custom) she had examined me in her Closet, which she calls the Closet of
Oracles.

I confess, Madam, that the cheat was well contrived; and he might have
certainly put a trick upon me, if the memory of the Earl d'Englesac, to which I
would continue faithful, had permitted me to think of Matrimony since his
death: For I gave credit to these Predictions with so much imbecility, that I
blush for it now: I began from that minute to defy the Count de Signac, as
they had wished me, to live no longer with him as I did formerly, to lay hold
of all occasions to banish him my company; and I did accomplish it effectually
soon after, to his great regret, because he had already brought himself to a
pleasant habit of loving me in earnest.

But the best of the contrivance was, that one of the principal Marks whereby I
should know him I was to be wedded to was, that he should shelter himself at my
House from the fury of several Assassinates. It did not a little amaze me when
I found that 'twas Birague had this Adventure a few days after. He took upon
him to fulfill the Prophesies, and did not miss of his aim; nay possibly he
remembered somewhat of the Adventure of my President or Counselor at Law, the
design of the persons hired to stand at a certain place and be ready at his
Summons: what a flight was this, now when I think of it, which I never so much
as questioned before!

I remember, when they began to draw their Swords upon this malicious Marquess,
I was standing at my Window, at one corner whereof I was, busied in
contemplating upon the amiable Lady Madam de Castelnau, whose Coach stopped
just over against my Door; and thus satisfied an ancient curiosity that I had
to see this Lady, who was always very advantageously Characteris'd as a most
accomplished person. Merinvil was also in my Chamber, who was busy about
something or other. O Heaven! said I, shrieking out aloud at the sight of the
drawn Swords, and turning all at once to Merinvil, my business is done, and I
am undone: This is the effect of what the Prophetess foretold me; and to
heighten my ill luck, it is Birague, that I love not, whom they did just now
attaque, and is coming hither to secure himself; and shall I be so far
unfortunate as one day to become the Wife of Birague? Miserable wretches, cried
I to all my Lacqueys at once, who were in the Street, have a care that you let
no body enter my House, let them rather kill one another there!

And judge you, Madam, what the Passengers could think, to hear me pronounce
those cruel Words in so great a Discomposure. This had been enough to persuade
them that I was one of the Accomplices in the Assassination, if there had been
really any such thing. Merinvil came and withdrew me from the Window, and
demanded, in a greater confusion than I was in my self, the reason of that
extravagant expression; and if I was not in a Dream, to believe that Birague,
who to my knowledge was a married Man, was the Widower mentioned by the
Divineress; which did a little recompose me, and made me at length yield that
he should save himself in my House; but 'twas too late: I had done enough
already to bring my Reputation deeply in question, and to afford my
Scandalizers large matter to work upon, and my Enemies to make a sad end of my
Portrait.

It Is true, I was in some measure excusable, because of the strong aversion I
had then for the Marquess; though now I protest he did not deserve it at my
Hands, and that it was the effect of an evil custom, and a strange kind of
unknown Capricio, rather than of any reason that I had for it. But, Madam, this
is not yet the whole History; I must begin where I left off, at what this
dangerous man said to me after he was got into my Appartment, and what I said
to him my self: he informed me among other things that his Wife lay a dying, if
she were not dead already; which was nothing but truth. What! said I, in a
foolish tone, (which I thought would prove much to his diversion, if he had not
been both Amorous and ill treated; but an unfortunate Lover cannot laugh) What!
said I, that might well be, that you might have been, or should be, a Widower
now! Go, Sir, I added farther, and as soon as you can possible deliver me from
your sight. Fly from hence, and if you can be grateful, think no more of me. I
thought also to have told him, that I repented I had been instrumental to the
saving of his Life.

But I ought perhaps to conceal these last circumstances, which do me no great
credit, and will not appear in themselves very probable; because it is a thing
unheard of almost, that the folly of a Woman, at least one that has not
hitherto been judged unworthy of a Noble Family, should hurry her self to such
extremities. However, I have told you nothing but what happened, and my Stars
were the cause of it. I will add farther boldly, that I did not rest here; and
in time I might possibly have committed many greater Extravagancies, if the
Earl d'Englesac, whom I had bewailed as dead for above ten Months, had not at
last returned on purpose to put a stop to the whimsical effects of two
different Passions. I must inform you, Madam, of what passed particularly at
this his unexpected Return.

First, It was de Signac, who, though he was the Earl's absolute Rival, brought
him back more Amorous than before; and having greater estimation of my Virtue
than ever, he himself had taken pains to undeceive him. Could there be any
thing done more honest? They met with one another upon the Avenues of
Champlastreux, where one was walking when the other was traveling for Paris.

Secondly, The way of bringing him to me was altogether new, in that to
surprise me the more pleasantly, (or to say truth more dangerously; for it had
almost been the death of me) this young Gentleman was resolved to make me
suddenly change my Anger into Joy; and to effect it, in lieu of submissive and
modest complaints which he used in writing to me since his Exile, told me,
Gentleman-like, that he was weary of his Banishment; and that I should prepare
my self to receive him in my Chamber at midnight; that he had found out a
secret to render me Amorous, and have thanks for his own visit; and if I would
not accept of the party, I should dearly repent of it.

What could I think of such expressions which seemed so insolent, to one that
did not apprehend them, as I was far enough from understanding them? yet this
was nothing to what follows; I was astonished when I found my Gentleman failed
not to wait upon me at the hour appointed, and advancing as far as the Door of
my Chamber without any opposition, or consideration: ('It Is true, he was most
certain of his excuse, because accompanied with the Earl of Englesac.) I was, I
say, amazed when I heard him say, Open the Door, Madam, order the Door to be
opened: I come to bring you both Joy, Love, and a Repose that will be far more
acceptable than that which I now interrupt.

I cannot express how highly he incensed me by this proceeding, so void of
Respect, and so far estranged from the civility wherewith he ever treated me.
Merinvil was not yet in bed, and I commanded her to tell that indiscreet person
through the Keyhole, that he should retreat, and that I was cruelly offended
at the liberty he had taken. But he made answer, he would not depart till they
had opened the Door; and that he would force it open, rather than pass over
that night without making his Peace with me, as he designed. He added many
other things, which were able to put me into a Passion, though he pronounced
them in a mild tone that spoke his good Intentions; so I resolved at last to
open the Door, but it was after I had seized on a Sword, in order to his
Reception, as I believed such an Insolent person deserved. O! said I then
aloud, open him the Door, and let us see what he aims at. I believe truly I had
not spared him in that angry fit at that time. Alas, Madam, how my Weapon dropped
presently out of my hand at the sight of the Earl of Englesac, who gave way to
this cheating Surprise. I made a great outcry, and that was all; for I
immediately fell into a Swoon, and was too happy that the various Joys which
were assembled together in my Heart all at once, did not kill me upon the spot;
for they say Women do die thus sometimes. When I was come again to my self, my
Tears only spoke for me; and running to embrace this my dear Object, I found
it true, that Signac had brought me both Joy and Love.

As for the Earl of Englesac, he being prepared to see me before brought to me,
he might not probably undergo such violent Passions as I suffered, though in
standing mute and making use of no other Language but that of his Tears as well
as I, he sufficiently discovered the bottom of his Heart. Almost an hour was
spent in this manner; after which, having returned many thanks to the generous
Signac, and my Lover and I having cleared one another, and made a promise never
more to question our fidelity, we took leave, in order to our meeting the next
day at a certain place. For the Countess of Englesac was as yet ignorant that
her Son was alive, or returned; and he would not present himself to her, till
he had taken some Measures to marry me at last, maugre all opposition
whatsoever, or at least be assured of this Contentment before he would
re-commit himself to the discretion of Fortune, which was so averse to us both.

Here, Madam, you have the Third Part of my Rehearsal: In the Fourth I will
give your Highness an account of what we were forced yet to rub over, before
this Marriage was happily completed; and this may prove as great a Curiosity
as any of the rest. I will also tell you in what part of the World my dear Earl
had been so rigorously detained, or rather in what place so remote he had spent
all the time wherein he was supposed to be dead, and could not write to any
person. In the mean time I beseech you to honor me so far, as to believe it is
in obedience to your commands that I continue the Relation of such things,
which possibly might be more properly omitted: And that I am

Your Highness's most Humble and most Obedient Servant, H. S. D. M.

THE ADVENTURES AND MEMOIRES OF Henrietta Sylvia Moliere. PART the IV.
I Am at length, Madam, arrived to that Part of my Life so long expected, and
so fervently desired. The Earl of Englesac gave me a Narrative of all that had
befallen him since the time that his Jealousy had snatched him away from me; I
found nothing in this Relation unworthy a Gentleman, and my Lover. We made
those Protestations and Reproaches one to the other which are usual in such
Rencounters; and by the diligence of some Friends, whom we were compelled to
acquaint with the Secret, we were married unknown to the Countess of Englesac,
and without Ceremony.

What Joy, Madam, was this, if it could have lasted but one day entire? But
that had been too great a Happiness; and when this poor Lover thought himself
the most contented of men in his Choice, when he believed he had cheated that
Fortune, which had so often deceived him, he found he was falling into the most
horrid Misfortune, in his opinion, that could happen. I am at a loss how to
express my self in this place; that is to say, Madam, that he found himself
married to no purpose, and that some of our Enemies had laid a cruel Charm upon
us.

How foolish is Mankind to think themselves therefore contemptible, because
they despise themselves! 'Twas to no purpose to swear to the Earl of Englesac
that this Mischance did not move me, and it was truth. 'Twas to no purpose to
tell him a thousand things, which if I should repeat, would create a good
opinion of my Wisdom in those persons, who would honor me so far as to take me
at my word. My discourse did not at all persuade him, he had such inward
regret, that I could not pity him; yet I could not sometimes forbear breaking
out into loud Laughter; and he, surmising that his Mother had contributed to
his Misfortune, went and acquainted here with the Marriage, which we had so
carefully concealed from her, not without some Exprobation.

You may well guess, Madam, the rage of this Woman, when she saw her Son raised
from the dead to afflict her with so great a displeasure: she upbraided him
with many injurious expressions, threatened him a thousand times; and not
satisfied with Words only, had recourse to Law, as she was accustomed to do.
This new Suit restored me again my Counselor. He thought this juncture to be a
very proper time to enhance my estimation of him, and had not forgot my Charms
any more than the rest of my Lovers, this accident of the Earl of Englesac's
having rouzed up all their Hopes: For the Lady d'Englesac imprudently told it
to all the world, and said it was an Effect of Divine Justice.

The Marquess de Birague was one of the first that came to disturb me: his Wife
was at the last gasp, he was in expectation of marrying me very speedily, and
took no distaste either at my Slights or Adventures. He left no Stone unturned
to gain my consent to the dissolution of the Marriage; he still kept in credit
with the Lady d'Englesac: He advised them to tempt me with Money; and old
Gabrieres, who came from the farthest part of Languedoc to add to my
persecution, proffered me, on the behalf of the Countess, thirty thousand
Livres, if I would by consent put a stop to all proceedings.

There was not one person, nay not so much as Madam de Seville, but what entered
into this League against me; who sent to inform me, that she would revoke all
the Donations she had made me, if I would obstinately resolve to,continue the
Wife of the Earl of Englesac. I understand well enough what made her discourse
me at this rate; she was then the fond Mistress of the Marquess de Sainte-Fere,
and I was informed that he was of my Enemies Faction.

But all this was nothing in comparison to what I am going to disclose. The
Earl of Englesac was sensible of the Menaces of the Lady de Seville, and
advised me to do whatever she desired, provided she continued the grant of the
Estate she had given me. I am apt to believe that my Interest only put him
upon this, as he confessed afterward; but I did not acquaint him that I thought
this was the motive to his Advice. I accused him of coldness in Affection: We
were Intrigued one with the other, and met together often in the same place,
without so much as looking upon one another. Signac took great notice of it: He
had not prosper'd in the design of being only in the number of my Friends,
and yet became more Amorous than ever to essay what advantage he could make of
my Divorce. The Marquess del Birague dreaded this Rival, and was extremely
jealous at his return.

I will acquaint your Highness with a pleasant effect thereof. Birague was one
day wearied with the company of de Signac more than ordinary: He gave him the
Lie in my Chamber upon a very indifferent thing, as de Signac thought, which he
himself had newly related: Signac would not charge me with this Injury, and
showed in that particular his great reverence of me; for it was not want of
courage in him. I advertised herewith Marshall d'Estre, who lodged near me,
and he put a Guard upon them. The Marquess de Birague could never tell the
reason why he gave him the Lie; and I am of opinion, that if Signac had said I
had been Beautiful, that Birague would have told him he ly'd.

The Lady d'Englesac heard of this Quarrel, and made use of it as new matter to
scandalize me with. But I had the comfort to be disengaged, at least for some
time, of these two importunate Inamorato's: For Birague was sent for three
Months to Fort- L'Evesque, and I sent for Signac, and prohibited his visiting
of me any more, that I might not be exposed to the Obloquy of the old Countess.

This poor Youth fell sick through Discontent, and I could not deny him a
Visit, which was worse than his coming to see me. I think that this Demon
Birague had some malignant Spirit at his beck; for he understood in Prison that
I had visited this sick Gentleman, and acquainted the Countess of Englesac
therewith.

Jealousy is a great help against the remisness of Lovers: the Earl of
Englesac wrote to me to be reconciled, and begged my pardon so often in his
Epistle, that I could not for my Heart deny it.

But I pretended the contrary; I had a mind to break him of that custom of
quarrelling with me; and seemed to be hardly drawn to it, to make him the wiser
hereafter. He took this Counterfeit, for an effect of the progress that de
Signac had made in my Affection, and became Jealous to that extremity, that he
almost lost his Reason. He procured persons unknown to look after me; he gained
my Lacqueys on his side; and caused me at length to be so closely watched, that
he surprised me in my private Conversation with de Signac in the Labyrinth that
is in the Garden of Simples.

Now, Madam, I had a very high esteem for Signac, and took pity of him, because
he flattered himself with vain hopes. I condescended to this Rendezvouze on
purpose to conjure him once for all, to shake off this Passion. No, Signac,
said I, I cannot accept of your Courtship, endeavor to overcome it, it makes
you unhappy; and you are not so indifferent to me, as that I can be sensible of
your prejudice without some discontent. Nay, what would you have me do more? I
love the Earl of Englesac: Our little Controversies are almost at an end; and
when they cease, our mutual Love will be greater than ever. But Signac
interrupted me with these words: Madam, this Earl cannot be happy; and the
Reconciliation that you discourse of, which would perfect another man's
Felicity, will but increase the Despair of your Husband. Have you never looked
earnestly in the Face of an enraged Inamorato, who has his Mistress in his
power, who is affectionately beloved, who might lawfully enjoy her, and yet
does not possess her? That which Signac said, struck me with such compassion
for the Earl of Englesac, that I could not forbear weeping: and Signac, turning
this to his advantage, fell at my Feet, and gave me such convincing arguments,
that I knew not how I could possibly oppose them. Permit your self, my lovely
Countess, said he, to be moved with my Sighs; amd murder not a miserable man,
whose Love, and Perseverance in that Passion, merits a kinder Destiny. If the
Earl of Englesac could make advantage of your Constancy, I would die before
I Would contend against it; and you are not ignorant that I once brought him back
to you. But, Madam, your Fidelity is fatal to him: And whilst you thus suffer
me to perish, to preserve your self for him, you put him to a kind of death no
less cruel than that which I daily experiment. Have pity upon us and your self;
you are not sensible what a dreadful mishap it is for a beautiful Woman to have
a Husband, who has just cause to have an ill opinion of him. You are going to
make your self the most unfortunate of Women, and that drives me into despair.
I replied, with Tears in my Eyes; No matter, I cannot suffer too much, in
acknowledging the Love that poor Earl has ever shown me. I will love him as
long as I breathe, come what will on it; and I should be too happy to spend my
days with him, in any condition whatsoever that can befall us. The Earl of
Englesac, who through a Palisado heard the whole Discourse, was so moved at it,
that he had not power to conceal himself any longer. He came and threw himself
at my Feet, and surpised us so strangely with his sight, that Signac cried
out, and I was ready to fall into a Swoon. Be not dismayed, said the Earl to
his Rival, I come not to upbraid thee with thy endeavors to seduce her, thou
deservest her better than I; I am a miserable wretch that have nothing to do
but to die: And he had almost died indeed at the uttering of these last words;
yet casting his Eyes upon me with a most pitiful look; No, my dear Sylvia, said
he, for so he always called me, I will not abuse thy Constancy, that would
render thee unhappy. Marry Signac, I freely consent to it; nay, I do more than
barely give my assent, I beg of thee to do it. And after this wish he departed
half desperate; went out of the Garden, and rode Post to Flanders, whither the
Army then began to march.

Signac hoped to succeed by this his departure, and the consent he gave in
favor of him; but he came far short of his expectation. I upbraided him a
thousand times as the cause that my Husband forsook me, and accused him only
for this my Misfortune: I vowed that I would hate him worse than death it self,
if he did not restore me the Earl of Englesac. Consider, Madam, if you please,
what Character his Love to me deserved. He followed the Earl the same Road, and
I have been certainly informed since, that he did his utmost endeavor to
procure his Return. But I have been too long serious, I must, to diversifie
this History, and to refresh you in some measure, since that I have in all
probability afflicted you, give your Highness a relation of my Counselors
Deportment to ingratiate himself into my favor.

He was my daily Visitant; I was obliged to be somewhat Complaisant; for if
these Gentlemen be coursely used, it is in vain to go to Law. He came one day to
tell me, that he knew an excellent way to overthrow my Adversaries, and enrage
the Countess of Englesac. I did really believe that he had found out some trick
in Law to my advantage. But excuse me, Madam, that was not the business, he
only endeavored to persuade me, that a brisk subtle Woman never dies without
an Heir: What do you think of such advice in Law? I durst not be offended at
it; for that had been to take it in earnest; besides, I had other businesses of
concernment to consider of.

This cunning Woman the Lady d' Englesac had disengaged me from a young
Gentleman whose Name was the Marquess de Vilars, whose Mother, as I was
informed, she was intimately acquainted with, and he was one of the handsomest
Court-Gallants. They entreated him to court me, hoping, as I conceive, that he
might win my Heart; and after he had wrought upon me so far as to disclose the
Marriage, then he should desert me, when Husbandless, and expose me thereby to
the Scoffs of all the World. But it fell out otherwise. This amiable young
Gentleman fell in Love with me in earnest, and disclosed all the designs of
the Lady d'Englesac, which still make me tremble at the very thoughts of them.
Poor Youth, this freedom of his, one would think, should have saved him from
that Musket Shot that gave him his mortal Wound at Dandremonde. Then they
would by force have put me again into the Convent at Avignon, where I formerly
secured my self. Madam de Vandosme, whose goodness they had prevaricated by
their framed discourses of me, was to countenance this design before the
Cardinal de Vandosme; and probably had done it, if she could have found me out;
for the zeal of all good souls is impetuous. I was never more disquieted and
disturbed to know how I should dispose of my self: every thing I heard I
fancied to be a Coach to take me away by force; and I was in a House where I
often met with such kind of frights; for 'twas in the Dutch House. Monsieur
the Abbot of Villeserin lodged over against me, and the Assembly des beaux
Esprits, or of the Virtuosi (which convened afterward at his Appartment) was
then designing. I saw none but men of a morose aspect stand at his Door, and
pass by the Street I lodged in; and I took them for so many Messengers from the
Lady Divota's or Nuns.

Not daring to venture my self any longer at Paris, I committed the care and
management of my Law-business to an able Practitioner, and without any other
Attendant but Merinvil, I went in quest of the Earl of Englesac, that he might
protect me from his Mothers Attempts. But, Madam, to what dangers do we not
expose our selves, when we thus ramble in the wide world? passing through the
Forest de Senlis, the Hackney-Sedan, which I had hired at Blavet, broke, and I
was left sitting at the root of a Tree, till they went to a Village near at
hand to fetch some Workmen to mend it: they tarried so long, that I grew very
impatient, and sent Merinvil to meet them and hasten their return: I was no
sooner left alone, but a Cavalier passing by at a small distance from me, after
some loud exclamations dismounted, and accosted me. He was, as far as I could
learn by his discourse, one that declared himself to be the natural Son of the
King of Portugal, commonly known by the name of the Portugal-Prince, and who
under that name had seen all the Courts in Europe.

He pretended that the very self-same Prophetess Voisin, who before that made
me fear my Marriage with Birague, had showed him in a Glass of Water a person
that resembled me, and had foretold many great mischiefs that should befall him
if he did not gain her Affection. I laughed heartily, whilst discoursed me at
this rate, and did also tell him many horrid Predictions; but this was no
repulse to him; for he said they were marked out by La Voisin. I was forced to
answer him as I did, and for the same reason he ought to attempt his
Enterprises in places more remote; which he had done, if the Marquess de
Sainte-Fere, who went to join with the Army, had not by accident taken this
Road. He did not think he did me so great a kindness as in truth he did: nay,
on the contrary, seeing that I was somewhat moved, and finding me alone in a
Forest with a person tolerably handsome, he thought he had done an ill office
by this his interruption, and excused himself very maliciously. I could not
persuade him he labored under a Mistake; but a Coach came running by, wherein
I spied the Marchioness of Sevil: She called to the Coachman to bid him hold;
and leaping down out of the Coach, gave the Marquess de Sainte-Fere many
Amorous Reproofs: he returned her a nimble and civil Answer: But finding the
more he attempted to satisfy the Marchioness with Reason, the more she was
irritated, he betook himself to flight, and the Lady de Seville with very grief
remained in my Arms almost senseless.

According to what I could observe by their Discourse, Sainte-Fere did only
pretend Love to the Marchioness of Sevil, during the interval of his falling
out with another Mistress. But this Quarrel was over, as there are few durable
between persons whose Affections are real; and the Lady de Seville, finding her
self deprived of a Lover, pursued him every where to blame him for this
Infidelity. I administered the best Comforts I could to her, and she knew them
to be so cordial, that she forgot all the Differences which had formerly been
between us, and promised not to abandon me till she had once more put me into
the hands of the Earl of Englesac.

As for our Portugueze, I knew not what became of him, I suppose he feared some
punishment would be inflicted upon him for his Boldness, when he saw that he
was taken notice of by a Cavalier in appearance, and a Lady with a splendid
Equipage. I diverted the Marchioness from her sorrow, by the relating of this
Adventure; and when Merinvil was come to us, we went together in the way to
Mesnes. The Queen was there at that time, and the King came to visit her with a
Retinue of several Volunteers, persons of Quality; among whom I discovered
Signac immediately. He was ready to dye, being extasied with Joy at the sight
of me; and do you but judge whether 'twas without reason? He loved me still,
and brought with him a Letter from the Earl of Englesac; by the Contents
thereof he was so far from coming to see me, as Signac assured me he did
entreat him to do, that he re-conjured me de novo to marry his Rival.

Complete the happiness of that person whom I love above all the World, (these
were the words of his Letter, speaking to me) and permit me to contribute to
his good Fortune by my assent, since I cannot do it otherwise. I desire this
your compliance as the last proof of your Love.

This poof Earl did greatly comply with me, when he wrote to me in these terms:
But no person is prudent whilst a Lover; I did not construe his Letter in that
sense: I cannot express how much his obstinate refusal to yield to me did
enrage me. The King returned at the head of his Troops; and it is pity that this
ensuing Relation is not penned by a Soldier that understands Military Affairs;
then your Highness would meet with many brave examples of Valor, and deserved
Elogies of our August Monarque. We followed the Queen, who came to be an
Eyewitness of his Conquests; and I gained a Lover who did divertise us
extremely by his way of Courtship. I had hitherto met with none but submissive
Courtiers: and I used frequently to say in the height of my Gayety, that for
the rarity of the thing, I would willingly, once in my Lifetime, meet with a
proud and scornful Lover.

He, that I am now speaking of, was the only man fit to give me this
satisfaction. You would have said that he was going to the Slaughter when he
came into my Chamber: he had nothing but terms of War in his mouth, and would
discover his designs with such an opinionative conceit of his own desert, that
I was ready to die with laughing. He seemed to be displeased once or twice at
my extraordinary Mirth; but I told him 'twas my natural Temper, and he must
take it patiently.

The mean while Signac continued his urgent Solicitations. Doway was the
besieged, and there the Marchioness of Sevil lost her Sainte-Fere, which she
mourned for excessivey, though without reason. Signac did Wonders at this
Siege, and yet could not forbear stealing away from time to time to visit me at
Tournay, where we were, and where he courted me with the greatest tenderness of
Affection. The Marchioness was moved with it; and if I may declare all my
thoughts to you, Madam, I was also very much concerned. Add to this, that I
heard not a word of the Earl of Englesac; he left the Camp as soon as he
caught the news of my Arrival, not having the courage, as I am apt to believe,
to come into my presence; for he always thought he had rendered me a most
unhappy woman, notwithstanding my Oaths that I made to him to the contrary. The
Marchioness did continually round me in the Ear, that the Earl of Englesac did
fly me, and that Signac held me dearer than his Life. In fine, Madam, I know
not what had been the Issue of it, if the Earl had not returned absolutely
transported, to tell me that the Charm had no more power over him.

He resolved to withdraw himself near your Highness; and in his way thither he
met with a Jew, who undertook to cure him, and was as good as his word. I did
never give credit to these Superstitions; but Experience is a great Mistress.

This return of Englesac's Health and person gave a mortal Wound to poor
Signac; I never saw him afterward, and I doubt not but his despair did
precipitate him into those perils and dangers that occasioned his Fall at the
Siege of the Island.

I wept very tenderly for this generous Youth; it was the least I could do in
acknowledgement of the great Love and Respect he had for me. But my Brave or
Gallant did not forbear comforting of me: he proffered himself, according to
his usual custom, to supply alone the place of all my Lovers. I was not in the
humor to listen to his prating, nor to laugh at him as I did at first. I told
him seriously, I desired he would leave me at rest, and perceived that now was
the time come wherein I should make a rude trial of his Gallantry. He did
honor me no longer with his daily Visits; and his stomachfulness freed me from
him, as the end of the Campaigne did from following the Army. And, Madam, I
could not force the Earl of Englesac from it; for he would assist (...) the
Rout of General Marcin before I could engage him to come to Paris. The
Marchioness led us back thither, and I shall bring with me some visible marks
that the Jew had uncharmed him.

This circumstance of my Return had almost killed the Countess of Englesac with
Rage. She did her most dreadful Efforts to persuade her Son that the Child I
went with was not his. She had heard of nay Rencounter with the Portugal
Prince: She told it again to her Son, as Sainte-Fere apprehended it, and
questionless had so published it. I am of opinion that she made this
Free-booter follow me to the Army, where possibly he never had been before in
all his life; and I know not also if they did not make me disannoy some of the
principal persons in Bionac.

I must give this testimony of the Marquess de Birague, that he did not second
the Countess of Englesac in her designs of ruining me, as he did in that of
vacating my Marriage. For he defended my Virtue against all that assaulted it:
but he labored in vain, for Detraction had taken its course.

I know not whether these false Rumors did cool his Affection, or whether the
Marriage only caused this change; but he took disgust, as it is customary; and
since that I was grown less acceptable to him, he was much taken with many
other Women.

The Marchioness of Sevil was the first that took notice of it, and to make me
observe it too. She was a woman always wanted some Intrigues or other to busy
her self withal, and it may be by chance, finding her heart destitute of any of
her own, she employed her self to disentangle the Earl of Englesac.

He gave me not so much as a Visit, but she knew it; he intended no design of
Gallantry, but she was advertised thereof, and of which she gave me an account.
I made a pleasant use of her advice; and if I durst acquaint your Highness with
it, you would find it full of divertisement, but at the same time you would
count me very foolish. No matter, I must leave you to guess what I have not the
Confidence to tell you.

One day I disappointed the Earl of Englesac of his design, more out of sport,
to try whether he would know me again, than for any other reason. He had so
little knowledge of me, that he presented me with a Bodkin studded with
Diamonds, thinking, that I had been his Mistress; and the next day I wore it.
Poor man! he never understood so much before, that he was not the only Husband
of his Wife; for he had promised one of his Friends a share in his good
Fortune: and it was the greatest happiness in the world, that this Gentleman
never found me after where the Earl of Englesac sent him: For he might probably
deceive me, having the Watchword, and it was Nightime. Good God! when I
think of it, how disquieted was my Husband, and what pleasure did his Friend do
him, when by accusing him that he had broke his word with him, he told him that
the Influence was turned quite another way? Do not you stand in admiration to
think of the Frenzy of Husbands that are Jealous of what they so highly
despise?

But this was not all; the Marchioness of Sevil gave me to understand of a
Meeting appointed by the Earl of Englesac at la Place Royale, with a Lady,
whose Merit and course of Life I was not unacquainted with. She was one of the
high Court-Ladies, who, without receiving any thing considerable, ruinate a
Lover in downright Expenses. I was told that one day, she having acquainted
one of her Lovers that she had a fancy for some Flame-colour'd Ribbon, to
appear with at a Masquerade at the Louvre; He was so great a Fop as to send to
London for some to please her. She would not by any means accept of it without
returning him the Money it cost: but it cost the Gentleman twenty Pistols to
procure it; and this was so inconsiderable a thing, that she scorned to take
notice of it.

This Consideration, or, if you please, small Jealousy (for I was not free
from it) made me endeavor to discover this Meeting. I made use of a Stratagem
to detain the Earl of Englesac longer than he intended at the house where he
supped: And coming to the Rendezvouze at the hour appointed, I gave them the
Signal which I knew he was to make, and so the Door was opened to me. The old
man St. Canal, who went along with me by my order, did me good service herein:
The shape of a Man deceived the Chambermaid that was to let in the Earl; and
when St. Canal was got within the Door, he laid fast hold of it, and so I had
the opportunity to enter. But, Madam, you may here find a most pleasant
Circumstance in this Story. The Chambermaid had received no orders from her
Mistress to do what she did. The Earl of Englesac was permitted to have
admittance, and perhaps stood somewhat in her favor; but he was not as yet in
a capacity of obtaining a grant for a Night-meeting. He was introduced without
a Passport; and he had some hope, upon the account of his Merit and Love, when
he should come to be in private with the Lady, that he should not only make
his own, but the Maid's peace also.

This produced two pleasant Effects. The first, That the waiting Gentlewoman
was so possessed with fear, that I came to her Mistriss's Bedside before she
could cry out.

The second, That understanding the Lady's Innocence and my own Error, I found
my Rival so handsome, that we ever after linked our selves in a most perfect
Tie of Friendship. I told her, with a smile, that I forgave the Earl of
Englesac's Infidelity which she was the cause of. She replied with much
Gallantry, that she would not pardon him. What shall I say, Madam? we had the
most rare and agreeable Conversation imaginable.

I was not the only Night-walker at that time; for I found under the Porch of
la Place Royale a man, who without doubt waited upon some good success in his
Amors; and it was, as I gathered by his Discourse, the young Prince de Salmes,
whose Name I had formerly taken upon me, and who had since that, by his vanity,
disturbed the Earl of Englesac and my self. He knew me, as soon as I spoke, not
to be the person he expected; but however I seemed handsome enough to supply
her place. He desired me to take a turn or two with him in the Gallery; to
which I consented. I had had a longing desire, for some time past, to meet with
this Prince, and to upbraid him with what he had said of me. And this Adventure
I ordered to my purpose; and without discovering my self, I demanded the
particulars of him: I did expect at least that he would be at a loss, and to
seek for an Answer. But, Madam, to what are poor Females exposed? my
German-Prince told me such Circumstances of my Intrigue with him, which had
almost wrought upon me to believe them, they carried so much probability along
with them. I was like to have been very loud with him, and had been so, beyond
dispute, if the Duke de Richelieu, who came from the Marshall d'Albret, had
not interrupted us; and his Servants carrying Flambeaux before him, the Prince
de Salmes durst not, as I presume, be seen thus without any Retinue; and I
should not have been much pleased to be found alone with him, so we departed
hastily without Ceremony.

I know not whether what I had told him of my self had made him remember my
Name, or that he only came to my House by mere accident: but he did come some
few days after with the Earl of Englesac to dine with me; they met together at
the Grand Prior's house, and the Earl of Englesac loved dearly to treat his
Friends nobly. He did not know me again to be the Lady which he entertained in
discourse at the Place Royale. I gave him the relation as if I had received it
from other hands, and asked what he thought of it. I put him in a great
perplexity; and he had divertised me a long time, if the Earl of Englesac, who
was almost grown desperate for the trick I had put upon him, had not told the
Prince that I my self was the person I discoursed of. The Prince de Salmes
without doubt remembered some other things he had discoursed to me; I found he
blushed, and I apprehended him by the confusion he was in, to be more bashful
than scrupulous. This had been a sufficient Intrigue with him, if Fortune would
have committed the Management of it to me; but she did not at all advise with
me thereupon. I believe this Prince would endeavor to speak truth, if he
should boast of any Intrigue with me, for the future. From that day his
Discourses were very passionate; and some others afterward, finding me in a
Balcony of Madam de Montausier at St. Germains, where I was placed to see the
Russian Ambassador go by; and he told me in an Amorous way, that I was the most
Beautiful Lady of all the Court. He did amplify his Discourse with many
Circumstances; nay I must needs be very handsome that day; for the Earl of
Englesac took notice, and told me of it also. Furthermore he showed me to the
Marquess de Castelan, Major of the Regiment of Guards, that was walking with
him in the Court; and by this little Transport he added to the number of my
Importunate Suitors, by whom, as it is registered in Heaven, I shall be
oppressed as long as I live.

For, Madam, this Marquess fell in love with me; and to complete my Anxiety,
the Marchioness of Sevil grew Amorous of him.

And thus I came to learn it: The Marchioness's Love was altogether fictitious;
and never had any other Woman so many Intrigues, and so few extricated. She
sent every morning either Verses or Notes to Castelan, though he knew not from
whence these Gallantries were. Castelan did somewhat depend upon the success of
his Amors; but some Ladies had balked him upon that account. He let one of
his Notes fall in my Chamber, and did what in him lay to persuade me, after his
way, that it was a Favor received from some considerable Lady. I knew the Hand
upon sight, and laughed heartily at the vanity of this Cavalier. The
Marchioness came in while I was laughing, and understood the occasion of my
Raillery, though much against my will.

But this was not the greatest mischance that I received by this vanity of his.
The Marchioness had ordered a rich Scarf to be made, and took her time to send
it to Castelan, on a certain day when the King had appointed a general Muster
to be made, for the entertainment of the Prince of Florence, who was then at
the Court Incognito. She employed one of my Servants to carry this Present; and
though they had disguised him as a Courier that came from remote parts,
Castelan knew him again. He unfolds the Scarf, admires, and shows it to all
that had a mind to see it: There were persons there who were so malicious as
to say, that he made himself that Present. He endeavored to prove the
contrary, and could not tell how to do it well, but by naming me; I was amazed
to find my self in Veau-de-ville with Castelan. I cannot tell you, Madam, how
many troubles this whimsie brought upon me. Two or three Ladies, who deserved
to bear a part herein more than my self, thinking that I was their Rivaless,
did grossly abuse me. This came to the Ears of the Earl of Englesac, and he was
apt to believe them: his Language was sharp to me; and if the Lady of la Place
Royale had not made it her business to appease him, I had been in danger to
lose him for ever.

But this was not all, he had a private grudge within himself, because that I
was so much in favor with the person he loved. Perhaps he thought that our
friendship would obstruct the prosecution of his Affairs, and I saw that it was
time for me to go and entreat that Lady to be more tractable, to make the Earl
of Englesac in a better humor.

The Marchioness of Sevil helped to complete my Vexation: She thought at that
time to have done me a piece of Service, in divulging to the world that 'twas
she that sent the Scarf to Castelan. He would not believe it, because he
thought not the Lady, as I believe, young enough to do him any kindness by her
Present. She made me bear the burden of that Contempt. We wrangled again
afresh; and the Earl of Englesac, who observing the maxim of distracted
Husbands, fell out about every thing, wished me ill, because the Marchioness
complained of me.

This Misfortune was attended by another far more grievous, and the
Consequences thereof have been more tedious. The Prince de Salmes continued his
Amors to me, and was wearied to find no other effect of his Love, but a
freedom of visiting me. He unbosom'd himself of this perplexity to I know not
what Woman, whose Name I have forgot; and if I should remember it, I know not
whether I may be so bold as to acquaint your Highness therewith. This Woman
droll'd with him because he had made no farther progress; and assured him that
she knew a shorter way for him to the Conquest of my Heart. I know not withal,
whether she did not tell him that it was no untrod-Path, and that by his
Conduct some Lovers had already followed him. The German Prince believed her,
and promised her vast sums of Money, if she could seduce me. She pretended to
endeavor it very earnestly; and moving me sometimes to Cruelty, and sometimes
to Condescension, she made me, in fine, resolve to subscribe to whatever the
Prince de Salmes could desire. I had engaged my word, and upon my Lady's
request, I know not how, I was discharged of that Obligation. Do you not
startle, Madam, at this piece of Impudence, or at least to hear it from the
Mouth of the person to whom this happened? Can you believe it to be probable?

I know not what course they took to deceive the Prince de Salmes, whether the
darkness only contributed thereunto, or that they applied themselves to
Magique; but he was so neatly cheated by a Bracelet which he thought he had
bestowed upon me, that he was also persuaded he had the entire fruition of his
Desires. This Mistake put him upon the spur to be familiar with me; he did make
use of his Privilege; and the first day he found me alone, he lost himself, in
my opinion, by his private Caresses. I leave it to your Highness to think with
your self how much I was surprised herewith; I who had always found him the
most respective man in the world, and had done nothing to divert him from it.

I asked him if he had dined in the City, and thought I had been favorable in
accusing him only of taking a Cup too much. He broke out into a great
laughter; but observe what reason he had for it: I had at that time on my Wrist
the same Bracelet which he thought he had given me: The person that received it
had more need of Money than Precious Stones: She gave it to a Woman-Huckster,
who by chance brought it to me, and proffered it me at so low a rate, that I
could not refuse the Purchase. Do but frame to your self in your mind, Madam,
the Personages that we represented: the more the Prince de Salmes laughed, the
more I was offended: He looked upon my Anger as counterfeit; hard words passed
between us: and without allowing him time to explain himself better, I forbad
him my house.

You may judge, that a happy Lover who sees himself thus used, would think he
was not obliged to be discreet. The Prince de Salmes published the Adventure as
he thought convenient; and by this means it came to the Ears of the Earl of
Englesac: I cannot describe to you, Madam, his great Commotion. He reproached
me very outrageously, and without lending an Ear to any Justification, he made
a vow never to set eye on me more, and retired to his Mother's. I ran about to
seek the Prince de Salmes, and said all that a just Resentment could move one
to: He knew not what to answer; but at last gave me an account of the false
Game they had played with us. I undeceived him, and doubted not but the
Traytress that had put this vile trick upon me, would her self confess the
truth hereof: for the Prince de Salmes divulged it with all the signs of true
remorse for the Mischiefs he had brought upon me. Yet his Discourse and
Penitence was unprofitable: the Earl of Englesac gave no credit to them but
contrarily, fancied with himself, that had purchased the Attestation of the
Prince de Salmes by the grant of some new Favors and being stirred up daily
more and more against me, he set his Hand to the rupture o^ the Marriage.

Then they took up the Cause again de novo the Countess of Englesac, who
depended upon the disgust of her Son, letting the business lie dormant for some
time, till there was a better opportunity to prosecute it. The Ear^ of Englesac
was not of Age when I was espoused by him; besides, this Marriage was no^ made
with all the Forms and Circumstances requisite thereunto. Is not here a fine
Return to so violent a Passion? and are not Women foolish to love in this
manner?

I used my utmost endeavor to come to the sight of the Farl of Englesac, and
to make the last Essay whether my power over him were so great as formerly: but
he shunned me carefully, and that cruelty made me despair.

I walked one day musing, with great Anxiety of mind, in the Garden of
Luxemburg* A person of Quality, whose Name I will conceal, because his
Repentance has purchased that respect since, came and sat down on the Bank
where I was reposed.

We did discourse indifferently on the Beauty of young Madam Stoup, and Madam
de la Mailleraye, formerly Ladies of Honor to Ma^am the Princess of Carignan,
who were walk^ng in the same Ally with us. The man I ^^eak of liked my
Conversation, and told me after we had had some discourses concerning the
various Charms of brown and fair Complexions, that the cause first would be
best managed by my Discourse.

I was out of humor to make a return to his Gallantry, but I found that this
man did relate to the Law; and in that condition I was then, I had need of the
assistance of all persons. We had an entertainment long and Ingenious enough.
He begged the freedom of visiting me, and I granted it, for the very sam^
reason that obliged me to enter into discour^ with him.

I know not whether my free and jovia^ way of behavior gave him such hopes as
never thought of; or whether 'twas his custom rashly to lay hold of them; but
he had not often repeated his Visits e're he gave me to understand his fatal
Intentions.

I made him so sensible of my Displeasure, that there was no way for him but to
renounce his Courtship. Yet this wrought not upon him, and brought his
Enterprise to that height as to leave a Purse of Gold upon my Carpet. I sent it
to him again, and took such strict order with my Attendants, that let him come
when he would, he should never see me more.

He was transported with anger at this: divulged the circumstances and accident
of the Purse, without so much as mentioning the Restitution. This calumny drew
upon me two or three other vexatious Propositions, which Madam d'Englesac knew,
and she failed not to extract malicious Consequences from them. But let her
pass; I was accustomed to her Injustice: Her Son began to believe her, and was
as much bent upon my ruin as his Mother.

Then the Suit recommenced with a matchless heat; the Lady d'Englesac took up
again the Informations that she had formerly exhibited against me, and
pretended to prove thereby, that the Child I had, but since dead, was not the
Earl of Englesac's.

The Marquess de Birague did greatly oppose this Article: He would willingly
have had me unmarried; for his Wife was dead, and he still had an intention to
espouse me; but he would have Madam d'Englesac to lay her foundation upon the
want of due form in proceedings at Law, and not upon Immoralities. This
perseverance of his to maintain my Reputation, did touch me somewhat nearly;
and though his Generosity was Interessed, yet we did reconcile our selves. The
Marchioness of Sevil came also to afford me her assistance; she was easily
offended, but of an admirable temper naturally, and proposed very comfortable
things to me, if it were my misfortune to be overthrown at Law.

But I relished nothing of all this; The Slights of the Earl of Englesac, which
were visible in his Countenance, and not in his Flight only, as usually, did
cast me into Despair.

Why do you go to Law with me? said I to him one day before one of our Judges
where we met together. Have you not always been the Master of my Destiny?
Heretofore 'twas your desire that I should spend my days in cohabitating with
you; you had my consent, and not without a sufficient proof, whether this
desire were sincere or otherwise: but now you will dissolve this Union: Well,
well! I agree to it; I only desired your Heart, and since I have no share in
it now, all the rest signifies nothing to me. But be pleased to consider this
difference with my Love. Answer me to this particular: I demand of thee the
Liberty which the Bonds of Matrimony have deprived me of. Return it me, and I
will receive it at thy hands as a token of thy Passion. Ungrateful man! upon
this consideration I will sign whatever thou can desire. Come, make use of
thy Authority, and nothing shall be impossible; but borrow not that of Justice:
for rather than yield thee up to any other person but thy self, I will contend
as long as I live.

The Earl of Englesac returned no other Answer to this Discourse but disdainful
looks; and thinking to do me a kindness by not reproaching me with my
Unfaithfulness, as he calls it, he did it more cruelly by his Silence, than the
most contumelious Language.

I know not whether the Lady d'Englesac feared that I should stir up pity in
the Judges or no; for, Madam, my Discourse moved them with a true Compassion;
or whether she had only a mind to leave Paris: but she instigated one of the
Heirs of Monsieur de Moliere deceased, with whom there was as yet some
Controversy about the Money of Monsieur de Candale, who espoused her Quarrel,
and who under the pretext of an Employment that required his presence at
Toulouse, petitioned that he might return to that Parliament.

I opposed this design very-strenuously, and knew that Monsieur the President
of -- and many other Presidents or Advocates in the Parliament of Toulouse,
were the Relations of Madam d'Englesac, and made withal so lively a
representation of the Injury she intended me, being I could not continue at
Paris, from whence by her Law-quirks she had found means to drive me: I
obtained an Evocation, or Habeas Corpus, to remove my Cause from the Parliament
(or Court of Judicature) at Grenoble.

My Lover that left the Purse behind him, was very serviceable to me in this
Rencountre; he had a true regret for what was passed, and endeavored a
reparation to the utmost of his ability: nay, I am apt to believe, that this
Repentance contributed to his submissive Retreat a little after; for he was
ever disconsolate for blasting my Reputation.

He wrote Letters of Recommendation (which he gave me) to Monsieur de la
Berchere chief President of Grenoble, and some other of his Friends: But before
we come to this City, I must, with your leave, detain your Highness a little
while at Bourbon, where I made some small stay; for my internal grief had
brought me into such a languishing condition, that I judged it convenient to
make use of this Remedy.

That year the Company was extraordinary; Madam de Fontevrauld, the worthy
Daughter of Henry the Great, Monsieur the Marshall de la Ferte, Monsieur and
his Lady de Sully, Madam de Guitault, the Lady Marchioness de la Trousse, and
many other persons both French and Strangers that came to the Bath and to drink
the Waters: Only one Swede seemed to me to come thither for Diversion more
than Necessity.

He was called Wakmester, a Swedish Title, which went for his proper Name among
us. He spoke the French indifferently, and had taken his Lodgings at the same
House I made choice of. We soon associated together; and discovered our
Sentiments mutually concerning the distempered persons at Bourbon, and devoted
our selves to innocent Raillery, without any manner of detraction.

I guessed that my Company was acceptable to the Stranger; nor was I alone of
that opinion, as your Highness shall soon understand.

I was coming back one day from the Priory of St. George near Bourbon, where I
made one of the number that went to hear an excellent Voice; and in the descent
of a Valley, which bounded upon the Street near the Baths, a Page of
Wakmester's came to throw himself at my Feet; but I betook my self to my heels:
for this Youth, though very handsome, did seem to me at that time to have an
ill-boding look; and Madam de la Trousse, who was then with me, did with much
Entreaty prevail with me, at the importunity of the Page, to give him a hearing.

I never heard any thing so persuasive as the discourse of this Page: it was a
German-Gentlewoman of Quality that Wakmester had deluded, who hid her self
under this disguise; and believing that I was become her Rivaless, did conjure
me, with a thousand Sighs, to kill her, or permit her to enjoy her Lover.

I did extremely pity the misfortune of this Girl, and reproved Wakmester for
it very severely; because that he first snatched her from the Arms of her
Parents, and then dealt ingratefully with her. He yielded to my Remonstrances,
and did sincerely reconcile himself to his Mistress. O how I envied their
Happiness! and how infinitely should I have been obliged to any person that
should have done me the like civil office with the Earl of Englesac.

From that time this Page of Wakmester and I became inseparable, and Wakmester
from her. This produced two pleasant Effects. A Lady of Provence, whose Name I
don't remember, fell in Love with the Page, believing him to be what he seemed:
And an Earl of Piemont, whose Name may be as well concealed, became my
Inamorato. He looked upon Wakmester as his Rival: and the Page's Sweetheart
believed me her Rivaless. The Piemontoise endeavored to win the Page to be as
a Spy, and watch all our Actions: and the Provensal-Lady strove to gain the
Heart of Wakmester, to make him ostruct the Intrigue of which she suspected me
the Authoress.

He did but smile at the discourse of this foolish Woman; but the hot pursuit
of the Page by the Piemontoise did displease him. They quarrelled, and fought;
and they honored me so far, as to make Proclamation that it was for my sake.

This false report made me hate Bourbon: I took my leave of the Ladies de
Guitault, de la Trousse, and some other considerable persons, with whom I had
contracted friendship, and so departed, followed only by Merinvil for
Grenoble, where my Suit at Law required my attendance, and there I found I was
out-stript by the news of the Duel upon my account.

Madam d'Englesac made use thereof, according to her custom, and her Son from
hence drew new matter to increase his ill will toward me. We met one another
every where at la Grenette, la Saulsave, at our entrance into the Court; for
there is a greater Opportunity of meeting at Grenoble, than at Paris. The Earl
of Englesac carried himself as strangely as if he had never seen my Face. I
thought I should immediately die with grief to find such a change in him, and
I courted him with Language that might have moved a Tiger, if he had understood
it. But at last I left off dallying any longer with so stupid a person, and
pretended, when it came to my turn, to be absolutely disengaged of my Passion
for him. This dissimulation mollified him; we associated our selves with some
honest persons, who began to understand one another, and discoursed of our
common affairs as of that of a third person. Honor obliged me to maintain my
Marriage; and I told him (though for all that it was not true) that he had done
me a kindness in endeavoring to null the Marriage; that his temper and mine
were incompatible; and that persons in their wits ought to separate themselves
after this manner, when they grow weary of one another.

You would have laughed extremely, Madam, if you had been a Witness of our
Entertainment. I did one day betray my self, and the Earl of Englesac advised
me like a person altogether disinteressed, that to avoid a Relapse in Love, I
should bestow my heart on some other person; that he knew I could not easily
efface his Idea out of my mind without the help of another; and did
ingenuously declare who of my Acquaintance he looked upon as the most probable
persons to be beloved by me. This Conversation had somewhat in it very
singular: I argued with the Earl of Englesac about those persons he proposed to
me; the one seemed too Lukewarm, the other too Fiery; the one had not the way
of pleasing me, and I was afraid of the Inconstancy of some others. I was in
hope hereby to make him apprehend, that he was the only man did suit with my
Temper; but he would not understand me, or else was deaf to my discourse.

I took upon me again my counterfeit Indifference, and gave him advice for
advice, though like an enraged Woman. He had been surprised with two or three
Passions that I was ashamed of, if these kind of Engagements deserve the name
of Passion. I told him he must find me out more Illustrious Rivalesses, and he
proposed some: To which I replied, Fix upon Madam -- she is beautiful enough to
please you, a witty Woman; and if she would engage her self in Love, I fancy it
would be to excess. And this is such a Mistress as you desire.

The Earl of Englesac accepted this advice: The Lady I mentioned was of
Grenoble: he made it his business to court her; and to the end that my
disdainfulness might not continue, the Bishop of Valence's Nephew, who came to
Grenoble to dispatch some business, did undertake to make me blot the Earl of
Englesac quite out of my remembrance: He had then done me a very considerable
kindness, if he could have effected it; and I consented willingly that he
should attempt it. I protest, that the discourse of this Youth, who was
otherwise a very deserving person, did prove a relaxation to my grief and
trouble. For, Madam, notwithstanding the Enterviews of the Earl of Englesac and
my self, our Suit at Law did not cease; and sometimes, when we parted from one
another civilly, we went to be informed what was done in our business. I was
told that the Abbot de Montreuil, who possibly had heard of my affairs by my
Lover of Dauphine, made fine stories of our being thus at Law: And the fair
Lady de la Mothe was often divertis'd at Valence with the Comedy that I acted
at Grenoble.

She began also to afford me some Diversion: I had banished Love far enough
from me; and there is no Heart so constant, but that an obstinate contempt may
force it to declare its Passion. And to conceal nothing from your Highness, the
Earl of Englesac was very indifferent to me.

I know not whether he perceived it, and according to the ordinary Maxims of
men, whether he was sensible of my loss, when he believed it to be certain: But
he interrupted me when he found me talking with the Nephew of the Bishop of
Valence.

These little rudenesses did divertise me sufficiently: The Cavalier, upon
whose account they were, observed them; and telling me with great freedom, that
he was resolved to serve me at his own peril, he omitted nothing that might
make the Earl of Englesac jealous.

And he proceeded successfully; for one day the Earl of Englesac asked me, with
a dejected Countenance, if I had made choice of this person for my Lover. To
which I returned, I know not, he is deserving, and does not displease me: but I
am resolved for the future to use my Lover as I do my Domestics; that is, to
change them often, till I find one that pleases me. Then, said the Earl of
Englesac, you design to turn a waggish Gossip? Why not, replied I, it is the
best way of loving for Ladies. Ha! Sylvia, pursued the Earl, either you are
very much altered, or you will never love at this rate.

The word Sylvia I looked upon as a good Omen, and had hopes to be revenged of
him for his slighting of me: For, Madam, I durst have sworn at that very
instant, that if the Earl of Englesac had renewed his Affection, I had rendered
him the most unfortunate Man that ever was in love. I had in my mind already
several Idea's of Cruelty; yet by this motive I believed that I had still a
desire to please him; but, Good God! how little do we know our selves?

One day I was in the Garden of Monsieur the Duke de Lesdiguieres Governor of
Dauphine, where there was a great concourse of people; for all persons of
Quality are welcome to that Promenade, and the Earl of Englesac was present
also. I shall think of that day as long as I live: I was as gay then as I used
to be before my Misfortunes; I laughed, was frolickish, and talked very
merrily. The Earl of Englesac accosted me, and hit me in the Teeth with my
Pleasantness, as a thing misbecoming a person that was deeply in trouble and
Law.

To whom I replied, Why should not I be jocular? my Heart is no longer Captive.
Is it not natural for all persons to rejoice when they regain their Liberty
after a tedious Vassalage? You are then very free, my Sylvia, replied the Earl
of Englesac, taking me very close by the Hand. I had almost said Yes, and some
other disdainful words; but as ill Fortune would have it, I cast my Eyes upon
the Earl, and saw so much Love appear in his looks, that I could not but be
somewhat sensible of it. I was troubled, and made him no other answer than
this, that I was as he would have me to be.

The persons that were with us were civil, and withdrew themselves when they
saw us in discourse together. Ah! said the Earl of Englesac, if I should desire
you to be otherwise, would you be what I desire you? I made no answer but with
Tears: The Earl of Englesac was also ready to weep; and had it not been for
that troublesome Lady Madam d' Englesac, who, with the Marchioness de Fargue
and some other Ladies came to walk in that Garden, we had probably linked our
selves again for ever.

The Earl of Englesac left me when he saw this company approach. He seemed
ashamed to be found with me alone, nor was it without reason; for after he had
done what he did to ruinate me, with what brow could he think to be friends
with me by an Accommodation, who had so entangled himself upon such slight
occasions?

I think this Reflection made him quit Grenoble; for he departed without taking
leave of any body; and only by one Letter he assured me of his Repentance, and
the return of his Passion.

Ah! Madam, what a Letter did he write? What expressions of Love did the
Contents discover? And that person must have been very hard-hearted that could
peruse it without relenting.

He acquainted me therein that he wrote one to his Mother of the same Import,
to conjure her to let me live undisturbed. I had a desire to see if the
Countess was as much moved with her Letter as I was with mine, and I ran to her
all in Tears.

She was then with Monsieur de -- a Relation of hers, and her very good friend;
a very virtuous man, who is at present retired into the Chartreuse, and who,
since our arrival at Grenoble, did use his Efforts in order to an
Accommodation. The Countess had in her hands at that time the Letter he sent
her. Ah! cruel Woman, said she as soon as she spied me, Is it possible that you
should again deprive me of my Son? you have ruined him in his Estate,
Reputation, and, Mind; your Flattery, Infidelity, or the shame of being made
the sport of the one and the other, has ravished him four times from my Bosom.
Unhappy Woman, what have I done to you? Is this the recompense I deserve for
stealing you from the ill resentments of Madam de Moliere, and receiving you
into my own house with so much tenderness?

I gave no other answer to her Reproaches, but my Tears: nay, what could I
reply? it was the Earl of Englesac's Mother that said it. At last I answered,
Say, and do what you will against me, you cannot do me so much hurt as you have
done me good by bringing the Earl of Englesac into the world. I shall never
forget what I owe you; and though you should deprive me of Life with your own
hands, you shall never blot that good deed out of my memory.

These words pierced the Countess so home, that the effect they produced was a
miracle. Her Countenance grew serene, Compassion visibly supplied the seat of
Fury. The Pious Witness of our Enterview seconded this her Inclination to pity
with his discourse, and I never heard any one speak with so much charity and
such powerful Arguments as this devout person. I understand since that the Earl
of Englesac had entreated him to do what he did before his departure. What
shall I say, Madam? I went away persuaded that our differences were at an end.

And to that purpose, some days after we mutually signed an Agreement, whereby
the Countess of Englesac desisted from all farther prosecution. She excused her
self to me, I begged her pardon; and our whole thoughts were taken up with
nothing but how we should recall the Earl of Englesac.

But alas! there lay the difficulty: he met, going from Grenoble, with a person
of Quality belonging to the Court of Savoy, whom he formerly knew at Thurin,
and was taking a voyage to Candia; this person persuaded the Earl of Englesac
to go along with him, and we knew not of the design till they were embarked.

I was ready to dye with grief when I heard this news; the Countess of Englesac
was also very much concerned; and had it not been for the Remonstrances of the
person I mentioned before, who did the best he could to comfort us, for my own
part I know not what I should have done. I only am certain, that the least of
my Resolutions was to embarque at Thoulon, and follow my Husband to Candia. But
our common Friend did appease these Commotions, and prevailed with Madam
d'Englesac to take me with her to Languedoc.

'Twas a very strange thing to see the very person, who was heretofore so bent
upon my Destruction, to lead me by the hand to all the Relations of the Earl of
Englesac, desiring them to esteem me as the Wife of her Son, and to boast of my
Constancy and Virtue before them, of which indeed she had received very good
testimony.

For the Marquess de Birague (who still continued his intention to marry me,
whom Madam de Seville did fortify by many repeated promises) had endeavored
to recover my Reputation. He cleared all the Adventures which the world
reported of me, and had caused my Innocence in the management thereof to be
published. Certainly he did not think that my Reconciliation with the Countess
of Englesac was the fruit of his great care and pains; if he had, I believe he
would have forborne to give himself that trouble till he had found I had been
overthrown in Law: but no matter, however I am very much obliged to him.

This Justification, together with the care I took to please the Lady
d'Englesac, did by little and little create in her that estimation that she had
of me formerly: And I presume I had received great proofs thereof in time, if
Death had not surprised her. But it should seem that this poor Woman had
nothing to do in this world after the performance of this piece of Justice; for
she died in consummating of it.

I mourned for her sincerely; so much had the friendship she began to testify
unto me erased the remembrance of those evils she had occasioned me out of my
mind; and I had reason to lament her loss much more in the consequence of it;
for I found my self implunged into new Perplexities, which I might probably
have escaped if she had lived.

First, the People that could pretend any right to the succession of the Earl
of Englesac, seeing that he was engaged in a dangerous War, would not stand to
the Agreement that the Countess had signed. They said she was near her end when
she committed that piece of folly, and that her spirits declined. They set up a
Guardian to secure the Earl of Englesac's Estate till his return; and when I
would oppose that Proceeding, as Wife to the absent Earl, they went to Law
afresh, with as much heat as the Lady d'Englesac had prosecuted formerly. They
had as much reason as she for it, I confess, for they never sued in my
Husband's, but in his Mothers Name; and provided that she had never desisted,
the Earl of Englesac's Guardian might continue it after the death of the
Countess.

To this vexation a second was added; I lived under the Tuition and Conduct of
an old Aunt of the Countess of Englesac's, which was the most Versatile and
Phantastique woman that ever I met with. One knew not how to satisfy her: that
which pleased her to day, would displease her to morrow; and because she had
been beautiful, and spared by detraction, she thought all Mankind was subject
to her censure.

I left Languedoc at the death of Madam d'Englesac, and was with this Woman at
her house near Marseilles. The same Castelan, who had formerly done me some
kindness in Paris, as I have informed your Highness, and thought to do me no
less here in Provence, came with a resolution to ship himself for Candia; and
hearing I was in that Country, came to see me.

He said nothing to me but what Severity it self would approve of, he being a
person that did not love to be imposed upon, and who was naturally a great
Courtier: I admired at his respectful carriage to my old Aunt.

But, Madam, if he had preached Repentance to me, or the Austerest Virtue, this
Woman would always pick out somewhat in his Discourse to find fault with. Why,
said she, does he come to visit you? Why should married women entertain such
Visitants? What an Age do we live in? what Manners and Customs have we? In my
time they lived not at this rate. And I saw in fine, it was come to this, that
Castelan must be thrust out of doors by the shoulders.

Judge you, Madam, what reason she had for it: I did load him with expressions
of my tenderness and love to the Earl of Englesac; and conjured him, with Tears
in my Eyes, to send him back to me, or to prevail with him that I might come to
him. Castelan smiled, when I gave him this Commission, and asked me whether I
had forgot that he once courted me, and that he could do so still. I also, in
my turn, could not forbear smiling at this Remarque; and we had discoursed very
pleasantly upon this subject, if the old Woman's murmuring had not obliged me
to take leave of him.

This visit was not the only thing that the Earl of Englesac's Aunt thought
she had cause to be discontented at. My Lover at Grenoble was not pleased with
me, he had been instrumental in making the Earl of Englesac jealous. This
Jealousy was advantageous to me, and I departed from Grenoble without
vouchsafing to return him thanks. He made his complaint to me thereof in
writing, which was rather an ingenious Missive. than an Amorous Letter.

But our old Woman was jealous of every thing. This Letter came unluckily to
her hands; and whatever I did offer in my excuse, she made so many tedious
Remonstrances, and ill-grounded Reproofs, that I could not endure them any
longer. I departed, upon pretense of my business still depending in the Court
at Grenoble, which called me away to that City.

The old Woman would never forgive me for my deserting her; and, Madam, she was
such a person as her Character here sets her forth to be: she was weary of her
life, because she could not apprehend why I complained of her Humor. Her Anger
was very prejudicial to me, as I am going to tell your Highness.

At Grenoble I met with the Nephew of the Bishop of Valence. The business that
brought him thither was over, but he was detained by some other new Affairs. He
was become Amorous, not with that amusing Love he had for me heretofore, but a
most solid and violent Passion.

He had a high esteem for me, though he was no longer my Lover; and I ever
observed it. We contracted Friendship, and I became his She-confident: I might
do this without scruple, because his Address was lawful. I readily employed my
Wit and Dexterity to render him prosperous in his Recherches. But, Madam, who
had we to deal with, think you? The Female that was in Love with my new Friend
had a passionate affection for the Marquess de -- though she could not marry
him, by reason of their different Quality; and one who by a principle of
Honesty, rarely in a man of the age of twenty four, as he was then no more, did
his utmost endeavor to prevent the increase of her Passion.

He shunned both her Sight and Society; and when common Civility obliged him to
be with her alone, he was so grave in his discourse, that he could not be too
much commended for it. We did not as yet understand them; besides, we did
believe on the contrary, that the young Marquess did make use of his
opportunity. All the Family of this young Gentlewoman was alarmed hereat; and I
was entreated by one of her Relations, who was my friend, to represent unto her
the injury that she did her self.

I was never more eloquent; for I had more Irons in the fire than one. I served
the Relation that employed me, and I promoted the Affairs of the Bishop of
Valence's Nephew. I thought I could have accomplished my desires; the
Gentlewoman seemed to yield to my discourse, and desired to do the same to the
Marquess de --. I undertook this task voluntarily, being altogether ignorant,
as I said before, that the Marquess wanted any Remonstrances; but I desired a
Letter of Credence, that is, a little Note to testify that what I said was not
of my own head. But, Madam, can you imagine what Letter I carried? 'twas a
fresh Protestation of tenderness of Affection, and a desire withal that he
would credit no report to the contrary.

I my self dictated the Letter which I intended to carry; I saw it written and
folded up; but the Gentlewoman had another in her pocket ready, which she had
prepared to send the next opportunity: She put the change upon me; and whilst I
was lighting a Wax-candle, and that she seemed to look for some silk to bind
it up, she put the cheat upon me so dexterously, that I carried a Love-letter,
thinking it had been a Letter of License.

Do you not, Madam, stand in admiration to think what Love is capable of? The
person I speak of was but eighteen; she had never been at Court, where they are
usually more close and cunning in the manage of their Gallantries than in the
Country. I am no Fool, and since it has so pleased my Destiny, I have but too
much experience. In the mean time I was the person that played the cheat for
the young Gentlewoman of Dauphine.

The Marquess de -- began to laugh when I read this Letter, and that he
apprehended by my discourse, it was so contrary to my commission.

Now this little story is not only recited by the by for your divertisement,
but it has some relation to mine, as your Highness shall understand. The
Gentlewoman whom I reproached severely with this Artifice, for I suspected it
immediately; and the Marquess, who is a very discreet and prudent person, could
not but avow it. This Gentlewoman, I say, being ashamed to find her Stratagem
discovered, and offended, as I am apt to believe, that it had such ill success,
reported it all over Grenoble that I was in love with the Marquess; and that
out of Jealousy I did take upon me to advise her.

This Fancy was carried from Dauphine to Provence, where the old Aunt did
still reside, and by her translated to Languedoc. They that expected to gain by
my fall, gave way to this Scandal, and made it come to the ears of the Earl of
Englesac.

One would have thought he should by this time have been cured of his facility
of receiving impressions of Jealousy; but natural defects are seldom
corrected. He added the news of my Intrigue with the Marquess de -- to the
story that his Aunt had sent him: for she did not pass by this Revenge. He was
grieved, and sought my injury more than ever: and being instigated by the same
Jealousy which had been so fatal to us both, he sent a Procuration or Letter
of Attorney to his Relations to vacate my Marriage by Proxy. What a Wound was
this to a poor Innocent, who had flattered her self with this opinion, that she
had wearied all her Detractors; and knowing in her Conscience that she had not
merited it, only waited for the return of the Earl of Englesac to enjoy that
Repose which she had purchased with so many Sufferings.

I was so overwhelmed with Grief and Anger, that I had almost lost my Reason.
There were several Ships that set sail from Thoulon daily, to carry Recruits to
the French in Candia: I resolved to go aboard of one of them, and without
consideration of the danger whereunto I exposed my self, had gone in person to
upbraid the Earl of Englesac with his Levity, but that I was obstructed by new
Adventures.

I will relate them to your Highness in their order, and you will find them as
singular as those I have recited already.

But Madam, I must afford you some respit, you cannot but be tired out with so
much Reading, as I am also with Writing. I desire your Highness would please to
give me leave to consider a while upon the remainder of my Relation, and
conjure you to look upon my obedience to your Command as no small matter in
this Declaration of my follies: And as it is your Highness only, of all
persons in the world, that could draw this Confession from my own mouth, so
there is no person to whom I am with so much Zeal and Respect,

The most humble and most submissive Servant, H. S. D. M.

THE ADVENTURES AND MEMOIRES OF Henrietta Sylvia Moliere. PART the V.
YOu must needs look upon me as a very indiscreet person in the Fourth Part of
this my Relation; and I was so indeed: For I did not only desire to go to
Candia, as I have avowed it to your Highness; but when I understood by some
persons returned from thence, that the Earl of Englesac was dead, I bewailed
his loss as if he had been the most faithful of men.

I had quite forgot all his Ingratitude, and ruminated only on our former
Love; and I leave it to your consideration, Madam, whether I had reason to
imprint him so firmly in my remembrance; for he had in that Country been guilty
of Infidelity several times.

I will acquaint your Highness with it in time; but I must first give an
account how my business was carried on at Grenoble.

The Heirs of the Earl of Englesac did persecute me cruelly. I had carried away
a great deal of the Goods he left them, and they could not agree to put it up
without a contest at Law. They sued me without intermission; they drained both
my Purse and Patience, and persisted in the ill humor of destroying my
Reputation and Fortune, who never so heavily oppressed me with the one hand,
but that she supported me with the other, and found me out to my happiness a
Protector. I will not tell your Highness his Name, because you do not know him;
but he was a good man, of great interest in the Court of Judicature; and I may
boldly say, that he is the only man that I ever knew espouse a handsome Woman's
interest, without any other motive but that of Charity. I had hopes, through
his means, to overcome my Enemies; but that hope soon vanished, and I will tell
you what destroyed it.

The Chevalier de Montchevreuil came to Grenoble, in order to the dispatch of
business. I was acquainted with him at Paris, where we were indifferent good
friends; and since he knew I was at Grenoble, he failed not to visit me. He did
of his own accord concern himself with me; and though he was more in Love with
Gaming than Women, he would for his diversion sometimes tell me, in a toyish
humor, that I became my Widows habit very well.

This Amusement was never intended as a piece of Gallantry. I told him one day
smiling, when he had spent a whole Afternoon with me, that he was indebted to
me for all the money that he had not lost; and he also answered me with a
smile, that he had then made a double gain, and expected a reward for hindering
me, during all that time, from thinking upon the Earl of Englesac. I took upon
me a severe Countenance, and prohibited him with much seriousness, not to
intermingle his discourse with my Husband. He laughed at my scrupulousness, and
told me I was unwise to keep such Measures with so inconstant a Husband. He
added farther, You are one of my Friends, I will cure you of this weakness, and
endeavor to obtain your Love, if it be but to drive the thoughts of that
Ingrate out of your mind.

Consider, Madam, whether this might be called an Engagement; we made no Secret
of it; and we were the first that did droll in Company after our own way of
Entertainment. But when malicious Spirits go about to poison Discourse, they
make every thing a Crime.

Your Highness may remember that I had stolen away the Heart of the Marquess
de -- from a Gentlewoman of Grenoble: she ever owed me ill will after that
Larceny; and knowing that my Protector was a very virtuous man, she understood
so well how to work upon him, that he was persuaded the Visits of the Chevalier
de Montchevreuil were more culpable than they appeared to be, insomuch that he
would not concern himself with my business any longer.

I know not how so wise a man was so easily seduced; nor how those innocent
Toys which passed between the Chevalier and I, could have so bad a Construction
put upon them: but in fine, they did interpret them very prejudicially, and
said such things of us both, as put me to the blush when I think of them. The
persons of Quality on whom he depended, blamed him for his Gaming; and in truth
he was never cut out for a Gamester, he was ever so unfortunate: But he could
not leave it off; nay he would shut himself up with Gamesters, that he might
play all night long without interruption. He honored me with his Watches as if
he were in my company; and they persuaded the good man that I spoke of, that
whenever they searched for Montchevreuil and could not find him, he was then
Caressing of me.

My Adversaries buoyed up this false rumor by their Authority and Testimony;
and I know not whether they did not likewise make use of some shift to
countenance it; for the talk was concerning a man muffled up in a great
Champaigne-cloak, that went out of my house at break of day. They invented
several other strange circumstances besides, which had as little of truth in
them. What shall I say, Madam? my Protector was ashamed that he ever had born
that Name; and write what I could in my own Justification, (for he would not
permit me to see him) he continued inexorable.

His change made so great an alteration in my Affairs, that I concluded I
should lose my Cause; and therefore took a resolution to go and cast my self at
the King's Feet, to Petition him that I might sue in another Court, or have
other Commissioners deputed to try my Cause. I departed from Grenoble upon this
design; and however, I gained this advantage by my Misfortunes, that all men
were insupportable to me. One of my greatest griefs in going to Paris was, in
thinking that I must be obliged to lend an ear to some of them; for I guessed
very right, that when a Woman is somewhat handsome, and that she undertakes
Solicitation at Court, she is frequently exposed to be caressed by Courtiers.
This reflection more than once persuaded me to steer my old course. I know not
what I should have done without the Remonstrances of Merinvil; but she asked me
whether I would live without Estate and Name in the World; and when I was not
sufficiently sensible of this consideration, she grew angry, told me that I had
lost my sense, and that she could wish I had ten Lovers, provided that one of
them would free me from trouble.

She had not any long time to discourse me with these kind of Follies; for I
learned by my arrival at Lions, that the King was upon his departure for the
Isle, where he was resolved to pass away two months time and better.

This delay afflicted me very much; I did not question but my departure from
Grenoble would have lost me those few Friends that I had left; and, seeing my
self deprived of the ready help which I expected, I repented my self that I had
taken such ill Measures. But Patience was the only remedy: What could I do?
The King would not hear any business till his return; and if I could possibly
move him with Compassion, how should I overtake him that makes such long
Journeys, and was 100 Leagues before me?

Well, I comforted my self as well as I could, and resolved to go to Lions all
the time that the King would be in Flanders. I thought that it would be more
easy for me to live there a solitary Life than at Paris: and I had formerly
made a friend at Languedoc, which was then a Pensioner in St. Peter's Abbey,
from whom I expected great matters: She had no greater cause to praise men than
I had; and we spent our time, whole days together, in strengthening our selves
in the Spleen we owed them.

A Divota, one of her friends, who was very Ingenious and Complaisant, did
sometimes come to our entertainment, and did always make it very pleasant; for
she was naturally merry. She told me and my friend, that we were Fools to shun
the society of Men because they had injured us. It Is not by avoiding their
Company that they are punished, said she; on the contrary, you should converse
with them, endeavor to please them, and then make them run mad. But I replied,
By enraging them they destroy Women; and if they are so civil as not to do it,
the Public will without their assistance. Add to that, says my Friend, that
usually, by endeavoring to bring but one Lover to despair, we come to love him
insensibly, and prove by this means that Love is not to be sported with.

We entertained one another one day after this manner, when the Earl de
Tavanes, who went from Lions in order to his passage to Candia, where he after
lost his Life, and who was very intimately acquainted with the Religious Woman
I speak of, came to see her; the Nun that attends at the Round Box, or
Portress, sent him into the Parlour where we were; and though I disappeared at
his sight, yet I was very much offended at this Rencounter. I told my friend
the next day after, that if her Parlour were made so common to all the world,
she should seldom have me there with her. She appeased me as well as she could,
and assured me, that I need not have any apprehension of fear upon the account
of that Gentleman that I saw there.

And indeed, Madam, she had already seen the Earl de Tavanes several times, who
persuaded her that he hated our Sex as much as I hated theirs. I did not at
first believe that Hatred was real: I told my friend that there was some
mystery hid under that, and that she was the person to be wheedled. But the
Religiosa and she told me so many things to take off that suspicion, that in
conclusion they did persuade me, and I my self had a desire to see a person so
rarely to be found.

That was no difficult matter; I went every day to St. Peter's Abbey, and he
himself seldom missed coming thither. We met together as we did the first time;
and I protest to you that I confirmed that was said of him.

He made the difference considerable between her and other Women. She is not a
little obliging, added he, and he must put a high value upon you, that
understands your Sex, and not to shun you. I am naturally Toyish, and as it
fell out, I was that day in an humor of Raillery: I told the Earl smiling,
that he was very confident to declare himself thus before three such Ladies as
we were; that he deserved to be punished for it; and if it had been in my
youthful days, I would have made him sing a Palinode.

He received this Menace with an indifference that extended even unto disdain,
and continuing to take this Character all the remaining time of the
Conversation: I was so much convinced of his hatred of Women, that I insensibly
avoided him no more, as I did other men. For, Madam, I did not hate their
persons, but their madness, to fix themselves near me, and always throw me into
some vexatious Adventure.

Now because I did not believe the Earl de Tavanes to be of that humor, I
permitted him to make up a fourth person in our Entertainments. He proffered
very kindly those friends that he had at Court: I was very much obliged to him;
and one day when it rained, and I had not my Coach with me, I suffered him to
wait upon me in his own to my House.

He only conducted me to my Chamber, and left me as soon as I was there. The
Nun made war with him next day, that he had not improved that opportunity to a
Visit: He excused himself with this, That he desired very little Commerce with
Women; and though he spoke of me very respectfully, yet it was for all that
with so little pressing to be better acquainted with me, that I took delight to
see his Friend blame him; and I did not contradict the advice they gave him to
come and make reparation for his fault.

Then, Madam, he came; and as if he would remove all questions, which that
Visit might have in consequence, he gave me an account of the Reasons he had to
abhor all Women. This Story is nothing to me, and I could willingly pass it
over; but why should I not tell it you? It did increase my Confidence in him,
and it will divertise your Highness. We did it only in Conversation; and it is
not the History of his Life, it is only a Recital of one of the Particulars
thereof.

I was born to Love, said he; and though I am not very much stricken in years,
I have already met with five or six Amorous Adventures. I have reason to
complain of them all: For I always met with those that are Cruel or Inconstant,
those that are Capricious or Light: And in fine, I had but too great reason to
seek after Change. The most dolorous Intrigue that ever I rencountred, and
which has made me determine never to have any more, is that you are now going
to learn.

I stopped at Dijon coming from the Country in Franche-Comte. I am (as it may
be you know) a Native of Burgundy, and my Lands lie in that Country. At Dijon
there was a very fair Woman at Law, whose Name I will conceal; for an honest
man is obliged upon his own account to this kind of discretion. She pleased
me, I kept close to her, and found nothing in her but that cruelty which was
necessary to render her Favors more desirable by me.

I did her good service in her Lawsuits; and when she had any spare time, I
showed her all the Divertisements that that Province could afford. She accepted
of my Care and Service, as if she ought never to have forgot them: but Ladies
have a very treacherous Memory; and I will tell you how she did acknowledge the
Obligations wherewith she was bound to me. The Marquess de Castelnauld was hurt
by a great Contusion at Besansson, and the Surgeon had made an Incision, but
closed it too soon; it grew worse and worse as he passed through Dijon, and
forced him to sojourn there for some time. My fair Law-Lady was taken with his
handsome looks; but let that go, one is not always Mistress of the Sentiments
of their own Heart. Yet, the rarity was, that the cunning Baggage feigned to
have a natural aversion for the Marquess.

He was a very good friend of mine; and it had been a mere Capricio of the
Brain to hate him thus without reason. I did extremely blame my She-dissembler;
and after I had told her that she must overcome this Hatred, I my self brought
Castelnauld to her, that he might by his merit finish what I had begun.

You may imagine there was no great trouble in this, this Visit was backed with
several others; and if I was told truth, my Inconstant Mistress did all she
could to advance the Intrigue.

The Marquess was not cruel, and the Lady very charming; they had soon
contracted friendship: and that which was so relishing to my Rival was, that
they made me their Mockery. They were agreed together that he should interpret
all the Testimonies of ber hatred to him before me, as Marks of his Passion;
insomuch, that when my Traitress was over-pressed with his Love, she told
Castelnauld the bitterest things imaginable.

I was really troubled at it; I begged his excuse, and asked him, with an
ingenious Air, if possibly he had not seen that Woman somewhere else out of
Dijon, and if the hatred she showed him had not some Legitimate foundation?

He smiled at my simplicity, and told me jestingly, that he must bear this
Misfortune as well as the other Malevolences of his Stars; and the injustice
wherewith I was so surprised, was not the only thing that Ladies are capable
of.

He played the counterfeit thus all the time we continued at Dijon; but one day
when at our return we were walking in the little Park at Versailles, and that
we came to discourse of our Law-Lady insensibly, he had such remorse on a
sudden, that he begged pardon for his Treachery, and told me what you have
heard from me.

I would not believe him; and I think I should still question the truth, if he
had not persuaded me to it by twenty Letters, some more convincing than others.
There was one, wherein she gave him a taste of this subtilty, as one of the
most agreeable Mysteries of Love. In some others she recommended it as a
necessary piece of Polity in him to obtain her Suit at Law, and informed him
what credit I had in our Parliament.

Upon your faith, Madam, replied the Earl, looking upon me steadfastly, do you
think that I have reason to hate Women? and after the relation of this
Treachery which I newly discoursed to you, am not I very moderate in doing them
no more mischief?

I was moved with a true compassion for the Cheat they put upon him; and
finding my self very much obliged for his confiding in me, I thought I must
acknowledge it by relating to him, now it came in my turn, some one piece of
the Ingratitude of the Earl of Englesac. Your Highness is ignorant of the
later, and methinks I must acquaint you with them in this very place.

This Versatile Man became Amorous of a Female- Greek in Candia; and finding in
her either counterfeit or real Virtue, told all the world that he was going to
marry her. He did not do so; for he could not; and if he could, I cannot
persuade my self that he would be so faithless. But his Discourses did injure
my Reputation: and as he did not conceal himself, and people are more apt to
believe bad than good Reports, the whole Army at his death was persuaded that I
was not his Wife.

O, Madam! what a piece of Ingratitude is this? Alas! he had formerly undergone
so much to become my Husband, and was so obliging to me, that I believed him
without difficulty: But this is not all, he lived nine or ten days after his
Wound, and employed almost the whole time in showing kindness to my Rivaless:
he said that he only regretted the loss of his Life, because he should die
without depriving her of something he had a mind to; and if some charitable
Officers in the Army had not looked upon those Expressions as of dangerous
consequence in a dying-man, and snatched away the Greek from his Bedside, the
perfidious man had died with such words as those in his mouth.

In your opinion now, said I to the Earl de Tavanes, are the Injuries you have
received more cruel than mine? and have you more ground for your hatred than I
have for mine? Let us join them together, Madam, replied he, and take delight
in detesting all Mankind.

I could not forbear smiling at this discourse, and answered him waggishly,
that I supected any Union whatsoever with men. But as he was a very deserving
person, and seemed in my opinion to hate those kind of Intrigues as well as my
self, he had free access to me when he pleased, and I loved him as a Brother.

A certain Knight, de la Mothe by name, came to ill purpose, and disturbed our
Society; he was Captain of a Gally that went to Marseilles in order to his
going to Sea, and that yearly in his passage staid ten or twelve days at Lions,
where he increased the number of the Admirers of Madam Carle.

This year, to my Misfortune, Madam Carle was not the sole occasion of his
stay: he had seen me in the Garden d'Aine, which is a fine place, where the
Ladies of Lions usually take their walks. I never went at those times when they
were there, but sought out the most solitary Retirements. I know not by what
accident the Knight de la Mothe found them out one day as well as my self; but
in the end he met me there; and from that time I never frequented any place but
he found me out.

He followed me to all the Churches; he was constantly in the way that leads
from my House to the Abbey; and when for vexation that I always met with this
man, I confined my self to my Chamber, he used himself to a Neighbor's house,
where he could see me through my Windows, as if he had been at home with me.

All this did highly disgust me; and I told the Earl de Tavanes one day, that
if the Knight de la Mothe did persist in his Importuning of me after this
manner, I would leave Lions, and go to Paris, in expectation of the King's
return thither.

I cannot tell whether the Earl was afraid of this, or whether he was only
ambitious to oblige me; but he went to the Knight, whom he knew, and entreated
him not to put me thus to the trial. This Woman has some reason to her self not
to be taken notice of, said he, and you discover her by your Affectation or
Desire to follow her. Good Sir, follow her no more, I beseech you: a gallant
man should never afflict a brave woman.

The Knight smiled at the Earl's Remonstrances, and answered him in a malicious
tone, that he could not accomplish his designs because they did so watch and
observe his forwardness, and looked upon it as a thing to be feared. Good God!
said I to the Earl, when he gave me an account of this their Conversation, let
him do what he will, I will not have you speak any more to him concerning me.
And indeed, Madam, that he should not think I stood in awe of him, I seemed to
take no farther cognizance of his behavior.

I know not whether this made him more confident, or whether he was resolved to
try my Patience to the utmost; but one day, when I was at an Abbey at the
Investiture of a Nun (and I could not avoid being present at that Ceremony) he
procured a Chair to sit near me; and without the least respect to the Holiness
of the place, discoursed to me concerning his Amors. Judge you, Madam, if he
did not make choice of a proper time; and if I were not very much disposed to
receive his Declaration. I looked upon him with so severe a Brow, and bid him
so imperiously seek out another object of his Gallantry, that he durst not
prosecute it any farther; but being in a great confusion, he went out before
the Ceremony was ended.

Alas! I had done far better to have dissembled my Anger, and permit him to
have been near me: For, Madam, he went to take a walk to allay his Grief in the
same Garden where he had the first sight of me; and I am going to acquaint you
with the new Displeasures that Fortune was preparing for me.

The Earl de Tavanes was walking alone musing, and the Knight de la Mothe
spying afar off a bundle of Papers fall from his Pocket, gathered it up: Ah!
Madam, what Papers were these, think you? they were eight or ten Letters which
I wrote to the Earl of Englesac when he wooed me, without Superscription; for I
usually folded them up in a double Covering: Now she that loves her Lover
extraordinarily, and is not so prudent as your Highness, oftentimes writes some
little fopperies designedly. This foolish Knight de la Mothe thought that these
Letters were directed to the Earl de Tavanes; and as it happened I had signed
some of them, he looked upon the Earl as his Rival, and did accuse him in his
thoughts as the Author of all the ill Treatments that he received at my hands.

Your Highness may guess how much I was surprised, when the Knight in revenge
dispersed these Letters all abroad, and that my She-friend gave me notice of
the discourse that was made of me. I asked the Earl de Tavanes the reason of
it; and he answered me very coldly, that I knew well enough he could not make
any bad use of my Letters.

Alas! no; for I never wrote any to him; but it was sufficient that they made a
story of him and I, to engage me never to look upon him more. I told him of it
very ingenuously; and he was so moved therewith, that he had a great Quarrel
against the Knight de la Mothe, and they were like to fight about it. Some
persons who were friends to both took up the business; and whether in the
accommodation they discovered the Mystery of those Letters, or that there were
some of them wherein the Earl of Englesac was known, they began to acquaint the
world to whom they did properly belong.

I became more innocent hereupon; but yet I was not less Intrigu'd. One of
these Letters came to my own hands, and it may not probably displease your
Highness to see what Style they write that are deeply in love; and that this
Love having no end but what is Lawful, constrains not the desires of the Soul.
Here is a Copy of the Letter I speak of.

HOw cruel are you with your Reproach and Suspicion? Have you no other way to
persuade you that I Love, than to accuse me that I do not love you at all?
Alas! look upon my Eyes, all the World discovers my Passion in them. Are you
the only person that cannot discern it? That were a very terrible thing; for I
have no fancy for any other Man in the whole Universe, except your self. No, my
dear Earl! it is your Sight only that affords me those Transports of Joy which
I cannot be Mistress of. There is nothing but your Absence that can discompose
me: You are the sole person that charms my Heart; and all my Actions bear
Testimony thereof. I endeavor to dissemble them with indifferent people, and
yet they believe them. I avow them in all things before you, and yet you doubt
whether you are fervently beloved by your

SYLVIA.


How foolish are Women when they are disturbed with these things? I understood
not till a long while after, that this Letter was the talk in all the
Female-assemblies at Lions. The Earl de Tavanes need not tell me of it; for as
there was reason for him to take no notice of it, so he departed angry to see
himself thus entangled with me in my concerns, and I knew not what was become
of him. It came into my thoughts, that the Earl of Englesac himself had lost
these Letters, that he was not dead, and that I should live to see him return,
as well as when I had so much lamented his loss in the Naval Fight of the Dutch.

This thought created a thousand idle Fancies in me; and I must confess to you
all my Imbecility: I think that the least Repentance of this Faithless man had
rendered him more dear to me than ever: But his death was too certain; besides,
Madam, if I could have flattered my self with hope, I had little time to think
of that, as I am going to inform your Highness.

My Adversaries made advantage of my absence, and obtained an absolute Order,
whereby they had permission to secure my person till the Suit were ended. Do
but see, Madam, how rigorously they dealt with me. I was the Widow of the Earl
of Englesac; they contended with me for my Estate and Quality, and would also
deprive me of the liberty of making my Defense; but any thing is granted almost
upon a Default: Yet to make the best of this Order, it proved of advantage to
me; for I hereby found out a new way to implore the King's Justice.

And then I made haste to Paris, where their Majesty's were expected in very
few days. And because, fearing a surprise, I made my Journey Incognito, I
pretended that I had obtained leave to enter into the Abbey of St. Peter; my own
Servants thought I was there already; and leaving them at Lions, the better to
conceal the business, I only took along with me Merinvil, and went into the
Passage-boat.

This Voyage at first drew Tears from my Eyes; it did not well agree with the
Widow of the Marquess of Meneza and the Earl of Englesac: but besides that, my
temper is not to be overmuch afflicted, I met with a Rencounter in that Boat
that diverted me from my sorrowful Reflections.

It was the famous Desbareaux; he went into Provence to pass away his time
there every Winter; and this year, being a little too forward, he found the
Season was somewhat hot as yet, and came back again near Chalons, to make an
end of the Vintage with one of his Friends.

I have heard much discourse of this man; and was impatient to be acquainted
with him. I seated my self by him, and did what I could to put him in the
humor of talking, which was no great matter of difficulty; and though they
gave little ear to him, he was not covetous of the Stories he knew.

He related some, wherein methought he had no extraordinary respect for persons
of the greatest Quality; and passing from one Adventure to another, I know not
by what means, he fell upon mine. He had never seen me in his Life; I told him
not my Name; and he believed me to be in St. Peter's Abbey; he spoke of me as
of an absent person, that is to say, he did not spare me at all.

Yet he did me Justice for all that in some particulars, and beyond all
Controversy the public Report had not taught him all that he knew. But,
Madam, one thing that surprised me very much, as it must needs do your Highness
also, was, that speaking of my sojourning at Lions, he gave out that the Earl
de Tavanes was my Lover. I was almost ready to discover my self by the strange
manner of my acquainting him that this Rumor was owned to be false, and that
the Earl de Tavanes certainly never loved the Countess of Englesac.

Who do you speak to, said he to me smiling? It Is from the Earl de Tavanes own
Mouth that I learned this whole Intrigue. I just now parted with him in Forest
at the Marquess de -- where we have been ten or twelve days together. And then,
Madam, he told me that the Earl de Tavanes had seen me at Grenoble, and that he
became Amorous of me there: That he followed me to Lions, where seeing that I
often frequented St. Peter's Abbey, he discovered himself to the Religiosa that
I have spoken of, who was his ancient Friend, and who without doubt looked upon
his Designs as Lawful, since that she had so engaged her self to do him
service.

It was a Plot among them, that he had pretended to hate all Women, merely to
introduce him to my house: And that he had no desire to have any farther
commerce with them. They deceived my Female-friend first; and to make it short
to your Highness, I was decoyed by all the Earl's appearances; and that which I
thought I had done by accident, I did with design.

This discourse drove me into an astonishment that I could not dissemble. I put
questions to Monsieur Desbareaux without intermission, and very few of them but
what were pertinent; for I never in my life knew any entrusted Confident better
informed. He understood even the least discourse that I had with the Earl: he
told me all that that Lover thought, what he believed I thought; and when we
came to the point of my Letters, he told me what had happened, as if he had been
an Eyewitness thereof. Your Highness knows but one part of it, but I will
acquaint you with the rest.

The Earl of Englesac had a Valet de Chamber whom I did always mistrust,
because he was preferred to him by the Countess his Mother. I told him, and
often wrote to him, that he should have a care of the Fellow, and that I had
reason to suspect every thing that came from whence he did: yet I could never
get him turned away; for he loved him, and was persuaded that I was
prepossessed with prejudice against him without reason.

He was with him to his Dying-day; and this Boy, having found among his
Master's Papers some Letters wherein I spoke very ill of him, did not come to
me to demand satisfaction, but made the best use of them he could.

He was by chance become Valet de Chamber to the Earl de Tavanes; and it was
just about the time that that Earl began to court me. He was not backward, as
your Highness may guess, in putting questions to his new Domestic Servant: He
knew that he had some of my Letters, and having taken them from him, thought to
have carried them with him to Lions, when he lost them, and that the Chevalier
de la Mothe took them up.

I was not sollicitous to disentangle my self of this; for to take away all my
suspicion, the Earl de Tavanes had sent this Valet to Toulon, where the rest of
his Equipage attended his Arrival, and from whence he did some small time after
Embarque himself to carry fresh Recruits to Candia.

Monsieur Desbareaux told me all these things very ingenuously, and put me into
an extreme trouble to think that I should have such a villainous Cheat put upon
me. The Earl de Tavanes had no great advantage by this deceitful Trick: I took
him always to be one of my Friends, and I continued within the limits of the
most Inncoent Friendship. But what might have happened if I had always persisted
therein? He was a well-shap'd Lover, and of an agreeable temper, whom I had,
without thinking of any such thing, permitted to be intimate with me for two
Months and better, who told me, that I should not be so much used to see him
unmoved; but that after I should understand something, I could not have the
power to banish him my Company.

This Thought made me forgive the Chevalier de la Mothe for all the
Importunities received by him: And in effect, if he had not troubled his head
with loving of me, the Adventure of the Letters had possibly never happened, and
I had still seen the Earl de Tavanes very familiarly. But as the Knight did not
do all that with good Intentions, so I did not hate his Sex the less for that;
for I said all that I could think of in their prejudice.

Monsieur Desbareaux pretended that he could say as much of ours, and was not
in the humor to spare them in the least. He remembered his Intrigues that were
passed, and had a thousand Reasons to believe Women to be much more perfidious
than men. I would not agree with him herein; and we had sometimes such Disputes
as resembled sharp Quarrels: for this man did not argue like other persons; he
maintained his Opinion with as much heat, as if he had been greatly interessed
therein: and when any one was positive in thwarting of him, he was transported
with Passion against those that contradicted him; and this Transport did
greatly increase his Passion.

But perhaps I tire your Highness in making so prolix a Discourse concerning my
Spleen against men: I must now divertise you with an indifferent Story, which
made me laugh heartily, and without question will create the same Passion in
your Highness.

We had in our Boat a man, who, though the whole Retinue that waited on him was
but one Lacquey, yet had he the Air of a person of Quality. He sat by me as it
fell out, and we did often chat together. We came (I know not upon what
occasion) to discourse of some of the Cities of Languedoc; and this man said,
though not very discreetly, that the Ladies of Montpellier were pliable enough.

This was said before one of that City, who had an indifferent handsome woman
to his Wife, of whom he was very jealous. He took offense at this reproach, and
asked the Gentleman that spoke first, with a severe look, if he had
experimented the Gentleness of the Ladies of Montpellier, or whether he knew
them only by hearsay.

I spent one whole Winter with them, replied this Gentleman coldly, and
associated my self with one of the most considerable, and greatest Gallants,
from whom I understood the Intrigues of many others. May a man be so bold as to
ask you her Name? replied the jealous Husband very briskly.

I know not whether they knew him, or whether they intended to punish him for
his Jealousy, or whether chance only introduced the Story, but they named his
Wife to him. You are mistaken, interrupted he, the person you have named is not
of the humor you talk of; and therefore you must needs take some other person
for her.

This Dispute did move me to curiosity; I would have pressed it more home, and
I did maliciously ask the man that spoke first, what kind of Woman she was
that is now in question.

He replied, She is tall; and if she had a double Chin, would be of an
excellent proportion. Her Eyes are beautiful, her Mouth somewhat wide, but
admirable Teeth; a lively good Color, brown Hair, and Sings as well as heart
can wish.

You would have laughed extremely, Madam, if you had seen how this poor Husband
hearkened to the Character given of his Wife. He changed Color twice or thrice;
and turning toward one of his Friends that stood near him, told him, louder
than he thought he did, It Is my Wife they speak of; and you may easily find
that the Discourse describes her Limb by Limb.

The other still prosecuted it: She loves to be at Balls, and they are often
made at her own House; And one Gentleman, said he, naming his Name, which I
have forgot, did treat her with five or six very noble Balls, during the time
that he made his Amors to her.

The Husband continued, This is not at all like her, speaking to his friend;
the man they talk of never was within my doors. I was at Paris when he was at
Montpellier; but I have faithful Intelligence of all the Passages in my
absence; and I am well satisfied that they mistook another for my Wife.

This Relator continued his Story: She has a very neat Country House, where she
spends the whole Summer; it was there that I first saw her, and all Strangers
out of curiosity go to see that House; for besides that it is more commodious
than usually Rural Appartments are, there is a Closet or little Room full of
Antique Arms, which is one of the greatest Rarities that can be seen.

Ah! that is more like my Wife than all the rest, said the Husband with a
desperate and loud Tone; nay certainly she is the idle Gossip, according to
their Representation.

We all brake out into such a loud fit of laughter, that the poor man was quite
discountenanced, and went to hide himself in some other part of the Vessel,
where I believe he made most dreadful Resolutions; but they permitted him not
to fortify them; for they went and swore to him, that all that was said was
only to try him, and the Story was false from the beginning to the end.

And it may be it was so accordingly; for who can give credit to what men say?
was there ever any one man faithful? But now I return to relate some novel
Subtilties, and new Romances, beseeching your Highness to pardon me (since I
could not avoid it) for telling the Tale of the Husband of Montpellier.

As we were tattling and jesting in this manner, we came to Paris insensibly,
where I immediately had a Rencounter that did much rejoice me, though it did
not a little afflict me too withal.

It was with a Gentleman Usher belonging to the Marchioness of Sevil, who was
looking for a convenience in a Stage-coach to bring me at Grenoble (where he
thought I still resided) a Casket that his Mistress had sent me. He was an old
Servant whom they had found to be very trusty; and judge, Madam. whether it was
not requisite that he should be well known! There was in it a great number of
rich Precious Stones: the Gentleman probably knew nothing of it; but however,
he did not look upon them, and brought them to me very faithfully.

I Will assure you, Madam, they did very much rejoice me; and these rich Jewels,
after so many Suits at Law, and Journeys, were a great help to me; but together
with the receipt of them, I understood that the poor Marchioness was dead.

There was besides somewhat of Adventure interwoven with this her Death: They
pretended that she had taken I know not what Potion, of which a man also took,
and 'twas to create an eternal Passion of mutual Love between them; which
Ingredients were ill prepared, or the hour of the Marchioness was come. She
died very suddenly, and it was thought that the Draught contributed very much
thereunto.

Poor Lady! she had left by Will all that she could, and sent me these Precious
Stones when she was dying. Alas! she had no need of this last act of Generosity
to oblige me to cherish her Memory. She had some little Phrensies, which did
not relish with all the world, and we had many Intanglements together; but when
all is said, she was a good and generous Person; and I am sensible that I was
very much obliged to her. I mourned for her as much as if she had been my
Mother; and I look upon your Highness to be so Compassionate as to bear a part
with me here in my affliction.

I kept her Gentleman with me, and rewarded him according to his desert,
because he had so faithfully performed the last Will of his Mistress. He was an
understanding man, and well acquainted at Paris: he found me out a Lodging,
where I was secured till they obtained from the Council stay of Proceedings,
and liberty to put me in a posture of Defense. I do'nt know how they did to
manage my business before the Privy Council. I had need go to Law indeed, being
so ignorant in litigious Quirks; and were I never so skilful in them, I should
not amplify my self upon that Subject to your Highness, because I believe that
would not prove any great Recreation to you. But however, I found my self free,
and in a condition to prosecute my Adversaries as freely as I had done formerly.

I sent for my Equipage that was left at Lions; and by good Fortune a man of
Dauphine, that was tired upon the Road, and could not sit his Horse, asked some
of my Servants for a place in my Coach; and they were so civil as not to deny
him.

I say, by good Fortune, Madam; for this Man was the particular friend of
Monsieur de Lionne; and when he arrived at Paris, grew acquainted with me. This
generous Officer found somewhat in my Physiognomy which did not displease him:
He desired to understand all my business, and I was so happy, that the most
stubborn of the Earl of Englesac's Relations had a weighty business in the
Court, which depended upon the management of Monsieur de Lionne.

He promised me very obligingly to make such a conjuncture advantageous to me;
and in truth he knew so well how to manage the man's temper, that he put him in
a way of accommodation; and he drew such expressions from him, and other of my
Adversaries, which became inviolable Sureties to me.

I do not remember that I ever passed away any time with greater Tranquillity
than this that I am now speaking of. I expected my Enemies day after day, who
promised me to do whatsoever Monsieur de Lionne pleased; and I was of opinion
that he would not prefer their Interests before mine. The Jewels of Madam de
Seville brought me into great trouble: They questioned her Donation to me in
Flanders; but I consulted several able Lawyers, who assured me, that
Controversy would not hold Water; and which pleased me beyond all the rest, I
had no Suitors near me: but this last Content was but short; and certainly it
is written in the Heavens, That Lovers in spite of me, will trouble me as long
as I shall live.

I was in a place where they Gam'd very much; and I did like the rest, but more
to link my self in the Society of Women, than for any love that I have to Play.
A Person of highest Quality at Court was often one that played against us; and
according to the Inconstancy of my Stars, he took a fancy to me, and
endeavored to obtain my Love.

He was not fit for that; Dignity and Magnificence sway very little with me;
for there must be somewhat agreeable to my eye, before it can arrive at my
Heart. But because he was a Person of great Credit, and that I had no reason to
procure such redoubted Enemies, I defended my self against him with somewhat
more Civility than I used the Chevalier de la Mothe.

Without dissimulation, when I think on it, his initiation into my Acquaintance
did greatly please me. The Man I speak of, has Wit enough in his own way, but
it is very confused and disordered; and as soon as he plunges himself in
Discourse, he falls into a Canting kind of Jargon. I did enviously propose
Questions to him, when he began to be Intricated; and applauding him for his
Eloquence, when he least deserved it, drove him into such obscurity, that I had
almost died with Laughing. I know not whether he perceived that I jeered him,
or whether through Malice any one gave him to understand it; but he showed a
great deal of Anger, and threatened me with no less than a memorable Revenge.

I feared it not; for I could not be convinced of any thing. It Is true, within
my self I did Quip or Gibe at him, but yet in the mean while I always kept my
self within such a Decorum as to outward Appearances, that he could desire no
greater; and if I had been defective in any of them, yet did I not think that
for that they would study revenge against a Woman of my Quality.

Therefore instead of being terrified at their Advice, I became more jocular;
and one day when I was in a waggish Humor, I said in relation to that
business, that he was ungrateful; and should remember that I once understood
him.

I confess that this passage was very poignant to a person who was drol'd at
for his Pedlers- French discourse; but it seemed so pleasant to me, that I
could not but out with it; and it fared with me as it does usually with people
that are over-eager to throw out a Jest; for not only the great Lord understood
it, and would never pardon it, as your Highness shall soon be informed; but it
drew abundance of troublesome business upon me.

I did this waggery before the Chevalier du Buisson, who was by accident in a
House where I used to play often. You, Madam, know this Knight, and understand
what an impression witty Raillery made with him. He was touched with this; and
desiring to be more particularly acquainted with me, he entreated the young
Earl d'Eschapelles, who was a very intimate Friend of mine, to accompany him to
my Apartment.

D'Eschapelles asked my leave, and I freely condescended to it: now do but
observe the concatenation of Causes, what a thing it is! The deceased Madam
d'Englesac had told me formerly, that she had some Pretense to the Succession
of Monsieur Deslandes-Payen, who was Uncle to this Chevalier. I had by chance
the Writings concerning that affair in my own hands; I came by them I know not
how at the death of Madam d'Englesac. I inquired for some person that
understood the affairs of Monsieur Deslandes deceased, to see if I could not
squeeze somewhat out of his Heirs.

The Chevalier du Buisson did seem to me a person very fit for the undertaking.
I told the Earl d'Eschapelles that I should be very glad to see him, and that
he might bring him with him when he thought convenient; who brought him
accordingly; and to my Misfortune I pleased him, as I had done many other
persons.

He told it very confidently to the young Earl, as I had it from him since; and
made him think that he went to make his utmost Efforts to gain a share in my
favor.

I acquainted your Highness that the Earl d'Eschapelles was my very intimate
friend; and you may remember that we were of the number that did design to
visit you at the time when he died. This poor Youth, who knew my sincerity, and
to whom I had often protested that I abhorred nothing so much as Lovers, did
his endeavor to free me from this person.

Don't you fool your self with this Woman, said he, she will afflict you too
much. She is repulsed by Love, and has no reason to commend it: She will have
no Adventures; and 'twould be a very difficult matter for one that should love
her really to accost her.

Du Buisson did nothing but laugh at this his advice; and though he was not
persuaded of the cruelty of Ladies, he judged of my Heart by the Intrigues that
I had received: And you may easily apprehend, Madam, that upon that account
they ought not to believe me too severe. He asked the Earl d'Eschapelles with a
pleasant Air, where he had so well studied the Map of the World: and they,
growing warm in discourse, laid a Wager, the one, that he would gain my Love
before I was two Months older; the other, that he would never obtain it.

Whether the Earl d'Eschapelles did me sufficient Justice to believe that I
should make him win without his Entreaties, or that he had engaged himself not
to say any thing to me of the Wager, he kept his word with the Chevalier du
Buisson, and I knew not one Syllable of what had passed between them; therefore
I entertained this new Courtier very civilly, and accepted of his Complaisance,
and Services.

He did not draw any trouble upon me on the account of his Uncle; for it could
not well be, and my Papers were not in good form; but he seemed to have done
his utmost, and that to me was as much as if he had succeeded. He did every day
afford me some new Divertisement, and knew so well how to play his part, that I
always believed he did it for some other person, and that others knew he did it
for my sake.

This is not all; he affected the Grimaces of a Prosperous Lover; he
counterfeited the Mysterious and false Discreet one; he would depart from me
as soon as it was observed that he was with me; and he was always taken reading
one Letter or other, which he did hide as soon as he was discovered.

All this looked like something extraordinary; but in the interim he could not
persuade the Earl d'Eschapelles that he had lost. He would hear me say with my
own Mouth, that I loved du Buisson; which was not like to be: for how could I
make that acknowledgement? The Chevalier du Buisson had not as yet told me that
he fancied me; and I said such dismal things before him both against Love and
Lovers, that he durst not attempt that Declaration. Yet he would however
maintain the Wager; for he though without doubt it would be a disparagement to
him to lose; or, it may be, he is of the temper of some other people in the
World, who are almost as much pleased to be thought they are beloved, as to be
so indeed.

What did this wily Youth do? He had some Letters whose hand did sufficiently
resemble mine, and which were very melting. He made the Earl d'Eschapelles
believe that I wrote them; made use of some other elusions to make me come to
the Tuilleries with him at suspicious hours. What shall I say, Madam? He played
his Cards so cunningly, that the poor Earl was deceived by him, and convinced
that he had lost.

There was a great deal of subtlety required to cheat him thus; for, besides
that he had a very penetrating Wit, he was not a Novice in all the Humors or
Courses of du Buisson; and if the world say true, he was a Man able to read
Lectures how to put tricks upon others: but for this bout he met with his
Master, and he was never more firmly satisfied of any thing than my private
association with the Chevalier du Buisson.

He had persuaded him to make a great Oath to behave himself closely; and I
think they might willingly have remitted his Wager upon that account. But which
way? How could a man very familiar with me, and who saw himself deceived in his
Confidence of me, be silent? He was not, Madam, and the first day that I was in
private with him, he quarreled with me for my Dissimulation, and acquainted me
with all that I have said.

I did not believe at first that he said truth; he was naturally addicted to
Raillery, and did affect it to his reproving me, to the end, as I think, that I
might esteem it the better for that. I set my self a laughing, and I told him,
that I was not so easily deceived; but as he said nothing but what was too
true, and at last we can distinguish Truth from Raillery, I began to believe
him, and never was more astonished nor incensed.

Yet I knew not how to quarrel with the Chevalier Du Buisson: I was unwilling
to expose the Earl D'Eschapelles; besides, I knew farther, that those Gentlemen
that succeed in their designs, take a pride in passionate and high Quarrels;
and that if I should engage with the Chevalier Du Buisson, it would prove an
Obligation rather than a Punishment. Whereupon I resolved to jeer him in
public, and thus I performed it. I was one day in the Kings Garden with a
Country-Lady of Quality, who lodged in the same House with me, and who brought
me to this Promenade. Many of our Acquaintance were there also, and among the
rest the two men that I was just now speaking of: They came both and accosted
us, and I no sooner saw the Chevalier Du Buisson near me, but stopping very
nimbly; To the purpose, Monsieur le Chevalier, said I, pray put me in mind
when I am at home to tell you, that I love you; I have deferred the
manifestation of it too long, and I had saved you many a false Story, if I had
considered on it, and declared it to you before now.

This, To the purpose, made them break out into excessive laughter, because it
was to no purpose at all. The Chevalier seemed very much perplexed; and I, to
increase it the more, pursued, What, are you resolved then to be cruel? looking
upon him tenderly. Ha! Monsieur le Chevalier, don't take upon you that
Resolution; this would kill me absolutely: It Is sufficient that I love you,
without loving you ineffectually. Believe me, Sir, Cruelty does not well become
your Sex; and I love you so much, that you cannot without Ingratitude refuse to
love me a little.

I said all this with such an envious Accent, that the Chevalier was quite out
of countenance. He would fain say somewhat, and asked very gravely, what ground
I had for that Raillery; but to his mischance, the Earl D'Eschapelles looked
upon him at that very instant, and he saw somewhat, I cannot tell what, that
was so full of Drollery in his very Countenance, that he disengaged himself,
and retreated in a great confusion.

Your Highness may well think, that they that remained there did not spare him
in the least. He loved to Droll naturally; and whether they were charitable to
him, or that the Report of him was true, they said, I was not the first Woman
whose Galant he falsely published himself to be. All persons were ravished to
see a man of his name thus tossed in a Blanket, and there was no kind of Jeer
but was thrown upon him. He understood the major part of them, and took a very
pleasant course to repulse them.

He pretended to understand my Discourse verbally, and told them that talked
with him concerning me, that we were at some variance, because he could not
find in his heart to love me. I confess she is well shaped, he further added,
and that she has also a diverting Wit; but every man knows his own business
best: a man cannot love all the world, and a man must needs have a great stock
of Love, to become amorous of all that deserve it.

I did but laugh at this Discourse, and they that were informed of the truth of
that Story, did so likewise; but all people knew it not: and there were some
persons so weak, as to publish it abroad, that I doated on the Chevalier Du
Buisson, and could not gain his Affection. Nay, I don't know whether they did
not make me act some desperate thing thereupon: For the Death of a fine Woman,
who arrived here the last Winter, had brought it in fashion; and perhaps they
have honored me so far, as to believe me dying by the Charms of this
ungrateful person.

These Tales reached the Ears of a Gentlewoman, who, as your Highness shall
understand, did not hear them indifferently. It was a pretended Prudent Woman,
who had deceived some good souls; and as honest persons judge freely of others
by themselves, she was looked upon as an extraordinary good Woman, and was
generally so reputed.

She was very High-minded, and you could hear nothing in her Quarters, but the
severe Remonstrances she made to all Women; and she favored me with some of
them. Do you judge, Madam, whether she made choice of a proper time, when I had
newly learned an Intrigue of Love between her self and du Buisson, above a year
before.

I smiled at the juncture of time; and having a mind to make it my
divertisement, I said, Being so Charitable and Virtuous a Lady, methinks you
have a strong Inclination to judge amiss of your Neighbors: I have been more
favorable to you; and whatever they have told me concerning du Buisson and
your self, I would never believe a word of it.

You would have laughed heartily, Madam, if you had but seen how discomposed
this Woman was when she heard her Lover named. She was at a loss, and in a
great confusion, but soon recovered her self; and reassuming her severe look,
told me, she was sufficiently known, and feared not those Calumnies; for that
they would return upon the Heads of their Authors.

They that told me the Story knew it very well; and I did not think my self
obliged to disguise it. I omitted not one Circumstance, and I put my
counterfeit Prudent Woman into so high a Passion of anger, that she could
dissemble it no longer.

She called me Ill-bred Detracting Woman, and I know not how many more Names,
posting away in a fury out of my house, and swear that I should repent I ever
had offended her.

I did but laugh at her Menaces, and made Monsieur de Lionne too laugh
heartily, when I told him of our Conversation: But I was a Fool to make so
slight of this business; we must not sport with such kind of persons; and I
learned soon after, to my own cost, that a Quarrel with them is not a Laughing
business.

I told your Highness, that this person was esteemed a very Virtuous Woman;
though they wronged her in so doing, as you may find: but in the mean time,
those that she had infected with this error were powerful persons, and
embarked hood-winked in her Quarrel. She persuaded them that I led a dissolute
Life, and that she had reason to upbraid me therewith. She accused me of having
used her injuriously, which I did not so much as dream of; and without doubt,
intermixing some piece of irreverence toward that which merits our Respect,
she stirred them up so highly against me, that thinking to do well, they became
the very Instruments of her Revenge.

All the Informations that the deceased Lady d'Englesac had drawn up against
me, in order to my destruction, he causes Copies thereof to be taken out of
the Office. They again set on foot the Slanders wherewith all our Proceedings
did abound: The last Arrest of the Parliament at Grenoble was not forgot; and
the Orders formerly obtained of the Queen Mother were strangely recovered. I
was amazed when the Chevalier du Buisson came and told me that they labored
for a new Order to clap me into a Convent, and were upon the very point of
getting it.

You may imagine, Madam, said du Buisson, in giving me this Information, that I
have no hand in the mischief they intend you. It Is true, I have had a little
prejudice for you; and if I should well consider it, it may be owed you some
still; but this does not extend to the extremity that they aim at against you.

I have done what I could to hinder it, though it has proved ineffectual; and
they take so little notice of my entreaties, that I must dispense with those
Measures hereafter as ineffectual. See now what I can serve you in. I know a
good way for you to revenge your self; and if you please, we will get such an
Order granted for your Adversary as they would have against you.

I did not accept of his Proffer, as your Highness may imagine; for I had
business of my own to defend, without employing my self in attaquing other
persons. But I did seem to be obliged to him for his good will, and that made
me forget all the causes of Complaint I had against him.

In the interim they solicited the procuring of the Order against me very
diligently; and the Great Lord I mentioned before, did me all the disservice
imaginable. I know not by what means my Counterfeit-she prudently discovered
that he was not my friend; but in the end she had engaged him on her side; and
I was certainly advertised that he wounded me most grievously.

All my hope was in Monsieur de Lionne; nor was it in vain, he had defended me
generously; for he loved what he loved extremely, and did not take slight
notice of those that injured their Reputation: But he was at Fontainbleau,
where the Court then resided; and as I was making preparation to go and find
him out, I understood that he was come back to Paris very sick.

His Distemper was at first only a Tertian Ague, and the Physicians did mock
at them that asked if his Life was not in some danger: But 'twere to no purpose
for them upon that account to deal with me en ridicule; Something, I know not
what, did foretell me the mischief that would befall me: And from the time
Monsieur De Lionne fell sick, I durst have sworn he was on his Deathbed.

Ah! Madam, what a Loss was this to me? The Generous and Powerful Protector
which I had in this worthy Officer! I did not lament alone, for every one
regretted his Loss; and it was the common Cry of the people, that Persons so
Meritorious as he was should be immortal: But the truth is, there are so few of
them, that it is not worth the while to make a Law purposely for them.

As Soon as his Death was known at Languedoc, the Relations of the Earl of
Englesac would not stand to their word in any thing they had promised him; they
had agreed by their Writings to own my Marriage, and give me a reasonable
Pension for Life. I was content with Six Thousand Livres per Annum, and they
were of opinion that I subscribed to reason herein; but when Monsieur de Lionne
was dead, they did not think themselves obliged to pay me any thing. They said
I was not the Earl of Englesac's Widow, and began afresh their Persecutions and
Calumnies.

I durst not make any further Addresses to the King, as I resolved to do coming
from Grenoble; for I was afraid that my new contracted Enemies had bespattered
me before his Majesty. It Is probable I did ill to have such apprehensions, and
it is to little purpose to entertain the King with so small a matter; but in
the end I was possessed with this fancy, that I would not expose my self to
the vexatious Consequences they might have.

Then I took up a Resolution to go and see if I should not have better Success
in receiving the Grant of the Lady de Sevil, than to prosecute the Succession
of the Earl of Englesac. I was at Paris without Substance or Allies; the
Chevalier du Buisson did assure me, that they were ready to do me a prejudice,
and the Heirs of the Marchioness of Sevil did get ground of me at Brussels by
my absence. What could I do better than in going thither? Then I put my self in
condition for that Journey; and, Madam, although many unhappy things befell me
at Paris, yet I protest to your Highness, that I left it not without some Sighs.

It Is a Commodious and Charming Residence; there are in other places, as well
as there, Palaces, Promenades, and the like; but you find only at Paris that
freedom of Living which is there practiced; which to my fancy is the most
valuable thing in the world.

I had a mind to Travel by the Country of Artois, to see a Man of Business
belonging to the Marchioness of Sevil, who I knew retired thither after her
Death; from whom I hoped to draw very great and clear Discoveries. And this had
like to have involved me in fresh Troubles, and procure me new Enemies.

My Hostess understood by my Servants that I took the Road to Artois, and
begged of me to let a certain Female, who she said was a Relation to one of her
Friends, have a place in my Coach, who had a desire to see her Husband, who was
in the Garrison at Arras.

I know not whether they had gained this Hostess by Bribes, or whether they had
only deceived her; but, Madam, the person that she charged me with, was
Mademoiselle de -- who after she had secreted her self three or four Months at
Paris, fled away Incognita, and was going to the Duke of -- in Flanders. You
have heard her History, Madam; for she made too much Bustle and Noise in the
World, not to reach you ear. Do but think, Madam, in what a pickle I should
have been, if this Maids Parents had taken me carrying her so privately from
Paris; they would never have forgiven me this; and they are not people that
will give grains of allowance to those they have no kindness for.

It Is true, I was not long exposed to this danger: for the Duke of -- overtook
us the second days Journey, and conveyed Mademoiselle de -- to a Castle of his
own beyond the Frontiers of France.

I cannot tell how these two came acquainted at first: it is possible, that they
who concealed this Gentlewoman at Paris, did not hide her from all the world;
and that he had seen her in that Journey that he made not long since.
Whatsoever it is, they seemed to me to be indifferent good friends; and
according to my Judgment, I had brought, unknown to me, a Mistress to her
Lover.

I could not forbear laughing when I knew it; my good intentions took away all
scruples; besides, Madam, I had many other things of concernment to trouble my
head with besides all that came so: For this Duke -- had forewarned me to have
a care how I came into the King of Spain's Dominions, and that at Brussels they
had obtained a Decree against me.

Certainly your Highness must needs be amazed to hear talk of a Decree; I was
also very much surprised hereat; nor did I believe that I had committed any
action that ought to come in question again: but one must be secure of nothing,
and I am going to rehearse to you a Quirp in Law that you could never have
devised.

The Heirs of the Lady de Seville had without doubt been at Counsel about their
Case as well as I; it is to be thought that they were told that the Donation was
in good form, and if they would contend with me, they must be condemned to pay
Costs and Damages; they bethought themselves of a strange Invention to hinder
my enjoying of that Estate so given and granted.

I told you, Madam, that the Lady de Seville had charged her Gentleman to bring
me a Cabinet, where I found some Jewels; and that he did so accordingly. This
was done without any kind of formality in Law. His Mistress had entrusted in
his hands this Casket, and I also received it from him: I know not how they
came to have some light of this Depositum; whether the Marchioness had told
some person that she had sent me these Jewels; or that I my self, who did not
conceal the Present, had discoursed it before some people that had
correspondence at Brussels. This news came to them on the wing, 'twas so
speedily known. They said they had good ground for this Prosecution. For in
cases of Legacies, or in other things of the like nature, which are to be
received from the party deceased, there ought to be a Declaration made thereof,
or else it must be nominated in the Will.

I had done neither; for I did not know it ought to be so; and I am apt to
believe the Marchioness was as ignorant of it as my self. They alleged this
piece of ignorance as a great error in me; and got a Decree against this poor
Gentleman for a Robber, and a Commission for Contempt, wherein I was also
comprised.

I was never more abashed, than when the Duke -- told me that all this was
Criminal. I had not heard so much as any discourse of it; and whether they
gained on their side those that managed my business in Flanders, or surprised
them unawares, I know not; but they sent me not a word of this whole Proceeding.

I confess, Madam, that I thought my Patience had been quite lost; and when I
found my self thus persecuted at Languedoc, in danger of my person at Paris,
and more than that, in greater peril at Brussels, I did murmur against my Stars
more than ever I had done formerly.

The Duke de -- did what he could to comfort me; he proffered me the assistance
of his Reputation and Friends; and told me, that if I would be in a place of
safety, I should be lodged in a Castle which was upon the Land of the Empire,
and belonged to his Relations.

I did not accept of this last offer, being unwilling to be so shut up in a
Country unknown to me; only I entreated him to speak to the Heirs of the
Marchioness, to see if there could be any way found out to reduce them to
reason. He promised to do his utmost Efforts; and we concluded that he should
send to me at the Country of Liege, where I resolved to go and tarry in
expectation of some news from him.

You know, Madam, that the State of Liege is a Country that is Neuter, and that
they stand highly upon that Neutrality; but yet I durst not altogether confide
herein; it is a neighboring place to Brussels; my Enemies were of repute there,
and I dreaded the treachery of some Magistrate. Therefore I would not declare
my self openly, but went to the Spaw, it being then the proper season to drink
Waters, as if I had been a French Lady to whom they had been prescribed.

Without dissembling, when I think of it, this design of hiding my self did
occasion much curiosity; and persons expose themselves to very strange
opinions, when they seem to conceal what they are.

That year the company at the Spaw was extraordinary: Monsieur the Count de
Marsin was there, who knew me again; but was so faithful to me, as not in the
least to discover who I was. There was also the Prince and Princess of Nassau,
and I know not how many Lords that were Strangers, together with an Abbess of a
Convent in Cologne, who came of a very Noble House in Germany; and had with her
two Religious Women, tt were very handsome.

All persons there did concern themselves to know who I was; and I am not able
to tell you, Madam, the many harsh Opinions this created.

There was a Frenchman who did assure them, that I was Madam -- that he knew me
very well, and had seen me formerly at Paris. Another affirmed, that I was her
Mother; and without consideration that if I were the one, I could not possibly
be the other as to outward appearance, they laid Wagers, and came very
ingenuously to entreat me to tell them which of the two had lost.

See, Madam, whether this was not a very reasonable Demand? And suppose that I
had been what they took me to be, judge you whether I should have told them? I
only laughed at their Folly, and said, that after the Season of drinking the
Waters was over, I would decide the Controversy; but they went back very angry
with me for my Silence.

This Wager was heard of by an English Lord, who came to the Waters also, and
to whom Madam -- is allied. He came to see me, and after he had sufficiently
conjured me to put my whole Trust in him, and not to conceal my Name from him,
as from an indifferent Person; he told me the Degrees o^ our pretended
Alliance, and offered me a Retreat in England.

His Generosity did touch me, and I treated him more respectively than those
that laid the Wager beforementioned, and protested in in good faith, that I
did not so much as know the Ladies he discoursed of. He would not believe me. I
cannot discover what he saw in me, to desire that I should take a Voyage to
England; but he had undertaken to make me his Relation, and did torment me ever
after to oblige me thereunto. I laughed at his Obstinacy, and for two or three
days received sufficient divertisement thereby; but at last it did annoy me. I
grew angry, and told my Lord, that he should learn to know me better; that I
could not be guilty of such Actions as that person was accused of, and that I
never had any Business like hers.

He thought, I believe, that the Honor of being his Allie, ought to wipe off
all Misfortunes; he admired that upon those terms I refused to go under the
name of Madam -- and to make me ambitious of being so, he told me his Pedigree.
I know not whether 'twas a Noble Family or no, for I am not acquainted with the
Illustrious English Families; but if I would credit him, all the Lords of his
Race were so many Heroes, and there was not one of them, but he forced me to
hearken to his Elogie.

I told the Story that night upon a Green, where all the Wits meet together;
and it was looked upon as very pleasant, and they put the English Lord again
upon the discourse of the Achievements of his Ancestors. He told over the
Story again; and every one that came into the company, desired to understand
the beginning, so that they made him repeat the same thing at least ten times
over.

This also afforded us another Divertisement. There was at the Spaw a rich
Citizen of Liege, who would not change his condition with an ancient Baron, and
believed there was no better Title than the Privilege of a Citizen. He laughed
at my Lord's vanity, and pretended to debase his Quality beneath that of a
Citizen. They quarreled; and as if their whole Nation had been contained in
their persons, they had a million of Invectives against the Manners and Customs
of their Countries. I laughed heartily at this difference, as also did Monsieur
Marsin, and the Abbess of Cologne; for we grew inseparable. The Abbess
expressed an extreme Kindness for me: I loved her heartily; and we could not
deny one another an entire Confidence of all the Secrets of our Life.

I will, one day or other, relate you her Story; I believe she will not oppose
it; for there is nothing in it but what tends to her advantage; for she is a
very rational and obliging person. Your Highness would love her too well if you
knew her; and I am ready to die with the desire of acquainting you with her.

During this Interval I received Letters from the Duke -- who acquainted me,
that the Heirs of Madam de Seville were inexorable; they would have the Jewels
from me, and withal, that I must renounce the Donation. I could on my part
only satisfy them as to the last Proposition; but as to the first, it was not
in my power: for I had disposed of some of the Jewels; and though they had been
all in my own hands, they could never have convinced me that I caused them to
be taken; that had been almost the same thing as to condescend to the delivery
of them; but I had no design to commit that fault; for I would have defended
them to the utmost extremity.

I was never more disquieted in all my life, nor more perplexed. The season for
drinking the Waters began to be over, and I was fearful of discovering my self
to my Enemies, if I should stay any longer at Liege, without some pretext or
other. Monsieur de Marsin offered me very freely his Noble Appartment at
Modave, where I did not question but to be very safe, since that Monsieur de
Marsin was too considerable a person in the Low Countries for any person that
lodged with him to fear any asault.

Well, Madam, I went thither: He had the goodness to conduct me himself, and my
dear Abbess of Cologne was willing to go and pass away some time with me. She
waited for a Coach to carry her back, that was not yet come, and thought she
might as well expect it at Modave as at the Spaw.

This house is one of the most charming and magnificent buildings that ever was
seen. Here for some days I forgot all my troubles, and received very great
consolation; for the Earl de Marsin had engaged to espouse my Interests; and I
was sensible that there were few things at Brussels but what he could easily
bring to pass.

But, Madam, he soon stumbled at the obstinacy of my bad Fortune; and the first
Letter I received from him did acquaint me, that I must expect no more favor
from him; and this was the reason.

The chief Heir of Madam de Seville had newly married the Daughter of the Earl
de Monterey Governor of the Low Countries; and the alliance rendered him so
considerable, that it was the same thing to oblige the Governor himself, as to
stick to him in his business.

Monsieur Marsin did greatly excuse himself, and he seemed by the expressions
in his Letters to be angry in earnest he could not serve me, and that was his
real design.

It was fit that my Female-friend should assist me with her Advice and
Remonstrances, to make me bear this new Misfortune patiently. She seemed to
take as great a share in it as my self; and conjured me, with tears in her
Eyes, to make choice of some other kind of Life than that wherein I had
languished for so long time. Are you not weary, said she, with fighting against
Fortune? And do you think you can have more Patience than she Malice? You
deceive your self if you believe so; for when Fortune resolves to persecute a
person, she overcomes the most resolute.

She gave me besides abundance of Examples, which prevailed much with me; and
among the rest that of a King, who after he had lost his Kingdom, Liberty,
Wife, and Children, without the tribute of one Tear, wept bitterly for the
death of a Slave. And how came that to pass thinks you, pursued my Friend? It
was not because that Slave was more dear to his Master than all that he had
lost; but because his Patience was at an end, and he could endure no longer. It
will even be so with you one of these days: You have been hitherto strong
enough; and your temper has overcome all things; but in the end it will grow
weak, and some fresh Mischief will befall you, which will make you sensible of
all the rest, and drive you into despair. Do not wait for that extremity;
retire with me into my Solitude, and come and shelter your self from those
Storms that may befall you: Make some few Reflections upon all the accidents of
your Life; and then consider how many Troubles you have run through, since you
killed Monsieur de Moliere. There will be matter enough for a Voluminous
Romance. Will you not at last be at rest, and put your self into such a
condition, that neither Fortune, nor all your Enemies can possibly hurt you?

I wept when she told me this; we embraced each other tenderly, and I was
sensible that she gave me wholesome counsel; but yet It was not in the humor to
follow it: methought 'twas a shame to forsake the World, because I was unhappy;
and I wished that my Retreat had been of my own choice, and not of necessity.

She laughed at my niceness, and told me it was a false pretext to tarry still
in the world; that people seldom forsook it, when they could live happily; and
if by any turn, which she did not foresee, I could accomplish my business, I
would have the less desire to retreat to a Convent.

Methinks, Madam, that she told me true; and rightly to consider all things, I
should rather be in love with what Madam de Seville left me, than my
Retirement; but this Gift was become very uncertain, and the Asylum that they
offered me was a present Refuge. In fine, I accepted it, and it would be a hard
matter to quit it if Fortune should prove more favorable.

The Coach of Madam the Abbess arrived according to her expectation, and we
went together to Cologne: for, Madam, I had dismissed all my Retinue as soon as
I resolved to follow her advice and only kept with me Merinvil. We traveled
not the shortest way; the Abbess had some friends in the Canonesses College
that she had a mind to see in her passage, and who expected her coming with
impatience. We stayed there some time, and without doubt your Highness will be
well pleased to know what we did; and I, Madam, am resolved to tell you; but
this Relation requires me to take a little breath, and I beseech you to grant
me that liberty. I have written a long time already; and I should fear
disobliging the Audience with which your Highness honors me, if I should tire
her with too prolix a Narrative.

Your Highness most humble and most obedient Servant, H. S. D. M.

THE ADVENTURES AND MEMOIRES OF Henrietta Sylvia Moliere. PART the VI.
ARe you not almost tired out, Madam, to hear me make such Complaints against
Fortune? I am weary my self, and methinks I do not use to remember them so much
nor so often.

But, Madam, I must confess that she did treat me with great Cruelty, and that
one cannot be more implunged in Troubles than I was at Modave, when I received
that Letter from the Earl of Marsin.

I saw all my Hopes proved abortive Births; the Alliance of my Enemies with the
Governor of the Low Countries, made me dread some violence that would be
offered me; and if I must confess all my weakness to you, I looked upon the
necessity of my retiring to the Convent I was going into, as a new mischief.

Not because that I did not really love my Abbess; and that in any place but a
Cloister I should have thought my self happy to have spent my days with her;
but the word Cloister startled me; and I had not yet forgot the Troubles that I
went thorough in my ancient Convent; nor could I beat it out of mind, but that
I should always meet with as many in all the Convents that ever I should go
into.

Yet I was foolish to nourish such Conceits; Fortune used me more courteously
than I thought of; and I must acknowledge that I never prosper'd better, than
when I followed the advice of the Abbess. But, Madam, I must relate all this to
you in order; and begin, according to my promise, with the Adventures of our
Journey.

First of all, it was much longer than we judged it to be; for we were but yet
at Maubeuge, which our Abbess took in her way to see some of her Friends, when
she received the News of the Disorders at Cologne, which your Highness is not
ignorant of, and knows also how that the Inhabitants of that City denied the
Elector entrance within their Gates, who is also Prince of Liege, and depended
upon the Power of the French King, who had promised him Recruits, and resolved
to force them open.

This began a War in the Borders of Cologne, which made approaches dangerous
for such persons as we were; and our Abbess was forced to stay at Maubeuge,
till all these Troubles were somewhat appeased: she was much afflicted at this
stay, and whatever I could say to persuade her that she ought to extend her
Permission to Travel as far as she could, she made me answer, that she had
business at home, and nothing could fall out more vexatious, than to be so long
from thence. I loved her well enough to sympathize with her like a true Friend
in all her Afflictions; but as for this, Madam, I must confess that I was but
very indifferently concerned; for, as I told your Highness, I went to Cologne
with regret, and the sojournning at Maubeuge began to be full of Divertisement.

Madam, You know the famous Colleges in Flanders, and without doubt understand
that the Canonesses, who compose them, make no Vows against Marriage, and admit
of Conversation with modest Galantry, as if they were in the most splendid
Court in the World. They write to them Notes and Amorous Verses, and they
answer them if they think it convenient; they are visited as if they inhabited
their own Houses, and receive their Visits in the Halls or Gardens, where they
are observed by none but Ladies as Sociable as Virtuous.

In truth, all things are managed here with a prospect of Marriage, and the
Quality of the Husband is most remarkable. But as oftentimes Marriages are
propounded and not accomplished; there are many lawful Addresses which in their
consequences become simple Galantries, and differ only from an Amorous
Intrigue, but by the Intention; of which every one passes his Sentence
according to his Fantasy. One of the Ladies of Maubeuge met with such another
Adventure as this, and when we came thither it was the general Discourse of the
place. I will relate it to your Highness, because I believe it may divertise
you; besides, Fortune has given me such a share therein, that I cannot tell you
the History of my Life, without a word or two of it by the by.

Your Highness has, beyond all question, heard talk of one called Don Antonio
of Corduba, who had some Command over the Troops which the King of Spain
maintained in Flanders, and was made Prisoner of War at the Campaign of the
Isle. He was very much in Love with the Canoness I mention, and there was a
stop to the Articles of their Marriage, when the War was declared between
France and Spain.

I know not whether the Marquess of Castel-Rodorigo, who was then Governor of
Flanders, did believe, that time of War ought not to be a time of Rejoicing,
and that a Married-man would Husband his Life better than a Bachelor, or
whether some other whimsie possessed him, which the Lovers never heard of; but
he gave Don Antonio to understand, that he would oblige him by deferring the
Consummation of his Nuptials, till the Campaign was over; and this Desire was
clothed in such Language, as would admit of no denial.

This retarding of the Match was very grievous to two persons that were agreed,
that loved each other very passionately, and desired a long while the
completing of their Espousals; but they must be patient; for the Governors of
Flanders are like so many Petty Kings as to Authority: and as in case of
Marriages, one obstacle seldom comes unaccompanied; so not only Don Antonio was
taken Prisoner, as I told your Highness already, but after the Conclusion he
was sent to Madrid, where he was in great danger of losing his Head.

I never thoroughly understood what he was accused of; but I think it was
because he espoused too much the Interests of Don Juan. Whatsoever it was, he
was kept Prisoner, and had need of the assistance of all his Friends to save
his Life upon this occasion.

There was a Rumor spread about Brussels, that he was dead; and they reported
so many circumstances of his Death, that the poor Canoness believed them to be
true, and mourned for him, as if she had really lost him.

She loved him sufficiently, to prefer him before all that would court her to
marriage: But this Love did not extend so far, as to make her to keep her self
single all her Life; she soon thought of getting another Lover: And as she was
beautiful, and one of the best Families in Hainault, she wanted not Suitors to
supply that Vacancy. They talked of three or Four Marriages, as if they had
been just ready to conclude; and this Bruit came to the ears of one called Don
Pedro de Larra, who was the best Friend that Don Antonio had in the whole
world. This Don Pedro had been the Confident to whom he had unbosomed himself,
concerning the Amors between his Friend and the Canoness; and was possessed
with an opinion that his Friend would die for Grief, if he should return, and
find his Mistress married.

Therefore he made haste to Maubeuge, and after he had blamed this Girl for her
Ingratitude, he assured her that he had received Letters from her Lover, that
he was upon the Way, in order to his Return; and that she would see him very
speedily in greater Favor and more Amorous than ever,

She gave not much credit to these Assurances, but would needs see a Letter
from Don Antonio, and that could not be done; for he was a Prisoner of State,
and they seldom permit those that are so, to keep a correspondence with their
Friends by Missives. Well, the Canoness still took her own course; and the
officious Don Pedro, not knowing what to do to guard his Friend from the
Mischief that threatened him, bethought himself of a very Comical Stratagem.

He was well born, and had a very large settled Estate; he seemed to put himself
in the number of Pretenders; and when he was admitted, he knew so well how to
make obstructions to impede the Conclusion, (and that is no difficult thing to
one that will make it his business) that in fine, the Canoness was still a Maid
when Don Antonio returned into the Low Countries.

I cannot forbear smiling still, Madam, when I think on the Success that
Crowned the good Intentions of this poor Man. He has said since that, that he
was forced to expose himself to strange Violences, to dissemble the being a
Courtier of this young Gentlewoman; and that by a Capricio, which he himself
knew no reason for, he had a natural aversion for her. In the interim, Madam,
he was so assiduous, and behaved himself so passionately, that he was looked
upon as a real Lover: and when at the return of Don Antonio he thought to have
had the merited Applause for his Care, and a cessation of so rude a Constraint,
he found that his Friend had changed his mind, and that he would not court her
any more.

It Is thought, that the Levity of the Canoness had disgusted him, and that he
would not make her his Wife, who was so easily comforted at his Death: But he
did not make use of this reason; and whether he durst not trust himself, and
feared the declaring of it to her; or that he would carry all things fairly
with the Gentlewomans Parents, who were persons of great Authority, he
pretended that he believed Don Pedro was absolutely in Love; and saying that he
would not be surpassed in Generosity, he added, That he yielded his place to
his Friend without Reluctance, and that he was very joyful to offer him this
Sacrifice.

You would have laughed excessively, Madam, if you had heard all the
Compliments that passed hereupon. They were there when we arrived at Maubeuge;
and I never met with any thing in all my Life more pleasant than this Dispute;
for they strained themselves to the utmost speaking in the praise of the
deserving Canoness. They protested, that because they were too real Friends to
do any thing amiss, they therefore forbore the taking her away voiolently one
from the other; and with these fine Discourses they both Intrigu'd themselves,
and the poor Lady was in danger of living unmarried.

I told your Highness that her Parents were most considerable Persons. They
were tired out to see her sported with at this rate; and being resolved that
one of them should marry her, things came to that height, that the Count de
Monterey was forced to take Cognizance of it, and to endeavor their
Reconciliation.

To this end he sent several times to Maubeuge, and I was a constant Testimony
of the Messages that were sent: for I found this was a very pleasant Story; I
implunged my self in it to divertise my self, and had so well gained the
friendship of the Canoness, that she did nothing but what she first entrusted
me with.

This produced a very pleasant effect, Madam; for as it fell out, he that was
entrusted with the Charge of coming to learn the Sentiments of this young
Gentlewoman was Heir to the Marchioness of Sevil; and as we did always
associate together, he saw me, and testified that he took delight enough in my
Company. I knew him not to be what he was; for he went under the name of a
Marquisate he had lately purchased; nor did he know me for the Lady d'Englesac;
and I went for one of the Abbess's Nieces, and bore the name of her Family.

We put our selves, I know not how, to play upon the Intrigue of Don Pedro, and
the Deference or Accusation of Don Antonio. I said pretty tolerable things upon
that subject, and in fine, such as were so pleasant, that the new Marquess was
much taken with my Conversation, and consulted how to bestow Visits on me in
private.

I would not permit them, being fearful of attracting to me other persons, who
might discover me; and I sent him word twice or thrice, that I was untoward or
ill; but as he still pertinaciously prosecuted his design, and to return him
always one and the same answer had been to make a Mock of him, my Abbess told
me, that I had no need to create me new Enemies; and was the first that sent me
to receive this Gentleman's Visit.

Which was at the beginning serious enough on my part; and I think he had no
great desire for a second, if I had continued my Talk; but he brought in the
Discourse of the Count de Monterey very properly, and gave me such satisfaction
of the absolute Command that he had over him, that I looked upon him as a
Person fit to do me Service, and by whose means I hoped to raise a
Counterbattery to balance the Favor of my Enemies.

Behold, I beseech you, Madam, if I did well in this, and if I was not
Comically inclined, to imagine that I could make this man act against himself.
I have laughed heartily since that this Imagination possessed me; and it had
been very well, if I had advanced the error so far as to entrust him with my
Affairs, and require his Protection. I was just ready to do it, and without
doubt had done it, if he had not prevented me, and taught me with whom I
entertained Discourse, before I was fully resolved upon what I had to say to
him.

I have observed to your Highness, that I was not so cold in the conclusion of
the first Visit as at the beginning; I became a little more sociable, and
though I did not treat him like one of my intimate Friends, yet I made him
believe at least, that in process of time he might be so; and gave him leave,
without any great Importunity, to visit me at pleasure.

He did not fail to make use of this permission; for, Madam, it is most certain
he found me according to his desire, and that his mistake caused more agreeable
Effects in him, than mine did in me: He took upon him all the Commissions or
Charges that could detain him at Maubeuge; he had always new businesses; and
sometimes by the Canoness, with whose Intrigues he did very much entangle
himself, sometimes for some accommodation of two or three neighboring
Gentlemen. He knew how to manage his business so well, that there seemed to be
no affectation in his Conduct; and he never forsook our Society, but at such
certain times when he could not see us.

This signified something more than I at present apprehended: for he had always
his Eyes fixed upon me; his Glances were very passionate; he commended me
highly; and when occasion was offered to talk of his settled Estate, he always
told me, that he had a Wife in a dying condition, and should be in a capacity
very speedily to court a young Gentlewoman.

But, Madam, I did not apply all his discourse to my self; and whether it was
that I had so absolutely lost the Idea of all Lovers, that I took no notice of
the management of their Passion, or that, being resolved to engage no more in
Love, I flattered my self with the opinion that I should never again occasion
it; I never fancied that this man had any kindness for me.

Yet he loved me with a most violent Passion, as he gave sufficient testimony
of it afterward, and could not contain himself any longer from discovering it.
This Conversation was very delightful, and deserves to be exactly related to
your Highness. I know not whether that very day I was more captivating than
ordinary; or whether our Flemish Marquess did fancy so; but he expatiated
again upon the subject of my Beauty, saying, it was the effect of my
Tranquillity: he pursued sighing, that he had not the like good fortune; for
his Eyes had been divorced from sleep through Passion a month or thereabout.

To which I replied, Is it because you are grown Amorous? not thinking that I
had said the truth. He answered, that I guessed very well; and in effect he was
the most tormented with that Passion of any man living; and beginning to extend
his discourse upon the Beauty and Merit of the person he loved, he said so
much, which he seemed to apply to me, that I began at length to open my Eyes,
and apprehend that I might be the Object of his Passion.

This suspicion did much trouble me; for as I have said, Madam, I thought this
man might be serviceable to me; and was very much disturbed to see that Love
did again turmoil this business, as it had done so many other before.

Then I said all I could to persuade this Lover that a married Man ought not to
trouble his head with Love-toys. He was of my opinion; for in that Country it
was held a Maxim, that a Man ought to be faithful to his Wife; but he thought
he did not owe so much fidelity to his own; for he swore he never loved her,
and that he had never married her, but only to support himself by the
Authority of his Excellency in some of his Affairs, of which mine was one.

You may imagine, Madam, if you please, how much I was amazed at this his
discourse. I made him repeat it more than once; and when by his frequent
Repetitions I understood that it was my Enemy I talked to, I was as much
surprised as I am now that he did not perceive it.

But he had other things in his head; he thought of nothing but his Love, and
did not imagine that the confidence he reposed in me was in the Countess of
Englesac. I found this Adventure so pleasant, that I could not forbear
laughing, and that I must divertise my self therewith in spite of all the
Vexations that I foresaw might accrue to me thereby. He wished that I had been
more serious in this matter, and said much in prejudice of my Jollity; but the
more he talked, the more he provoked me to Laughter, insomuch, that he not
being able to bear with my Mirth, and I incapable to forbear, he left me very
much incensed, as I guess, because I did share so little with him in his
Afflictions; and I went to seek my Abbess, to acquaint her with what had happened
to me.

I found her in a very bad humor to take delight in this Recital; for she had
received news from Cologne, which touched her to the very quick: and here,
Madam, I must give you a relation of some part of her History; I promised it
you in the end of the precedent Book; and I have so satisfied her that she
might really confide in your Goodness and Discretion, that she has permitted
me to acquaint you with her concerns, according as I thought convenient to
discourse them. I must confess, Madam, that Love is an universal Passion; and
if there were only need of Companions in Adventures to comfort them, I should
not have been destitute of that consolation: But I cannot be taken with such
things as these; and the affliction of unfortunate Lovers is a new Subject of
trouble to me.

The Abbess I mention was one of this number: She is of Germany; and the Ladies
of this Climate are not accused of taking too much to heart the passion of
Love. But she was of a more brisk Constitution than her Country-women usually
are, and deeply in love with a neighboring Lord who was designed her Husband
from her Childhood.

For, Madam, I must say this in her commendation, that no person exceeds her in
Wisdom; and if the Commands of her Parents had not oversway'd her Inclinations,
she had indisputably overcome them: But as all the world seemed to approve of
them, and that she foresaw no obstacle that could intervene, she yielded up her
heart solely to him. The young Courtier had done as much to her; they loved
each other most fervently; and every thing at first seemed so propitious to
them, that there wanted nothing to consummate their Marriage, but the arrival
of her Uncle, who had a mind to assist at the Ceremony, and was gone to the
Emperor's Court, to negotiate some affairs which I could never understand.

But, Madam, when a person is born for Adventures, it is to no purpose to
contend* The Influence of the Stars is predominant* and when one thinks least
of it, something falls out, which makes the most innocent and common business
subject to a Romantic fate.

First; This Gentlewomans Father fell sick before the return of the Uncle so
much expected; he died of that distemper, and when he was dead, his Widow, who
was then young enough, and Mistress of a very great fortune, made it be noised
abroad that she had had a long time a private Inclination to he intended
Son-in-Law.

She disguised it at first with other pretenses saying, That since the Death of
her Husband she understood her estate better than formerly that that person was
not a suitable Match for her Daughter; and that she had another in hand, who
was a better fortune, and would be more suitable to her. But seeing that this
was not looked upon as a sufficient and valid consideration to break off a
Marriage so forward, and the most considerable Relations of the party deceased
did affirm, that he desired this business might be brought to a period, and
that it ought to be accomplished; she resolved to take another course.

The Uncle, who had been so long and so unluckily expected, was a very covetous
man, and might be wrought upon to do any thing for lucre, and a person of great
credit in the Family; for he was the only Brother of the person deceased: The
Mother wins him by Presents and Promises; and when she saw him wholly at her
devotion, they complotted together one of the greatest Cheats that ever was,
which your Highness, questionless, will not hear without astonishment.

The Old man had married to his second Wife a Widow, who had a very docile
Child by her former Husband, and for whom the good man had a great Affection:
This Boy was not rich, and his Father-in-Law was willing that he should be
wealthy, provided it were not at his charge: they resolved to put this
supposititious Lover in the place of him that really affected the Lady; and by
these following Contrivances they arrived at their end.

They attempted what they could to prevail with the Girl by Remonstrances and
Menaces, which were both unprofitable. She would keep her Fathers word; and the
Amorous Mother was in fear every minute that she had performed it already. The
Uncle, who was gained by the other party, was the first that advised her to
prosecute her Resolution effectually; but he counseled her withal to do it
privately, and promised her both his Protection and Assistance therein. Your
Mother, said he, will carry away a great part of the Estate of Inheritance; She
may remarry, and so this Estate will go to another Family; therefore she ought
not to be moved against you by a public disobedience; and it was far better
to bring her to her self by degrees, and not to let her know that the Evil is
remediless, till she was prepared to understand it by many other things
precedent to that confession.

The poor young Gentlewoman, who was not capable of Malice, and therefore
believed that all the world was incapable thereof as well as she, accepted with
many thanks the advice of her Uncle, and left her self solely to his Conduct.
He carried her to a House of his in the Country, and made her believe that she
was much obliged to him for the pains that he took to obtain this leave of her
Mother. He found out a Priest and a Notary, and assured her that her Lover had
notice to be there at the time appointed. He persuaded her that she must
conceal her self carefully from the Servants of the house, for fear her Mother
should get some intimation of what they were about; and for this reason made
choice of the Night-season; and the Chapel wherein this was to be effected was
made very dark. What shall I say, Madam? this poor young Lady married the
Uncle's Son-in-law in lieu of the person to whom she thought she was espoused;
and as Chance does nothing by halves, there was always some resemblance between
them, nay there was very much; but above all, in their Voice.

This Change put upon her has somewhat in it so much above what is ordinary,
that it will seem fabulous to those that know not the Original, as I do; or who
do not rely upon my words in some measure, as your Highness does. In the
interim, Madam, nothing is more real than the story I am about to tell you: But
why should I fear being believed by you? you knew particularly a famous Abbess
of France, who had the same Misfortune: in truth she that I speak of, told me
the Deceit took not so deep impression in her as in the French Lady; for she
owned her supposed Spouse as soon as she was going out of the Chapel, and
nothing more passed between them two. But here too much had passed already for
a virtuous person, and one that naturally feared all Adventures like death it
self.

I cannot recount to you, Madam, all the Complaints and Regrets of this
unfortunate Lover, when she discovered their perfidiousness. She called her
Uncle Cheat and Dissembler a thousand times one after another. She blamed her
self for her own simplicity: she accused her Stars of injustice; and above all,
afflicted her self with the suspicion she had that her Lover would conclude her
faithless.

She would willingly have prevented this, by acquainting him with the truth of
things; but they denied her that liberty. It may be they had hopes in time to
calm her; and that nothing might traverse this hope of theirs, she was not
permitted to associate with any person whatsoever

In the mean while, Madam, you may very well suppose that her private Rivaless
was not asleep. She had found out some people who were wicked enough to assure
her Lover that his Mistress had fully consented to the Marriage; that they were
Witnesses thereof; and that she lived with her Husband as the most tender and
passionate Woman in the world. These false rumors produced all the expected
effects imaginable. This poor man was in Despair; and the Amorous Mother,
thinking to take advantage of this favorable opportunity, did not fail to
cause some Propositions to be made to him upon her own account, as to her self.

They were set off with the fairest gloss that could be invented. She said that
the Inconstancy of her Daughter did strike her with horror; and that it was to
make some kind of Reparation that she proffered this betrayed Lover both her
Person and Fortune. All the world knew very well that she had openly declared
her self against him, and she could not deny it; but she said, that at last she
did yield to the perseverance of both these Lovers: That she was now in
balance, her Daughter being gone; and that she was much troubled she did not
give her time to determine that business.

But, Madam, she might say and do what she would, the Lover still was Amorous
of his Mistress; and if he were grown desperate to see himself thus betrayed,
yet it was a tender Despair, and not a brutish and vindicative Resentment.

Two months complete were elapsed in this manner, during which time, our
new-married Gentlewoman, who was not, for all this, the Wife of her Husband,
did so feelingly represent unto him the remorse that an honest man exposes
himself to when he exercises violence upon a Woman's Inclinations, and that he
abuses a power that is not lawfully given him, that he conceived a kind of
horror within himself for the action he had done, and resolved to make
reparation for it by all possible means.

The new-married Man was, as I acquainted your Highness, a kind of tractable
Youth, and well enough principled, who demonstrated more Obedience than Malice
in all these Transactions. His Father-in-Law proposed this Cheat to him, and he
acted it without prying into the consequences that might follow; but when he
saw apparently that he should make a person very unhappy, and lead his life
with a woman from whom he could expect nothing but Complaints and Reproaches,
he freely set his hand to the rupture of the Marriage; and leading his Wife
into a Convent, whereof one of his Aunts was Abbess, and she her self became
Abbess afterward, they parted the best friends in the world.

This Retreat made a great noise throughout the whole Country where 'twas
transacted: the cause was at last known; and the Lover making haste to clear up
the truth, no sooner understood the innocence of his Mistress, but thought to
bring her back with him, and at last to conclude that Marriage which had been
so often crossed.

But she had an insuperable reluctance to see that she had two Husbands at
once; he might talk if he would, and say that he did not believe her to be Wife
to the first, and that he would remember that Adventure only to enhance her
estimation with him: She said that all the world would not be of his opinion;
and continuing firm in her Resolution of making her self a Nun, they converted
their Love into such innocent and endeared Friendship, that it cannot be too
much admired.

One day they would have married the man I am talking of; and the Religious
Woman newly entered, who judged this Match might be advantageous, advised him to
accept of it. I shall see you then with less scruple, said she, for I shall
never possess your whole heart. And though mine be replete with none but
innocent desires, and that I believe yours are the same; Methinks an honest
Wife, and one that should love you well, would better suit with this Innocence:
and this is a Caution we should do well to give one another. You have a
sufficient one in the Character of your Soul, Madam, said he, and in that that
you have been able to imprint upon my esteem of you; I look upon you with
admiration, which permits me not to love you like another woman: and judge you,
Madam, if it be not with justice that I make such a difference between you and
others. I have found you tender, not weak. You have seen your self basely
betrayed without Despair. You have quitted one Husband, and he never complains
of your Conduct; you have driven one Lover into Despair, and yet he cannot
reproach you in the least; and by a Privilege granted from Heaven to you
only, you are a Wife, Lover, and Nun, without failing in any of your Duties.
How can I know you so well, and suffer any vacant place in my Heart for another
Woman to supply? Madam, don't ordain me to marry an honest person; and one that
could love, without doubt would complain of her Choice; and in the humor I am
in now, I should look upon my self as very unhappy, if I should not make may
Wife absolutely happy.

This was the delicate and passionate Gentleman that was wounded at the siege
of Cologne; and that I found the poor Abbess drowned in the Tears he had so
well merited, when I came to acquaint her with my last Adventure.

She was so pleased herewith, that she made a Truce with her Grief, for a small
time, to give ear to it. And as my Stars will create me Lovers and Suitors
everywhere, she gave me Relation for Relation; and told me that Don Pedro was
also grown in Love with me.

I perceived no such thing, and I did not believe the Abbess when she told me
this news. But, Madam, I could not by any means question it afterward; for as
she went for my Aunt, and that he believed I was committed to her Tutelage, he
addressed himself to her, discovered his Amors, assuring her that he had but
an Honest and Lawful Design.

This did not take much with me; for, in the humor I was in at that time, I
did as much detest a Lover under the name of a Husband, as under any other
form. But I thought I stood in need of all the world, and feared some dreadful
effects of our Marquess his Resentment, if he came to discover the cheating
trick that his Heart had played him.

Therefore I treated his Rival more civilly than I should have done, if I had
followed my own Sentiments; and as that did somewhat confine my Spirit, and did
not willingly admit of Courtiers, or else did divertise my self by turning what
they said into Ridicule, I often revenged my self of this constraint by the
Questions that I put on my part, and by the Person that I made him represent.

He was engaged very deeply in many of my particular Concerns, and told me all
the ways that he made use of to deprive me of the Requests of the Marchioness
of Sevil. This put me upon it to ask him sometime or other some news of my own;
and you would have laughed, Madam, sufficiently, had you but heard how I
persecuted him on this Subject.

He knew nothing of them, as your Highness may imagine; but I pretended that he
did; and that it was out of mistrust or defiance that he would not acquaint me
therewith. He would not let me continue long in that opinion; and giving me a
relation of the first Adventure that he could call to mind, he put me in
thoughts of the most pleasant things in the world.

I remember that one day he made me walk in Man's Apparel, in I know not how
many Towns in Italy, and gave me several Adventures which are known to befall a
fair Lady of great Quality; for whom certainly I could not be mistaken.

He told me one among the rest which was very pleasant, and would agree with me
well enough if I were detained in a Convent where I should give my self over to
wearisomness, and tire the people with looking after me. He said that the Lady
whom he would have me to be, loved Hunting extremely, and was very much
disturbed if she passed the Season without Hunting; for it must be about that
time that she entered in Religion. She complained of this her trouble to a
Gentleman of Quality, who found out the way of seeing her at the Grate, and
who, as it is reported, was a little concerned. He sent her a live Hare, and
some Dogs for the Chase. I know not, Madam, whether, this Hare did escape from
the place where she was looked after, or whether there was in all that as great
a malice as desire to hunt; but this Hunting-bout was at Midnight; and the Nuns
were in their deep sleep, when as they heard a noise of Dogs and voices in
their Dormitory, which were taken for a company of Hobgoblins or Spirits, and
put them to the greatest fright that ever they were in before.

Poor Girls! They could not but be much terrified indeed; and such a horrid
noise as this must prove a very strange awakening in a morning to Nuns, when
fast asleep. Our Marquess would needs persuade me, that this Folly brought many
troublesome businesses up^on me; and you had laughed, Madam, beyond measure, had
you beheld with what Ingenuity he did assure me that all this befell me.

He presented me with such Comedies daily, and I contributed as much as I could
to cherish him in his error; for the Siege of Cologne continued still, and it
was now more difficult than ever to enter into that City, without running a
great deal of danger: Therefore I concealed my self from the Marquess with
great care; but, Madam, when Chance intermeddles with business, it is in vain to
be precaution'd against it: and I was discovered by the most unexpected
Accident in the world, which I could not possibly avoid.

I told your Highness, that passing by Lions, I met with a Friend of mine, who
was a Pensionaress in the Convent of the Ladies of St. Peter, and that she had
no more reason to commend Men than my self. I must show you some cause she had
to complain of them. For besides that I have still a design herein to discover
the Levity of Mankind, and that I abhor it too much to speak favorably of it;
this little discovery, or clearing of the thing, seems in my opinion necessary
for the understanding of the ensuing Discourse.

She was formerly deeply engaged with a Friar Minorite, who following the
custom of most Young Men, repented of the Promises he had made her, and would
fain have disengaged himself of them. This was the occasion of many Suits at
Law between this person and her Lover; and because she was overthrown in them,
she retired from the world, and put her self into the Convent, where I told you
I met with her.

She seemed to me resolved never to go out of it as long as she lived, and I
did very much encourage her in this resolution; for though I love not a
Convent, I find that they are very happy Receptacles for those that fancy
them; and I advise all persons to enter into them, who can dwell there without
great Reluctance.

I had often very earnestly persuaded my Friend to take this course, and
thought she had done so; for she did satisfy me at my departure that she
would: But, Madam, when a Woman makes so great a progress as to love in
earnest, and that a man is satisfied she does so, this goes a great way in the
business.

This very Lover that she knew to be so inconstant and so insincere, found out
(by what means I know not) a way how to see her again, and there was wrought an
Accommodation between them. He told her he had done nothing but out of policy,
and in obedience to his Tutor, which he could not avoid; but that withal he
well understood his own Duty, and would be no ways wanting therein, when he
should become absolute Master of his desires.

This poor Gentlewoman believed him, and he recommenced his former familiarity;
and because that by reason of what had passed she durst not see him publicly,
she sometimes went out of her Convent, pretending business, and they met and
had their private walks together: Yet they could not be so private but that the
Parents of the Gentlewoman had some intelligence of it, and that did very much
irritate them; for this man had treated her very ill, and she did her self a
great injury in seeing him again.

Therefore her Parents did lie in wait to ensnare them, and surprised them at a
Rendezvous appointed by them in the Spring-Gardens near Lions; they had a mind
to take away their Child by force, and threatened her with no less punishment
than to starve her between four Walls. The Lover did very vigorously oppose
their design, and he deserves to be commended for this action eternally. He
killed a man in defense of his Mistress, and was so violentlty prosecuted for
this man's death, that he was forced to absent himself and go to Flanders,
where his Mistress came to him, and hoped to make him give her reparation for
all his past Faults. He did promise her very seriously to do it; I know not
whether he was as good as his word. But in fine, they were in Flanders, and she
was carried by a Gentlewoman with whom she had got acquaintance in that
Country, to see the College of Maubeuge.

I was at that time walking in one of their Gardens, where they entertain
Company, with my two Lovers, and five or six Canonesses. This imprudent woman,
knowing me before I took notice of her, ran to me with open Arms, crying out, I
am not mistaken, it is the Lady d'Englesac; which struck all the Company with
the greatest admiration imaginable.

My Name was very well known in Flanders; and the Suits that I had about the
Inheritance of the Marchioness of Sevil, were as yet very fresh in the Memory
of all persons. The Canonesses with whom I was, were not unacquainted with
them; they were infinitely surprised at what they heard, and one of them ran
and told it to some others that were walking not far off. It was soon
understood in the College what obliged me to conceal my self. I would fain
have persuaded them that this woman was mistaken, and made signs to her to say
as I said; but she was too long before she apprehended me, and the Action was
too natural to leave the truth of the thing questionable.

Do you but imagine, Madam, the astonishment of the Marquess, when he had
reason to believe I was the same Lady d'Englesac that he had so much
persecuted; and the Combat that was in his Heart between his Love and all that
should tend to his Destruction. You might easily guess at his agitation or
disturbance by the changing of his Countenance: I never saw a Face carry more
discontent in it, and I expected some terrible effect of his Transport, when I
saw him turn his Back upon us, and depart so rudely out of the Garden, that I
had not so much time as to exchange one word with him.

I was troubled that he left us thus, and would willingly have made an Essay
how he stood affected toward me, before he had seen any person that might have
incensed him against me. I desired Don Pedro to go after him, and to bring him
back to me if possible; but he could not find him; for he had taken Horse, and
it was not known till a long time after what was become of him.

You cannot believe, Madam, the noise that this accident made at Brussels.
Maubeuge, as it is probable you know, is not far distant from thence, and there
is great Communication between both these Towns; for many Ladies of Maubeuge
have their Families at Brussels, and make it their Winter Quarters. They soon
knew that the Marchioness de Meneza, which was then known to be the Countess of
Englesac, was in that Country; that she had sojourned there for some time under
an imaginary Name: and as those people who make it their business to poison all
things with the virulency of their Tongues, do not stop half way, they assigned
several causes of this my Disguise, which I never so much as thought of, and
indeed was certainly incapable of dreaming any such thing.

The absence of the Flemish Marquess did help to render these rumors more
dangerous. The Earl of Monterey was angry with him, because he went away
without taking leave of him. His Lady was so vexed at it, that she grew worse
ill than ordinary, and they looked upon me as the cause of all; for they began
to reason and argue upon his being so long at Maubeuge. It was well known that
he visited me as often as he had an opportunity; and when they saw him thus
departed almost half desperate, and without prosecuting any of his Suits
against me, they guessed at one part of the Truth, and his Parents wished me
very ill for it.

My Abbess and I did imagine with reason that we must steal our selves away
from their Resentments; and we also apprehended that the Ladies of Maubeuge
were discontented that this Comedy was acted among them; but we knew not how to
get from them: for this was the time when the French King made War against the
Hollanders, and all these Countries were overrun with Soldiers, some being
put into Maubeuge for its safeguard, to hinder the Enemy from insulting.

Upon this consideration we durst not expose our selves to pass through so many
Troops unknown; and much less required Guards or Pasports under our Name; for I
feared some ill turn from the Heirs of the Marchioness of Sevil; and my Abbess
had the goodness to believe upon my account, as if they had been her own.

The Love of Don Pedro was hereupon a great help to us; for Don Antonio of
Corduba was at last reconciled to his Mistress, and resolved to consummate the
Marriage. This left Don Pedro entirely to me; and I was not less acceptable to
him when I was the Lady d'Englesac, than how as Niece to the Abbess of Cologne.
On the contrary, I think that I pleased him better, and that he framed within
himself such Idea's of my person since he knew me, as rejoiced him more than
those he had when he knew me not.

Hereupon he came very obligingly, and proffered us a Castle for our Retreat in
a Country that was Neuter, and his Guard to conduct us. I confess, Madam, that
this offer did not a little please me, and that in spite of my scornful
humor; I knew then that I had really touched the Heart of Don Pedro. We did
accept of his Retirement with satisfaction, and his Conduct also, and had all
the reason in the world to be pleased therewith at the very first; for the
Castle whither he led us was very pleasant, and we arrived there without any
accident. It belonged to a Lord of Liege, one of his Friends, who was then near
the Prince of Liege, and had a very great Employment that fixed him there, who
had left there two Sisters and one Relation, who seemed to be very rational
persons.

Don Pedro leaving us with them, returned for Brussels, where his Duty obliged
him to be; but promised to come and revisit us as soon as he could, and in the
mean time to inform us of all News, wherein I was in the least concerned.

I heard none but what was troublesome; for, Madam, the absent Marquess was
dead since our departure; and they wished me as much prejudice upon the account
of his Death, as if I had murdered him. Alas! I could not contribute much to
it; for, Madam, if you remember, the first time that her Husband spoke to me of
her, he told me she was threatened with sudden Death: But they had intercepted I
know not what Letter which this man had sent to me at Maubeuge, wherein he
made, as they report, great Protestations of Love to me. This woman was jealous
hereat, and they would have this to be the cause of her Death, rather than the
mortal Disease which had seized upon her a long time before.

This Letter so surprised, created two or three bad effects. For the Love of
the Marquess passed for current, which at first was only suspected upon very
weak grounds. They supposed, and that is seldom wanting in Detractors, that I
had entertained him either with Favors or Hopes. This did again cloud my
Reputation de novo; and that which proved worse in the consequence was, that
Don Pedro seeing he had a declared Rival, and understanding that the Death of
his Wife made him sole Master of his Actions, he feared some Enterprises, and
hereupon made me be kept up in this Castle, like a Prisoner.

I did not perceive any thing of this; for I seldom went abroad; and if I did,
and had spied any Soldiers, I should have looked upon them as our Protectors,
and not our Goalers. Thus I patiently waited for the end of the War at Cologne,
and according to the gayety of my own Humor, I only sought after some company
among the Ladies of Liege, to comfort up my self in these new troubles that
befell me. I told your Highness that they were persons very rational; and they
proved so indeed. They had been educated at Brussels, where the Gentry are very
polite, and endeavor to imitate their great Lords. They were more witty and
pleasant than usually the Women of Liege are; and his Niece, above all, was the
most Complaisant and Mild Person that ever I was acquainted with; her Name was
Angelica, and her Mother was the Confident of the Amors of the Duke -- Uncle
to the deceased person last mentioned, and of the Countess of -- This
Gentlewoman and I contracted a very firm Friendship; and she sometimes gave me
an account of what she had learned from her Mother, concerning this Love I am
discoursing of. Without any fallacy, Madam, these two Lovers must needs love
each other very passionately; and I wonder that their Love continued not as
long as their Life. They had a secret pre-apprehension, which advertised them
of their Arrival, a long time before they saw one another; and you may judge,
Madam, if you please, whether or no this Precognition was just?

The Duke became jealous of the Earl of -- who was indeed very amorous of the
Countess, and known to be one of the best-shaped men in the world. She did not
love him; and whatsoever is said of it, Angelica has vowed to me, that Madam de
-- loved the Duke de -- only; but he was not so well satisfied with his good
fortune as he ought to have been; and being daily informed that his Rival was
very assiduous and passionate, he resolved to question him for it privately,
and to that purpose came to Brussels incognito.

At this time there was great Joy for the Birth of a Prince born in Spain,
named Balthazar; the Duke was not ignorant thereof; For what Man of his Quality
is there that understands not those things? He knew therefore that upon that
occasion there would be great rejoicing in those Countries, for the King of
Spain is their Sovereign. Therefore he believed this a very favorable time for
his designs; came to Brussels unknown, as I said before, the better to deceive
his Mistress; and wrote to her that he was going from France a Journey quite
contrary to that.

At his arrival, he lodged in a very retired place; and Fortune favoring him
in all things, he understood that several Lords of that Country designed an
Indian Mascarade, and went in that Disguise to the Apartment of the Countess de
Cante-Croix, where there was to be a very numerous Assembly: he procured the
sight of one of those Habits, nor was there any great trouble in that; for
there were no orders that they should not be shown; and made one just like it,
who intermixing himself with these Maskers, entered with them into the Hall,
where they danced.

There he saw Madam de -- who appeared more beautiful in his eye than ever; and
Monsieur the Earl of -- just by her; for he was always there at such Meetings;
and she could not hinder him, because of the Reverence that was due to his
Quality. I believe, as the Gentlewoman of Liege said, that Madam de -- was
importuned by that Man; and they pretend that at that very time her Discourse
did very much trouble him.

But, Madam, if she had been very pleasant with him, the Duke de -- could not
have been a witness thereof; for as soon as he came in, the Countess felt such a
kind of emotion within her, as she used to have at his Appearance. She could
not believe it a mistake; and notwithstanding what her Lover had sent to her
concerning an intended Journey, she searched very diligently for him among me
Maskers, that at last she discovered him.

This did very much noise the business abroad; for the Passionate Lady for joy
at first of seeing him again, could not dissemble her Sentiment: And the Lover
himself was likewise so much transported, that he forgot the reason he had to
conceal his love. I will not tell you his Reasons, for all France knows them,
and therefore you cannot be ignorant of them. Besides, Madam, I tell you all
this only en passant, and because it is to the purpose.

I saw the Original of one of the Duke's Letters, upon this effect of Sympathy,
which in my opinion was one of the most curious things that ever was penned. He
complained of the excess of his good Fortune; for he did confess it was a very
great happiness to be thus found out by his Mistress: but said, that this
deprived him of the pleasure of seeing what was then in her Heart, without her
desire to show it him.

These kind of discoveries were in his opinion one of the greatest Joys that a
Lover could be sensible of; and nothing appeared more moving to a noble Soul,
than these Effluxes of Tenderness and Sincerity, where neither Art nor
Precaution can be suspected to bear any part.

I cannot, Madam, express all this to you so well as it was done in that Letter
I mentioned. To do this exactly, I should produce the Letter it self; but that
is imposible: for besides that Angelica kept it up very cautiously, I had then
so many businesses befell me, that I found no time to spare in other persons
business.

Cologne was besieged, as I told your Highness, and I question not but you have
been informed thereof by other hands. The Siege was obstinate enough at first;
but at last they were forced to condescend to whatever their Prince would
propose. Thus the taking thereof put a period to the War in those parts, and
our Abbess was once more permitted to travel.

And she was the more impatient, because her Friend that was Wounded was still
very ill; and that she thought if she came in person to assist him in the Cure,
she should soon see him recover his Health. Therefore she made very speedy
preparations for her Departure: But, Madam, we were much surprised,
understanding by an Officer that Don Pedro sent to us, that she was not to take
me along with her, and must resolve to go without me, or else to continue there
a long time in the Country of Liege.

Do you but guess, Madam, how much we were amazed at this Compliment; and we
wondered at nothing more, than that this should come from Don Pedro himself; and
though I was persuaded that he loved me, and through Polity I had flattered
that very Affection of his with some hopes, yet he ever appeared to me so civil
and respective, that I could never entertain a thought of such an Enterprise.

Nor could I believe that it was done by his order; nay I told the Officer he
sent, that it was he that detained us thus to have some Reward, and that he
should be severely punished for it according to his Demerits; but he had his
Orders in writing, and brought one also with him from the Lord of the Castle,
whereby he commanded his Sisters to let Don Pedro have an absolute power in his
House, and not to oppose him in any designs.

Therefore 'twas in vain to complain to these poor Ladies of the violence that
was offered us; they could not any way remedy it, but seemed as much concerned
at it as we our selves. Our Abbess made a very great bustle that she was thus
treated, and threatened to complain of Don Pedro to the Governor of the
Low Countries, and bring this Business, if there were occasion, even into the
very Council in Spain: But they said they did not detain her, she might depart
when she thought convenient; and that they would conduct her as far as Cologne
if she desired it: that it was only I who was to be stopped, because Don Pedro
loved me too violently to suffer me to escape out of his Clutches without some
assurance of my Friendship; that he would be there very suddenly in person, and
endeavor to receive a testimony thereof; in the mean time I was as secure in
the House, as in a Convent at Cologne.

But the Abbess was not well satisfied herewith; she could not resolve to
forsake me, and expose me thus to the desires of a Person both Amorous and
Absolute: Nay, she seemed to have such a Combat within her self, between this
Generosity and the business that called her home, that I thought an hundred
times to conjure her to depart, and leave me to the conduct of Fortune; but
this very Fortune labored for me, when I never thought of it, and drew me out
of these evils, as she had done out of many others.

Angelica, of whom I have already spoken, did not dwell always with her
She-Cosins; for she had a Mother at Liege, and came to this House only to spend
some Months there in the Summertime. A young Brother of hers came to fetch
her at that time, when we received this Message from Don Pedro; and this poor
Gentlewoman was so moved with Compassion for my Trouble, and had so great a
Kindness for me, that she endeavored my Escape.

She had a great Influence upon her young Brother, being much his elder; and he
respected her as highly, as if he had been her own Son: she made him condescend
to lend me his Clothes, and continue there in mine, till she could send him
some other Garments.

The poor Boy dreamt of no other Mystery in this, but only a Trick of Youth, to
make some sport, and create diversion: he was very young and unexperienced, and
therefore without any more ado consented to his Sisters desires; and all things
being firmly agreed upon between our Abbess and our selves (for you may judge,
Madam, that I did not do it without her knowledge) I dressed my self up one
Morning with the Young-mans Apparel, and stood at the Door with Angelica, as if
I had been that very Brother of hers, who they knew was to have her back with
him.

It was then very early, and there was no Order to detain any one but me; the
Gentlewoman of Liege was strictly examined, whom they knew very well; and they
did not mind me, because they took me for a Boy, and knew there was one to go
along with her. What shall I say, Madam? we went out of the Castle very happily
under this my disguise; and by the conduct of an old Gentleman that belonged to
Angelica's Mother, who came with her Brother, and was well acquainted with the
way. We went to one of Baron de Roste's Houses, who is a great Lord of Liege,
to whom Angelica was of Kin, and whole Protection she depended upon, to conduct
me to Cologne.

I could not cease giving thanks to this generous Maid, and blessing Heaven
that I met with her so fortunately. We traveled with circumspection enough;
and I for my part was somewhat troubled that I had left Merinvil with the
Abbess, for fear she should discover me: but we could not forbear laughing at
Don Pedro, who might arrive that very day, and would be much startled to find
his Journey unsuccessful. We were informed since, that it fell out so as was
expected; and that he was transported with anger when he understood by the
Abbess that he must not expect me there. He did and said abundance of
extravagant things; he would needs kill the persons that had so ill guarded me,
and had almost lost all respect to the Young Man that lent me his Clothes. But
after all this, he was forced to take it patiently, and frequent the fair
Ladies in Brussels, to comfort him for my loss. He had a mind to send after
me, to quarrel with me; but besides that he knew not the way we took, there was
somewhat else to be considered, that violences are not committed unpunished in
Countries that are Neuter. And if he should undertake to force me away
publicly, some persons or other, to maintain their Privilege, would endeavor
to hinder him. All that he did was, he detained Angelica's Brother with his
she-Cozens, to see if they would not send to seek him, and if by that means he
could discover where I was: but that precaution did us more good than he
imagined; for we could not tell what to have done with that Young Man, if he
had been with us. Well, I came to the Baron de Roste's without any Accident,
Madam; and though he was not then at his House, and that one would think should
somewhat trouble us; We were so well entertained by his Mother, who was there,
that we persuaded our selves we might wait his return without impatience. He
was gone but to Namurs, which is not far from this Castle; the business that
carried him thither was almost over, and he was daily expected. Angelica
concluded that I must only be discovered to him; for women at the age of the
Baroness are often too severe upon such Enterprises and Disguisements, and the
Gentlewoman of Liege was afraid of being blamed by that good Lady.

But I think her fear was groundless; for the ancient Baroness understood the
world well, and they found she had not always lived in the Country. She was of
Brussels, and one of the greatest Ornaments of that place, when Monsieur the
Prince was there. She would sometimes tell us the Intrigues and Galantries of
that Court; and among other things, that Marigny was one of her intimate
Friends, and they still keep a Correspondence together by Letters. I ever
phancied this Man's Style, and testified so great a curiosity to see some of his
Letters, that the Baroness obliged us so far as to satisfy it. I was mentioned
in two or three; for they were all a kind of Gazette of the most considerable
Occurrences that passed at Paris and the French Court, and he had honored me
with one place in his Relations. They were not too true, nor too charitable;
but I found them throughout so full of pulse and vigor, that I believed such a
man as he was capable of any thing, and that his Malice must be pardoned in
favor of his Expressions. In the last Letter, Madam, I met with a piece of
news that did very much disturb me, and I am sure will trouble your Highness
likewise; that is, that the poor Countess of Susa was sick of an incurable
Distemper, and that she was looked upon as a dead woman. In truth, Madam, it is
great pity that this person should die so soon: She was a very Ingenious
person, and frequently composed Amorous Verses.

While we thus entertained one another in discourse, on a sudden we espied a
man on Horseback pass by, followed by a Valet de Chamber, whom the Baroness
knew to be one of her Son's best friends, and who without question came to give
him a Visit.

She went forward to meet with him, and we followed her; because we thought our
selves obliged in civility so to do. But, Madam, I attended her not long; for
as this man approached near us, I thought I should know him to be the Flemish
Marquess, of whom I have so much discoursed in my Adventures at Maubeuge.

And it was the same, Madam, indeed, nor was I mistaken; we understood since
that he had news of his Wife's Death, and returning to Brussels to order his
Affairs, he passed by the house of the Baron de Roste (who as I said before was
very much his friend) in his journey thither.

Judge you, Madam, if you please, what a condition I was in, when I saw that
man whom I did not in the least expect there, and from whom I had cause to fear
as many Persecutions as I lately suffered by Don Pedro. I returned to the house
all in a maze, and the Gentlewoman of Liege following me; for she perceived by
the alteration of my Countenance, that the arrival of this man did discompose
me, and asked the reason. We went together into a Garden, where they go through
a Glass-Portal belonging to a Hall; and I told her my discontent, and how in
endeavoring to escape out of the hands of one Lover, I was fallen unhappily
into those of another.

She was almost as much troubled at this Rencounter as my self; for I never
knew a more tenderhearted Girl, and she concerned her self with her friends
business as if it were her own. We consulted together what we should do to free
our selves from this mischief; and after many Arguments on both sides, 'twas
concluded, that the safest way was to counterfeit being Sick, and hide my self
till that man was gone.

To this end, I went and shut my self up in my Chamber, and Angelica went to
the Lady de Roste and told her I was troubled with a Meagrim, to which I was
very subject; and the best remedy for it was, not to speak to any one. She said
this only to prevent their seeking after me; but for her part she never left
me time after time, but came to understand how I stood affected, and to bring
me some Conserves, which I supped with that evening.

For, Madam, I forgot to tell you that I passed all this while for this Girls
Brother; and Fortune herein did very much favor our Cheat; because that young
Man had run through his course of Learning at Antwerp, where he had an Uncle,
and was little known by any of his Relations in the Country of Liege.

The Baroness of Roste knew very well that Angelica had a Brother; but for the
reason I told you, never saw him: and though she knew very well he could not be
above seventeen or eighteen years old, yet Women look so young when clothed in
Men's Apparel, that she did easily believe me to be the same person. Therefore
she thought it not strange that Angelica spent some part of the Evening with
me: nay, she had come her self, but that she thought she should disturb me.
Yet, Madam, I might have let her come, for my precaution was useless, and I
might as well have showed my self publicly as conceal my self.

You may well think, Madam, that we were forced to rely upon the Valet that
came with us; and he could not possibly see another person in the place and
habit of his young Master, without acquainting him with our Secret in some
measure.

We took all the precaution we could to engage him to secrecy and fidelity; but
at last we run the risque of his deceiving us; and he knew, as well as we, that
I was a Woman, and that I fled from the violence of Don Pedro.

He kept this business private enough whilst we were with the Baroness de
Roste; and you have heard, Madam, that I was not discovered: But he had been
formerly a Servant to this Flemish Marquess that I mentioned but just now; he
went from him only to be married, and had yet a great love for his old Master.
He thought he was not obliged to Silence with him, as he was with other
persons; and as soon as the Marquess saw him, and that he asked him what he did
there, he told him very fully and ingenuously what was the cause of it, and all
passages precedent to our arrival.

The Marquess had not so absolutely renounced Brussels and Maubeuge, but that
he had private Intelligence of all their Transactions. He understood by those
Letters that were sent to him, how Don Pedro had declared himself my Lover,
that he had conducted me to Liege, and that the Abbess of Cologne also went
along with me.

When he heard his old Servant tell him that he conducted a Woman in Man's
Apparel; that she escaped out of a Castle where she was with an Abbess, and
where a certain person, one Don Pedro de Larra, would have detained her; he
himself added to all this, that I counterfeited my being sick, as soon as he
came thither, because he should not see me, and he did not question but that I
was the Countess of Englesac. He told me since that, that Imagination did very
much enhance the Estimation and Tenderness he ever had for me; and that he
could not hear without much satisfaction, that I had testified so great a
Repugnance to an amorous Intrigue with the forementioned Don Pedro.

He spent a whole Night almost in taking to himself I know not how many
different Resolutions: And the next Day understanding where my Bedchamber was,
and being led thither, he came in and out like a Laquay from the Baroness to
understand how I did; I being very much amazed to see him at my Beds-head,
before I could use any means to prevent him.

I was so disturbed at his sight, that I could not speak one word to him; and
my silence, without doubt, made him guess at my commotion inwardly. Fear not,
Madam, said he, that my Visit shall prove injurious to you; I come not here to
upbraid you with the Errors into which you have plunged me, and which you have
maintained with so many Cheats and Dissimulation. On the contrary, I come to
assure you, that in my Opinion you are already justified; and it shall be only
your fault, if there follows not upon all that passed between us a most loving
and solid Friendship. I have contended with you about the Estate of Madam de
Seville, because I was persuaded it was more my Right than yours; Besides that,
there was some discourse both of you and her, that her Relations could not see
you without shame become her Legatory. To these Considerations of Policy and
Interest were added the naughty Character that they gave me of you; I am
satisfied within my self, that it was false, and take delight in so thinking.
For, Madam, I love you still, and will always love you as long as I live.

I trembled again when I heard him make these Protestations, and interrupted
him, saying, that certainly he deceived himself, and he did not love so much as
talked of.

Pardon me, Madam, he replied; I am not deceived, and do certainly love you as
much as I am capable of Love: but do not fear that this Love of mine has the
same effects as Don Pedro 's. I know very well that my Wife is dead, and her
death has rendered me absolute Master of my Will; but I have so often stoken ill
of you formerly, that I can no longer offer you the place that she possessed;
and think so well of you at present, that I should look upon it as a piece of
Injustice to offer you any other. The action of your stealing away from Don
Pedro has touched me to the very quick, and seems to be done by a very
virtuous person. You are she, Madam, without doubt, and they are sordid people
that have discoursed otherwise of you. Virtue in a Lady is not the only thing
that men always seek after; but for my own part, I declare it, that I love
dearly to meet with it in you; and that there is nothing which I will not do to
defend and proclaim yours abroad. Depend upon my Esteem of and Friendship for
you, they shall never fail you; and I swear by all that is most Sacred, if you
put your real confidence in me, you shall not be deceived.

I am naturally credulous enough; and all the while the Marquess was thus
discoursing, with me, he had sincerity written in his very Forehead; but yet I
could not for all this believe but that he laid Snares for me, to cast me into
some new Precipice; and I am apt to believe he had never persuaded me to it if
Angelica had not come to his assistance.

But as she did not foresee things as I did, the fidelity of the Marquess
prevailed more with her than me. She told me I was unjust to this honest
Gentleman, to believe him so wicked and so great a dissembler. He justified
himself herein with a thousand Oaths, and that he never did me any harm, but
only upon the false Reports that were bruited abroad of me to him. To which he
added large promises to do me right in the business of the Marchioness of
Sevil's Grant, and to conduct me into any part of the world I would make choice
of. What shall I say? In fine, Madam, I yielded to his Propositions and
Promises, and began to advise with him about all my affairs. Then we agreed
together that he should depart for Brussels that very day, to take orders for
all things that he intended in my behalf; that after he had settled his affairs
in that City, he should come back to me again, and furnish me with Women's
Apparel and all Necessaries to conduct me to Cologne: for, Madam, 'twas to no
purpose for him to proffer me any other place, and to say he would put me in a
condition of living in any part of the world that I fancied. I was resolved to
see our Abbess once more, and satisfy her by the simplicity of my proceedings,
that she was not deceived in me when she gave so favorable an opinion of me.

The Marquess did daily increase his advantageous conceit of me; I never saw a
man esteem a Woman so highly as he did me: and, Madam, it was not a mere
Grimace; he had really an Esteem for me, and gave me great demonstrations of
it, as I am going to inform your Highness. He took upon him the care of
Angelica's young Brother, about whom she began to be disquieted; and having
given us a Valet to go and acquaint the Virgin's Mother that she should not be
troubled for her Children, and that they were at the Baroness de Roste's, and
reprehended ours very sharply that he had been so indiscreet; and went so far
as to be responsible for his discretion for the future, taking him along with
him, and leaving us one in his room that knew nothing of our affairs.

For, Madam, we had agreed that I should keep them private till the return of
the Marquess, or at least the Baron de Roste, which he represented to me as a
person of the greatest Integrity in the world, and in whom I might confide as
to businesses of greater Importance than my Disguise.

But I was not troubled with that; for his Affairs led him to Namurs, in the
Country between the Sambre and Meuse, where he had a House; and he was obliged
to stay whilst the Army passed by, for fear, that notwithstanding the Orders
which the Officers made, the Highway-men should commit some outrages.

Now it was only the old Baroness de Roste that I was obliged to deal with;
and that was no great matter of difficulty, because, Madam, she had a great
kindness for me. She often told my supposed Sister, that I was the prettiest
Boy in the world; and when they find that in one Sex persons are so amiable,
they do not trouble themselves to seek them in another.

She was not the only person in her House that pleased her self with this
mistake. A young Gentlewoman Related to her, whom she had brought up from her
Cradle, and who was a very Complaisant person, found me very suitable to her
humor; and could willingly (as I think) have wished that I had been the
Brother of Angelica indeed; and withal, I had as great a kindness for her as
she had for me.

She took great care of me in some small concerns, which relished more than
ordinary Civility: and one day when we were playing at Verquere, which is the
Tick-tack of that Country, I told her in a drolling humor, I would play with
her for her Heart, and try if it were possible for me to win it.

Pray, Sir, teach me, if you can, said she, what it is to win a Heart, and how
those persons that lose it are sensible they have lost it? I replied, Fair
Lady, A Heart is won several ways; but the surest is to expose it to Fortune,
as it would be if you should wager your heart against any person at Verkeere,
and that the Chance of the Dice should so order it. But if I should play for
it, and lose it, she added, How shall I know when it is won? There is do
difficulty in that, I replied smiling: When any one has lost his Heart with
another, she desires always to be with the Man that has won it: One minutes
absence creates a thousand Troubles; She is sensible of an Emotion when she
sees him, and of a surprise when he is absent. Nay, it is in vain to endeavor
to overcome those Commotions, it can never be done; for there is no living
without a Heart, and it must needs be, though you have one, that you should be
always present with him to whom you parted with it. Come, let us play no more,
said she, blushing and veiling herself with her hood, We have sported
sufficiently, and I am so unlucky a Gamester, that I lose all I play for.

The Baroness came in just as she ended her Discourse, and we durst not
continue it before her; for if the acknowledgment I owe to her kind Reception
permit me to say what I think, she commended me very much; and methinks in
Women's Mouths such extraordinary Applauses proceed rather from the Heart than
the Brain.

But she was not always with us: For this young Virgin and I went for a walk
together at some certain times, and I took delight to see how her youthful
heart grew warm by little and little, and would have made a very great
progress, if I had instigated her thereunto. I still thought that I was with
the Countess d' Englesac, my Mother-in-Law, and that I saw this Love increase
between her Son and my self, which brought so much trouble upon me. This did
sometimes draw tears from my eyes; and, Madam, you would have been too
compassionate, had you seen how this poor Infant bore a share in my petty and
inconsiderable Troubles, and endeavored to put an end to them.

I spent five Weeks complete in this House, still expecting the Return of the
Baron De Roste, or the Flemish Marquess, who neither of them came back; and I
began to be so troubled at their long absence, that I was at last resolved to
confide in the Lady de Roste, and to require her assistance in order to my
going to the Convent: But as I had just taken up this Resolution, my Marquess
returned; and he did not only extricate me out of that Labyrinth wherein I was
intricated, but freed Angelica from the Disturbance she was in upon the account
of her Brother.

We heard not one word from him, since the time that we left him with my
Garments in that House from whence I escaped; and we durst not send to enquire
after him, for we were fearful that by that means they would discover our
abode; until we were secured that the Baron De Roste would protect us. I always
thought it was dangerous for me to give them so much light as to guess at the
place of my Retirement.

The poor Young Man was carefully kept up in this House; but when they found it
was to no purpose to confine him there, he was dismissed, and by good fortune,
as he came to Liege, much troubled to know what was become of us, he was met by
the Flemish Marquess, and known by Angelica's Valet, that he had along with him.

He left them both in a House that he was acquainted with, where we met with
them not long after; and coming to Monsieur de Roste, Angelica and I took
leave, as if she had received some Letters from her Mother that obliged her to
return to Liege; and the Marquess came to us the next day at that very House
where he left Angelica's Brother and Valet, and where he appointed us to meet.

The poor young Gentlewoman that I have told you of, took our separation very
grievously; and I observed that Madam de Roste was not altogether insensible.
Both the one and the other told me very obliging things; and the young
Gentlewoman above all wept heartily: But as they hoped that I would see them
again very speedily, their affliction was inconsiderable in comparison of
Angelica's and mine.

What a good and generous person was this Gentlewoman, Madam! How much am I
obliged to her, and what Friendship did we contract at our departure! She would
have gone to Cologne if she durst, and I had a great desire she should; for
though the Marquess brought Women with me to conduct me with the greater
decency, yet I always trembled at the thought, that I confided in a man which
had been in love with me, and possibly is still: But, Madam, I was forced to
take this course; for I was afraid of doing Angelica an injury as to her
Mother, if I should abuse her kindness so far as to permit her to accompany me;
and I thought it was but an ill acknowledgment of the obligation she had laid
upon me, to do her such an ill office.

Therefore, Madam, I went away without her; she went to Liege, and I to
Cologne, where I am at last arrived without any accident; and where the Heir of
the Marchioness of Sevil has kept his word with me so generously, that I find
my self in a capacity to live a peaceable and indifferent quiet Life, in any
condition that I shall make choice of. But, Madam, if I continue the humor I
am now in, I shall never be of any other opinion. I find it a calm life; the
Convent does not appear to me what it was afar off; and I may boldly say, there
would be nothing wanting to the Content of my Mind, if I could tell you
near-hand what I write to you now at a distance, That no person is devoted to
your Highness with so much Zeal and Submission, as

Your Highness most humble and most obedient Servant, H. S. D. M.

FINIS.

