THE DESCRIPTION OF THE Castle of Entertainment: AS ALSO The Wonderful Increase
of the Race OF THE HUFFS, Together with The Relation of their First Original,
as it was Attested by Old Mother Huff In strange Characters, and since
Discovered and Copied out by a Pilgrim in the Year 1668.
IT fortuned in August 1668, that two Pilgrims went out of the Famous Castle in
Parsonage Island, to visit on foot a Foreign Shrine they had never before seen.
They had scarce gone any weary Steps before by a small House lately Inhabited
by a Knight of Actaeons Order, and his Wandering Lady, in whose room now
resides Sir Joannes Winnow-corn and Dame Skreen-face his Wife. From thence they
went by one of Vulcan's Forges; then ascending up a short Hill, and so through
a plain even way, that brought them to another longer Hill, on both sides
beautified with goodly Fabrics. Arriving to the height they viewed a Chapel on
their right hand, where looking up to see where the Wind sat, (the better to
steer their course) their Expectations became frustrate, for the discourteous
Weathercock had taken his flight and forsook his Perch. From thence they
suddenly passed through a very High Gate, arched over with an Edifice of Brick,
much differing from the Form of the Egyptian Pyramids. Thence taking their way
on their left hand, they entered into solitary Groves through lower Gates, till
they came to a certain Thicket, bearing the name of wicked Cain, but on what
account so called those silent Trees could not inform them; they nevertheless
were confident, that neither that Fratricide, nor any of his Posterity, ever
came thither, much less planted that Wood. Thus ruminating in their thoughts,
they found Diversion by beholding a sumptuous Fabric there erected. Having
some time admired it they went on, till they exchanged those melancholy Paths
to an open Desert on a Mountain, which invited their eyes to delightful Objects
round about. Among the rest one that seems wonderful to report; for on a Hill
they beheld a Harrow of such vast extension, that it lay upon more ground than
Ten Yokes of Oxen with Ten Ploughs can plough in Ten Days. Through this
pleasant way the Pilgrims still continued their Travel along by the Pillar of
Salutation, and then near to the Tower of the four flying Streamers, till at
last by diligent labor and strict inquiry they arrived at the place desired.

What signal Favors they there received from the Munificence of Persons of
high Honor, as also the Courtesies showed to them from others of lower Rank,
shall here be wholly omitted, because meriting better Record in the Register of
Grateful Memory, and therefore above the scope of this Discourse. It shall here
then suffice to relate only what an admirable Cave they beheld within those
Territories, so strangly framed by Nature, that it seemed in all respects quite
contrary to other common Caves; for whereas they lie fixed under ground, and
are dark and empty, this appeared high above ground, in frequent motion,
pleasantly lightsom, and replenished with commendable Endowments.

The Pilgrims having there presented their obliged Homage, departed thence
toward the Castle of Entertainment, by the Invitation and Conduct of a
courteous Knight in Black Armor, in company of a single Damosel, and her
Sweetheart a merry Falconer, where after a short Journey (partly by Water, for
they seldom trod on dry Land) they soon arrived. They found the Castle seated
on the side of a Mountain in a small Grove of shady Trees, but of an
indifferent proportion, neither high nor large, but well contrived into little
Rooms, all within sound of the Sentinel's Trumpet; well defended not only by
its own proper Garrison, but also by Auxiliary Forces in great numbers daily
repairing thither. The Gates standing open toward the top of the Mountain,
they resolutely entered in without the least Resistance or dispute; where no
sooner set down, but there were some brought in whose Faces were full of Black
Patches; whom when the Black Knight aforesaid had espied, he caused them
without mercy to be destroyed as many as appeared in his sight, some drowned,
and others broken in pieces on a Wooden Engine, so long till the elder of the
Pilgrims (not enduring any longer to behold so cruel a Massacre) was enforced
to call away the other Pilgrim and depart; and by the way, far enough from the
Castle, upon an invisible Pillar, in Characters so strange were never yet
perused, read as follows.

I Mother Huff, having in my Youth been crossed in Worldly Affairs, (though
always subtle and covetous) for which cause in my elder years I betook my self
to yonder Castle, where I adopted one Yesticus Huff for my Son, who (by the
assistance of other his Associates) composed for my use an Enchanting Liquor,
so pleasant to the Taste, and lofty in Operation, that in short time it filled
my Castle with Guests, and my broad Pouch with jingling Cash. Soon after it
chanced that my said Son Yesticus grew enamored of a Damosel named Flourca,
whom by the power of my Charms I procured to be fetched (hood-winked in a Bag)
from the Tower of the four flying Streamers, and having craftily sifted our her
Heart, in fine I adorned her with Beauty Spots, and brought my Son and her
together; from which Conjunction in few hours were produced many Dozens of
young little Huffs; nor were they improperly called so, for no sooner were they
in view, but they presently swelled bigger, and were huffed up through the
Ambition naturally derived to them from their Father, who ever sought for
Superiority, and was therefore exiled from a Boarded House near adjacent,
called Hoop Castle, when first I took him into my house. In brief, this Spotted
Huffing Progeny daily multiplied so fast, that the report thereof spread
throughout the Country, by which means I got the Name of Mother Huff, which to
this day I own, as I do them also for my adopted Offspring. But such was the
cruel Fate that attended them, that my Neighbors in jealousy, lest they
should overrun their Confines, conspired against them, laid violent hands on
them, and did murder them daily before my face; yet it did the less grieve me,
for that notwithstanding they still increased, and I hope will still do. And
now considering that I grow old, and must die and leave them whether I will or
no, lest my Name and Fame should perish among them, I have here erected this
Monument in these unknown Figures, to declare to Posterity their wonderful
Original, and my singular good Affection toward them, wishing them still to
reside in my Castle, which I bequeath to them and their Successors for ever, on
these conditions, that henceforth it be called the Castle of Entertainment, and
that the Gates should stand open all day in an hospitable manner, to admit any
in for their Money, and not otherwise, according to my own Laudable Custom: And
so I bid the World Farewell.

The Pilgrims having taken a Copy thereof, it is here written for private
Recreation, and not for public Benefit.

FINIS.

