THE FUNERAL OF THE MASS: OR, The MASS dead and buried, without hope of
Resurrection. Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed by Andrew Clark, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor at the
sign of the Crown in Little Britain. 1673.

To the Right Honorable The Earl of SHAFTESBURY, Lord High Chancellor OF
ENGLAND, etc.
MY LORD,
I Could not without injustice, have dedicated this Book to any but your
Lordship, because, as there is no person to whom I am so much obliged, so there
is no member of either House of Parliament that has so freely and generously
owned the Protestant interest. As for my obligations to your Lordship, because
they are too great to be expressed, it is my duty to take all occasions of
expressing my thankfulness for them, and therefore I take this occasion to
proclaim my thankfulness to the World. As for your Lordships late owning the
Protestant interest in the House of Peers, it was so eminent, and accompanied
with such zeal and courage, that (next under God, and the King) your Lordship
may deservedly be styled the chief asserter and promoter of it, and
consequently the asserter and promoter of the interest of England. For the
interest of the Protestant Religion, and the interest of this Kingdom, are so
interwoven, that the welfare or ruin of either, is the welfare or ruin of
both. Now being obliged by your Lordship, both as an English Protestant, and
also more particularly in my private capacity, I beseech God to grant that your
life may be long and prosperous, your memory and posterity honorable, as long
as the Sun and Moon shall endure, and your soul and body eternally happy, when
time shall be no more. To this Prayer I shall only add, that I am unfeignedly,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most affectionate honourer, and most humble Servant,
S. A.

The PREFACE.
THe Author of this Piece was one Mounsieur de Rodon, Philosophy Professor in
the Royal College at Nismes, a City of Languedoc in France, where it was
written. But as soon as it was Printed, it was suppressed by the command of
Authority, prohibiting all persons to keep any of them, upon I know not what
severe penalties, and such Copies as could be found, were publicly burnt by
the Hang man, about 1660. Whereupon the poor Gentleman, for fear of being
condemned to keep company with his Books, was forced to fly to Geneva, where he
not long after died. These severities of our Adversaries bring to my
remembrance what a learned and ingenious Frenchman once told me, viz. that this
small Tract has more netled their Party then any one Piece that ever was
extant in France since the Reformation of Religion there. Whether that be a
mistake, I know not, but this I dare affirm, that though many famous men of
that Kingdom have, in the memory of this Age, written very smartly against the
Romish heresies, yet there is not one of them whose person and writings have
had such hard measure. Whence it appears that our Author (his very enemies
being judges) has made good what he undertook, viz. he has destroyed that
great Diana the Mass, and has also, by way of prevention, destroyed all the
Arguments made use of by the Romish Doctors for the restoring and
re-establishing of her: which he has so well performed, that to this very day,
not one of them has dared so much as to attempt to revive her, by answering
his Book; so that here you may see her laid in her grave, without hope of
resurrection; and therefore the Book may very fitly be termed, The Funeral of
the Mass; and consequently the Funeral of Romish heresies and idolatries, as
the Author well observes. For the truth is the Mass and the Romish Religion are
almost convertible terms, so that if the former be destroyed, the latter must
vanish into its first nothing, and therefore our Author having destroyed the
Mass, has destroyed the thing called Popery too. As for the monstrous
absurdities and blasphemies which flow from this one Romish doctrine of the
sacrifice of the Mass, they would fill whole volumes; but I shall content my
self to say that the Mass consists of more gross and abominable Superstitions,
Phanaticisms, and Idolatries, then ever have been believed or practiced by the
most ignorant Pagans. What the tenets of the Romanists are, and what their
practices have been in reference to Protestant Magistrates and People, woeful
and sad experience has sufficiently taught the World. I shall only add, that
they are as pernicious to our bodies, and estates as their heretical Doctrines,
and idolatrous Services are to our Souls. And consequently to introduce Popery
into this Kingdom would be an act as unpolitick as Antichristian, as has
been demonstrated in that incomparable piece, entitled, The established
Religion in opposition to Popery. But because (I know not by what strange
infatuation or enchantment, or rather by what wonderful judgment of God) this
monstrous, absurd, and destructive (shall I call it?) Religion prevails amongst
us, I thought good to English and Print this small Treatise, as the best
Antidote against Popery (the Holy Scripture excepted) that ever I read; and for
ought I know, it is not inferior to the best of this kind, that ever was yet
extant: to which opinion the harsh usage it has had from our Adversaries, as
aforesaid, does certainly give no small Testimony. But I know that the holy
Scripture it self cannot profit except God be pleased to give his blessing,
much less can this Book; and therefore, I earnestly beseech him that he would
make it prosperous and successful for the good of Souls; and if any shall
receive benefit by it, I desire them to give him all the glory, and then I
shall think my self infinitely recompensed for my pains in translating it.

The Contents of the Chapters.
Chap. I. 1. COncerning the Exposition of these words, This is my Body. Page 1.
Chap. II. 2. Concerning the Exposition of these words, He that eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood has eternal life. My flesh is meat indeed, etc. P. 10.
Chap. III. 3. Against Transubstantiation. P. 19. Chap. IV. 4. Against the real
presence of Christ's Body in the Host or consecrated Wafer. P. 32. Chap. V. 5.
Against the adoration or worshipping of the Host. P. 56. Chap. VI. 6. Against
the taking away of the cup. P. 78. Chap. VII. 7. Against the Mass. P. 91. Chap.
VIII. 8. Containing answers to the objections of the Romish Doctors. P. 112.
Amend the following Errors of the Press thus:
Page 2. line 5. for obscure read obscurely. p. 23. l. 7. for then read else:
p. 46. l. 22. for accident read accidents. p. 49. l. ^2. for being read seeing.
p. 51. l. 3. for that should read that it should. p. 57. l. 17. for creatures
read creature. p. 60. l. 13. for tood read too p. 66. l. 17. for Apostles read
Apostle. p. 83. l. 12. read Pastors only, because. p. 105. l. 2. read Council
of Trent* p. 10^. l. 4. for Mass read Cross. p. 115. l. 17. for that by read
that if by. p. 124. l. 18. for Apostle read Apostles. p. 130. l. 2^* read
Priest.) p. 133. l. 13. dele them.

THE FUNERAL OF THE MASS.
CHAP. I.
Concerning the Exposition of these words, This is my Body.
THE Romanists are wont to tell us, that these words of Jesus, Christ, This is
my Body, are so clear to prove the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Host,
and consequently to prove Transubstantiation (or the substantial conversion of
the Bread into Christ's Body) that they are amazed we cannot perceive so
manifest a truth. Against which I form this Argument: He that speaks contrary
to the usage of all the World, and takes words otherwise then all other men do,
must without doubt, speak very obscure: But if Jesus Christ by these words,
This is my Body, had meant the real presence of his Body in the Host (as the
Romish Doctors assert) and consequently had meant the substantial conversion of
the Bread into his Body, he had spoken contrary to the common usage of all the
World, and had taken the words otherwise then all other men do, which I thus
prove. There was never any Author either sacred, or profane, that made use of
such words as these, This is my Body, to signify the substantial conversion of
one thing into another; or to signify the real presence of a thing immediately
after the pronouncing of them, and not before. On the contrary, there was never
any man that did not use them to signify, that the thing was already that
which it was said to be. For example; When God the Father, speaking of Jesus
Christ, said, This is my beloved Son it is certain that Jesus Christ was the
Son of God before God said it: and in common usage it is never said this is
that, except the thing be so before it is said to be so. For example; We do not
say this is a Table, before that, which we mean by the word this, be a Table.
Therefore it is contrary to the common style of all Authors, as well sacred as
profane, and contrary to the common usage of all men, to make these words of
Jesus Christ, This is my Body, to signify the substantial conversion of the
Bread into Christ's Body, and the real presence of his Body in the Host
immediately after the pronouncing of them by the Priest, and not before. Seeing
then that Jesus Christ, when he said, This is my Body, did not speak contrary
to the common usage of all the World, and did not take the words otherwise then
all other men do, it necessarily follows that these words of Jesus Christ, This
is my Body, do not signify the substantial conversion of the Bread into
Christ's Body, nor the real presence of Christ's Body in the Host immediately
after the Priest has pronounced them, and not before. And this being so, the
Romish Doctors must seek some other passages of Scripture, than this, This is
my Body, to prove such a conversion, and such a presence; and seeing they can
find none, I conclude that such a conversion and such a presence, have no
foundation in holy Scripture.

2 That which I have said concerning common usage is founded on this reason,
viz. because things must be before there can be any Image, Picture, or
Representation of them, and consequently Images are after the things* whereof
they are Images: But words are the Images of conceptions, and conceptions the
Images of things: Therefore things are such before we can really conceive them
to be such, and we conceive them to be such, before we can say they are such.
Therefore that which Jesus Christ held, and gave to his Disciples, expressed by
the word this, was his body, before he conceived that it was his body, and he
conceived that it was his body, before he said This is my Body; and
consequently it is not by virtue of these words, This is my Body, that that
which Jesus Christ gave to his Disciples, expressed by the word this, was his
Body; but rather it is by blessing the bread, or thanksgiving that the bread
was made the Body of Christ, because it was made the Sacrament of it. Whence it
follows that these words, this is my body, must be expounded thus, this bread
is my body; and these words this bread is my body, must be expounded thus, this
bread is the Sacrament of my body; which I prove thus.

3. A Proposition must be expounded according to the nature of the thing in
question; for example, If a man, pointing at the Kings Person, should say, this
is the King, the Proposition must be expounded thus, this is the Kings Person,
because the Kings Person is meant: But if a man coming into a Painters Shop,
and pointing at the Kings Picture, should say, this is the King, the
Proposition must be expounded thus, this is the Kings Picture; because here his
Picture is meant. Even so if Jesus Christ laying his hand on his Breast, had
said this is my Body, we must without doubt have understood the Proposition
concerning his real Body, and not concerning the Sign, or Sacrament of it;
because his very Body had been then meant, and not the sign or Sacrament of it:
But Jesus Christ, being about to institute the Eucharist, and to that end,
having taken bread, blessed it, and given it to his Disciples with these words,
Take, eat, this is my Body, it is evident that they must be understood of the
Sacrament of his Body, and the Proposition must be expounded thus, this is the
Sacrament of my Body* because here the Sacrament of his Body is meant. And
seeing a Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace, as the Council of
Trent says, in its sixth Session, it is evident that this Proposition, This is
my Body, being expounded by this, this is the Sacrament of my Body, may be
expounded thus, this is the sign of my Body; which I confirm thus.

4 In these two Propositions, This is my body, This cup is the New Testament in
my blood, the word [is] must be taken in the same sense, because they are
alike, having been pronounced upon the same matter, viz. the one upon one part
of the Sacrament, and the other upon the other part of it; and because of like
things we must give a like judgment. But in this Proposition, this cup is the
New Testament, the word [is] is not taken for a real and transubstantiated
being; but for a sacramental and significative being: because neither the cup,
nor that which is in the cup, is changed into a Testament; neither is it really
and properly a Testament, but the Sacrament of the New Testament. Therefore in
this Proposition likewise, this is my body, the word [is] is not taken for a
real and transubstantiated being; but for a sacramental and significative
being: and consequently as this Proposition, this cup is the New Testament,
must be expounded thus; the Wine that is in the cup is the sign and Sacrament
of the New Testament: So this Proposition, this is my body, must be expounded
thus, this Bread is the sign and Sacrament of my Body. Whence it follows that
in one single Proposition of Jesus Christ in the institution of the Sacrament
of the Eucharist, viz. this cup is the New Testament, there are two figures,
one in the word Cup, being taken for that which is in the cup; this is a figure
called a Metonymie, whereby the thing containing is taken for the thing
contained. The other Figure is, that the cup is called the New Testament: this
is also a Figure called a Metonymie, whereby the sign is called by the name of
the thing signified. And therefore the Romish Doctors are mistaken when they
tell us that all that Jesus Christ said when he instituted the Eucharist, must
be taken literally, and without a figure. But withal we must not imagine that
Jesus Christ spoke obscurely, because he spoke figuratively* these figures and
manners of speech, being commonly and familiarly used by all the World.

5. But when we say that these words, this is my body, this is my blood, must
be expounded thus, this Bread is the Sign and Sacrament of my Body, this Wine
is the Sign and Sacrament of my Blood, we do not mean that the Bread and Wine
are barely and simply signs of Christ's Body and Blood* but we believe that the
Bread and Wine in the Eucharist are signs that do exhibit the body and blood of
Christ to Believers: For when they do, by the mouth of the body receive the
Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, they do at the same time, by the mouth of the
soul, viz. by Faith, receive the Body of Christ broken, and his Blood shed for
the remission of their sins, as will be proved in the next Chapter.

6. Add hereunto this one Argument: When a man says that a thing is such, if
it be not such, during the whole time, which he imploys in saying it is such,
he makes a false Proposition. For example, When a man says that a Wall is
white, if it be not white, during the whole time he imploys in saying it is
white, he makes a false Proposition. But (according to the Romish Doctors) when
Jesus Christ said, this is my body, it was not his body during the whole time
which he employed in saying this is my body; for, they say, it was his body
afterward only: Therefore, according to the Romish Doctors, Jesus Christ
uttered a false Proposition: which being blasphemous to affirm, we must lay
down this for a foundation, that that which Jesus Christ gave his Disciples
when he said, this is my body, was his body, not only after he had said it, but
also while he was saying it, and before he said it. And here we have this
advantage of those of the Romish Church, that we believe the truth of these
words of Jesus Christ, this is my body, much better then they do; because they
believe it at one time only, viz. after he had said it: but we believe it at
three several times, viz. before he said it, when he was saying it, and after
he had said it. But here some may object that we must not take the words of our
Lord in too rigorous a sense, and that in these words, this is my body, we must
take the Present tense for the next Future, and then the sense will be this,
this will immediately be my body. To which I answer, that the Romish Doctors
will have us take these words, this is my body, in the rigor of the literal
sense, and then the Proposition is evidently false. I know that the Present
tense may be taken for the next Future; as when Jesus Christ said, I go to my
Father, and to your Father; I go to my God, and to your God: that is, I shall
go speedily. But who can be so bold and ignorant as to affirm that this speech
is without a Figure, seeing all Grammarians know that it is a Figure called
Enallage of time? Therefore the Romish Doctors must confess, that by their own
doctrine this Proposition of Jesus Christ, this is my body, is either false or
figurative; and that seeing it is not false, it must be figurative, and that
the figure must be a Metonymie, whereby the sign takes the name of the thing
signified (as has already been proved) and not an Enallage of time.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Exposition of these words,
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood bath eternal life. My flesh is
meat indeed, etc.
1. IN this Chapter I shall prove that Jesus Christ speaks of a spiritual
eating and drinking by Faith, and not of a corporal eating and drinking by the
mouth of the body. My first Argument is this. When a man would satisfy his
hunger, and quench his thirst, he eats, and drinks that thing, which he
hungers and thirsts after; because eating satisfies hunger, and drinking
quenches thirst: But it is by Faith, that is, by believing in Jesus Christ,
that we satisfy the hunger, and quench the thirst which we have after Christ;
for it is in the sixth of St. John, He that comes to me shall never hunger,
and he that believes in me shall never thirst: Therefore it is by Faith or by
believing, that we eat and drink Jesus Christ; and consequently the eating of
Christ flesh, and drinking his blood is spiritual, and not corporal.

2. My second Argument is this: Jesus Christ says, He that eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood has eternal life. And except ye eat the flesh of the Son
of man* and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, John 6. But it is the
spiritual eating and drinking by Faith that gives life eternal, and not the
corporal eating and drinking by the mouth of the body; because many Reprobates
(according to the very doctrine of Rome it self) do corporally eat the flesh,
and drink the blood of Christ, and yet shall not inherit eternal life.

3. The third Argument is taken from S. Augustine, and Cardinal Cajetan, who
expound the words of Jesus Christ as we do. St. Augustine in Book 3. of
Christian Doctrine, speaks thus, To eat the flesh of Christ is a figure,
teaching us to partake of Christ's Passion, and to imprint in our memories with
delight and profit, that Christ was crucified for us. Card. Cajetan in his
Commentary on St. John 6. says, To eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his
blood, is faith in Christ's death; so that the sense is this, if you use not the
death of the Son of man as meat and drink, ye shall not have the life of the
Spirit in you. And having sufficiently proved his Exposition, he adds: To eat
and drink the Sacrament is a thing common, as well to those that eat
unworthily, as to those that eat worthily, but that which Jesus Christ here
speaks of, is not common to both, for he says, he that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life; he says not he that eats worthily and
drinks worthily, but he that eats and drinks. Whence it clearly appears,
that according to the Letter, he speaks not of eating, and drinking the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, but of eating and drinking the death of Jesus
Christ.

4. Now that we may clearly understand this doctrine, we must consider, wherein
the life which Jesus Christ gives us, does consist; for seeing the flesh of
Jesus Christ is meat to us, because it gives us life; it is evident that if we
know what life what life that is which Jesus Christ gives us, we must know
likewise how Jesus Christ is meat to us, and consequently how we eat him. But
to know what that life is which Jesus Christ gives us, we must consider what
that death is in which we were involved, which is expressed by St. Paul, Ephesians.
2. in these words: When we were dead in sins and trespasses God has quickened
us together with Christ: by grace ye are saved; and consequently the death in
which we were involved, consists in two things, first in the curse of the Law,
which imports the privation of felicity, and the suffering of temporal and
eternal punishment for our sins: Secondly it consists in an habitual
corruption, whereby sin raigns in us; and therefore it is said 1 Timothy 5. The
widow that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives. Also sins are called
dead works, Heb. 10. So that the life which Jesus Christ has purchased for us,
consists in two things. First, In deliverance from the curse of the Law by the
pardon of our sins, as St. Paul tells us, Colloss. 2. God has quickened you
together with Christ, having forgiven you all trespasses, blotting out the
obligation that was against us; which obligation proceeded from the Law,
because it did oblige all the transgressors of it to a curse. Secondly, It
consists in regeneration, or sanctification, whereof Jesus Christ speaking in
John 3. says, Except a man be born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God: and S. Paul Heb. 12. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Therefore
seeing that the life which Jesus Christ has purchased for us, consists in the
pardon of our sins* and in our regeneration, and sanctification, which ends in
glorification; and that Jesus Christ is called meat in reference to this life,
we must consider the means, whereby Jesus Christ has purchased these things
for us; and seeing it is certain, that his death is the means by which he has
purchased pardon of sins, and regeneration, we must conclude that Jesus Christ
is the food and nourishment of our souls in regard of the merit of his death.
But that Jesus Christ by his death has purchased life for us, (that is
justification, which consists in the pardon of our sins, and regeneration,
which consists in holiness of life) appears by these passages of Scripture viz.
We are justified by the blood of Christ, and reconciled to God by his death,
Romans 5. We have redemption by his blood, even the remission of sins. Ephesians. 1.
He has reconciled us in the body of his flesh by his death, that he may
present us holy, without spot, and blameless in his sight. Coll. 1. We are
sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. Heb. 10.
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it unto
himself a glorious Church, etc. Ephesians. 5. Therefore seeing Jesus Christ has
purchased life for us by his death, and that his flesh and blood are our meat
and drink (because they purchased life eternal for us on the Cross, viz. the
remission of our sins, and sanctification, ending in glorification) it follows
that the action whereby Jesus Christ is applied to us for righteousness and
sanctification, is the same by which we eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his
blood. But this action is nothing else but Faith, as the Scripture tells us:
Being justified by faith we have peace with God. Romans 5. God purifies our
hearts by faith. Act. 15. He that believes has eternal life. Joh. 6. From
what has been said I form this Argument. That Action whereby we obtain
remission of sins, and sanctification, ending in glorification, is the same,
whereby we have that life, which Jesus Christ has purchased for us by his
death; because that life principally consists in the remission of sins, and
sanctification, as we have proved. But the spiritual eating, and drinking by
faith, and not the corporal by the mouth, is that action, whereby we obtain
remission of sins, and sanctification, as we have also proved. Therefore the
spiritual eating and drinking by faith is the action, whereby we have that
life, which Jesus Christ has purchased for us by his death, and not the
corporal eating and drinking by the mouth. And consequently seeing in St. John
6. a certain eating and drinking is spoken of, whereby we have that life which
Jesus Christ has purchased for us by his death; it is evident that a spiritual
eating and drinking is there spoken of, and not a corporal.

5. From what has been said it appears, that when Jesus Christ says, my flesh
is meat indeed, etc. the figure falls upon the word meat, which is taken not
for corporal but spiritual meat. The reason whereof is, that corporal food is
that which is appointed for the nourishment of the body, as spiritual food is
that which is appointed for the nourishment of the soul; so that although
corporal food be taken by the mouth of the body, yet that only does not make it
to be corporal food, except it be taken for the nourishment of the body;
otherwise poison, medicine, a bullet, etc. which a man should swallow would be
corporal food; which is absurd to affirm. But the flesh of Christ, which is
pretended to be eaten in the Eucharist by the mouth of the body, is not
appointed for the nourishment of the body; because that food which is appointed
for the nourishment of the body is changed into the substance of the body: but
the body of Christ is not changed into the substance of our bodies: Therefore
the flesh of Christ is not a corporal food, but his flesh broken, and his blood
shed on the cross is a spiritual food, which nourishes the souls of those, who
by a true and lively faith, do embrace this flesh broken, and this blood shed;
that is, who do wholly rest and rely on the merit of his death and passion for
obtaining mercy from God. And certainly, seeing that the life which Jesus
Christ gives us by his death, is spiritual, that the nourishment is spiritual,
that the eating his body and drinking his blood, is spiritual (as has been
proved) it follows that his flesh must be spiritual meat, and his blood
spiritual drink. And this flesh of Christ is incomparably better, and more
truly meat indeed in regard of its effects, than corporal food can be; because
it does better, and more perfectly nourish the souls of Believers then corporal
food does their bodies; this being corruptible food which gives temporal life
only; but that spiritual and incorruptible food which gives life eternal.

6. I conclude this Chapter with this consideration. When a doctrine is
proposed which is pretended to be divine, and that passages of holy Scripture
are alleged for the proof of it, if it opposes, or seems to oppose sense and
reason, and to include contradictions; and that a more suitable and rational
sense can be found out for those passages, so that all these inconveniences and
contradictions may be avoided; there is nothing more just than that we should
embrace that probable and rational sense, and reject that doctrine which
opposes sense and reason and seems to imply contradictions: But the doctrine
of the real presence of the Manhood of Jesus Christ in the Host, and the
transubstantiation of the Bread into his Body, is repugnant to sense
and*reason, and seems to include diverse contradictions; (viz. that a humane
body is in a point without any local extension, that a body may be in diverse
places at one and the same time, that the Bread and Wine are changed into the
Body and Blood of Christ, which were before; that accidents may be without a
subject, etc.) And the passages that are impertinently alleged to prove such a
presence, and such a change, have a sense very commodious and rational, for the
avoiding all these contradictions, as appears in this and the former Chapter,
where I have very rationally expounded those two passages which the Romish
Doctors impertinently make use of for this subject. Therefore they ought to
embrace that commodious and rational sense which we have given them; and to
reject the doctrine of the real presence of the body of Jesus Christ in the
Host, and the doctrine of Transubstantiation.

CHAP. III.
Against Transubstantiation.
1. TRansubstantiation is the substantial conversion of the Bread and Wine into
the Body and Blood of Christ, which I destroy by diverse Arguments; the first
whereof is this:

In every substantial conversion, that thing into which another thing is
converted, is always newly produced. For example, when seed is converted into
an animal, that animal is newly produced; when Jesus Christ turned the water
into wine, the wine was newly produced, etc. But the Body and Blood of Christ
cannot be newly produced in the Sacrament of the Eucharist: Therefore the Bread
and Wine are not substantially converted into the Body and Blood of Christ in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist. The second Proposition, viz. that the Body and
Blood of Christ cannot be newly produced, I prove thus: That which is newly
produced receives a new being; because to produce a thing, and to give it a
being is one and the same: But the Body and Blood of Christ cannot receive a
new being, which I prove thus: A man cannot receive ^^^t which he has, while
he has it, and therefore he cannot receive a being while he has a being; for
as it is impossible to take away a being from that which has no being; so it
is impossible to give a being to that which has a being already: and as you
cannot kill a dead man, so you cannot give life to one that is living* But the
Body and Blood of Christ have, and always will have a being: Therefore they
cannot receive one, and consequently cannot be reproduced in the Eucharist.

2. My second Argument is this. In every substantial conversion, that thing
which is converted into another is destroyed. For example, When the water was
turned into wine, the water was destroyed: But in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist the Bread and Wine are not destroyed by the consecration* which I
prove thus: In the celebration of the Eucharist there is breaking, giving,
eating and drinking after the consecration, as appears by the very practice of
our Adversaries, who after consecration, break the Host, and divide it into
three parts, give nothing to the Communicants but consecrated Hosts* and eat
and drink nothing but what was consecrated: But the Scripture says, that in
the celebration of the Eucharist, Bread is broken, that Bread and Wine are
given, and that Bread is eaten and Wine drunk, as appears by these following
passages. St. Paul 1* Cor. 10. says, The bread which we break is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? and 1* Cor. 11. St. Matthew. 26. St. Mark 14.
and St. Luke 22. it is said that Jesus Christ took bread, brake it and gave it;
and St. Mark 14. and St. Matthew. 26. Jesus Christ after he had participated of
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, says, I will drink no more of this fruit of
the Vine: and 1 Cor. 11. As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup. Let
a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup.

3. Secondly, When Jesus Christ said to his Disciples, Drink ye all of this,
St. Matthew. 26. that is, drink ye all of this cup, either he commanded to drink
of a cup of Wine or of a cup of Blood: if he commanded them to drink of a cup
of Wine, then it follows that they drank nothing but Wine, because it is
certain that they obeyed Jesus Christ; for it is said St. Mark 14. that they
all drank ^f it. Or if he commanded them to drink of a cup of Blood, then it
follows that the Wine was already changed into his Blood, because it is not
probable that Jesus Christ said to them Drink ye all of this cup of Blood, and
yet that it was not a cup of Blood, but a cup of Wine. But when Jesus Christ
said, Drink ye all of this, he did not speak to them of a cup of Blood for the
Wine was not then converted into Christ's Blood, because (according to our
Adversaries) it was not changed until Jesus Christ had made an end of uttering
these following words, for this is my blood. But he uttered these words, Drink
ye all of this, before he uttered those, for this is my blood; because a man
must utter a Proposition before he can give the reason of it.

4. Thirdly, When a thing is converted into another, we cannot see the effects
and properties of the thing converted, but only of that into which it is
converted. For example, When the seed is changed into an animal, we can see no
more the effects and properties of the seed, but of the animal only; and when
Jesus Christ turned the Water into Wine, the effects, properties, and accidents
of the Water were no more seen* but of the Wine only, etc. But in the Eucharist
we cannot, after the consecration, perceive the effects, properties, accidents,
or parts of the Body and Blood of Christ; but we see there all the effects,
properties, and accidents of Bread and Wine: Therefore in the Eucharist, the
Bread and Wine are not converted into the Body and Blood of Christ. And the
truth is, if that which appears to be Bread, and has all the effects,
accidents, and properties of Bread, be not Bread, but Christ's Body clothed
with the accidents of Bread; then it may likewise be said that they that appear
to be men, and have all the effects, properties, and accidents of men are not
men, but horses clothed with the accidents of men.

5. The fourth Argument is this. In every substantial conversion there must be
a subject to pass from one substance to another; for then it would be a
Creation, which is the sole action that does not presuppose a subject. But in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, after the consecration, there is no subject;
because, according to our Adversaries, there remains no subject; for, as they
assert, the accidents of Bread and Wine remain without any subject at all:
Therefore in the Sacrament of the Eucharist there is no substantial conversion.

6. The fifth Argument is drawn from hence, That Transubstantiation destroys
the nature of accidents, thus. That doctrine which asserts that accidents are
not accidents but substances, destroys the nature and essence of accidents,
because it is impossible that an accident can be a substance. But the doctrine
of Transubstantiation asserts that accidents are not accidents, but that they
are substances, which I prove thus. That doctrine which asserts that accidents
are not inherent, but that they subsist of themselves, does assert that
accidents are not accidents, but that they are substances, because inherence is
the essential difference of an accident, and subsistence the essential
difference of a substance. But the doctrine of Transubstantiation asserts that
accidents are not inherent, but that they subsist, which I prove thus. That
doctrine which asserts that accidents may be without a subject, viz. the
accidents of Bread and Wine without any substance, and without any subject to
sustain them; for by Transubstantiation the substance of the Bread and Wine is
gone, and their accidents remain: Therefore the doctrine of Transubstantiation
asserts that accidents are not inherent, but do subsist by themselves, and
consequently asserts that accidents are not accidents, but substances, and so
destroys the nature and essence of accidents. But here it may be said that
actual inherence does not constitute an accident, but aptitudinal only. Against
which I form this Argument. Whatsoever does exist actually, either it exists in
something else actually so, that it cannot be without it, which Philosophers
call actual inherence, as walking: or else it exists in and by it self
actually, so that it may be alone by it self, which Philosophers term actual
existence; the former of these constitutes an accident, and the latter
constitutes a substance. But the accidents of the Bread and Wine, after
consecration, do exist actually: Therefore they must exist either in something
else actually, or in themselves actually. But they do not exist in and by
themselves actually, for then they would subsist by themselves, and be real
substances, which is impossible: Therefore they exist in something else
actually, viz. in the substance of the Bread and Wine, and consequently the
substance of the Bread and Wine remains after the Consecration, and so there
can be no Transubstantiation.

7. The sixth Argument is drawn from this, That Transubstantiation destroys the
nature of Sacraments, because every Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible
grace, as the Council of Trent says in Sess. 6. and every sign relates to the
thing signified, so that we must speak of signs and Sacraments, as of things
relating to something else. But all relative things have, as it were, a double
being, viz. an absolute being which is the natural being of the thing, and a
relative being whereby it relates to something else. For example, In a man that
has begotten a child, we consider his absolute and natural being as he is a
man as others are, and his relative being, whereby he is a Father, and is
distinguished from other men that have no children, and so are not Fathers. So
in the Sacrament of Baptism, the sign, viz. the Water, has an absolute and
natural being, viz. its cold and moist substance, whereby it is water as other
waters are; and a relative, sacramental, and significative being, whereby it is
the sign and Sacrament of Christ's Blood, and differs from other waters that are
not employed for this sacred use. Even so in the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
the Bread and Wine, which are the signs, have their natural and absolute being,
viz. their substance whereby they are Bread and Wine, as other Bread and Wine,
which we commonly use; and their relative, sacramental, and significative
being, whereby they are the Sacrament and signs of the Body and Blood of
Christ, and differ from all other Bread and Wine that is not thus employed. To
this I add, That it is impossible a relative being should be without an
absolute, because a relative cannot be without its foundation. For example, It
is impossible to be a Father without being a Man; to be equal without quantity,
etc. And this being granted, I form my Argument thus, That which takes away the
natural being from signs and Sacraments, destroys their nature and essence;
because the relative and sacramental being cannot be without the absolute and
natural, as has been proved. But the doctrine of Transubstantiation destroys
the natural being of the Bread and Wine, which are signs and Sacraments of
Christ's Body and Blood; for by transubstantiation, the whole substance of the
Bread and Wine is destroyed: Therefore the doctrine of Transubstantiation
destroys the nature and essence of Sacraments.

8. To this Argument our Adversaries answer, That in the Eucharist the Bread
and Wine are not signs, because by the consecration they are destroyed as to
their substance. But some of them say that the signs are the accidents of the
Bread and Wine; others say that the Body and Blood of Christ contained under
the accidents of the Bread and Wine, are the signs of the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ crucified; Lastly, others say, that neither the accidents of the
Bread and Wine only, nor the Body and Blood of Christ only, but the Body and
Blood of Christ, together with the accidents of the Bread and Wine, are the
signs of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ crucified: Therefore seeing the
doctrine of Transubstantiation does not destroy the natural being of Christ's
Body and Blood, nor the natural being of the accidents of the Bread and Wine,
they maintain that the doctrine of Transubstantiation does not destroy the
nature and essence of Sacraments.

9. To this I reply, That neither the accidents of the Bread and Wine only, nor
the Body and Blood of Christ only, nor the Body and Blood of Christ together
with the accidents of the Bread and Wine, are the true signs of Jesus Christ
crucified; but the Bread and Wine only, which I prove thus:

First, In Sacraments there ought to be an analogy and similitude between the
sign, and the thing signified, as our Adversaries confess, and particularly
Card. Bellarmin Book 1. of the Sacrament, chap. 9. in these words. The fourth
thing required in a Sacrament, is that the sign should have some similitude and
analogy with the thing signified. And he quotes St. Augustine in Epist. 23. to
Boniface, speaking thus: If Sacraments had not some similitude of the things
whereof they are Sacraments they could be no Sacraments: But in the Sacrament
of the Eucharist, neither the accidents of the Bread and Wine, nor the Body and
Blood of Christ, whether jointly or severally, have that similitude and analogy
to the thing signified which is required, but only the Bread and Wine in
substance; because that which is principally signified, and represented by the
signs in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is the nourishment of our souls in the
hope of eternal life: for as Baptism is the Sacrament of our Regeneration and
spiritual birth; so the Eucharist is the Sacrament of our spiritual
nourishment, as Card. Bellarmin confesses in Book 3. of the Eucharist, chap.
9. and in Book 4. chap. 19* he says that the Sacrament of the Eucharist was
ordained to preserve spiritual life, which cannot be represented and signified,
but by signs which can nourish our bodies; for the analogy and similitude
consists in this, that as the signs have virtue to nourish our bodies for the
preservation of temporal life; so the things signified have a virtue to nourish
our souls in the hope of eternal life. But neither the accidents of the Bread
and Wine, nor the Body and Blood of Christ, whether severally, or jointly with
the accidents, can nourish our bodies, (nourishment being essentially the
conversion of aliment into the substance of a living body,) and it is certain
that neither the accidents of Bread and Wine, nor the Body and Blood of Christ,
whether separately, or jointly with them, can be converted into our substance,
but only the substance of Bread and Wine, and other aliments which we take:
Therefore neither the accidents of the Bread and Wine, nor the Body and Blood
of Christ, whether separately, or jointly with them, are the true signs; but
the Bread and Wine only, which being the ordinary nourishment of our bodies, do
represent to us the spiritual nourishment of our souls by the Body and Blood of
Christ, received by Faith.

10. Secondly, The Council of Trent in Session 13. commands that the Sacrament
of the Eucharist shall be adored with Latrie, which according to our
Adversaries, is the sovereign worship due to God only. But the accidents of the
Bread and Wine ought not to be adored, because they are creatures, and that God
only must be adored: Therefore the accidents of the Bread and Wine are not the
Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Thirdly, A Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace, as the Council
of Trent defines it in Sessions 6, and 13. But in the Eucharist the Body and
Blood of Christ are not visible: Therefore, in the Eucharist the body and blood
of Christ, are not the signs.

Lastly, I say, that in every Sacrament the sign relates to the thing
signified; and Relation is always between two different things; because nothing
relates to it self, and consequently nothing can be both the sign and thing
signified. But the Body and Blood of Christ are the things signified: Therefore
the Body and Blood of Christ are not the signs. And it is to no purpose to say
that Jesus Christ in the Mass is the sign and figure of himself on the Cross;
for Jesus Christ wheresoever he is, is one and the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever. And therefore Jesus Christ not being different from himself, cannot
be relative to himself, nor the sign of himself.

Other reasons which are usually alleged against Transubstantiation will be
more properly mentioned in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Against the real presence of Christ's Body in the Host, or consecrated Wafer.
1. THe Romish Doctors affirm, That immediately after the Priest in the
celebration of the Mass, has pronounced these words, this is my body, the body
of Christ is really present in the Host, and that it is whole and entire in
every part and point of the Host; which doctrine I destroy by these following
Arguments, the first whreof is this.

2. If a thing be created in a place, either it must be produced there, or it
must come, or be brought thither from some other place; for it is impossible to
find out a third way of putting any thing in a place. And the Romish Doctors
have hitherto been able to invent but one of these two ways of putting Christ's
Body in the Host, the Jacobins telling us that it is brought thither from some
other place, and the Jesuits that it is produced there. But the body of Christ
can neither come, nor be brought thither into the Host* nor can it be produced
there: Therefore the body of Christ is not in the Host.

3. First, The body of Christ cannot come, or be brought into the Host from any
other place, because it can* come from no place but Heaven, being no where but
in Heaven. But Christ's body neither comes, nor is brought from Heaven into the
Host; which I prove thus: When a body comes, or is* carried from one place to
another, it must leave its first place. For example, if a man would go from
Paris to Rome, he must leave Paris: But the body of Jesus Christ never leaves
Heaven; for the heavens must contain him until the time of the restitution of
all things. Acts 3. Therefore Christ's body neither comes, nor is brought from
Heaven into the Host. Besides, it is impossible that Christ's body should come
or be brought into the host without passing through the space that is between
Heaven and Earth where the consecrated Hosts are; because a man cannot pass
from one extreme to another without passing through the space that is between
them. But the space between Heaven and Earth is too vast to be passed through
in a moment (for these Doctors will have it, that immediately after the
pronouncing of these words, this is my body, the body of Christ is brought into
the Host.) Moreover it must in a moment be in all the Heavens, and in all the
Airs between the highest Heaven, and this Earth where the Hosts are, (because a
man cannot pass through a place without being there) and then it would have
three sorts of existences at once, viz. one natural and glorious existence in
Heaven, one sacramental existence in the Host, and one airy existence in the
Air. But seeing all these things are absurd, we must conclude that Christ's body
neither comes, nor is brought into the Host.

4. Secondly, Christ's body cannot be reproduced in the consecrated Host,
because a thing that is produced already, cannot be produced again, without a
preceding destruction; for as a dead man cannot be killed, nor that be
annihilated, which is annihilated already; so neither can that be produced
which is produced already, nor that receive a being which has one already.
This common conception of all men is founded upon this principle, That every
action, whether it produces or destroys a thing, must necessarily have two
distinct terms, the one called in the Schools, terminus a quo, that is, the
term from which the thing comes; and the other terminus ad quem, that is, the
term to which it comes. But according to this principle, that cannot be
annihilated which is so already, nor that receive a being which has one
already; because the term from which it should come, and the term to which it
should come, would be one and the same thing; contrary to the Maxim already
laid down, viz. that the terms of action must necessarily be distinct, and that
one of them must be the negation or privation of the other.

5. Here perhaps it may be objected, That by Transubstantiation the substance
of Christ's body is not newly produced, but only a new presence of him in the
place where the substance of the bread was. But to this I answer, That in all
substantial conversions and actions, a new substance must be produced, as in
accidental, a new accident must be produced. But Transubstantiation (according
to the Romish Doctors) is a substantial conversion: Therefore by
Transubstantiation a new substance must be produced. And seeing that the new
presence of Christ's body in the place where the substance of the bread was, is
not a substance, but an accident of the Catagorie which the Philosophers call
Vbi, it is evident that by Transubstantiation the presence of Christ's body only
is not produced in the place where the substance of the bread was; and seeing
that the substance of Christ's body is not produced there (as has been proved
in the preceding number) we must conclude that there is no Transubstantiation
nor real presence of Christ's body in the Host. This instance does also destroy
the adduction of Christ's body into the Host, which has been already refuted in
number 3.

6. My second Argument is this. In a true humane body such as Christ's body is,
there is something above, and something under, right and left, before and
behind; for the head is above the neck, and the neck above the shoulders, the
shoulders above the breast, the breast above the stomach, the stomach above the
belly, the belly above the thighs, the thighs above the legs, etc. But all the
World knows that in a point there is nothing above or under, right or left,
before or behind: Therefore Christ's body is not in a point, and consequently it
is not in every point, or part of the Host. To this I add, that the quantity*
and greatness of Christ's body is nothing else but its length, breadth, and
thickness, which cannot be in a point. Lastly, The quantity of Christ's body is
nothing else but its extent, as we all know; and a body is extended when it
has its parts one without another; that is, they are not one within another,
as all the Jesuits expound it. But the doctrine of the presence of Christ's
body in the Host, puts all its parts one within another, because it puts them
all in a point: Therefore such a doctrine takes away its extent, and
consequently its quantity.

7. My third Argument is this. To move and not to move at the same time, to be
eaten and not to be eaten at the same time, to be in a point and not in a point
at the same time, to occupy a place and not to occupy it at the same time, are
contradictory things. But if the body of Christ were in diverse consecrated
Hosts, it would move and not move at the same time. For example, When a Priest
carries a consecrated Host to a sick person, the body of Christ which is
pretended to be in it, moves with the Host; for it leaves the Altar, and goes
with the Priest toward the sick persons house, and at the same time the body of
Christ, which is pretended to be in the other Hosts that remain on the Altar,
moves not; and so the same body of Christ at the same time moves and moves not,
which is a contradiction. Seeing then it is impossible that one and the same
body at one and the same time should move and not move, it is likewise
impossible that Christ's body should be in diverse Hosts at the same time. In
like manner, if Christ's body were at the same time in Heaven, and in the Host
it would be eaten and not eaten at the same time; for it would be eaten in the
Host by the Priest, and at the same time, it would not be eaten in Heaven. Also
it would be in a point and not in a point at the same time; for in the Host it
would be in a point, and in Heaven it would not be in a point at the same time:
Therefore seeing it is impossible that one and the same body at one and the
same time should be eaten and not eaten, should be in a point and not in a
point; it is also impossible that Christ's body should be both in Heaven and in
the Host at the same time.

8 The fourth Argument is this: Two relatives are always different, as the
Father and Son, the Husband and the Wife, etc. and relation is always between
two things that really differ; as the equality between two Else, the
resemblance between two Crows, etc. In a word, nothing can have relation to it
self, but whatsoever has relation must necessarily have it to something else,
as appears by the definition of Relation: But to be distant is a relative and
not an absolute term; for when we conceive an absolute term we conceive but one
thing, as when we conceive a Crow; but when we conceive a relative term, we
necessarily conceive two things. For example, We cannot conceive a Crow to be
like, without conceiving something else to which it is like. Seeing then we
cannot conceive a thing to be distant without conceiving something else from
which it is distant, it is evident that to be distant is a relative term, and
that distant things are relatives, and consequently are really different.
Whence I form this Argument: Relative things are really different, as has been
proved: But the body that is at Rome is distant from that which is at Paris, by
reason of the space of about 300 leagues that is between those two Cities; and
the body that is in the highest heavens is distant from that which is upon
earth, by reason of the many thousands of leagues that are between heaven and
earth: Therefore the body that is at Rome is different from that which is at
Paris; and that which is in heaven, is different from that which is upon earth;
and consequently one and the same body cannot be at the same time at Rome and
at Paris, in Heaven and upon Earth; else one and the same body might be distant
and different from it self, which is a contradiction: Therefore seeing Jesus
Christ is not distant, and different from himself, it follows that he cannot be
at the same time in Heaven and in the Host, nor at the same time in the
consecrated Hosts at Rome and at Paris.

9. But perhaps it may be said that a body being at the same time in two
distant places is not distant from it self, but that the places only are
distant; and therefore that Christ's body in heaven is not distant from it self
in the Host, but it is the places only, viz. heaven and earth (where the Host
is) that are distant. To this I answer that it is only the distance of places
that makes the distance of things existing in those distant places. For
example: The reason why Peter that is at Rome is distant from Paul that is at
Paris, is not because they are two things really different, else they would be
always distant, even when they are in one Bed together, (for they are always
really different) but all the reason of their distance is, because they are in
two distant places. Seeing then (according to our Adversaries) that Christ's
body is in two distant places at once, viz. in Heaven and in the Host, at Rome
and at Paris in diverse Hosts, it follows that Christ's body is distant, and
different from it self. And seeing it is impossible that it should be distant
and different from it self, it is evident that it cannot be in two distant
places at once; and consequently not in Heaven and in the Host.

10. Besides, Suppose that Peter could be at Rome and at Paris at once, and
that Peter that is at Rome should have a mind to go to Paris, and should go
accordingly; and that the same Peter that is at Paris should have a mind to go
to Rome, and should go accordingly, it is certain that Peter would draw near to
himself, and meet himself. But things that draw near to each other, must of
necessity have been at a distance before; and therefore if a body draws near to
it self, it is certain that it was distant from it self before. And hereupon I
would fain ask our Adversaries, whether, when Peter should meet himself, he
would let himself pass, or not? and if he should let himself pass, whether
Peter going to Rome, would step aside and give way to himself going to Paris,
or else the contrary? But if he should not step aside and give place to
himself, I would ask whether he would hinder himself from passing, or not? and
if he should not hinder himself from passing; whether he would pass through
himself, and so make another Janus with two faces, etc? Whatsoever answers they
shall make to these Questions must (I am sure) be very absurd and ridiculous.

11 The fifth Argument is this: It is a perfect contradiction, that a body
should be one and not one: But if Christ's body should be at the same time in
heaven, and upon earth in the host, it would be one and not one; for it would
be one by our Adversaries own confession, and it would not be one; which I
prove thus: That a thing may be one, it must neither be divided in it self, nor
from it self, as appears by the definition of Unity; and it is certain that
nothing is divided or separated from it self: But if Christ's body be at the
same time in heaven and upon earth in the host, it will be divided, and
separated from it self, that which is in heaven being divided and separated
from that which is upon earth, because it is not in the space between both.

12. Here again it may be objected, That a body in diverse places is divided
from it self locally, because the places in which it is, are divided; but not
entitatively, because it is still one and the same entity of body. To which I
answer, 1. That entitative division (which is nothing else but a plurality of
beings, or a plurality of things really different) is no true division, for
then the three divine Persons which are really different, would also be really
divided; and the body and soul of a living man which do really differ, would
also be really divided. 2. I say, That if a body be divided and separated from
bodies which it touches, it is also divided and separated from bodies which it
does not touch; and if a body be divided and separated from bodies to which it
is near, it is also divided and separated from bodies that are far distant from
it; but especially the division is true, when between two there be bodies of
diverse natures, to which there is no union. Therefore, seeing that between
Christ's body, which is really in heaven, and the same body which is pretendedly
upon earth in the consecrated Hosts, there be diverse bodies of diverse natures,
to which it is not united; it is evident by our Adversaries own doctrine, that
Christ's body is really divided and separated from it self. And seeing it is
impossible it should be separated from it self, it is also impossible that it
should be in heaven and in the host at the same time. 3. I say, That local
division takes away entitative division, and things that are divided locally,
are also divided entitatively; that is, they are also really different; else no
reason can be given why two glasses of water taken from the same fountain, are
really different, seeing these waters are like in all things, except in
reference to place, and there can no reason be given why the Ocean is not one
single drop of water only, reproduced in all places occupied by the Ocean,
except it be that one drop of water cannot be reproduced in all those places;
but if it be possible, then Reason obliges us to believe that it is really so,
because God and Nature do nothing in vain; and it is in vain to do that by many
things, which may be done by one thing: and if it be really so, then it
follows, That all the Sea-battles that ever have been, were fought in one drop
of water, and many thousands of men have been drowned in one drop of water, and
all people since Adam have drunk but one drop of water, which things are absurd
and ridiculous.

13. The sixth Argument is this: Jesus Christ as he is man, cannot be in diverse
places at once, if another man cannot be so too, because Jesus Christ, as he is
man, was made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, as the Apostle to
the Hebrews observes. But another man cannot be in diverse places at once; for
example, Peter cannot be at the same time at Paris and at Rome, which I prove
thus. It is impossible that Peter should be a man and no man at the same time:
But if Peter could at the same time be at Paris and at Rome, he might at the
same time be a man and no man, which I prove thus: He that may at the same time
be both dead and alive, may at the same time be a man and no man; because he
that is alive is a real man, and he that is dead is no real man, but a carcass:
But if Peter could at the same time be at Paris and at Rome, he might be both
alive and dead at the same time; for he might be mortally wounded at Paris and
die there, and, at the same time not be hurt at Rome, but alive and making
merry there. Besides, Peter might be divisibly at Paris, and indivisibly at
Rome; (as Christ's body, according to our Adversaries, is divisibly in heaven,
and indivisibly in the host:) But if at Paris (where he should be divisibly)
his head should be cut off, he would die, and cease to be a man; and at Rome
(where he should be indivisibly and in a point) his head should not be cut off,
and so he should remain at the same time a living and real man, which is a
contradiction. In a word, Peter might be at Paris in the midst of flames, and
be burnt and reduced to ashes, and consequently should die, and be no man;
whereas at the same time he might be at Rome in the River Tiber, sound and
brisk, and consequently be a true living man: whence it follows that he might
be a man, and no man, which is a contradiction.

14. To this may be added other absurdities that would follow from this
Position, that one body may be in diverse places at once, viz. That one Candle
lighted might give light to all the World, if it were reproduced in all places
of the World: That a great Army might be made of one man, reproduced in a
hundred thousand adjoining places: That all the debts in the World might be
paid with one Crown, reproduced as many times as there be Crowns due: That all
the people in the World might quench their thirst with one Pottle of Wine,
reproduced as many times as there be inhabitants in the World: That all the men
in the World might drink in one and the same Glass, reproduced as many times as
there be men in the World: (whereupon a man might be so curious as to ask,
whether if this Glass should be broken at Paris, it would also be broken at
Rome, Constantinople, and other places:) That one man reproduced in an hundred
thousand places, might at the same time marry an hundred thousand wives, and
lie with them; whereupon a man might desire to know whether these women might
not conceive, and every one of them be delivered of a child at the end of nine
months; and consequently it may be said that one man did in one night beget a
hundred thousand children, etc.

15. The seventh Argument is this: If Christ's body were in the host, it would
be seen there; for being there in its glory (as the Romish Doctors say it is)
it would be there more visibly then it was when he conversed amongst men here
below; because the glory of Christ's body does principally consist in the
brightness and splendour of an extraordinary light, like to that which it had
upon Mount Tabor; but who dares affirm that such a glorious body is not visible
wheresoever it is; and yet it is certain that Christ's body is not to be seen in
the host, which is an evident sign that it is not there. But it may be said
that Christ's body is under the accident of the Bread, and that these accidents
hide it from us. To this I answer, that (according to our Adversaries) Christ's
body is in the place where the substance of the Bread was: But the substance of
the Bread was not under the accidents, and the accidents of the Bread were not
upon their substance, for then the substance of the Bread and its accidents had
been in two different places, above and under being two several differences of
place, and that which is under is not above, etc. Therefore Christ's body cannot
be under the accidents of the Bread, and consequently the accidents do not hide
it from us. And seeing (as our Adversaries say) Christ's body is in every part
and point of the host, it must needs be in the superficies, and consequently
cannot be hid or covered by the accidents of the Bread. Here again it may be
said that Christ's body is glorious, luminous, and visible of it self, but God
hinders us from seeing it. To this I answer, That if God hinders, it is only
because he is pleased so to do; and consequently if he were pleased not to
hinder, he would not do it, but would permit it to be seen in the same posture
as it is in the host. Whereupon I would ask our Adversaries in what posture it
would be seen there, whether sitting, standing, lying, or in any other posture,
or whether it would be in any posture at all? If it be in no posture, it must
be without any external form, because posture or situation absolutely depends
upon external form, But how can a man be seen without an external form of a
man, and without being in any posture of a man? and how can Christ's body be
without posture, and without external form; seeing (as our Adversaries say) it
is whole and entire in the whole host, and occupies the whole space of a great
host? But if it be sitting, or standing, or in any other posture, and with the
external form of a man, and if (as they say) it be whole, and entire in a point
of the host, then it will follow that a man may be seen sitting, or standing in
a point; and seeing a man that is standing has his head above and his feet
below, it will follow that Jesus Christ will be seen in a point of the host
with his head above and his feet below, though in a point there be nothing
above or below. To this I add, That if it could be seen in the host it would
appear as big as the host, because it would occupy the whole space of the host;
and it would appear round, because it would be bounded by the space that the
host occupies, which is round. Besides, if the host should be divided into two
equal parts, it would appear less by one half, and in the form of a half
circle, because it would be whole and entire in the half of the host, and
occupy the space of it. It would also appear a hundred thousand times less, and
in a hundred thousand several forms; for, as they say, it is whole and entire
in a hundred thousand parts of the host, and occupies the spaces of them. In a
word, There was never such a monstrous thing seen in the World, as Christ's body
would be, if it were really in the host in such a manner, as our Adversaries
affirm it to be.

16. The eighth Argument is this: Either the Manhood of Jesus Christ, which is
pretended to be in the host, can act there, or it cannot: if it cannot act,
then it follows that it cannot see, hear, know, or love, or exercise any other
function of the sensitive or rational soul: But if the Manhood of Christ in the
host knows nothing, nor loves nothing, then it follows that it will not be
happy, because happiness chiefly consists in the knowledge and love of God.
Also the Manhood of Christ in the host will be different from his Manhood in
heaven; for it will know in heaven, and at the same time know nothing in the
host; it will love in heaven, and love nothing in the host; it will see in
heaven, and see nothing in the host. But if Christ's Manhood can act in the host
as it does in heaven, then it will follow that it will open its eyes, and move
its feet in a point; because, according to our Adversaries, it is whole and
entire in every point of the host. And being, as they tell us, God can as
easily put the whole World into a point, as he does the whole Manhood of Christ
into a point of the host, it will follow that all the parts of the World
existing in a point, may do in it all those actions which they now do in a vast
space, as the parts of Christ's Manhood existing in a point of the host can do
in it all those actions which they do in heaven; and so in a less space then is
occupied by a grain of Corn the Sun may move from East to West, the Sea may
have its floods and ebbs, and the English may have a Sea Fight with the
Spaniards. In a word, A Sparrow may easily swallow all the World, seeing the
World will not occupy so much space as a grain of Corn does; and yet the World
which it shall swallow, will be as great as it is at*present; even as Christ's
body in the host, is as big and as tall as it was on the Cross, as our
Adversaries affirm.

17. The ninth Argument is this: As a body cannot be in a place, except it be
produced there, or that it comes, or be brought thither from some other place;
so a body cannot cease to be in a place without being destroyed, or going to
some other place; and consequently if Christ's body cease to be in the host
after the consumption of the accidents, it must necessarily either perish, or
go to some other place: But Christ's body cannot perish, for Jesus Christ dies
no more, Romans 6. And Christ's body goes to no other place; for if it should go
to any other place, it would go to heaven: But it cannot go to heaven, because
it is there already, and a man cannot go to a place where he is already:
Therefore Christ's body does not cease to be in the host. Whence it follows,
that either Christ's body still remains in the host, and that it is impossible
that should be consumed, or else that it never was in the host: But every one
knows by experience that the hosts are eaten and consumed, and that Christ's
body cannot be there after the consumption of the accidents of the bread:
Therefore it never was in the host.

18. The tenth Argument is drawn from hence, That the pretended presence of
Christ's body in the host, destroys the nature of Christ's body, thus: The
properties of a Species are incommunicable to every other Species. For example:
The properties of a man are incommunicable to a beast; for, seeing the
properties flow from the essence, or are the very essence it self, it is
evident that if the essence of a Species be incommunicable to another Species,
then the properties of a Species are also incommunicable to another: But the
body and the Spirit are the two Species of substance: Therefore the properties
of the Spirit cannot be communicated to the body, as the properties of the body
cannot be communicated to the spirit. But there are two principal properties
which distinguish bodies from spirits: The first is, That spirits are
substances that are penetrable amongst themselves, that is, may be together in
one and the same place, but bodies are impenetrable substances amongst
themselves, that is, they cannot be together in one and the same place. The
second is, That bodies are in a place circumscriptively, that is, all the body
is in all the place, but all the body is not in every part of the place, but
the parts of the body are in the parts of the place; but spirits are in a place
definitively, that is, all the spirit is in all the place, and all the spirit
is in every part of the place; because a spirit having no parts, must
necessarily be all wheresoever it is. Whence I form my Argument thus: That
doctrine which gives to a body the properties of a spirit, changes the body
into a spirit, and consequently destroys the nature of a body, seeing
properties cannot be communicated without the essence: But the doctrine of the
pretended presence of Christ's body in the host, gives to a body the properties
of a spirit, because it affirms that the quantity of Christ's body penetrates
the quantity of the Bread, and is in the same place with it; that all the parts
of Christ's body are penetrated amongst themselves, and are all in one and the
same place; and that Christ's body is all in all the host, and all in every part
of the host: Therefore the doctrine of the Romish Church touching the pretended
presence of Christ's body in the host, destroys the nature of Christ's body.

19. The eleventh Argument is drawn from hence: That Jesus Christ being sat at
Gods right hand is in a glorious estate: and yet the doctrine of the pretended
presence of Christ's body in the host subjects him to diverse ignominies, viz.
that his body goes into peoples bellies, and amongst their excrement; that it
is subject to be eaten by his enemies, yea by Mice and other Beasts. Hear what
Claude de Xaintes, a famous Romish Doctor says of it, Repet. 5. Chap. 2. Of
all these we exclude not one from the true and corporal receiving of the Lords
flesh in the Sacrament, let him be Turk, Atheist, Infidel, or Hypocrite; yea,
though he should be the Devil himself incarnate. It is also subject to be
stolen, for about 25 years since a Thief was executed at Paris for stealing out
of a Church the Chalice and this God in it; and the Priest went to the Prison
in his sacerdotal Ornaments, and falling on his knees before the Thiefs pocket,
pulled his God out of it. And as it is a God that cannot keep himself from
being stolen, so neither can he keep himself from being burnt, as it appeared
when the Palace-Hal at Paris was burnt. In short, The host, or God of the Mass,
has been seen in the hands of one possessed by the Devil, and consequently in
the Devils power; yea, there are charms made by the Romish Priests to compel
the Devil to restore God to them. A horrible and prodigious thing to put God
into the Devils power, and into a capacity of being eaten by the Devil
incarnate, especially, seeing he is now glorious in heaven.

20 The twelfth Argument is drawn from hence: That God does no miracles without
necessity: But what necessity is there that he should do so many miracles in
this Sacrament, viz. that accidents should be without a subject? that the Bread
should be converted into Christ's body, which is already? that Christ's body
should be in a point, and in a hundred thousand places at once? What necessity
is there that it should be eaten by wicked men, by Beasts, and by Devils
incarnate? What necessity is there that it should be carried away by the Devil,
that it should be stolen, burnt, etc. Can it be said that it is for the
salvation of the soul of him that eats it? But Reprobates, as our Adversaries
confess, eat it too; and the Faithful under the Old Testament did not eat it,
nor do the little children of Believers under the New, and yet they are saved
for all that. Can it be said with Bellarmin and Perron, that the host being
eaten, serves as an incorruptible seed for a glorious Resurrection? But the
Faithful of the Old Testament, and the little children of Believers under the
New, will rise again gloriously, though they never participated of the
Eucharist. And St. Paul tells us Romans 8. that this seed of the resurrection of
our Bodies is not Christ's flesh, but his Spirit, in these words, If the Spirit
of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he shall also quicken
your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you.

21. Lastly, The holy Scripture* is clear in this matter; for Jesus Christ is
asceuded into heaven, Acts 1. And the heavens must contain him until the time
of the restitution of all things, Acts 3. and he himself says, I leave the
World and go to the Father, St. John 16. The poor ye have always with you, but
me ye have not always, St. Matthew. 26. To which may be added what Jesus Christ
says, St. Matthew. 24. viz. In the last days false Prophets will come* that
shall say, Christ is here or there, and that he is in the secret chambers, (or
Cabinets) which cannot be but by the doctrine of the Romish Church, which puts
Christ's body in diverse places, and shuts it up in several Cabinets on their
Altars; and it is very remarkable that in the Greek it is (...), that is, in
the Cupboards, (...) being properly a Cupboard to keep meat in.

CHAP. V.
Against the adoration or worshipping of the Host.
1. AGainst the adoration of the host, I form three Propositions; The first is
this, We are not obliged to adore or worship God every where, or in all places
where he is, at least not with external adoration, but we are only obliged to
worship him in all places where he appears in his glorious Majesty. The first
part of this Proposition, viz. That we are not obliged to worship God in all
places where he is, appears by the practice of all Christians. For God being
every where, and consequently in Stones, Trees, Beasts, Devils, and all other
Creatures, there is no man so extravagant as to fall on his knees before a
Tree, an Ass, or a Devil, that he may worship God in them, who is as really
present in them, as he is in heaven.

2. The second part of this Proposition, viz. that we are only obliged to
worship God both with internal and external adoration in all places where he
appears in his glorious Majesty, is proved, first, by the commands which Jesus
Christ gave his Apostles when they asked him how they should pray; for he
answers them thus; When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, St.
Matthew. 6. St. Luke 11. Why does he say, which art in heaven, and not which art
on Earth, or in the Sea, or in the Air, seeing God is equally in all these
places? but only because God appears in heaven in his glorious Majesty and
there crowns all the blessed Spirits with his glory. Secondly, When God
appeared to Moses in the burning bush, which was not consumed, he said to him,
Take thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place where thou stand is holy
ground, Exodus 3. Why is this ground called holy, and Moses commanded to
approach it with reverence, submission, and adoration, seeing any other ground
is equally Gods creatures, and that he is equally present every where? but only
because God did manifest somewhat of his power and glory in that place, by
causing the Bush to burn without being consumed. Thirdly, Joshua and the
Israelites did prostrate themselves before the Ark of the Covenant, Joshua 7.
6. because God appeared there in a peculiar and glorious manner, for, from the
Mercyseat which covered it, he gave his oracles and made known his will, Exodus
25. 22. Numb. 7.

Fourthly, When the Priest celebrates Mass, a little before the consecration,
he recommends the sursum corda, that is, the lifting up of their hearts; Why
the lifting them up, seeing God is equally both above and below? but only
because God appears above in heaven in his glorious majesty; and consequently
it is thither that we must direct our Vows, our Prayers, and our Worship.

3. The second Proposition is this: We are not obliged to adore Jesus Christ in
the water of Baptism, though he be really there in regard of all that is
adorable in him. The first part of this Proposition, viz. That we are not
obliged to worship Jesus Christ in the Water of Baptism, is chiefly proved by
the practice of all Christians; for no man ever fell on his knees before the
Water of Baptism and adored Jesus Christ in it, at least not with external
worship, which is only here intended; and doubtless the reason is, because
Jesus Christ discovers no beam of his glory there; nor does he appear in the
Water of Baptism any more then in other waters; so that as we are not obliged
to worship God, save only where he appears in his glorious Majesty, as has
been proved, so neither are we obliged to worship Jesus Christ, but only where
he discovers some beam of his glory, which he does not in the Water of Baptism.

4. The second part of this Proposition, viz. That Jesus Christ is really
present in the Water of Baptism in respect of all that is to be adored in him,
is proved thus: All that is of it self adorable in Jesus Christ, is either his
Godhead, or his divine Person, or his divine Attributes. As for his Godhead,
seeing it is really every where it cannot be denied but that it is also in the
Water of Baptism. As for his Person, seeing it is divine, and eternal, and
infinite, it is really every where, and consequently in the Water of Baptism:
and as for his divine attributes, seeing they are not really different from the
Godhead, or the person of Jesus Christ, it necessarily follows, that seeing the
Godhead and Person of Jesus Christ, are really in the Water of Baptism, his
divine Attributes must really be there likewise.

5. The third Proposition is this: We are not obliged to adore Jesus Christ in
the host, though he be really there in respect of all that is to be adored in
him, viz. in respect of his Godhead, his divine Person, and his divine
Attributes; yea, though he were there invisibly in respect of his Manhood too.
The principal reason of this has been touched upon already, viz. That as we are
not obliged to worship God in all places where he is (at least not with
external worship) but there only where he appears in his glorious Majesty, viz.
ordinarily in heaven, and extraordinarily elsewhere, as has been proved in the
first Proposition. And as we are not obliged to worship Jesus Christ in the
Water of Baptism with external adoration, though he be really there in respect
of all that is adorable in him, because he does not discover the least beam of
his glory there, nor appears in the Water of Baptism more then in other waters,
as has been proved in the second Proposition: Even so we are not obliged to
worship Jesus Christ in the host with external adoration, although he be there
in respect of all that is to be adored in him, yea, though he were there in
respect of his Manhood ^ood; because Jesus Christ does not discover any beam of
his glory there, nor does he appear in the consecrated hosts any more then in
those that are not consecrated, for no man can distinguish the one from the
other. And as for his Manhood which is pretended to be there invisibly, I say
that there is no sensible mark of its presence, and consequently nothing which
obliges us to external worship, for the same reason as is already alleged;
for if the invisible presence of the Godhead, divine Person, and divine
Attributes of Jesus Christ which are of themselves adorable, do not oblige us
to external worship in the Water of Baptism, why should the Manhood of Jesus
Christ, which is not of it self adorable, oblige us to external adoration
though it were in the Host, it being there only, as they say, invisibly? In a
word, They must show us the disparity, and tell us the reason why we are not
obliged to adore Jesus Christ with external worship in the Water of Baptism,
though he be really there present in respect of all that which is adorable in
him, viz. in respect of his Godhead, his divine Person, and his divine
Attributes, and yet are obliged to worship Jesus Christ in the Host with an
external worship, though nothing renders him more adorable there then in the
water of Baptism.

6. To this the Jesuit S. Rigant, one of the most learned of his Order,
answers, That although there be nothing in the consecrated Host that renders
him more adorable then in the Water of Baptism; yet there is something in the
Host which obliges us to external worship, which is not in the Water of
Baptism; because, says he, the Manhood of Jesus Christ is in the Host, and is
there in stead of a ray of glory; and God will be adored in all places, where
the Manhood personally united to the Godhead, is present: But in the Water of
Baptism Jesus Christ discovers no beam of his glory, and his Manhood which is
equivalent to a ray of glory, is not there.

7. To this I reply, That the rays or beams of glory which oblige us to
external adoration in a certain place, must be sensibly in that place. And
therefore seeing the Manhood of Jesus Christ which is pretended and supposed to
be really present in the host, is neither visible nor sensible, it cannot be
equivalent to a beam of glory. To which I add, That as the Godhead and divine
Person of Jesus Christ which are equally present in the Water of Baptism, and
in the Host, do not oblige us to external worship, for this only reason, viz.
because they do not discover any ray of their glory there: so neither does the
Manhood of Jesus Christ, pretended and supposed to be really present in the
host, oblige us to external adoration, for this only reason, viz. because it
appears not there, nor discovers any ray of its glory. Lastly, I affirm that by
the very doctrine and practice of the Romish Church it self, we are not obliged
to adore Jesus Christ in all places where his Manhood is, because, as the
Romish Doctors confess, we are not obliged to adore Jesus Christ in that host
which the Priest has newly eaten, and whose accidents are not yet destroyed;
nor in that host which is locked up in the Cupboard that is on the Altar; nor in
that host which a Priest carries under his Cloak to a sick person in the
Country.

8. To this the same Jesuit answers, That although the glory of Christ's
Manhood appears not to our bodily eyes, yet it appears to the eyes of our soul,
viz. to our faith; for the greatest glory of Christ's Manhood consists in its
being personally united to the Godhead, and in being sustained in a peculiar
manner by the Word. Suppose then, says he, that Jesus Christ be in the host, we
are sure that it is personally united to the Godhead; and consequently, the
glory of Christ's Manhood, which consists in this personal union, does certainly
appear to our Faith, which is sufficient to oblige us to an external adoration
of Jesus Christ in the Host.

9. To this I reply, That there is a twofold glory of God, and of Jesus Christ,
or of his Manhood, viz. the one essential, internal, and hid from our senses;
the other accidental, external and apparent to our senses: the essential and
internal glory of God which is hid from our senses, consists in the eminence of
his perfections, which are to be infinite, almighty, most wise, etc. and the
accidental and external glory of God, which appears to our senses, consists in
some miraculous and extraordinary effect, which is sensible; as when God caused
a Bush to burn without being consumed, when he pronounced his Oracles from
above the Mercyseat; and when, being made man, and having manifested himself in
the flesh, he commanded the Winds and the Waves, cast out Devils, raised the
dead, etc. But I affirm that we are not obliged to worship God with an external
adoration in all places where he is, in his essential and internal glory only,
although it appears to our Faith, because God being every where with this
essential, and internal glory, we should be obliged to worship him with an
external adoration in Trees, in Beasts, yea and in Devils too, which is absurd:
But we are only obliged to worship God with external worship in all places
where he makes his essential and internal glory appear by some accidental and
external glory, viz. by some miraculous or extraordinary effect, which is
sensible, and equivalent to a ray of his essential and internal glory, as
appears by what is said in the first Proposition. In like manner the personal
union of the Godhead and Manhood, being an essential glory of Jesus Christ, and
an internal glory of his Manhood, wholly hid from our senses, does not oblige
us to the external adoration of Jesus Christ, although it certainly appears to
our Faith, except it be accompanied with an external and sensible glory; for if
the essential and internal glory of the Godhead and divine Person of Jesus
Christ, which appear equally present to our Faith in the Water of Baptism, do
not oblige us to an external adoration of Jesus Christ, except it be
accompanied with an accidental, external and sensible glory; why should the
internal glory of Christ's Manhood, which is infinitely beneath the essential
and internal glory of the Godhead, and appears present to the Faith of those of
the Romish Church, oblige them to the external adoration of Jesus Christ, if it
be separated from all external and sensible glory? To this I add, That
according to the doctrine and practice of the Romish Church, we are not obliged
to adore Jesus Christ with external adoration in all places where the personal
union of the Manhood with the Word, appears to the Faith of those of that
Church; for we are not obliged to adore Jesus Christ in that host which a
Priest has newly swallowed; nor in that host which is locked up, nor in that
host which a Priest carries under his Cloak to a sick person in the Country;
although the essential glory of Jesus Christ, and the internal glory of his
Manhood (which this Jesuits makes to consist in the personal union of the
Manhood with the Word) appear certain to the Faith of those of the Romish
Church.

10. To this the Jesuit answers, That as if we would obtain any grace from
God, considered as he really exists in a stone, we should be obliged to
prostration and external worship of the Godhead really present in that stone:
so, if we would obtain any grace from Jesus Christ really existing in the host,
we are obliged to approach unto it with reverence, and external adoration; and
consequently we are obliged to worship Jesus Christ in the host with external
adoration whenever we would obtain any grace from him, as he exists in the
host.

11. To this I reply, That as we are never obliged to beg grace of God, as he
exists in a stone, except he discovers some beam of his glory there, (for it is
sufficient to beg grace of God, considered as he exists in heaven, where he
appears in his glorious Majesty, according to the command of Jesus Christ, when
ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, and according to the command of
the Apostles, lift up your hearts) so we are never obliged to beg grace of God
or Jesus Christ, considered as existing in the host, because he discovers no
ray of his glory there; but it is sufficient to beg grace of God or Jesus
Christ, considered as existing in heaven, because he always appears there in
his glorious Majesty. Therefore as we are never obliged to beg grace of God,
considered as existing in a stone, so we are never obliged to adore him there:
and as we are never obliged to beg grace of God or Jesus Christ, considered as
existing in the host, so we are never obliged to adore him there with external
adoration.

12. To this the Jesuit answers, That God has done many miracles by this
Sacrament, and in it, both by punishing profane persons, and the despisers of
it; and also by making a little child appear upon the Altar, or flesh in stead
of the bread, or blood in stead of the wine; all which ought to be acknowledged
as so many rays of the glory of Christ's Manhood, and that they ever oblige us
to the external adoration of Jesus Christ in the host.

13. To this I reply, That I do not at all doubt but that God has many times
punished profane persons, and the contemners of this Sacrament, both
ordinarily and extraordinarily; for St. Paul 1 Cor. 11. tells us that many of
those that did receive this Sacrament unworthily, were sick, and many slept,
that is, were dead: and St. Cyprian in the Treatise of those that fall,
observes Gods judgment against wicked and profane persons, and the contemners
of this Sacrament. But as for those apparitions of Jesus Christ in form of a
child, and of flesh and blood, etc. I look on them as fabulous stories invented
by Monks and other superstitious persons, above seven or eight hundred years
after Christ, when the doctrine of the real presence of Christ's Manhood in the
host, began to prevail* and was powerfully opposed by Gods people in those days.

14. Secondly, I say, That although there had been such apparitions yet we must
not infer from thence, either the presence of Christ's Manhood, or external
adoration; because that is not Christ's flesh which seems to be so; and these
apparitions may be illusions of the Devil. The Jesuit Vasquez in Disput. 193.
chap. 2. speaks thus. I answer, That which appears is not the flesh of Christ,
nor of any other that is really flesh; but it is only an effigies, or
appearance of flesh, as St. Thomas says: and whereas the simple are deceived,
and do believe that Christ's flesh is there in a divisible and bloody manner, it
is no great matter, and this deceit must be corrected by the right instruction
of the Doctors. Gabriel Biell, a famous Doctor of the Romish Church, Lesson 51.
upon the Canon of the Mass, says, That such apparitions of flesh and blood may
be made by the illusions of the Devil, to deceive the simple, God permitting it
to be so; and he gives an example of it, viz. That in a Convent of Minor Friars
at Ysennes in Thuringia, a certain person like unto an Angel, appeared to a
Lay-Frier that was preparing himself for the Communion, and thrust into his
mouth a piece of flesh, which as soon as he had swallowed, he was possessed,
and grievously tormented by the Devil. The Jesuit Suarez, Tom. 3. Disp. 55.
Sect. 3. speaks thus. Experience tells us that by length of time this flesh and
this blood which appear in the Eucharist, are changed and corrupted. But when
this happens, says that famous Romish Doctor Alexander Hales, Sent. 4. Quest.
11. It is a sign that the apparition which was made in that form, was not made
by the power of God, but by the power of the Devil, or by the craft of man.

15. Thirdly, If it were as true as it is false, that Jesus Christ has
appeared sometimes in the Sacrament of the Eucharist in the form of a little
child, or of flesh and of blood; yet I say, that as God, when he appeared to
Moses in the Bush that burned without being consumed, was to be worshipped
there, for this only reason, because he discovered a beam of his glory by
causing the Bush to burn without being consumed; but it does not follow that
God must be worshipped in all other Bushes, though he be as really in them as he
was in that, for this only reason, because he does not discover in them any ray
of his glory: so, if Jesus Christ has sometimes appeared visibly in the host
(which I do not grant) I think then he should have been worshipped, because of
such a visible appearance, which is equivalent to a ray of glory; but it
follows not that Jesus Christ must be adored in other hosts, where his Manhood
appear; not, though it be really there, for this only reason, because no ray of
his glory appears there.

16. To the three foregoing Propositions I add this Argument, which is very
considerable: In lawful adoration it is requisite that he that adores, be well
assured that what he adores is the true God, else he may justy be reproached,
as Jesus Christ reproached the woman of Samaria, Ye worship ye know not what.
But the Romanists can never be assured (according to their own maxims) that the
host which they worship is the true God, and they have always cause to suspect
that they worship a morsel of Bread in stead of the Redeemer of the World;
because according to their own doctrine, the real presence of Christ's body in
the host depends on lawful consecration; and lawful consecration depends on the
quality of the Priest, and on the pronouncing of the words of consecration, and
on his intention in pronouncing them; for there is no consecration (as they
say) when either he that celebrates Mass is no Priest, or does not pronounce
the words that are essentially requisite to consecration, viz. this is my body,
etc. or does not pronounce them with intention to consecrate; and consequently
in these cases the host remains mere bread. But it is impossible certainly to
know these three things: For as for the quality of the Priest, he must have
been baptized; and he that baptized him must have observed the essential form
of Baptism, and have had intention to baptize him: Again, he must have received
Ordination from a true Bishop; and the Bishop must have observed the essential
form of Ordination, and have had intention to make him a Priest; and to make
this Bishop a true Bishop, he must have been baptized in due form, and with the
requisite intention, and must have received Ordination in due form, and with
the requisite intention from other Bishops; and they again, for the making them
true Bishops, must also have received Baptism and Ordination in due form, and
with the requisite intention, from other true Bishops, and these from others,
and so back to the Apostles. But who can be assured that from the Apostles to a
Bishop, or Priest, now adays, there has been no failing, either in the
essential form of Baptism or Ordination, or in the requisite intention? As for
the pronouncing of the words requisite to consecration, none but the Priest can
know whether he has pronounced them or not, because in the celebration of the
Mass, those words are pronounced so softly, that no person present can hear
them. And as for the intention, it is evident that no man but himself can know
it. Besides, It is known that some Priests are Magicians, as Lewis Goffredi,
and other wicked Priests, who do neither consecrate in due form, nor with the
requisite intention, especially such as believe nothing of what they profess;
yea, diverse Monks and Priests that have been converted to our Religion, have
assured us that for a long time before their conversion they did abhor the
Idolatry that was practiced in the adoration of the host. Judge then if such
persons as these had any intention to consecrate in the celebration of the Mass.

17. The Romish Doctors have sought all the remedies imaginable to prevent this
danger. Pope Adrian Quest. 3. speaks thus: In the adoration of the Eucharist,
there is always a tacit condition, viz. if the consecration be duly made; (as
bath been decided at the Council of Constance) otherwise they could not be
excused from idolatry, that worship the host when the Priest pretends to
celebrate, but celebrates not; or pretends to celebrate, and is no Priest, as
it many times happens. Observe these words, it many times happens, for they
show that there is great cause of doubting, and that much caution must be used.
For, as if a woman, in her husbands absence, should say to a man that comes to
her, and tells her he is her husband, (and she has probable grounds to suspect
him) If thou art my husband I will receive thee, and thereupon endeavors to
clear it before she admits him to any privacy; this condition frees her promise
from blame; but if she gives her self up to him, before she clears this doubt,
saying, I will receive thee if thou art my husband, this condition does not
free her action from blame, but she will be reputed an adulteress. Even so if a
man to whom an host is proposed to be adored, and he has reason to doubt
whether it ought to be adored, should only say, If thou art Christ I will adore
thee, and should not adore it before he be well assured of it, this condition
would render him blameless; but if, notwithstanding his doubt, he adores it,
this condition, if thou art Christ, I adore thee, does not exempt him from the
crime of Idolatry; for to what purpose is the condition, whether it be tacit,
or expressed, I adore thee if thou art Christ, because he actually adores it,
without knowing whether it be so or not.

18. To what has been said, I add, That the Primitive Church never adored the
host, nor believed that the body and blood of Christ were really and invisibly
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist; for if the Christians of the Primitive
Church had believed it, they had furnished the Heathens with specious pretenses
to excuse the idolatry of their Image Worship, and to retort upon the
Christians those very arguments which they had made use of against them.

19. First, The Heathens did maintain that their Idols were composed of two
things, viz. of a visible Image and an invisible Deity dwelling in it. They
bring their gods, says St. Chrysostom in Theodoret in Atrep, into their base
images of wood and stone, and shut them up there as in a prison. Your gods,
says Arnobius, Book 6. dwell in Plaster and Baked Earth; and, that they may
make these materials more venerable, they suffer themselves to be shut up, and
to remain hid and detained in an obscure Prison. But might not the Heathens
have justly replied to the Ancient Christians, if they had believed what the
Romish Doctors do now adays. And do not you believe the very same of your host,
that it is composed of two things, viz. of the visible species of bread, and
the invisible body of Christ, which is hid under the species? Does not your
Christ dwell in baked dough, and that he may make a piece of bread more
venerable, does he not suffer himself to be shut up, and does he not remain
hid, as in a Prison?

20. Secondly, The Heathens held that consecration was the means whereby the
Deity, which they adored, was made present in the Image. So Tertullian in his
Apolog. chap. 12. says, I find nothing to object against Images, but that the
matter of them is such as our Frying-pans and Kettles are made of, which
changes its destiny by consecration. And Minutius Felix speaks thus of a Pagan
Image, Behold it is melted, forged, fashioned, and yet it is not God; behold it
is gilded, finished, erected, and yet it is not God; behold it is adorned,
consecrated, and worshipped, and then it is God. And Arnobius in Book 6.
Dedication or Consecration makes them dwell in Images, they refuse not to dwell
in habitations of Earth, or rather, being forced to go into them by the right
of Dedication, they are incorporated, and joined to the Images. But might not
the Heathens have replied to the Christians thus. We find it just so in your
Eucharist, viz. that the signs are of the same matter with our common Bread and
Wine, but change their destiny by consecration; behold it is kneaded, and
molded, and yet it is not God; behold it is baked in the Oven, and yet it is
not God; behold it is consecrated and adored, and then it is God; for your
Christ does not refuse to enter into these earthy matters, or rather, being
forced to go into them by the right of consecration, he is incorporated and
joined to the species of the Bread and Wine.

21. Thirdly, The Heathens had both great and little Images, and did believe
that the Deity which they worshipped, was as well in the little as in the great
ones. Arnobius in Book 6. jears them for this, saying, that, If their Gods had
their great and little Images in which they dwelt, they must needs be
straightned for want of room in the little ones, whereas in the great ones they
might stretch themselves out at their full length. But might not the Heathens
have reproached the Christians of those times in the same manner if they had
believed that Jesus Christ had been wholly contained as well in a little host
as in a great one, and as well in the least part of the host as in the greatest?

22. Lastly, The Heathens were reproached for worshipping Wood and Stone, the
work of men's hands; things that cannot see, hear, smell, taste, breath, speak,
or move; things exposed to age, rust, corruption, dust, falling, breaking,
burning, etc. to the injuries of Worms, Mice, and other Beasts; subject to the
power of Enemies, to be stolen, locked up, etc. as you may read in Arnobius,
Lactantius, Minutius Felix, and other ancient Doctors of the Church. But if
those ancient Christians had believed what the Romanists now do, might not the
Heathens have replied thus; And can you deny that the host which you worship is
the work of a man's hands, that molded it, and gave it such a form as pleased
him, and then consecrated it with certain words to make your Christ come into
it whole and entire? Do not you adore your host, which neither sees, nor hears,
nor smells, nor breaths, nor walks, nor speaks, nor moves? Is not your host
subject to age, dust, felling, burning, to Worms, to Mice, and other Beasts? Is
it not subject to be taken away, stolen, locked up, etc. But if it be said that
the accidents of the host are only subject to these inconveniences, and not
Jesus Christ that is under them, I answer that the Heathens had said the same,
viz. that their Gods were not subject to these inconveniences, but the Images
only in which they were; for in Arnobius his 6. Book, they speak thus: We
believe not the Copper, Gold, and Silver, whereof the Images are made, to be
Gods and Deities, that of themselves deserve adoration; but in these materials
we adore those that sacred dedication introduces, and causes to dwell in the
Images.

CHAP. VI.
Against the taking away of the Cup.
1. THe taking away of the Eucharistical Cup was established as an Article of
Faith by the Romish Church Representative, assembled in Council at Constance,
Anno 1415. Session 13. in a Canon, the chief clauses whereof are these: Seeing
that in diverse parts of the World there be some who rashly presume to say, that
Christian people ought to partake of the Sacrament of the Eucharist under both
species of the Bread and Wine; and do give the Communion to Lay People, not
only under the species of the Bread, but also under the species of the Wine;
this present holy general Council of Constance, lawfully assembled in the name
of the Holy Ghost, being desirous to provide for the safety of the faithful
against this error, does therefore declare, decree, and determine, that
although Jesus Christ did administer this venerable Sacrament to his Disciples
under both the species of Bread and Wine; and although in the Primitive Church
the Faithful did receive this Sacrament under both species, yet notwithstanding
that (for the avoiding of certain dangers and scandals) this custom, which was
introduced with reason, ought to be kept, viz. that Priests that say Mass shall
communicate under both the species of the Bread and Wine, but that Lay-persons
shall communicate under the species of Bread only: and they that shall say the
contrary, ought to be expelled as Heretics, and grievously punished by the
Bishops, or their Officials. This Canon was confirmed by the succeeding Romish
Councils, and particularly by the Council of Trent.

2. Against so horrible a Canon and so strange a Law, it is very difficult to
oppose any thing; for, if you tell them that this Law is contrary to the
Institution and command of Jesus Christ, they freely confess it; seeing that
although Jesus Christ did institute and administer the Eucharist under both
species, yet they will not have it so practiced. If you tell them that this Law
is contrary to the command of St. Paul, and practice of the Primitive Church,
they ingeniously own it; for they openly declare, that although the Faithful in
the Primitive Church did receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist under both
species, yet they that practice it thus ought to be expelled and punished as
Heretics. This is the true way of ending all Controversies, and of keeping us
from disputing with them. For example, If we allege that St. Paul 1 Timothy 4.
says, that they who forbid to marry, and command to abstain from meats, do
teach the doctrines of Devils; they need only answer, That although St. Paul
does say so, yet we must not believe it, because the Romish Church has
determined otherwise. Again, If we allege, That the same Apostle Ephesians. 2.
says, that we are saved by grace, through faith; and that not of our selves,
it is the gift of God; not of works, least any man should boast; they need only
answer, That although this was written by the Apostle, yet we must not believe
it, because the Romish Church has determined, that we are saved by works and
faith as coming from our selves, and from the strength of our own free will,
etc. And now I leave you to judge whom we ought to follow, whether these lying
Doctors, or Jesus Christ and his Apostles. But that which I find utterly
insupportable is this, viz. that they accuse of rashness, error, and heresy,
those that by obeying Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and following the practice
of the Primitive Church, do affirm that we ought to partake of the Cup as well
as of the Bread. Again, I find it an insufferable piece of impudence, that they
boast so much of antiquity, and of the conformity of their Creed to that of the
Primitive Church, and yet can so openly renounce both in this chief and
principal point of doctrine.

3. Here the Romish Doctors now adays think to shelter themselves, by telling
us it is true that Jesus Christ did institute the Sacrament of the Eucharist
under both the species of the Bread and Wine; and that the Primitive Church did
so celebrate it, not by any express command of Jesus Christ and his Apostles,
but merely by Ecclesias^ical policy, which may be changed, as several occasions
and circumstances require. And they add, That it is sufficient to observe that
which is of the essence of the Sacrament, viz. to receive the body and blood of
Christ; but that the Church may change that which is accidental, viz. to
receive them under both the species, or under one species only; for they will
have it, that the blood of Christ is under the species of the Bread, by
concommitance* and that his body is under the species of the Wine by
concommitance; because Jesus Christ being now glorious, his body and blood
cannot be separated.

4. To this I reply, First, That there is an express command of Jesus Christ to
take the Cup and drink, St. Matthew. 26. in these words, drink ye all of it. To
this the Romish Doctors answer, That the word all is not extended to all men;
for then we should say that the Eucharistical Cup ought to be given to Turks,
Jews, and all other Infidels. And they add, that the word all does not extend
to all those that are of the body of the Church of the Elect, for then the
Eucharistical cup should be given to little children, whom God has elected to
eternal life: But say they, the word all is extended only to all those, to whom
Jesus Christ gave the cup, viz. to the Apostles, considered as they were
Pastors.

5. To this I reply, That although Jesus Christ gave this command to drink of
the Eucharistical cup to his Apostles only, yet we must know in what quality
they received this command. But it was not in the quality of Apostles, for then
none but Apostles could partake of the cup; and there being now no more
Apostles, it should be quite taken away, and so Mass could be no more
celebrated. And it was not in quality of Pastors, or sacrificing Priests; for
Jesus Christ was then the only Sacrificer, as the Romish Doctors say, and the
Apostles did not then exercise the function of sacrificing Priests. Besides it
belongs to Pastors, and those that administer the Sacraments, being public
persons to give, but to private persons to receive only: But the Apostles in
the celebration of the Eucharist, did only receive of Jesus Christ their Master
and Pastor: Therefore they received the command to drink of the cup, as they
were Believers. Whence it follows that all the faithful that partake of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, are obliged by the command of Jesus Christ to drink
of the cup. So then the Romish Doctors are mistaken when they tell us that none
but Priests that sacrifice, have a right to drink of the cup, and that those
Priests that do not sacrifice, must communicate under the species of the bread
only, for at that time the Apostles did not sacrifice. To this may be added,
that if the command of Jesus Christ, drink ye all of it, was spoken to Pastors
only, because they to whom Christ spoke were Pastors; then it follows that the
command of Jesus Christ, Take, eat, was spoken to Pastors, because they to whom
Jesus Christ spoke were Pastors; and so the people will not be obliged by any
command to communicate under the species of the bread, and consequently will be
wholly deprived of the Sacrament, which is very absurd and contrary to Christian
Religion.

6. Secondly, I say, That in 1 Cor. 1. there is an express command to all the
Faithful to drink of the cup, in these words, Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. In which words the Apostle
speaks to all Believers, who, no doubt, have cause to examine themselves. And
this is apparent, because St. Paul directs his Epistle (and consequently these
words) to all those of the Church of Corinth, as well Laymen as
Ecclesiastical; for in chap. 1. verse. 2. he directs it to all that in every
place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord. To this I add, That Jesus
Christ does not only say, as often as ye eat this bread, but also, as often as
ye drink this cup ye do show the Lords death till he come; so that we do as
much commemorate Christ's death by partaking of the cup in the Eucharist, as we
do by partaking of the bread. And this is very proper, for seeing that not only
the body of Christ was broken, but also his blood shed on the Cross; and that
in every propitiation and expiation for sin, the effusion of blood was very
considerable (because it represents death better then any thing else does) it
is certain that they do not celebrate the memory of Christ's death as they
ought, that do not partake of this part of the Sacrament, whereby only we
commemorate the effusion of Christ's blood.

7. Thirdly, I say, that in the dispute about the Eucharist, our Adversaries do
allege to us the words of Jesus Christ in chap. 6. of St. John's Gospel, Except
ye drink the blood of the son of man, ye have no life in you. Why then do they
deprive the people of life, by taking the cup from them and hindering them from
drinking? And it is not at all to the purpose here to allege concommitance,
and to tell us that by taking Christ's body under the species of the bread, we
take his blood also, because it is inseparable from his body. For, to this I
answer, First, That to take Christ's blood in taking the host, is not to drink
it: But Jesus Christ says expressly, Except a man drink his blood he has no
life in him. Secondly, I say, That although in some places by the body, should
be meant the body and blood too, yet it could not be in those places where a
manifest distinction is made between the body and the blood: But in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist this distinction is very apparent; for Jesus Christ
gave first the Sacrament and sign of his body, in these words, Take; eat, this
is my body, which is broken for you; and then separately the Sacrament of his
blood, in these words, Drink ye all of it, for this is my blood, which is shed
for you. And he not only speaks of them separately, but represents them as
really separated in his death* for he says, my body broken for you, and my
blood shed for you. In which words there is no place for concomitance; for the
body broken by diverse wounds does not contain the blood, and the blood being
shed, is not contained in the body. Also our Adversaries affirm, that the
sacramental words do operate that which they signify; But by their own
confession, they signify the separation of Christ's body from his blood, as
Card. Perron acknowledges in his reply to the King of Great Britain, page
1108. in these words, The scope of the entireness of this Sacrament, is to put
us in mind that this body and this blood which we receive, were divided by his
death on the Cross; whence St. Paul says, as often as we eat this bread, and
drink this cup, we show the Lords death till he come. Thirdly, I say, That as
he that eats bread dipped in wine, has indeed wine in his mouth, but does not
drink it; so he that should eat or swallow a consecrated host, would not drink
Christ's blood, though it were in it.

8. Lastly, I say, That seeing the Sacraments were instituted to assure us the
more of the truth of Gods promises, and that all our comfort depends on this
persuasion, that all Gods promises are most true; it necessarily follows, that
as much of the Sacrament as is taken away, so much of the certainty of this
persuasion is diminished. And it is to no purpose to say that one part of the
Sacrament does as much confirm Gods promises as the whole Sacrament does; for
if it be so, then God has unnecessarily instituted two Sacraments; for it had
been enough to have instituted Baptism only, seeing it is ordained to confirm
Gods promises. But, if for such a confirmation two Sacraments are better then
one, and if two pledges, and two seals for that purpose, are of more
consequence then, one alone; then in one Sacrament also, two signs are of more
weight then one alone, for the confirmation of Gods promises. and seeing it is
said St. Luke 22. and 1 Cor. 11. that the cup is the New Testament, and the New
Covenant in the blood of Christ, because it is the Sacrament of it, why then
are people deprived of it?

9. As for the imaginary dangers and scandals which the Romish Doctors find in
peoples partaking of the cup, I say in general, that Jesus Christ (in whom the
treasures of wisdom are hid, and in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells
bodily) foresaw them as well as they; and yet he instituted and administered the
cup, and commanded all to drink of it. And St. Paul who was extraordinarily
inspired by the Holy Ghost, does (notwithstanding these pretended dangers and
scandals) command the Corinthians, as well Lay persons as Ecclesiastical, to
drink of the cup, as has been already proved.

10. The first inconvenience which our Adversaries find in peoples partaking of
the cup, is that they fear they may dip their moustaches in the Chalice, and so
the blood of Christ may remain on some hair of the moustache; also they fear
that the species of the wine, and consequently Christ's blood, may fall to the
ground, and being fallen it cannot be gathered up again.

To this I answer: First, That Women, Eunuchs, and such young men as have no
beards, ought not to be excluded.

Secondly, It is better to be without Moustaches then without the participation
of the whole Sacrament.

Thirdly, This inconvenience proceeds only from a false supposition, viz. that
Christ's blood is under the species of the wine; but if in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist there be nothing but Bread and Wine in substance, and any of it
should fall to the ground accidentally, and not through any fault of ours, this
inconvenience is not great enough to violate the institution and command of
Jesus Christ and his Apostles.

11. The second inconvenience is, That it is almost impossible to observe this
Law where there is a great number of people and but one Priest.

To this I answer, First, That in places where there is much people, as in
Cities, there are diverse Priests.

Secondly, If one Priest be not enough, another must be called from some
neighboring place.

Thirdly, That which cannot be done in one day, must be done in two or three
days, rather then the command of Jesus Christ should be violated, and the
practice of the Primitive Church abandoned.

12. The third inconvenience is, that some have a natural antipathy, or
aversion to Wine, and consequently cannot drink of the cup.

To this I answer, That because corporal actions do depend on certain natural
powers, they are supposed to be commanded to those that have natural powers
proper to exercise those actions, and to none else. For example, The hearing of
Gods Word is not commanded to deaf persons, but to those that can hear it; but
drinking of Wine is a corporal action, and therefore commanded to those only
that can drink it. So that if the cup must be taken from all Lay People,
because some of them have a natural antipathy to Wine; then the preaching of
the Gospel must be taken from Christians, because some of them are deaf and
cannot hear it.

13. The fourth inconvenience is, That there are some Countries where no Wine
grows, as in Lapland, Norway, etc.

To this I answer; First, That although no Wine grows in those Countries, yet
some may be brought thither.

Secondly, But if none can be brought without being spoiled, and its form
changed, then it is better to substitute the ordinary drink of the Country in
stead of Wine.

Thirdly, But if this common drink of the Country may not be substituted in
stead of Wine, then they that cannot have Wine, do abstain from it, because
they are forced thereunto; and it is neither impudence nor contempt, to abstain
from a thing commanded by Jesus Christ, when it is not to be had: but to ordain
that they that have wine in abundance shall abstain from the cup, is an
insufferable boldness, and a most unchristian contempt of the Sacrament.

CHAP. VII.
Against the Mass.
1. THe Mass, according to the Romish Doctors, is a Sacrifice of the Body and
Blood of Christ propitiatory for the sins of the living and dead; and so it is
defined by the Council of Trent, Session 22. Against such a Mass we might
allege all the Arguments already made use of against Transubstantiation, and
the pretended presence of Christ's body in the host; for our Adversaries confess
that those reasons which destroy Transubstantiation, and the pretended presence
of Christ's body in the host, do also destroy the Mass. But in this Chapter we
shall only use such Arguments as are directly against the Mass, and do utterly
destroy it.

2. The first Argument is drawn from this, viz. that in the institution and
first celebration of the Eucharist, Jesus Christ did not sacrifice nor offer
his body and blood to his Father, as appears by what is mentioned in the three
Evangelists and the Apostle St. Paul, in which there is not the least foot-step
to be seen of a sacrifice, or oblation of Christ's body and blood. This
Bellarmin confesses in Book 1. of the Mass, chap. 27. in these words, The
oblation which is made after consecration, belongs to the entireness of the
Sacrament, but is not of its essence; which I prove, because neither our Lord
nor his Apostles, did make this oblation at the first, as we have demonstrated
out of Gregory. The Jesuit Salmeron in Tom. 13. of his Commentaries on the
Epistles of St. Paul, makes a Catalogue of unwritten Traditions, in which he
puts the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, the worshipping of Images, the Mass, the
manner of sacrificing, and the tradition that Jesus Christ did offer a
sacrifice in the Bread and Wine. Card. Baronius in his Annals on the year 53.
freely confesses that the sacrifice of the Eucharist is an unwritten
Tradition. A strange thing that the Mass, which is the foundation of the Romish
Church (for the Doctors require nothing of the people, but that they should go
to Mass) cannot be found to have been instituted or commanded by Jesus Christ.
And the truth is, if Jesus Christ in the celebration of the Eucharist had
offered unto God his Father a sacrifice of his Body and Blood, propitiatory for
the sins of the living and dead, then there had been no need that he should
have been sacrificed again on the Cross, because, having already expiated our
sins in the sacrifice of the Eucharist, there was no need he should expiate
them again on the Cross. To this I add, that St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. 11. mentions
the Offices which Jesus Christ left his Church when he ascended into Heaven, in
these words, He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors, and Teachers, but makes no mention at all of the Sacrificers
of Christ's body and blood, nor in 1 Timothy nor in the Epistle to Titus, when he
describes the duty of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, without making the
least mention of this sacrificing of Christ's body and blood.

3. The second Argument is drawn from the definition of a Sacrifice, as it is
given us by our Adversaries, Card. Bellarmin in Book 1. of the Mass, chap. 2.
defines it thus: Sacrifice is an external oblation made to God alone, whereby
in acknowledgment of humane infirmity, and the divine Majesty, the lawful
Minister consecrates by a mystical ceremony, and destroys something that is
sensible and permanent. From these last words, viz. that the lawful Minister
destroys something that is sensible, I form two Arguments which destroy the
sacrifice of the Mass.

The first is this, In every sacrifice the thing sacrificed must fall under our
senses; for our Adversaries say it is a sensible thing: But the body and blood
of Christ, which are pretended to be sacrificed in the Mass, under the
accidents of the bread and wine, do not fall under our senses, as we find by
experience: Therefore the body and blood of Christ, which are pretended to be
under the accidents of the bread and wine, are not the thing sacrificed.

The second Argument is this: In every true sacrifice the thing sacrificed must
be utterly destroyed; that is, it must be so changed, that it must cease to be
what it was before, as Bellarmin says in express terms in the place above
cited: But in the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass Christ's body and blood are
not destroyed, for Jesus Christ dies no more, Romans 6. Therefore in the
pretended Sacrifice of the Mass, the body and blood of Christ are not the thing
sacrificed.

4. To these two Arguments Bellarmin in Book 1. of the Mass, chapter 27. and other
Romish Doctors answer, that Christ's body simply is not the thing sacrificed in
the Mass, but it is Christ's body, as it is under the species of the bread; and
that it is in reference to the species of the bread, that Christ's body is
sensible and visible.

Secondly, They answer that in the sacrifice of the Mass Christ's body is
destroyed in respect of its sacramental being, but not in respect of its
natural being; for when it is eaten in the sacrament it cease to be under the
species of the bread.

5 To these answers I reply, First, That Christ body is not visible by the
species of the bread, because, as our Adversaries say, that hides it from us,
and hinders us from seeing it. And although a substance may be said to be
visible, and cognizable by its accidents, yet it is never so by the accidents
of another substance; and consequently Jesus Christ may be said to be visible
by his own accidents, but not by the accidents of the bread, which are just
alike both in the consecrated and unconsecrated hosts; and it is a ridiculous
shift to say that Christ's body is visible under the species of the bread,
because that species is visible; for as we cannot see Wine that is in a
Hogshead, because we see the Hogshead; and we cannot see Money that is in a
Purse closed, because we see the Purse; so neither can we see the body under
the species of the bread, because we see the species; for as our Adversaries
say, that species hinders us from seeing it.

6. Secondly, I say, That by the sacramental being is understood, only an
accidental being of Jesus Christ (for example his presence in the Sacrament) or
else besides that, is understood his substantial being too. If his substantial
being be also understood (seeing the substantial being of a thing is nothing
else but its substance and nature) then it will follow that if Jesus Christ be
destroyed in the Sacrament of the Eucharist in respect of his substantial
being, he must also be destroyed in respect of his natural being, which is
contrary to what the Apostle says, Romans 6. that Jesus Christ dies no more. If
an accidental being of Jesus Christ be only understood (for example, his
presence in the Sacrament) then these absurdities will follow, viz.

First, That the sacrifice of the Mass will be the sacrifice of an accident
only, and not of Jesus Christ, because the presence of Jesus Christ is not
Jesus Christ himself, but an accident of him.

Secondly, It will follow that the sacrifice of the Mass, and that of the Cross
will not be the same sacrifice in reference to the thing sacrificed, because
Jesus Christ, and his presence are not the same thing; Jesus Christ being a
substance, and his presence an accident, which is contrary to the decision of
the Council of Trent, which has determined that the sacrifice of the Mass, and
that of the Cross, are the same in reference to the thing sacrificed.

Thirdly, It will follow that the thing which is destroyed in the Sacrament, is
not the same with that, which was produced there, because there is only an
accident destroyed, whereas a substance was produced by Transubstantiation,
which is a substantial conversion, as has been sufficiently proved.

Fourthly, It will follow that the sacrifice of the Mass will be offered in the
Priests stomach only, because this presence is not destroyed till the Priest
has eaten the host; and consequently, the sacrifice of the Mass will be
offered after the Mass, for this presence is only destroyed by the destruction
of the accidents; and commonly these accidents are not destroyed till after
Mass is said.

Fifthly, It will follow that the justice of God will cease to be the same; for
whereas heretofore it could not be satisfied but by the death of Christ, and by
the destruction of his natural being; now God is appeased, our sins expiated,
and Gods justice satisfied by the destruction of his sacramental being only;
for they will have it, that the sacrifice of the Mass is propitiatory for the
sins of the living and the dead.

7. The third Argument is drawn from these words of the Apostle, Heb. 9. Almost
all things are by the Law purged with blood, and without shedding of blood is
no remission: It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the
Heavens should be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with
better sacrifices* then these. From which words I form this Argument. There is
no propitiation, or remission of sins without sheding of blood, as the Apostle
says: But in the Mass there is no sheding of blood (for it is called an
Unbloudy sacrifice:) Therefore in the Mass there is no propitiation or
remission of sins; and consequently no propitiatory sacrifice for sin. This
Argument may be thus confirmed: Under the Old Testament there was no
propitiation, or purification, without sheding of blood, and the types of
heavenly things were so purified, as the Apostle says, Heb. 9. Therefore under
the New Testament also there can be no propitiation or purification without
sheding of blood, and heavenly things, being represented by the legal types,
must be purified by a more excellent sacrifice, viz. by the sheding of Christ's
blood. And although the Apostle uses the word Sacrifices in the plural number,
yet we must understand the only sacrifice of Christ on the Cross; because when
one thing is opposed to many, it is often expressed in the plural number; as
when Baptism, which is but one, is called Baptisms, Heb. 6. 2. But the only
sacrifice of the Cross of Christ in the Text above cited, Heb. 9. 23. is
opposed to the old Sacrifices, which were types and figures of the sacrifice of
the Cross.

8. The fourth Argument is drawn from the words of the Apostle, Heb. 10. 16.
This is the Covenant which I will make with them after those days says the
Lord, I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write
them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Now where
remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin. Whence I form this
Argument: Where there is remission of sins there is no need of an oblation, or
a propitiatory sacrifice for sin, as the Apostle says. But in the Christian
Church, by virtue of the New Testament, or New Covenant, confirmed by the blood
of Christ, there is remission of sins, Heb. 10. 16, 17. Therefore in the
Christian Church now adays, there is no need of an oblation, or propitiatory
sacrifice, and consequently no need of the sacrifice of the Mass.

9. The fifth Argument is drawn from the words of the Apostle, Heb. 9. Jesus
Christ offers not himself often, as the High Priest enters into the holy
place every year with the blood of others; for then must he often have suffered
from the foundation of the World, but now once in the end of the World, has he
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And as it is appointed to
men once to die, but after this the judgment, so Christ was once offered to
bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he appear the
second time without sin unto salvation. This is confirmed by the words of the
same Apostle, Heb. 10. The Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not
the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they
offered year by year, continually make the comers thereunto perfect, for then
would they not have ceased to be offered, because the worshipers once purged,
should have had no more conscience of sins. But in those a remembrance is made
again of sins every year; for it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of
goats should take away sins, etc. And every High Priest stands daily
ministering and offering often times the same sacrifices which can never take
away sins; but this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever
sat down on the right hand of God. For by one offering he has for ever
perfected them that are sanctified: which is conformable to what he had said a
little before, that we are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once for all. From all which I form these Arguments.

10. First the old sacrifices were reiterated, for the Apostle says that the
High Priest enters into the holy place every year with the blood of others:
but the sacrifice of Jesus Christ must not be reiterated, for the same Apostle
says that Jesus Christ offers not himself often; and that he has once
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself: Therefore the sacrifice
of the Mass is not the sacrifice of the Cross reiterated, or the reiteration of
the sacrifice of the Cross, as our Adversaries would have it.

11. Secondly, The Apostle adding, else he should often have suffered from the
foundation of the World, Makes it apparent that Christ cannot be offered
without suffering: For, as he that should say, this is not fire else it would
be hot, does necessarily presuppose that fire is hot; and as he that should say
he is no man else he would be rational, does necessarily presuppose that man is
rational: so when the Apostle says, that Jesus Christ offers not himself
often, otherwise he should often bave suffered, does necessarily presuppose
that Jesus Christ cannot offer himself without suffering* But Jesus Christ does
not suffer every day in the Mass: Therefore he is not offered every day in the
Mass by the ministry of Priests.

12, Thirdly, These words, from the foundation of the World, are of great
weight, for it is as much as if the Apostle had said, if the only sacrifice of
Christ on the Cross be not sufficient to take away sins which shall be
committed hereafter, it follows that it was not sufficient to take away sins
which have been committed heretofore from the creation of the World; for it is
very unsuitable that the sacrifice of Christ on the Cross should have more
virtue before it was offered then since: But the sacrifice of Christ on the
Cross, had the virtue to take away sins before it was, otherwise (says the
Apostle) he should often have suffered from the foundation of the World:
Therefore it has also virtue to take away sins committed since it was, and
consequently there is no need that it should be reiterated in the Mass.

13. Fourthly, The Apostles comparison is considerable, the sense whereof is
this: As men suffer death but once, and after death appear no more till the day
of the resurrection, and day of judgment; so Christ has offered himself to his
Father once for all on the Cross to take away sins, and will be no more on
earth until he comes to judge the quick and the dead. This utterly destroys the
Mass, in which Jesus Christ is said to be offered and sacrificed continually by
the ministry of Priests.

14. Fifthly, Sacrifices that take away sins, and sanctify those that come
thereunto, ought not to be reiterated; for the only reason which the Apostle
alleges, why the old sacrifices of the Law were reiterated, is because they
could not take away sins, nor sanctify the comers thereunto as appears by the
Text above cited. But the sacrifice of Jesus Christ on the Cross, takes away
sins and sanctifies those that come thereunto: Therefore the sacrifice of Jesus
Christ on the Cross, ought not to be reiterated, and consequently is not
reiterated in the Mass.

15. If Jesus Christ did offer himself a sacrifice on the Cross that he might
sanctify us for ever, and purchase eternal redemption for us, then it is
evident that the fruit and efficacy of this sacrifice endures for ever, and
that we must have recourse to no other sacrifice but to that of the Cross: But
Jesus Christ did offer himself a sacrifice on the Cross, that he might
sanctify us for ever, and purchase eternal redemption for us, as appears by
the Texts aforesaid: Therefore the efficacy of the sacrifice of the Cross
endures for ever, and we must have recourse to no other Sacrifice but to that
of the Cross. In a word, either we must confess that the sacrifice of the Cross
has no virtue to take away sins, and to sanctify us for ever, (which is
contrary to what the Apostle says) or else if it has this virtue and
sufficiency, then Jesus Christ has offered one only sacrifice once for all,
and consequently is not offered daily in the Mass by the Ministry of Priests.

16. Lastly, The Apostle almost throughout the whole Epistle to the Hebren*s,
says, that Jesus Christ was constituted and consecrated by his Father, High
Priest for ever; and particularly chap. 7. he says, That many were made
Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death; but
Jesus Christ because he continues forever, has an unchangeable Priesthood;
and that he is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them; and consequently he has
no need of Vicars or companions in his Priesthood.

17. In answer to these Arguments the Romish Doctors are wont to say that the
sacrifice of the Mass is the same with that of the Cross, in respect of the
essence of the Sacrifice, the same thing being offered in both, viz. the body
and blood of Christ by the same Priest, viz. by Jesus Christ. But it differs in
respect of the manner of offering; for on the Cross Jesus Christ offered
himself bloudily, that is, when he died he shed his blood for mankind; but in
the Mass he offers himself unbloudily, that is, without sheding his blood, and
without dying: On the Cross Jesus Christ was destroyed in respect of his
natural being, but in the Mass he is destroyed in respect of his sacramental
being. They add, that all the Arguments drawn from the Epistle to the Hebrews,
respect only that bloody oblation which was once offered on the Cross; but
besides this bloody sacrifice there is another that is unbloudy, which is daily
offered in the Mass. Lastly, They say, that the sacrifice of the Cross is
primitive and original, but this of the Mass representative, commemorative, and
applicative of that of the Cross as the Council has it in its 22. Session.

18. To these distinctions I reply, That the sacrifice of the Mass does not
differ from that of the Cross in respect of the manner only, (which is but an
accidental difference) but it differs in respect of essence too.

First, Because the natural death of Jesus Christ is of the essence of the
sacrifice of the Cross: But the sacrifice of the Mass does not comprehend the
natural death of Jesus Christ, for Jesus Christ dies no more, Romans 6.
Therefore the sacrifice of the Mass does not comprehend that which is of the
essence of the sacrifice of the Cross, and consequently differs from it
essentially, and not in respect of the manner only.

Secondly, Because the representation of a thing differs essentially from the
thing represented: For example, The Kings Picture differs essentially from the
King. Also the memorial of a thing differs essentially from the thing whereof
it is a memorial: For example, The celebration of the Passover, which was a
memorial of the Angels favorable passing over the houses of the Israelites,
differs essentially from that passing over. And lastly, the application of a
thing differs essentially from it: For example, The application of a Plaster
differs essentially from the Plaster. But according to the determination of
the Council of Trent, in Session 22. the sacrifice of the Mass is
representative, commemorative, and applicative of that of the Cross: Therefore
the sacrifice of the Mass differs essentially from that of the Cross.

Thirdly, Because the sacrifice of the Cross is of an infinite value, and
consequently ought not to be reiterated; for its value being infinite, it is
sufficient to take away all sins past, present, and to come, as Bellarmin says
Book I. of the Mass, chap. 4. But the sacrifice of the Mass is of a finite
price and value, according to the same Bellarmin and other Romish Doctors; at
which we may justly wonder, seeing, as our Adversaries say, it differs not from
the sacrifice of the Cross, either in respect of the thing sacrificed, or in
respect of the chief Priest, and yet from these the sacrifice has all its
price and value.

19. Secondly, I say that an unbloudy propitiatory sacrifice is a feigned, and
an imaginary thing, and that the Arguments drawn from the Epistle to the
Hebrews, do wholly destroy it.

First, Because it is said, Heb. 9. that without sheding of blood there is no
remission of sins: Therefore in the unbloudy sacrifice of the Mass, there can
be no remission of sins, and consequently it cannot be a propitiatory sacrifice
for sin.

Secondly, Because Jesus Christ cannot be offered without suffering; for the
Apostle says, Heb. 6. Jesus Christ offers not himself often, otherwise he
should often have suffered: But the sacrifice of Jesus Christ with suffering,
is a bloody sacrifice: Therefore there is no unbloudy sacrifice.

Thirdly, Because the bloody sacrifice of the Cross, being of an infinite
value, has purchased an eternal redemption, Heb. 9. and has taken away all
sins, past, present, and to come. Whence it follows that there is no other
sacrifice either bloody or unbloudy, that can purchase the pardon of our sins*
the sacrifice of the Cross having sufficiently done it.

Fourthly, Because the justice of God requires that sins shall be expiated by
the punishment that is due to them; and this is so true that the wrath of God
could not be appeased but by the bloody and ignominious death of the Cross:
Therefore the justice of God must have changed its nature if sins can be
expiated in the Mass without pain, or suffering.

20. Thirdly, To the distinction of Primitive sacrifice, which was offered on
the Cross, and representative, commemorative, and applicative, which is daily
offered in the Mass, I reply, First, That what the Council of Trent says in
Session 22. viz. that in the Eucharist there is a sacrifice representative,
commemorative, and applicative of that of the Mass, may bear a good sense, viz.
that there is in it a representation, commemoration, and application of the
sacrifice of the Cross, viz. a representation, because the bread broken,
represents the body broken; and the wine poured into the cup, represents the
blood of Christ shed for the remission of sins: a commemoration, because all
that is done in it, is done in remembrance of Jesus Christ and his death
according to his own command in these words, Do this in remembrance of me, and
according to what St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. As often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come: and an application,
because the merit of the sacrifice of the Cross is applied to us not only by
the word, but also by the Sacraments, as we shall show hereafter. But our
Adversaries are not content with this, for they will have it that in the
celebration of the Eucharist, there is offered a true and proper sacrifice
propitiatory for the sins of the living and the dead, which has been already
refuted at large.

Secondly, I say that the application of the sacrifice of the Cross may be
considered on Gods part, or on man's part: on Gods part, when he offers Jesus
Christ to us, with all his benefits, both in his Word and Sacraments: on man's
part, when by a true and lively faith, working by love, we embrace Jesus Christ
with all his benefits offered to us both in his Word and Sacraments. And this
is it that Jesus Christ teaches us, St. John 3. in these words, As Moses
lifted up the serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted
up, (viz. on the Cross) that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have eternal life: For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten
Son, (viz. to die) that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life: he does not say, whosoever sacrifices him in the Mass, but
whosoever believes, etc. And St. Paul shows it clearly in these words, God
has set forth Jesus Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his blood; he
does not say through the sacrifice of the Mass but through faith. And we really
and truly apply the sacrifice of Christ's Cross when we have recourse to him, as
a man applies a Plaster when he has recourse to it, and lays it on the wound:
But the recourse or refuge of a penitent sinner to the sacrifice of the Cross
for obtaining mercy from God, is nothing else but Faith. As for the distinction
of the sacramental and natural being of Jesus Christ, it has been already
refuted in the 6. Number.

21. I shall conclude this discourse with the testimony of Thomas Aquinas, the
most famous of all the Romish Doctors, and called by our Adversaries, the
Angelical Doctor. This Thomas in Part. 3. Quest. 83. Artic. 1. having proposed
this Question, viz. Whether Christ be sacrificed in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, he concludes with these memorable words. The celebration of this
Sacrament is very fitly called a sacrificing of Christ, as well because it is
the representation of Christ's Passion, as because by this Sacrament we are made
partakers of the fruit of the Lords Passion. And afterward he gives his answer,
in these words: I answer, We must say that the celebration of this Sacrament is
called a sacrificing of Christ, in two respects. First, Because (as Augustine
to Simplicius says) we are wont to give to Images the name of the things
whereof they are Images, as when we see Pictures on a Wall, or in a Frame, we
say this is Cicero, that is Salust, etc. But the celebration of this Sacrament
(as has been said above) is a representative Image of Christ's Passion; which
Passion is the true sacrificing of Christ, and so the celebration of this
Sacrament is the sacrificing of Christ. Secondly, The celebration of this
Sacrament is called the sacrificing of Christ in regard of the effect of
Christ's Passion because by this Sacrament we are made partakers of the fruit of
the Lords Passion. Let the Romanists keep to this decision of their Angelical
Doctor, and we shall agree with them in this point; for I am confident that
there is not one of the Reformed Religion but will subscribe this true doctrine
of Thomas Aquinas.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing Answers to the Objections of the Romish Doctors.
1. IN the two first Chapters we have answered the two principal Objections of
the Romish Doctors, drawn from these words, This is my body, etc. and from
these, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, etc.
Now we must answer the rest.

Objection. 1.
2. The first Objection is this. When the establishing of Articles of Faith,
the Institution of Sacraments, and the making Testaments and Covenants are in
agitation, men speak plainly and properly, and not obscurely or figuravitely:
But in the celebration of the Eucharist Jesus Christ established an Article of
Faith, instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and spoke of a Testament and
a Covenant; for it is said of the Cup that it is the New Testament and the New
Covenant in the blood of Christ; yea, he spoke then to his Disciples, to whom
he spoke in plain and proper terms, and not in obscure terms, or in figures or
parables, as he did to the people.

Answer.
3. To this objection I answer, First, That it is false that Articles of Faith
are always expressed in proper terms in holy Scripture, as when it is said in
the Creed that Jesus Christ sits on the right hand of God, it is evident
that this is a Figure and a Metaphor, for God being a Spirit, has neither
right hand nor left; and all interpreters expound this sitting on Gods right
hand, metaphorically, viz. for that Lordship both of Heaven and Earth, which he
has received from God his Father, as earthly Princes make their Lieutenants,
whom they appoint to govern in their name, to sit on the right side of them.
Again, When it is said, St. Matthew. 16. Upon this rock I will build my Church,
and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, and I will give thee the
Keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven, etc. It is manifest that these are Figures and Metaphors, as
Bellarmin confesses in Book 1. of the Bishop of Rome, chap. 10. and yet it is
chiefly by this passage that they endeavor to prove the Popes authority.

4. Secondly, I answer, That the holy Scripture commonly speaks of Sacraments
in figurative terms; thus Circumcision is called Gods Covenant, Genesis 17. in
these words, This is my Covenant, every male shall be circumcised, that is,
this is the sign of the Covenant, as appears by the following verse, Ye shall
circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the Covenant
between me and you. So the Paschal Lamb is called the Lords Passover, Exodus 12.
because the blood of this Lamb sprinkled on the dore-posts, was given as a sign
of the Angels favorable passing over the houses of the Israelites; as appears
by verse 13. of the same Chapter. So Baptism is called the washing of
Regeneration, because it is the Sacrament of it. In a word, The Eucharistical
cup is called the New Testament, because it is the sign, seal, and sacrament of
it.

5. Thirdly, I answer, That in holy Scripture, Testaments are not always
expressed in proper terms without a Figure; for the Testament of Jacob, Genesis
49. and that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. are nothing else but a chain of Metaphors, and
other Figures. And Civilians will have it, that in Testaments we should not
regard the proper signification of the words, but the intention of the
Testator. To this I add that Jesus Christ did not then make the New Testament
and the New Covenant, but only instituted the Seal and Sacrament of them: For
the Covenant was made with all mankind in the person of Adam after the Fall,
when God promised him that the seed of the Woman should break the Serpents
head. This was afterward renewed with Abraham, when God promised him that in
his seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, viz. in Christ, the
blessed seed, who has destroyed the Kingdom of Satan. After this it was
confirmed by the blood of Christ shed on the Cross: Then it was published
through all the World when the Apostles had received the Holy Ghost. And
lastly, Baptism and the Eucharist are the Signs, Seals, and Sacraments of it.

6. Fourthly, I answer, That by these words, To speak clearly or plainly, be
understood, to speak intelligibly, so that the Apostles might and ought to
understand what he said to them, then it* is certain that Jesus Christ did
speak clearly; for to speak sacramentally, and according to the style used in
all Sacraments, was to speak clearly and not obscurely: But if by these words,
to speak clearly, be understood to speak without a figure, then it is false
that he always spoke clearly to his Disciples, witness the calling of his
Disciples to whom he said St. Matthew. 4. follow me, and I will make you fishers
of men: And when he says else where, ye are the salt of the earth, the light
of the world etc. To this I add, The Apostles did ask Jesus Christ the meaning
of Parables, and other things which they did not understand; and therefore
certainly they had much more reason to ask the meaning of so many strange
things as follow from the Mass, from Transubstantiation, and from the pretended
presence of Christ's body in the Host, viz. how a humane body can be in a point,
and in diverse places at once? how the head of Jesus Christ and his whole body
could be in his mouth? how accidents can be without a subject? etc.

7. Lastly, Seeing Jesus Christ said, drink ye all of this cup, all Priests,
whether Jesuits, Monks, or other Romish Doctors, would of necessity be
constrained, really, properly, and without a figure, to drink of the cup,
whether melted or not, and really to swallow it, until they should confess that
there are figures in the words of Jesus Christ in the celebration of the
Eucharist.

Objection 2.
8. The second Objection is this: The Sacrament of the Eucharist is more
excellent then that of the Passover, because the Sacrament of the Passover is a
type of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and the thing typified is always more
excellent then the type: But if the Sacrament of the Eucharist did not really
contain the body and blood of Christ, but was only the sign of it, then it
would follow that the Sacrament of the Eucharist would not be more excellent
then that of the Passover; nay, the Sacrament of the Passover would be more
excellent then that of the Eucharist; because a Lamb and its blood is more
excellent then Bread and Wine; and the death of a Lamb, and the shedding of its
blood, does much better represent the death of Christ, and the shedding of his
blood on the Cross, then Bread broken, and Wine poured into a cup can do.

Answer.
9. To this I answer, First, That the thing typified by the Paschal Lamb, is
Jesus Christ, and not the Sacrament of the Eucharist; as St. Paul shows
clearly, 1 Cor. 5. when he calls Jesus Christ our Passover, in these words,
Christ our Passover was crucified for us. The truth is, a whole Lamb without
spot or blemish killed and burnt toward the evening, and its blood shed, does
very well represent Jesus Christ perfect, without sin, put to death, and his
blood shed toward the end of the World, and in the fullness of time; but such a
Lamb represents nothing of that which is seen in the Eucharist. Besides the
Types and Sacraments of the Old Testament were instituted that the Faithful of
those Times might come to the knowledge of the things typified and signified,
for the salvation of their souls: But the Faithful under the Old Testament
never came to the knowledge of the Eucharist by the Paschal Lamb; and though
they had come to the knowledge of it, yet they had had no benefit thereby. In a
word, seeing the Passover and the Eucharist are types, images, and signs, of
Jesus Christ, it is very impertinent to say, that the Passover is the type of
the Eucharist, because a type is not properly the type of another type, but
only of the thing typified; as the image of Caesar is not the image of another
image of Caesar, but only of Caesar himself.

10. Secondly, I answer, that the excellence of one Sacrament above another,
must be drawn from its form and efficacy, and not from its matter, because it
is form that chiefly gives being to things composed of matter and form. But the
form of Sacraments depends on the words of Institution, because being signs of
divine Institution, their form can only depend upon the will of God, who
chooses certain things to signify other things; and this will of God cannot
be known but by revelation, which is the Word; so that it is properly said that
the Word joined with the Element makes the Sacrament: Therefore, although the
Sacrament of the Passover be more excellent then the Eucharist in respect of
its matter, because the Paschal Lamb and its blood, are more excellent then the
Bread and Wine of the Eucharist; and that the Lamb and its blood have a greater
analogy with Jesus Christ and his blood shed on the Cross, then the Bread and
Wine of the Eucharist have; yet the Sacrament of the Eucharist is much more
excellent then that of the Passover in respect of its form, which depends on
the words of Institution, because that at the institution of the Sacrament of
the Passover God spoke not one word of the principal end for which he did
institute it, viz. to be the type of Jesus Christ and his death. But at the
institution of the Sacrament of the Eucharist Christ declared in express terms,
that he did institute the eating of the bread broken, and the drinking of the
wine, poured into the cup, to be commemorative signs of himself, and his death.
The Sacrament of the Eucharist is yet more excellent then that of the Passover,
in respect of its efficacy, which depends on two things, viz. on the form,
which being more manifest in the Eucharist, does also operate with more
efficacy, and also because it represents a thing past, viz. the death of
Christ. But the knowledge of things past is more clear and perfect then the
knowledge of things to come; and we are more touched with the memory of things
past, when some symbol brings them to our thoughts, then when we consider
things to come, through clouds and shadows. To this I add that the bread and
wine of the Eucharist have a greater analogy with Jesus Christ then the
Paschal Lamb had, in one respect, viz. in regard of the spiritual nourishment
which we receive by Christ's death; for as Baptism is the Sacrament of our
spiritual birth, so the Eucharist is the Sacrament of our spiritual
nourishment. But this nourishment is much better represented by bread and wine
which are the ordinary nourishment of our bodies, then by a Lamb.

Lastly, I answer, That it is far less inconvenient to give some prerogative to
the Pasover above the Eucharist, (^^z. to give it a more excellent matter and
analogy) then to assert the corporal presence of Christ in the Host, by an
unheard of Transubstantiation, which destroys the nature of Sacraments, gives
our Lord a monstrous body, includes notorious absurdities and contradictions,
and gives the lie to Sense, Reason, and holy Scripture; as has been proved.

Objection 3.
11 The third Objection was proposed at Nismes, Anno 1657. by the Jesuit S.
Rigaut, thus. God does communicate, or can communicate to the creature in a
finite degree that which he possesses in an infinite degree. For example; God
has an infinite power whereby he can do all things at once; therefore he
communicates, or can communicate to the creature a finite and limited power,
whereby it may do diverse things at once, as appears in a man, for he can see,
hear talk, and walk at the same time. God has also an infinite wisdom and
knowledge, whereby he knows all things at once; therefore he communicates, or
can communicate to the creature a finite knowledge, whereby it may know diverse
things at once. And even so God has a virtual infinite extent, which is called
immensity, whereby he fills all things and all places at once: Therefore God
communicates or can communicate to the creature, viz. to a body a finite
extent, whereby it may fill diverse spaces, and occupy several places at once.
Whence it follows that Christ's body may be in diverse places at the same time,
viz. in Heaven and in the Host.

Answer.
12. To this I answer, That as God cannot be in two places (for example, in
heaven and upon earth) without being in all those places that are between both,
(for then he would be distant, and separated from himself) so Christ's body
cannot be in two distant places, viz. at Paris and at Rome, in Heaven and upon
Earth in the host, without being in all those places that are between both, for
then it would be distant and separated from it self, which is impossible, as
has been sufficiently proved. Therefore seeing Christ's body is not in all
places between Paris and Rome, and between Heaven and Earth, it follows that it
is not in heaven and upon Earth in the host, nor at Paris and Rome in
consecrated hosts. So that to make a creature, for example the body of Christ,
partaker of Gods extent or immensity, it is sufficient that as God by his
infinite extent occupies all places, so Christ's body should by its finite
extent occupy some place. But if to make it partake in a finite degree of this
divine attribute of immensity, it must be in diverse places, yet it is
sufficient that it be in diverse places successively and not at once; or if to
make it partake of this attribute it must be in diverse places at once, yet it
is sufficient that it occupies them by its several parts; for example, that the
head be in one place, and the feet in another, etc. In a word, that it be
without discontinuance or separation, as God is every where without
discontinuance. Thus the learned, Master Bruguier then answered and much
better, but I cannot remember his full and complete answer.

Objection 4.
13. The fourth Objection is this. If diverse bodies may miraculously be in one
and the same place, then it also follows that one body may miraculously be in
diverse places, there being no more difficulty or impossibility in the one then
in the other. But diverse bodies may miraculously be in one and the same place;
for Jesus Christ came into the room where his Disciples were, the doors being
shut, which he could not have done, if his body had not penetrated the doors.
Besides, It is said that Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, and
consequently Mary was a Virgin both before and after his birth, which could not
have been if Jesus Christ had not penetrated her belly and come forth without
fraction or overture. Lastly, Jesus Christ penetrated the stone that was laid
on his sepulcher when he rose again; and it is said that he penetrated the
heavens when he ascended.

Answer.
14 To this I answer, First, That it is not said that Jesus Christ came in, the
doors being shut; for these are the words, The same day when it was evening,
and the doors having been shut for fear of the Jews, Jesus came, etc. which
words do indeed show the time when Jesus came in unto his Disciples, but not
the manner of his entry by penetration, but if the words be translated, the
doors being shut, and that they do import that the doors were not opened by any
body, yet they do not exclude the opening of them in the twinkling of an eye
by the divine power, since we have examples of this in holy Scripture; for Acts
5. we read that the Apostle went out of Prison, though the doors had been fast
shut, but it is said that the Angel of God opened them. And Acts 12. The door
of the Prison opened to S. Peter of its own accord; that is, without being
opened by any body. And so it is said that Jesus Christ entered, the doors
being shut, or having been shut; which excludes the opening of them by any
body, but not the opening of them by a divine power in so short a time that it
was undiscernable.

Secondly I answer, That the Virgin Mary was a true Virgin both before and
after her delivery, if by being a Virgin be meant not to have had the company
of a man; but it is certain that Jesus Christ came out of the Virgins belly by
opening her womb; for it is said, St. Luke 2. that Joseph and Mary carried
Jesus Christ to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord; as it is written in the
Law, every male that opens the womb shall be holy unto the Lord.

Thirdly I answer, That Jesus Christ did not penetrate the stone that was laid
on his sepulcher; for it is said, St. Matthew. 28. That the Angel of God rolled
it back from the door of the sepulcher.

Fourthly I answer, That when it is said, Heb. 4. that Jesus Christ penetrated
the heavens, we must understand it improperly, in the same manner as it is
commonly said that an Arrow penetrates the Air; that is, the Air gives way to
the Arrow that passes through the Air; and so Jesus Christ penetrated the
Heavens, because the Heavens gave way to his body, and not that the Heavens and
his Body were in one and the same place.

15. All the Romish Doctors agree with us, that modal accidents (which are
nothing else but the manners of the being of substances, as action, passion,
relation, figure, etc.) cannot be without a subject, no not by the power of God
himself. But all the Objections by which they endeavor to prove that the
accidents of the bread and wine may exist without a subject, (that is, without
their substance) do prove the same thing of modal accidents too. So that I
shall not stay now to repeat those Objections with their Answers, which are set
down at large in my dispute about the Eucharist.

Objection 5.
16. The fifth Objection is drawn from Mal. 1. in these words, From the rising
of the Sun unto the going down of the same my name shall be great among the
Gentiles; and in every place shall they offer incense to my name, and a new and
pure offering: where by this new and pure offering nothing can be understood
but the sacrifice of the Mass; because by this offering we cannot understand
Prayers, Alms, Contrition of heart, and other good works, which are sometimes
in Scripture called Oblations and Sacrifices, for the Prophet Malachi promises
a new offering. But Prayers, Alms, and other good works were common amongst the
Jews; and besides, they of the Reformed Church do believe that all the actions
of the Faithful are poluted, and the Prophet speaks of a pure and clean
offering. Again, By this offering which Malachi speaks of, cannot be understood
Lambs, Bulls, and such like Animals, which were wont to be sacrificed in
Solomon's Temple; because the Prophet promises that it shall be offered in
every place, even amongst the Heathen. Lastly, By this offering cannot be
understood the bloody sacrifice which Jesus Christ offered on the Cross,
because that bloody sacrifice was offered but once upon Mount Calvary in Judea,
and the Prophet speaks of an oblation that shall be offered in every place:
Therefore by this offering must be understood the sacrifice of the body and
blood of Christ, under the species of the bread and wine, which is nothing else
but the Mass.

Answer.
17. To this I answer, First, That by the offering whereof Malachy speaks, must
be understood that spiritual Worship and Service which Believers should perform
unto God under the New Testament, which is comprised in that sacrifice which
they offer to God, both of their persons and religious actions; and this is the
reason why St. Paul, Romans 12. speaks thus. I beseech you therefore, Brethren*
by the mercies of God that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. And chap. 15. speaking
of the grace that was given him of God, he says, it is given him that he
should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the Gospel
of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being
sanctified by the Holy Ghost. Whence it appears that by this oblation whereof
Malachy speaks, we must not understand the offering of Christ's body and blood
under the accidents of bread and wine, but the offering up of the persons and
religious actions of those that should be brought unto God by the preaching of
the Gospel, and particularly the Gentiles.

18. Secondly I answer, That in the whole passage of Malachy above cited, the
words new offering are not to be found, but only clean offering. And though a
new offering had been there spoken of, yet I say that things may be said to be
new, when being spoiled and corrupted, they are restored and made sound again.
But the service of God which had been corrupted under the Law, was
re-established by Jesus Christ and his Apostles under the Gospel, so that all
things were made new; a new Time, viz. the time of the preaching of the Gospel;
a new People, viz. the Christian People; a new place, viz. all parts of the
World, and not at Jerusalem only; a new Prayer, viz. the Lords Prayer; new
Sacraments, viz. Baptism and the Lords Supper; and new Preaching, viz. the
preaching of salvation by Jesus Christ.

19. Thirdly I answer that the oblation which is offered unto God under the
Gospel, is pure and clean; the service which is performed to him, according to
his Word, is pure; the preaching of the Gospel is pure. In a word, the
Christian Religion is pure, though there be many failings in those that profess
it. And although the Faithful that present their bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable to God, be compassed about with many infirmities, and that
their religious actions be accompanied with diverse failings, yet their persons
and works may be said to be pure and clean in Jesus Christ, in whose name they
are presented to God; so that although they cannot of themselves please or
satisfy God; yet as they are members of Christ, they are reputed holy before
God: for it is these St. Peter speaks of in Epist. 1. chap. 2. who as living
stones, are built up a spiritual house, a holy Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And so our sacrifices
are a pure and clean offering, but it is through Jesus Christ, who covers them
with his purity and holiness, so that the defects of them are not imputed to
us. To this I add, That besides the perfect purity which we have by the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, we have also a purity begun by the Holy
Ghost; of which St. Paul speaks Romans 15. in these words, that the offering of
the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost: for that
which God has decreed, Je^us Christ has purchased, and the Holy Ghost has
begun, is reputed by God perfect and complete. And St. Paul shows clearly the
truth of what has been said, 1 Timothy 2. 8. in these words, I will that men pray
every where, listing up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. And Ephesians. 5.
Jesus Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify
and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word, that he might present it
to himself, a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing,
but that it should be holy and without blemish.

Objection 6.
20. The sixth Objection is drawn from Genesis 14. in these words: And Melchisedec
King of Salem, bringing forth bread and wine (for he was a Priest blessed him.
And from Psalm. 110. and from Heb. 7. where it is said, Thou art a Priest for
ever, after the order of Melchisedec. From which words our Adversaries argue
thus. First, They say that Jesus Christ is a Priest, not after the order of
Aaron, but after the order of Melchisedec; the difference between Aaron and
Melchisedec consisting in this, viz. that Aaron and the other Levitical Priests
offered bloody Sacrifices, killing and shedding the blood of Beasts, which they
sacrificed to God, as a sign and figure of the bloody sacrifice of Jesus Christ
on the Cross. But Melchisedec offered an unbloudy sacrifice, for when he went
to meet Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, he offered to God
Bread and Wine. And seeing this Bread and Wine offered to God by Melchisedec
were signs and types of Christ's body and blood, Jesus Christ was obliged to
offer an unbloudy sacrifice, viz. his body and blood under the species of bread
and wine, which he did at the institution and celebration of the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, that so the reality of the thing typified might answer those
shadows and types. Secondly, That although Melchisedec had brought all this
bread and wine for the refreshment of Abraham and his Army that returned from
the slaughter of the Kings, yet he first offered it to God, and then gave it to
them, that so they might partake of the sacrifice of bread and wine. And the
reason of this is, because the Scripture says that Abraham returned from the
battle with great spoils; amongst which there was meat and drink enough for the
refreshment of himself and his people: also it says expressly that Abraham's
people had taken such refreshment as was necessary before Melchisedec met them;
and consequently they had no need of the bread and wine which he brought,
except it had been to partake of the sacrifice of the bread and wine which he
offered. Thirdly, They say this is strongly proved by the following words, for
he was Priest of the most high God, which show the reason why Melchisedec
brought bread and wine, viz. to make an oblation or offering of it to God; for
if he had brought this bread and wine for the refreshment of Abraham and his
people, the Scripture would have said that he had brought this bread and wine,
because that Abraham and his Army being faint and tired, had need of meat and
drink; but it speaks nothing of this: on the contrary it says that he brought
bread and wine, for he was Priest. Fourthly, They say that Jesus Christ is a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec; and seeing there can be no
Priest without a sacrifice, there can be no eternal Priest without an eternal
or perpetual sacrifice. But the sacrifice of the Cross was offered but once,
and cannot be reiterated, for Jesus Christ dies no more, Romans 6. Therefore
there must be another perpetual sacrifice in the Church, which Jesus Christ
offers by the hands of Priests, which can be nothing else but the sacrifice
of the Mass, viz. the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood under the species of
the bread and wine, typified by the sacrifice of the bread and wine of
Melchisedec.

Answer.
21. To this I answer, First, That the Hebrew word does not signify bringing
but brought, drew out, caused to be brought, etc. but our Adversaries falsify
the Text thus, to make way for another falsification, viz. to put these words
in a Parenthesis (for he was Priest) in stead of putting them without a
Parenthesis, and he was Priest; so that we may say that in these few words they
have made three falsifications; first, when they translate it proferens, that
is bringing, in stead of translating it protulit, that is brought, or drew out:
secondly, when they translate it erat enim sacerdos, that is, for he was
Priest, in stead of translating it, and he was Priest: thirdly, when they
translate it benedixit ei, that is, blessed him, instead of translating it and
benedixit ei, that is, and he blessed him. And so of three different
propositions, viz. Melchisedech also brought bread and wine, and he was Priest,
and he blessed him; they have made but one, with a Parenthesis, thus:
Melchisedec bringing bread and wine (for he was Priest) blessed him.

22. Secondly, I answer that the Hebrew word used by Moses, signifies commonly
brought, drew out, caused to be brought, caused to be drawn out, caused to
come, etc. But we must not stray from the proper signification of words but
upon very great necessity, which appears not in this Text. And although this
Hebrew word should signify brought to offer, and that it should be taken for
offered, yet our Adversaries would gain nothing by it; for it is not said in
the Text that he brought bread and wine to offer unto God; but we must rather
expound it thus, viz. that he brought bread and wine to offer and present it to
Abraham: And indeed the following words, viz. and blessed him, do clearly show
it, for the Pronoun Relative him, relates to Abraham, according to the
exposition of the Apostle, Heb. 7. where he says expressly that Melchisedec met
Abraham and blessed him. And a little after he says, that Melchisedec blessed
him that had the promises; and that the less is blessed of the greater. But if
these words, he brought bread and wine, must be expounded thus, he offered
bread and wine to God, then it must necessarily follow that Melchisedec blessed
God and not Abraham; for in these words, viz. he offered bread and wine to God,
and blessed him, the Pronoun him can relate to none but God.

23. Thirdly, I answer, That Melchisedec brought bread and wine to Abraham to
refresh him and his people, and not to offer unto God. Bellarmin in Book 1. of
the Mass, chap. 6. confesses that Melchisedec brought bread and wine to
Abraham to refresh him and his people, who returned faint and tired from the
slaughter of the Kings, which is true; but he adds that Jesus Christ had
offered it to God before, which is false, and cannot be proved. Jerome in his
Epistle to Euagrius, writes that the Jews understood it that Melchisedec
meeting Abraham after his victory, brought bread and wine to refresh him and
his people. Josephus writing this History, says, that Melchisedec presented
bread and wine to Abraham to refresh him and his Army. Damascene, Book 4. of
the Orthodox Faith, says that Melchisedec treated Abraham with bread and wine.

24. Fourthly, The Reasons of our Adversaries, mentioned in the Objections to
prove that Melchisedec brought bread and wine to Abraham that he might partake
of the sacrifice which he had offered, are not considerable; viz. because
Abraham returned from the battle with great spoils; and so there was meat and
drink enough for him and his people; and that they had taken their repast
before Melchisedec met them, etc. These Reasons, I say, are inconsiderable,
because although Abraham had great spoils, yet he restored all to the King of
Sodom; and though his people had eaten and drank of such as they found amongst
the spoils, yet it is not said that Abraham did eat and drink; and though both
he and his people had eaten and drank, yet it is not said how long it was
since, and that they had no need of more provision; and though they had no need
of more, yet Melchisedec not knowing that they had eaten and drank, did, that
which prudent men are wont to do, viz. provide all that may be needful in case
of necessity.

25. Fifthly, I answer, That the principal reason which our Adversaires bring
to prove that Melchisedec offered unto God bread and wine, viz. because it is
in the Hebrew Text, for he was Priest, is a manifest falsification; for it is
in the Hebrew Text, and he was Priest. Also the old Latin Interpreter, and the
Greek Septuagint translate it as we do, viz. and he was Priest: And it is very
probable that this passage has been corrupted in Jeroms Latin Translation,
because in his Hebrew Questions, and in his Epistle to Evagrius, he translates
it, and he was Priest. St. Cyprian in his Epistle to Caecilius, and St. August.
Book 4. of Christian Doctrine, chap. 21. and elsewhere, translate it, and he
was Priest. So that although the Hebrew particle used by Moses, do sometimes
signify, for, yet seeing that both its proper and common signification is and;
and that for one place where it signifies for, there are a thousand at least
where it signifies and; and that there is nothing that obliges us to translate
it for; it is evident that the Argument of our Adversaries is of no force at
all. Therefore it is more pertinent to refer these words, and he was Priest, to
what follows, viz. and blessed him, then to what goes before, viz. brought
bread and wine. For as Melchisedec, being a liberal King, brought bread and
wine to Abraham, to refresh him and his people; so, as he was a Priest much
more excellent then Abraham, he blessed him. And though it should be
translated, for he was Priest, yet it would not follow that Melchisedec did
sacrifice bread and wine unto God; for it might be said that Moses would show
the reason of the good will of Melchisedec toward Abraham; viz. it was very fit
that he that was Priest of the most high God, should testify his kindness to
so eminent a servant of God as was Abraham, by presenting bread and wine to
him, whereof he thought there was need.

26. Sixthly, I answer, That from what is said, Psalm. 110. and Heb. 7. viz.
that Jesus Christ is a Priest for ever, it will not follow that he must offer
himself every day in the Mass, under the species of bread and wine, by the
ministry of Priests; for the Apostle writing to the Hebrews, places the
perpetuity of the Priesthood partly in this, viz. that there is no need he
should be offered any more, seeing by one oblation he has consecrated for ever
those that are sanctified; and partly in this, viz. that being exalted far
above the heavens, he intercedes continually for us; for the Priesthood
consists in certain functions, and in the virtue and efficacy of them. And
seeing there are two parts of Christ's Priesthood, whereof one relates to the
oblation of himself, which he offered on the Cross; and the other to his
intercession; it is certain that the virtue and efficacy of the oblation is
eternal, and that the intercession will continue unto the end of the World.

27. Seaventhly, I answer, That in all the holy Scripture where the Priesthood
of Melchisedec is spoken of, three things only are mentioned of him, viz. that
he was a Priest, that he was a Priest for ever, and that he was so with an
oath, according to the application that is made of it to Jesus Christ in Psalm.
110. and Heb. 7. in these words, The Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou
art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec, but there is nothing at
all spoken of the sacrifice of Melchisedec, nor is it said wherein it did
consist: for as it was fit that all the offices which we find, were born by the
greatest Kings, Priests, and Prophets under the Old Testament, should be
collected in the person of the Messiah; which was done by proposing them as
types and figures of Jesus Christ; and that the most illustrious type was
Melchisedec; so it was more expedient not to speak of the nature of the
sacrifice of Melchisedec, because it was not expedient then to speak of the
nature of the sacrifice of the Messiah. And therefore although we know not the
nature and quality of the sacrifice of Melchisedec, yet we know that he was a
Priest: Even as we know that Melchisedec was a King, though we know not in what
manner he executed his Kingly Office.

28. Lastly, I answer, That it is false that the difference between the
Priesthood of Melchisedec and that of Aaron did consist in this, viz. that
Aaron offered the bloody sacrifices of Beasts, and Melchisedec offered an
unbloudy sacrifice of bread and wine. It is also false that the likeness of the
Priesthood of Melchisedec to that of Jesus Christ does consist in this, viz.
that as Melchisedec did sacrifice bread and wine, so Christ did sacrifice his
body and blood under the species of bread and wine: these are humane
inventions, and are founded neither on Scripture nor Reason, for on the
contrary, the Apostle writing to the Hebrews, places the difference between
the Priesthood of Melchisedec, and that of Aaron, and its likeness to that of
Christ in quite another thing. First, He is called Melchisedec, which being
interpreted (as the Apostle says Heb. 7.) is King of righteousness; and then
King of Salem, that is, King of Peace; and herein he very well represents our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is truly King of righteousness, not only because he is
righteous, and was always without sin; but also because by his satisfaction he
has purchased righteousness for us, being made unto us of God, righteousness.
He is also truly King of peace, in that he has reconciled men unto God, made
their peace with the Angels and has particularly recommended peace to them. As
for Aaron, and other High Priests, they were no Kings, much less are the
Priests of the Romish Church so, and consequently cannot be after the order of
Melchisedec, and they that have written the lives of the Popes have
sufficiently declared what righteousness and peace they have procured for the
true and faithful servants of Jesus Christ, as I shall show at large elsewhere.
Secondly, The Apostle Heb. 7. represents Melchisedec to us as a man come from
heaven, without father, without mother, without descent, having neither
beginning of days, nor end of life: not that he was really such a one, but
because Moses has wholly concealed from us his Father, Mother, Descent, Birth,
and Death, that he might be the type of Christ, who was without Father, as he
is Man; without Mother, as God; without Descent, both as God and as man; having
neither beginning of days as God, nor end of life, as God or as Man. But the
Fathers, Descent, Birth, and Death of Aaron, and other High Priests, are
exactly described by Moses. And there were never any Popes, Bishops, or
Priests, whose Parents, Birth, and Death, were not known, and consequently they
cannot be after the order of Melchisedec. Thirdly, The Apostle adds, that
Melchisedec being made like unto the Son of God, abides a Priest for ever;
because Moses makes no mention of his death, nor of any one that succeeded him
in his Priestly office; that so he might be the type of Jesus Christ, who never
left his Priestly office, but will exercise it until the end of the World,
always inter^^ding for those that are his, by presenting his sacrifice to God
the Father continually. As for Aaron and other Priests, they are dead, and have
had successors. And the Popes, Bishops, and Priests, die daily, and have
successors; and consequently are not after the order of Melchisedec. Fourthly,
The Apostle says likewise, that Melchisedec took tithes of Abraham, and adds
that Melchisedec blessed him that had the Promises, viz. Abraham, and that the
less is blessed of the greater. Whence it appears that Melchisedec having taken
tithes of Abraham, and blessed him, and Levi, and all the Priests in his
person, was more excellent then Abraham, Levi, and all the Priests. In which
respect he was a type of Jesus Christ, who was infinitely more excellent then
Abraham and all his successors, because he in whom all the promises were
fulfilled, must needs be incomparably more excellent then he that received them
only. But I do not believe that the Priests of the Romish Church are so bold as
to prefer themselves before Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, in whose seed
all the Nations of the Earth are blessed; and consequently are not after the
order of Melchisedec. Fifthly; The Apostle never spoke of the sacrifice of
Melchisedec, so far was he from comparing it with the sacrifice of Jesus
Christ, as being like it, or with that of Aaron, as being unlike it; so that
all that our Adversaries say of it, is nothing else but mere humane invention.

29. I conclude my answer with this Argument, Jesus Christ has offered no
sacrifice but after the order whereof he was established a Priest. But he was
established a Priest after the order of Melchisedec only, as the Apostle
observes. Therefore he has offered no sacrifice but after the order of
Melchisedec: But (according to the Romish Doctors) there is no other sacrifice
after the order of Melchisedec, but that of the Mass: Therefore (according to
the Romish Doctors) Jesus Christ has offered no other sacrifice, but that of
the Mass. And seeing (according to them) the sacrifice of the Mass is an
unbloudy sacrifice, it follows that Jesus Christ has offered no other
sacrifice, but an unbloudy sacrifice; and consequently he has not offered a
bloody sacrifice on the Cross, which is blasphemy.

THE END.

