Loves Journal: A ROMANCE, Made of the COURT of HENRY the II. OF FRANCE.

Printed with License at Paris, 1670.

And now made English.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Ratcliff and Mary Daniel, and are to be sold by
Booksellers in London, 1671.

Licensed, Roger L'estrange.

March 22. 1670/1.

TO THE READER.
ALthough there be many Illustrious Names in this History, which would make you
believe it true; yet you ought to look on it no otherwise, than it really is:
as a little Romance made of the Reign of Henry the 2d. as you have already seen
of those of Alexander and Augustus; in which we have made use of Names so well
known, only the more agreeably to flatter your Imagination. The Princess of
Montpensier, which seemed to Interest so many Persons, who yet hold the chief
rank in France: for this very reason has not concerned any of them. And this
Journal being a mere Fancy, and the Author having no design but your
Divertisement, he confidently hopes you will not draw thence any consequence
contrary to his Intent.

Loves Journal.
The First Day.
THE Poets say, the Spring is the season of Love; let us begin with it Loves
Journal: for 'twas then the young Duke Octavo arrived in France, so famous by
his own Exploits, and for the misfortunes of his Family. He came to entreat the
Assistance of Henry the Second, against Andrea Doria, and Ferdinando de
Gonsagues, who by the support of the Emperor Charles the 5th. had inhumanely
Murdered his. Father Lewis de Farnese, one of the greatest men of his time,
and a particular Friend of our Henry's. Octavo being come to that extreme
Calamity, which seems to be its period, and after which Fortune could not
choose but grow weary; all things cast a more favorable aspect. The weather
during his Voyage was as propitious as his wishes; and he arrived at Court upon
a great Hunting day, which succeeding happily, put the King into a more
pleasant humor than ordinary. He loved the sport exceedingly, or to say truly,
he loved all Pleasures with excess, so that his Court was the center of all
Delights: the Queen feigned a compliance, Diana of Poitiers Duchess of
Valentinois, his Mistress, was beautiful and ayrie, and all the Courtiers
devoted to pleasure. But as Octavo knew well the intrigues of the Court, so he
resolved not to learn any of their dispositions. He was young and admirably
well made, wise, but unfortunate; his grand design was to revenge his Fathers
Murder, and not to enjoy the pleasures of his Youth; therefore would not be
seen at Anet, where the King then was, but disguised like a Traveller, and
leaving all his Equipage at Lions that might discover him, resolved to go
himself and understand his Interest and the Kings inclinations. His way lead
him insensibly into a Forest, where all things seemed to inspire Love; he
thought the Birds made a more exquisite Consort than otherwhere, and the Winds
breathed a more Amorous murmur than in the neighboring Fields. Venus being
represented in so various and charming forms, that were it in the times of
Idolatry, he had believed the Goddess took pleasure to have those Copies drawn
by the Divine Original.

Octavo stopped a while to consider these rarities, and having been informed at
his arrival, the King was a Hunting, he was extremely pleased, to pass in so
delicious a place that time the Court spent in their divertisement. He sat him
down upon the Rimme of an Oval Fountain, where the Goddess was represented
leaning upon a Bed of black Marble, a Rock of the same unpolished supporting
her head, which gently besprinkled her body with a thousand spinning streams;
her Arms were spread, as it were to receive embraces, and that part of the
Statue which represented the source of Pleasure, in a bubling water, cast forth
the loveliest spout in the whole World.

The young Duke found his griefs so much alleviated, by the consideration of
this Statue, that he had continued his contemplation much longer, had he not
been interrupted by one of the Hunters, who came to refresh himself at the
Fountain. Octavo was so delicately made, that our unknown Hunter could not look
upon him without admiring his excellent Mine; he asked him what Adventure drew
him to that Quarter, and ofter'd him his Interest at Court in such a manner,
that he easily perceived him very considerable there. The Duke generously gave
him thanks for his obliging offers; at which instant many of the Hunters coming
near, he knew by their Respect, 'twas the King he had been discoursing with.
You had reason, said the Duke pleasantly, to offer me your Interest in the
Court, for I am much deceived if you have not a very considerable one there;
and without injuring the Respect due to the King, I am assured you have as
great a Power there as himself. The King was going to confirm his opinion, when
Montmorency the dearest of his Favorites approached them, and shouted for joy
at the sight of Octavo, which caused the King to turn his face toward him: I
humbly beg your Majesty's pardon said Montmorency, that I could not command my
transport at the sight of this Stranger; it is the brave Octavo Son to the Duke
of Parma and Placentia, of whom I have told so many wonders, and who is now
come to confirm those praises your Majesty heard me give him after my return
from Italy. The King having understood by this discourse the birth of Octavo,
did him all the civilities he could expect from an obliging and generous
Prince: And knowing the practices of Andrea Doria, imagined Octavo came to
desire his Protection from his Fathers Murderers; therefore preventing his
Addresses, promised him his assistance with an unparalled goodness.
Montmorency contributed all his power to this promise, having a very great
esteem for Octavo: For in the time of his exile under the Reign of Francis the
last of that name, he sheltred himself in Italy, and there contracted a very
strict Friendship with the House of the Farneses, so that there was not any
thing he would not do to evince its reality. This first day being almost spent
in Complements between the Duke and the Court, they left him to his freedom,
that he might give the remainder to his rest, Montmorency conducting him to a
Majestic Apartment, where he was attended with a pomp suitable to the French
Magnificence, and the Interest he took in his affairs.

The Second Day.
OCtavo was scarce awake when Montmorency entered his Chamber. The Friendship
this great man bore the late Duke of Parma was so great, and his compassion for
the afflictions of his Son so generous, that he consulted his heart and not his
grandeur, in all that concerned the young Duke; and accordingly prevented his
intentions, of thanking him at his own Apartment, for the obligations of the
precedent Evening; and interrupting him upon the first Complement he made him
upon that account, Octavo, said he, let us banish all Ceremonies, they are
neither according to my humor, nor the friendship I vowed your Father; you are
young, a Stranger, and in a refined and amorous Court, where Love reigns in
various forms, therefore I will give you some necessary instructions how to
quit your self bravely in all intrigues. Let us walk into the Garden, the
morning is fair, and the King not yet stirring: upon this they went through a
Gallery adorned with excellent Pictures, from whence by a Terrass with
Balisters, they came into the Garden, and so into a close Walk, where they
might discern ten or a dozen spouts of water of different forms, which made a
very pleasing object. As they walked, Octavo told Montmorency some
circumstances of his Fathers death, which he knew not before, and also the
particulars of Doria's Rage, of the Authority of Gonsagues, and the troubles of
Parma; this was their discourse till they entered the Alley, when Montmorency
turning himself suddenly to the Duke, said smiling. What you have said informs
me of the state of your House, but Octavo that of your heart who shall tell me?
it is by that we must know the man; nor can I engage for you to the King, but as
for a Stranger, while I know no more of you than all Europe may do. Octavo knew
the intrigues of the Court better than Montmorency imagined; he was not
ignorant that the King excessively loved the beautiful Diana, and that 'twas
for her he built the magnificent House of Anet, where the greatest Artists in
Christendom were then completing this Masterpiece; and as it is natural for
Subjects to follow their Princes example, so he knew Love was the surest means
to get his favor: yet he also knew the Kings jealousy of Diana, and her
little care to make it dye, therefore resolved to prevent those inconveniences
his good Mine might cause. And with a look extremely melancholy, said to
Montmorency, Alas! the affairs of my Family are all those of my heart; I have
so small an inclination to Love, as though had I nothing else to do but Love, I
could not resolve to quit my Indifference. Judge then how that can be received
in a heart filled with revenge and ambition, which could not tempt me in my
peaceful leisure. Ah! Octavo, replied Montmorency, you have given me the
pourtract of your sentiments, but not in the French dress; you must Love in
this Court, or resolve to be hated by all our Courtiers; the King loves, the
Duke D'aumale loves, St. Andre, Farnae, and Chastaigneraise feel its flames.

Strossi as brave a Captain as he is, has the same concerns, and I for my part
assure you my Gray hairs should not countermand my Love, knew I any Fair one
would accept me as I am. In saying this, he was accosted by several persons,
who brought him word the King was awake; he took the Duke with him to his
Majesty's Apartment, where the expectation of the Queen, the indisposition of
Madam de Valentinois, who had kept her bed three days, and the misfortunes of
the Duke, were the mornings News, till unawares they fell upon the Chapter of
Love, which at those times never missed; the King not seeing the Duke D'aumale
there, said pleasantly, he was dressing himself fine against the Ladies came:
Montmorency answered, the Princess Claudia his Majesty's Sister would be
interess'd in his Gallantry; the King replied, he knew not whether the young
Princess Margaret his Daughter would not dispute it with her Aunt; passing from
one thing to another, never a Lord in the company but had a touch of Raillery
upon the Royal Troop they expected. According to what I understand, said Octavo
to Montmorency, I am happy in my Insensibility, for by his Majesty's
description, I should find those places I would possess Garrisoned by another.
The King desiring to hear what the Duke said, Montmorency repeated it, and
telling the subject of their discourse, charged Octavo so home with his
Indifference, that he was forced to use all his wit to maintain it; the King
saying, the Ladies beauties and not the Men's persuasions must cure his
distemper, went immediately to meet the Queen, and the whole Court, who were
just arrived; which being composed of very beautiful Women, Montmorency saw
not one without asking the Duke if he were still Insensible; always the same,
answered Octavo, I see nothing there can convince me, though I know the Court
of France is admirable, every one of her Ladies are a Feast to my eyes, without
concerning my heart. Montmorency saying, he must leave him to be convinced by
time, and the pleasure of seeing his affairs in a better condition, took him to
Dinner, and afterward showed him his Stables, the Kings Hounds, with the
Carving and Painting which so much adorned that stately House; when hearing the
King was at the Counsel, he conducted Octavo to the Queens Apartment, where
having told the Princess Claudia, (who was ingenuous and ayrie) he had brought
an Enemy of Love to be converted by her charms, he went to negotiate for him at
the Counsel. Octavo was so well made and so pleasing, that never a Lady in the
Court, but secretly reproached her eyes for leaving his liberty so long in his
own power. But as he knew there was never a one but had some Gallant of
Quality, so he knew in the present juncture of his affairs, he had need of all
helps, therefore said so many things to persuade his Indifference, that the
whole Court believed him, and he was already called as much the Insensible, as
Duke Octavo. In the evening he had the honor to lead the Queen a walking, and
to hear with her a Consort of Haubois, which the King placed upon the water,
that adjoined to the fair Diana's Lodgings: This Consort was followed by
Artificial Fireworks, all the Figures representing Half-moons, and streams of
Fire. And the Duke Farnese not ^nding a convenience to speak with Montmorency
all that evening, understood not what the Counsel had ^one in his favor, but
stayed to be ^nform'd till the next morning.

The Third Day.
THe fair Duchess of Valentinois having known by the King, and some others who
had the liberty to see her in bed, the arrival of the young Duke of Parma, and
what was already said of his Indifference for the Ladies beauty, pleased her
self with the thoughts that (...) he had seen her, he would soon change his
mind, and being always proud of her own, had shown by (...) hundred
circumstances she esteemed it above all; she felt such a desire to triumph over
the Indifference o^ this rash Youth, that she could hardly brook her slow
amendment for retarding her Victory; but sent for Montmorency, (who was
absolutely hers) and discoursing o^ the Duke of Parma's Insensibility as of a
wonder, attributed it to so many different defects, that she ingenuously
obliged him to make her Octavo's Pourtract, as that he was infinitely well
made, of a quick wit, and his Indifference could not be attributed to any want
of good humor or knowledge; the more questions the Duchess asked, the more
her desire increased to vanquish his Indifference. She prayed Montmorency to
walk with him that evening, in a part of the Garden she told him, where she
would be undiscovered, and endeavor to see the Duke without being seen by him;
saying she chose that way, because she had not seen the Queen since her arrival
at Anet, who might justly complain of her, if she perceived her well enough to
receive the Visits of a Stranger, but feigned an indisposition when she ought to
wait on her Majesty; though the truth is, the Duchess thought there was
somewhat more Gallantry to see him this way, than in her Chamber. Montmorency
was so much obliged to her, that she durst have communicated it to him though
it had been a more guilty design. 'Twas to her he owed his return to the Court,
and the Kings favor; for it is publicly known, the deceased King Francis upon
his Deathbed, commanded his Son never to suffer his return: But Diana was so
powerful with this Monarch, that neither his Fathers commands, the counsels of
his most faithful Friends, nor the Queens most private designs, could ever
prevail against the entreaties of his Mistress. Therefore Montmorency thought
himself highly honored in her choice of him to do her that little service, and
went immediately to look the Duke, whom he found coming from his own Apartment,
where he had been to Visit him; thither they returned, and the Duke asking him
what the King had resolved in his affairs, was informed that obliging. Prince
prepared to protect him with all his Power, and for that intent had given out
Commissions for the raising new Troops, so that in a little time, he might see
Forty Thousand men armed for his defense. This happy news put the Duke in so
good a humor, as made him twice more lovely than before; he thanked the King
with such a Grace, as absolutely gained him, and was so pleasant all that day
with the Queen and the Ladies, that they talked of nothing but him. Evening
being come, Montmorency pretended some new Questions with him, concerning the
Forces with which Gonsagnes took Placentia some time before, also what
Intelligence he had in Italy; to discourse this more conveniently, he led him
into a private Walk, which abutted upon a green Arbor, from whence without
being discerned one might see who walked in the Alley. 'Twas in this Bower the
Duchess stayed, accompanied with one of her Women who she trusted above any,
called Saint-Brune, and followed by a little Polander lately presented her, who
commonly carried her Mantle. When Montmorency came within hearing of the Arbor,
With your permission, said he to the Duke, how do you find your Indifference? I
thought all day I had something to ask you, and it slipped out of my memory till
now: I beseech you, replied Octavo, let it always do so, for I can make you
but the same answer I have already, that is, I never did love, do not now, nor
if I can help it never will; the revenge of my Fathers death, with the
re-establishment of my Fortune, possesses my whole Soul; and besides, I have so
great a love for Glory, that I dare promise my self my heart will never change
it for any other passion. Truly very fine sentiments, said Montmorency, and
worthy the Son of Lewis Farnese: But Octavo, Love and Glory are not
inconsistent in a brave mind, for both possessed Alexanders. You may rather
say, answered the Duke, they both flourish in the mind of your brave Henry, who
is the best of Kings, yet I know he adores the fair Diana; but all these
examples don't convince me, for those great men who give way to Love, understand
the strength of their own Reason, and know their passion shall ever be
subjected to it; therefore looking upon Love as a divertisement, lay themselves
open to it, without fearing its evil consequence; but as for me, my power is
not so Sovereign over my self, for I understand so well that if I did Love at
all, I should do it to excess; that rather than hazard Loving too much, I will
not Love at all. Alas, said Montmorency, clapping him upon the shoulder with
his hand, Love is not so excessive as you imagine; it is a Monster to you, only
because you look upon it at a distance, but if ever you grow familiar with it,
you will find it makes no such havoc as you think of; when like you we are
young, well made, and fit to be loved, we esteem our selves more than we love
others; and if pleasure make us quit our Reason, self-love knows the art to
reduce us into the limits of necessity and usefulness. That which you say may
be real, replied Octavo, but your Truths persuade me not; Fortune shall do what
she pleases with my heart, I leave it to her; but as for Love, with your
permission I must forbid it to my Grave.

If I could ever have entertained it, 'twould have been for the beautiful
Princess of Milan, who is certainly one of the loveliest persons in the World,
and whose Alliance would have prevented the calamities of our Family: The fair
Princess of Florence, with whom I was bred, had vanquished my Insensibility
were it possible to be overcome, and I need not have come so far to present a
heart to your French Ladies, which perhaps they may think unworthy of their
charms, since I shall see them but as a Pilgrim in a Voyage. The Duchess who
heard this discourse, was exceedingly jealous of her Beauty, and suffered with
impatience those praises which Octavo gave the Princesses of Milan and
Florence. Montmorency knew the Duchess well enough to understand her
jealousy, and turning himself briskly to the Duke, Go, said he, I find you a
thousand times more guilty than I thought you were; I looked upon you as a
bashful young man, who had more fear his first amors might not succeed, than
antipathy to essay it; but since your Indifference is a wilful hardening of
your self, I declare to you, that you are not according to my humor, and that
I esteem you not half so much as I did. Montmorency was upon these terms only
to complement the Duchess, who heard them; but the Duke not knowing his
design, and perceiving his earnestness in the discourse, thought the King had
given him some private orders, to discover his true sentiments, which made him
the more resolute to defend his Insensibility, and made him draw such a
pourtract of all the evils of Love, as would have smothered desire, in a heart
the most inclinable to that passion; so passing from Reasoning to Examples, he
enlarged upon the weakness of Mark Anthony, and several other places in History
that fitted his subject, in such a manner as made the fair Diana think she had
never seen a man so pleasing and so witty as the Duke of Parma; in the heat of
their discourse, they walked between whiles, and the night not being very dark,
Madam de Valentinois saw the Dukes Stature and majestic Mine; then joining the
charms of his wit, to those she observed in his person, she had such an extreme
desire to know him more particularly, that if it might not be called Love,
'twas at least a great inclination to become so.

The Fourth Day.
It Is not to be imagined how desirous the Duchess was to show the Duke, the
Princesses he had so much praised, were not the fairest in the World; upon her
first sight of the King, she assured him she found her self well enough to take
the air that day, his Majesty telling her he expected a Scotch Prince, who came
to desire his assistance for the young Queen, whom the English would take by
force for Edward their King; she being desirous to see his Reception, there
needed no more to make his Majesty comply with her inclination. He ordered they
should cause the Earl to pass by a Terrass, built the length of her Apartment,
and deferred his Audience till Diana could conveniently be upon it, from whence
she not only saw the Ambassador, but all the persons of Quality of the Court,
(who were commanded to receive and conduct him to his Audience) as they passed
in order before the place where she was seated. The fair Diana was in a
careless dress, but exceeding magnificent and well contrived, her natural
beauty of it self assuredly charming, was adorned with so many Jewels as dazzled
the Duke of Parma, (who saw her several times as he passed by) and the Earl was
pierced to the very hearts, stopping at the sight of her, as if he had been
Planet struck. The Duchess observing with pleasure this effect of her beauty,
redoubled such piercing glances, as made him from that very moment the most
passionate of all Lovers; but perceived with grief, her charms were not so
powerful upon the Duke Octavo's heart: For although he thought her admirably
fair, the Kings goodness was so continually before him, that he shunned her eyes
as some dangerous Rock. This cunning woman, who understood the dumb language of
the eyes, and who was experienced in all the little gestures and motions of the
body, with displeasure remarkt the Duke Farneses. In the evening she told the
King, she would be glad to see some company, who brought her the Duke of Parma,
and the Scotch Earl, whom she received leaning upon a Couch strewed with
Flowers where she pretended her indisposition caused her to rest. This posture
and the Dutchesses amorous carriage, touched our Insensible to the quick, so
that the fair Diana perceived, he was not so much a Philosopher as the night
before.

The Fifth Day.
SHe would be assured the next day, and commanded Saint Brune to satisfy her
desire; this apt ^irle, who had Wit, and as they say, experience in Amorous
affairs, quit^ed her self worthy the trust reposed (...) her. She went to the
Kings Mass, and chose her Seat so well, that without showing any design, she
was be^ide the Duke of Parma, who took notice of her, by the respect was ^hewn
her, and had the curiosity to ^sk who she was; being informed (...) was St.
Brune, the best beloved by Madam de Valentinois of all her women, he whispered
in her ear some Gallantries upon her seeming Devotion: All France knew so well
what an absolute power the fair Diana had with the King, as had the Duke only
consulted his Politics, he ought not to have slipped that opportunity of being
acquainted with her Favorite. But beside this consideration, St. Brune was
exceeding Lovely, yet the great Motive was he thought her Mistress the Evening
before, the most charming Person in the whole world; all these reasons made him
say a thousand kind things to her woman during Mass; this crafty Favorite
answered him so wittily, and wholly engaging, that without h^ suspecting any
hidden design, she insensibly obliged him to lead her to her Chamber; as they
went, the Duke could not forbear praising her Wit and Beauty; when she was past
the danger of being over heard, she turned suddenly to him and said, my Lord
Duke I know to whom you address your Compliments; you tell them me only to say
them over again, and the reward you expect for your kindnesses, is that I
assure the Duchess you know how to distribute them. Octavo thought he should
have fallen down at this discourse; he did but just believe himself that Madam
de Valentinois was Beautiful, nor had he revealed it to any, and looking upon
this as a design to ruin him with the King; who I! cried ^e, I love Madam
Valentinois! yes, yes, you do love her, replied St. Brune, (counterfeiting a
great freedom) and gave her a hundred looks yesterday that assured her of it,
and it is by her Order, I inform you she takes notice on it, and is exceedingly
surpised to see so wise a man as you seem to be, should thus prefer his
desires before his Interest: She says, she thinks boldness becomes young folks
very well, but thought you not capable of what she observed; and in fine, she
conjures you not to give way to this Passion. The King being with the Duchess,
St. Brune was fain to run into her Mistresses Chamber, to carry her some
Spanish Gloves, which she knew she would present his Majesty, and left the Duke
in the greatest confusion he ever was in. He had too much wit, not to perceive
St. Brunes precise remonstrance to be an ingenuons Lesson what he should do,
and not a reproach for what he had already done; and this advance from one of
the Loveliest persons in the World, and beloved by a Great King, pleasingly
flattred his Vanity; his first emotion was a transport of Joy, which appeared
in his Eyes and Face; then again, that respect which he owed to the King, and
the fear of losing so necessary an assistance, should he disagree with France,
made him look upon that as ill Fortune, which just before he thought the
greatest happiness; his mind was so full of various thoughts, that to hinder
the Knowledge of his disturbance from any curious Eyes, he walked alone into a
Wood, there two whole hours going backwards and forwards at a great rate; then
stopping on a sudden, without knowing positively what to determine: but in the
end Love remained Victorious. The Duke being of an Age wherein it is hard to be
Cruel, when Beauty makes the first overtures, and besides, he knew a woman
contemned, is capable of the greatest Cruelty Revenge can inspire. He went to
the Queens Lodgings, where St. Brune wittily informed him, the Duchess would
spend a part of that day, and there counterfeiting an extreme distraction and
languishing, had a thousand private Assurances he was observed; the Duchess
several times asked the Ladies and the Courtiers, if the Duke used to be so
Melancholy; and being told they never saw him so gloomy before, she seemed to
think it was the unhappy state of his Affairs that made him so out of Humor,
and showing an obliging Compassion for his misfortunes, Courage my Lord Duke,
said she, we should not be dismayed by the blows of Fortune; that which seems
the most difficult, is many times the most easily accomplished; we are in a
business where our Interest is great enough to foretell you a happy Issue. As
the Duchess said this by the by, so he suspecting those about him, made no
other answer than with his Eyes but pleased himself with the thoughts that he
was understood.

The Sixth Day.
HOw pleasant was the Night that followed this happy Day? the fair Duchess of
Valentinois was continually in Octavo's Imagination, anticipating his
Discourse, and in some sort his desires. See what a great Soul is, said he to
himself, thus all women of sincerity and wit should do; and if the rest of
women-kind knew so well the value of each Moment, we need not spend half our
lives, making pitiful faces and useless sighs. These reflections gave him such
an Idea of the Pleasures to come, as made him enjoy one little less for the
present; (his pleasing thoughts making him forget he was alone, and the
extravagance of talking when there is none to answer:) how Lovely she is!
continued he, and how Charming is this Procedure to a man of a generous Mind?
these thoughts entertaining him the greatest part of the Night, he waked so
late the next morning, that Montmorency and the Marquess of Jarnac, (who came
to fetch him to Dinner with the Duke D'aumale, where the Scotch Earl also was)
found him in Bed. Ha! cried Montmorency, (entering the Chamber) pray s^e how
Loves Enemies employ their time; they seem to be in the World for nothing but to
sleep, and the Suns Rising is a Beauty of Nature too Precious for their Sight.
Why then, (replied the Duke of Parma, smiling) do you think sleep so great an
evil, that you reproach it to my Indifference as a Crime? Yes, said Montmorency
smartly, whatever comes from a bad Cause, can produce no good effect; and
consequently you must either resolve to quit your Insensibility, or I must be
no longer of your Friends. Ha Sir, (answered the Duke, taking Montmorency by
the hand) if you please then do not deprive me of your Friendship. His new
Passion forced this from him against his Will: and fearing the Marquess de
Jarnac might take notice of it, he added. But stay till Love constrain me to
complain of him, and do not make him Persecute me before hand, by being the
Author of your aversion for me. The Marquess helped the Duke to defend the
freedom of the Mind and Inclinations: when passing from this Discourse, to the
arrival of the Scotch Ambassador, Montmorency told Octovo, that this Scotch
Prince praised Madam de Valentinois so excessively, as made the whole Court
believe he would soon be in love with her, if he were not already. This News
made Octavo feel a secret envy, and showed him the fair Diana's Charms had left
a deeper impression in his Heart than he imagined. Montmorency going into the
Gallery of Pictures, that the Duke might dress himself with the more
convenience, whither he followed him with the soonest; then they went together
to the Duke D'aumales, whose good Cheer took up a part of the day. From thence
all the Company went to the King, where he was seeing some Horses rid, which
the Queen of Scots had presented him. The Duke Octavo perceiving the Court so
well employed, thought he could never find a time more favorable to visit the
Duchess; therefore privately withdrew himself from the Company, and repaired
to Madant de Valentinois; he knew she was in an Arbor of Rock-work that
adjoined to her Summer apartment, which doubtless was one of the most agreeable
places in the World. All its Furniture was little Boles of Fountains, Cushions
of Cloth of Gold, and China Flowerpots filled with Flowers; a Venus of White
Marble, formed a Grotto the length of the Arbor, and Eight or Ten Cupids, some
sleeping, others employed in the Goddesses service, made as many various spouts
of water, which reflecting upon several looking-Glasses that adorned this
Bower, glid away with a delicious murmur through small Leaden Pipes. At the End
of the Arbor was a Couch made Portugal fashion, and by a cornish of Rock-work
that jetted out, hung a thousand branches of Greens intermixed with Flowers,
which made a Canopy over the Duchess head, who lay under it. The Duke thought
her so Lovely in this posture, that he stood like one in a maze; Diana knowing
perfectly the effects of her Beauty, felt a secret joy for Octavo's Trouble,
which made her yet more Charming. It Is so customary with Love to produce
bashfulness in young Lovers, that if Madam de Valentinois had not had more
resolution than the Duke of Parma, this interview so commodious and worthy to
be well employed, had been lost in silence and admiration: but the fair
Duchess growing weary of this Dumb Music, asked the Duke, how his Affairs
proceeded? A man more experienced in these occasions would have answered, that
she knew better than himself, since on her only depended his destiny; but it is
so true, that the most Ingenuous amongst young people, are but Asses in the
beginnings of their first Loves, that our respectfull youth durst not speak one
word to discover his Passion, but changed his Countenance, and hesitated, as if
he was troubled to find something to say; the Duchess pitying his little
experience, would give him time to come to himself, and fell to playing with
the Flowers, as if she had forgot the Duke was there; till remembering she had
heard Octavo was a great Traveller for a man of his Age, she changed their
conversation to the subject of his Travels. In the mean time the Duke
recollected himself; he wanted neither wit nor courage to undertake a great
enterprise; and his timidity, which proceeded from Surprise or Transport, did
but serve to quicken his wit. He told the Duchess, he had seen nothing finer
in his Voyages, than a Statue of the Sultaness Asteria, the Mistress of Solomon
the second, which the Venetian Ambassador at Constantinople, (since Duke of
Venice) had caused to be made for her. Madam de Valentinois, though she was
very curious, remembering not that she had ever heard of this Statue, was
surpised that a thing he spoke so admirable, should escape her curiosity, and
earnestly desired the Duke to tell the parcuticulars of this Raritie; the witty
Italian was not silent to her demands, but continued the Fable with as much
freedom of wit, as if his own memory, and not his invention, had furnished him
with it, and begun his Discourse in these terms.

The History of the Sultaness Asteria.
MAdam, the History which you command me to recount is so secret, and seems so
strange, that the Venetian Ambassador should get entrance into the Seraglio of
the Emperors Women, as if the Statue I told you of did not confirm it, and the
people of whom I learnt it, were not as well known to me as my self, I should
hardly believe their recital. Solomon was one of the greatest Princes in the
World, he was generous and magnificent, and seemed to be a Monument of the
fidelity of the ^ultanesses to the Ottoman Emperors; but Love is an odd kind of
(...) fellow, to whom every ordinary ^ccident becomes formidable, and ^e will
always have Wonder and Romance in his intrigues; it is enough to make a man
execrable, who finds an invincible necessity to Love him. The Duke spoke these
words with so much earnestness, that the Duchess could not forbear smiling to
observe it; and making him remember he spoke to the Mistress of a great King,
Let us proceed to the Sultaness, my Lord Duke, said she, and leave the Sultan.
He seemed to be somewhat confused at his digression, and returning to his
Story, with as much seriousness as if it had been real, he continued, Madam,
she was so ^ovely, that whatever I can tell you of her beauty, is infinitely
less than those Ideas I have of her in my own mind; she had such a Stature and
Mine, as inspired respect and admiration; her hair was a shining black which
exceedingly set off the whiteness of her skin, and her complexion bright and
dazzling; her mouth ha^ a thousand charms that cannot b^ expressed; and her fair
eyes, which with the sparkling of the black, ha^ the languishing of the blue,
spok^ such a passionate language, tha^ 'twas impossible to meet the glances and
not understand them or without being transported with love for whatsoever they
said The pourtract of the Sultaness Asteria, so perfectly resembled the
Duchess of Valentinois, and the Duke looked upon her with (...) much passion
while he made it, that she was like to interrupt him in that part of it; but
her curiosity over coming her impatience, she let him go on in this manner. The
happy Venetian saw her upon a day of the Sultans triumph; and though he selt
his heart wounded by her at first sight, yet he hoped she took notice of it.
This person thought himself Insensible till that day, and took a pride to
appear so; Fortune was his only Divinity, and Policy seemed to rule all his
Actions: but Love never triumphs more, than ^n the midst of great difficulties.
This dangerous Seraglio, which would have frighted any but a Lover, seemed not
worthy our Ambassadors consideration; the desires to please, and the fear of
not pleasing, were the only things that merited his reflections, and having
found the secret to discover his love, and that he was not hated, the easily
found a way to be introduced to the fair Asteria's Apartment, having engaged an
Eunuch who was privy to the adventure, and who disguised him so well, that he
was not suspected by any of the Guards. He found his beautiful Sultaness alone
upon a bed of Flowers, and took her for the Goddess of Pleasure; her fair eyes
showed him nothing of cruelty, and th^^ amorous Venetian's spoke the greatest
passion in the world. What shall I tell you further, Madam? i^ short, he was so
tempted to steal (...) kiss from her fair lips, that he had much ado to
overcome his transport. Does this presumption make you blush, Madam? (said the
Duke earnestly looking upon the Duchess, who indeed blushed) and if the
incomparable Madam de Valentinois, had been the Sultaness Astevia, the
Ambassador could never have been so favored by Love as in this occasion. That
was according to the excess of his passion, and the Idea which the Lady
conceived of it, (replied the Duchess, looking on the ground.) Ah Madam, cried
the Duke, (in rising and stealing a kiss from the Duchess) how well the
Venetian understood Love, and the divine Sultaness him? The fair Diana showed
all necessary signs to make the Duke believe, he stole that kiss against her
will: But the cunning Farnese easily perceived the appearance from the truth,
and continuing his History as if it had not been interrupted, was going to make
his pretended Ambassador so happy, that Octavo would have been glad to
participate his good fortune; but the Duchess perceiving this History to be a
Fable, after what had happened, Not so fast, my Lord Duke, said she to him, I
have heard enough of this Adventure for the first day, we may know the rest in
good time, but a History of this nature requires more warning than I have
leisure to take now. Ah Madam, (replied the Duke, with an unparalled
fervency) those who told me this story, assured me that which made the Venetian
so fortunate, was that he persuaded the Sultaness they ought to make use of all
occasions who meet with them but seldom. I Will warrant you, (said the Duchess
smiling) they who employ the first opportunity so well, can easily find a
second. As the Duchess spoke these words, the King entered the Garden, followed
by the Scotch Earl and the whole Court; the Ambassador did so many extravagant
actions in Madam de Valentinois sight, that the Duke thought it convenient to
follow his example, and retired into his Closet so filled with Love and
flattering hopes, that these enchanting thoughts employed all the rest of the
day, and part of the following night.

The Seventh Day.
It Is so much the property of Love to inspire young Lovers with Poetry, that
our Duke could not be dispensed with from this general Law; he made an Italian
Madrigal, and repeated it the next day to the Queen, as a piece of Gallantry
sent him from his own Country; who being an Italian, and knowing all the
delicacies of that tongue, liked it so well, that several French Poets were
ambitious to translate it; and 'twas done so happily, that the King who loved
Music commanding an Air should be composed to these words, he and all the
Court sung no other Song.

Madrigal.
FOr every Blessing double thanks we owe:
First for the simple Gift we are in debt.
Then from those petty sums, much larger grow;
To the interest of our joys no bounds are set.
No Laws control that Usurie,
Nor will it stinted be,
But adds, and still without control adds more;
And then it doubles what it gave before.
2.
Though millions for my happiness are due;
That balmy Kiss, which has my wounded soul
But one applied half cured. They are but few,
But very few, compared with that vast scroul,
Which the blessed Interest does fill,
And with much more yet will.
The dreams, the pleasing thoughts, and ecstasies;
The sweet remembrance of 't, has given, and give.
3.
Ah would my Fair one grant another Boon!
Or but the very same she gave before;
In spite of envious fate, which does so soon
Destroy, even what she gives; and makes us poor.
By the same hand of Time, which brings
The store. I Will clip his wings,
And make him stay; or I Will beg: if 'twont be,
Then I my self will giv't Eternity:
It shall for ever live, live in my memory.
4.
Nature, in vain thou striv'st to guard the heart!
In vain's the prudent care that walled it in:
(Though one would think it safe on every part)
In vain, alas! thy care and cost has been:
Love has a passage found, he has;
But the other day it was,
When to my grief he showed his powerful art;
He stormed my mouth, and by it gained my heart.
The Tune that was made to this Madrigal proved so sweet, that every body
learnt it. But the pleasantest thing was, the Ambassador of Scotland delighting
exceedingly in Music, (as generally all his Countrymen do) sung it
continually. He had a good voice, and thinking to please the Duchess with that
quality, was the first that sung to her the Madrigal upon the Kiss; and
quavering so long upon the passionate words, and with so much affectation, that
the Duchess could not forbear laughing when she observed it; he looking with
such languishing eyes, when he sung balmy Kiss, and another Boon, made his
error seem so pleasing to Madam de Valentinois, that (not unlikely) the happy
Farnese owed to that circumstance, the consequence of this divertisement. It
may be some may think, that according to this Journal, Love makes great
advances in a small time; but we mean it not for a Register of the days of our
lives, but a List of Amorous affairs; therefore you must think, that all the
principal Actions were attended by such circumstances, as were necessary to
produce them.

The Eighth Day.
THe Queen who loved not the Duchess, having a private Alliance with Scotland,
had less Friendship for the Duke of Parma, than the Scotch Earl, she being then
laying the Foundation of the Alliance between the Dolphin of France, and the
Queen of Scotland; and this particular Interest, making her have one more
General for the concerns of the Ambassador, she was the first that observed his
Love for Madam de Valentinois, and we may believe was not the last that
strengthened his Hopes. She looked upon the fair Diana's disloyalty, as the only
Rock on which the Kings Love could be wreckt, and thought the Earl a fit Person
to make her fall into the Snare so often laid; wherefore she made all her
Servants; whom she thought capable of serving her in this Design, flatter his
Passion, and gave the Earl all opportunities she could to see Madam de
Valentinois; the Queens jealousy made all feasible, she appearing so
favorable to the Earls Amorous desires, that he could not be accused of
presumption, for cherishing his Hopes by her encouragement, and pursuing his
Amor by her Assistance; but the fair Diana had no inclination to him. And
besides that grand Obstacle, she was as politic as those who undertook to
ensnare her; she knew as perfectly the Queens Intentions, as if she had been of
the Privy-Counsel of her Revenge, and resolving to turn the mischief prepared
for herself upon her enemies, she complained to the King of the Earls boldness,
as an extreme jnjury to his Majesty's Honor: he was almost overcome with Joy
to see his Mistresses Fidelity in so nice a business; she drew a thousand
benefits from this Affair, and so powerfully strengthened his Love, that she
absolutely gained his belief and assurance of her. The King loved the Duchess
excessively, and being naturally jealous, advised with Montmorency how to
remedy this Ambassadors extravagance, without violating the Law of Nations.
Montmorency commended His Majesty's moderation, and desiring to make the Duke
Octavo necessary, mentioned him as a fit Person for the reducing the Earl to
his proper Duty. The Duke was politic and witty, and whatever was done of his
part, could not be suspected to come from the King; for by the Queens advice
(who endeavored to hinder the Duchess of all important friends) the unwary
Earl had made several overtures of friendship with the Duke. Therefore His
Majesty resolved upon Montmorency's advice. We see now the Duke Honored and
made the Confident of the King his Rival, and entrusted to be revenged of one
who begun to be so. You may imagine he failed not to use so favorable an
opportunity, but insinuated himself into the Kings Favor with so much art and
success, that this Monarch could not live without him; and adding the pleasures
of the advancement of his concerns, to that of loving Madam de Valentinois
without the Kings suspicion, he so well reconciled his Politics with his Love,
that he was equally happy in both, at least we have Reason to think so; for
it is certain, the King hastened the raising of those Troops he designed him: and
there were some Verses abroad about this time, which were thought to be his, by
which we may judge he succeeded as well in the art of pleasing, as in that of
negotiation. Some of these Verses are put here for form sake, but are left to
your choice whether you will read them or not.

The Enjoyment.
IN a cool shady Bower to lie,
Where the kind embracing of the loving bows,
Against every envious eye,
A sure defense allows:
And modestly (what humane Lovers ought too) shows.
2.
There at his beloved Mistress feet to lie;
View and consider well
The many charms make up that mighty spell,
(For great and many too they needs must be,
Since man so much unwilling to obey we see;)
That mighty spell whereby
She first enslaved him, as yet free,
And then for ever, bound him to her Tyranny.
3.
Then on a sudden in her eyes to find,
Those gentle spirits move,
Which are the Harbingers of Love,
And take possession of the mind.
One sooner could deny
A mighty Prince, than this kind language of the eye,
When Beauty bids it on ber Errand fly.
4.
And then to feel what none could e're express;
And none but Lovers ever guess:
To feel the sweet Infection spread,
With a soft tickling pain,
Through every vein,
And seize the heart, as well as head.
5.
Then when the body (like the nobler soul)
Warmed with a hot desire,
Becomes all fire
Within her arms to lie, and cool
The excessive heats now dangerous grown;
And from her panting breasts, her dying eye,
And melting sighs which from her bosom fly,
Take new flames, and more kindly than his own.
6.
How long, alas! the learned, grave, and wise,
Have sought with vain and fruitless toil,
The blessed seat of Paradise:
These are the joys which make that happy soil:
And that blessed Bower the place,
Which if my Mistress grace,
And but as kind as yesterday she was, will be,
In spite of Fate each day is Paradise to me,
As sweet as that soothed Mankinds harmless Infancy.
The Ninth Day.
THe Duchess was building a Monastery some distance from Anet, which she
visited often; the way to it lying near a part of the Forest, the Duke who
knew how to Create pretexts, managed his time and Circumstances so well, that
seldom a day past wherein he saw not Madam de Valentinois in her walk to the
Covent; she went ordinarily without any other Company than St. Brunes, and a
little Polander, who knew not a word of French, nor understood any thing but
his Mistresses signs; so that he was employed in all those Mysterious Affairs,
which required such an ignorant Officer. One day when the King Hunted the wild
Boar in the Forest, the Duchess being gone her wonted Pilgrimage, Octavo,
(whose new Favor obliged him to be near his Majesty's Person) cunningly stole
from the Company, to a place where she enjoyed the coolness of the shade; she
rise at first sight of him, and striking him upon the Shoulder with a branch of
Orange tree she held in her hand, You're very bold my Lord Duke, (said she)
thus to interrupt a Ladies Privacy; even withdraw your self, continued she,
(and flung a handful of Orange Flowers in his Hair) the Adventure is more
dangerous than you think for, showing him a little Hillock shadowed by a
Sloe-bush in Blossom. The Duke began this piece of Gallantry bravely, and
taking her by the hand to conduct her to the place she had shown him, You have
very little Charity for poor strangers, (replied he in a drolling tone) thus to
lie in Ambush for them upon the Kings Highway; who could ever have imagined
this attaque? go, Madam, you deserve to be Chastised, and I hope to quit my
self of your Ambuscado like a brave Fellow. Without question a Discourse so
well begun, was carried on as pleasantly; for although St. Brune went such a
distance from them that she could not hear their Discourse, the substance of
the Entertainment may be guessed by the Verses made in that solitude.

Madrigal 2.
HArk how the murmuring Woods, my Fair one, do complain,
Since you and I the other day they spied;
That unkind Nature has to them denied:
Those sweeter pleasures which by Love we gain.
It vexes 'um to see,
Their glorious Progeny,
So trim and gay adorn the smiling Field,
Yet not the remembrance of one sweet pleasure yield.
2.
Whilst spend-thrift like she so profusely wastes,
Such mighty sums on her dear Favorite Man;
That even whilst he his Duty pays, he tastes
Those pleasures which they never knew; nor can
Devouring Time destroy,
The sweets which we enjoy.
When age depraves our taste; in a Child we
Then enjoy, and in a Grandchild chew over our Leacherie.
Clor. Thus the short pleasure we enjoy,
In getting of one lovely Boy,
Still multiplies it self, and we
Enjoy it still in our posterity.
For when he mates, we cry,
Ah so did Phillis once, and I.
Ah so, etc.
If the Duke of Parma had contributed only the subject to this Song, yet he
writ it with his own hand, and being 'twas with a Pencil in a Table Book, it
not being so easy to make lettters upon Ivory as upon Paper, his were so
difficult to be known, that the Duchess thought it needless to wipe them out,
but put them in her pocket, and returned to the Castle, much satisfied with her
happy encounter. The Duke followed the Hunters, though he could hardly overtake
them; yet when he found them, was outwardly sorry for the losing their Company;
Montmorency comforted him as well as he could, telling him, the King was very
much concerned for his absence. The Duke having a mind for to droll, Had I been
in Love, (said he, pleasantly) I need not complain of being so long alone; but
I confess solitude is very Melancholy and dull to a man that is Insensible: You
see, (answered the Ambassador) that sometimes Love is very useful; I begin to
think so too, (replied the Duke, smiling) and two or three such accidents as I
met with to day, will make me hate my Indifference: These Discourses continued
till they came to the Castle, where the remaining part of the day was spent in
telling the success of their Hunting, which having been somewhat violent, they
went early to bed, and eased themselves of the labors of the day.

The Tenth Day.
THe next day the Court went a Fishing, and the Ladies were in a dress suitable
to the Recreation; the King showed his magnificence in the expensiveness of the
Banquets, and the rich adorning of the Boats where they were served. After the
return from Fishing, there was an Italian Comedy at the Queens apartment, and
the Duchess having some private reasons to love that Language, was one of the
first at that divertisement. The Scotch Earl having the opportunity to place
himself behind her chair, his Passion being always the Mistress of his
Politics, resolved to give her some new mark of that Love he could not
overcome; Madam de Valentinois lifting up her hand to put something of her
dress in order, the Earl spied a Ribband at the entrance of her Pocket, which
he thought was her Table Book, softly drew it out, whilst she was looking
another way, and thinking to make some advantage of that adventure, went to
write some Gallantry in it; but casting his eyes upon that of the foregoing
day, was surprised to find that Character in the Dutchesses Tablebook, and the
reading it raised in him so great a Jealousy, as made him fetch a deep sigh:
the fair Diana hearing it, looked toward him, and perceiving her Table Book,
nimbly snach'd it away, letting him see by her angry looks, that she was
displeased at this presumption; he looked earnestly upon her when he saw her
anger, and fetching another sigh as deep as the former, Ah! Madam, said he,
what have I seen? At these words he left the Room: the Duchess perceiving by
them he had read the Madrigal, resolved to prevent the evil these Verses might
cause if they were known; she read them first, and faining she believed the
Ambassador writ them, complained to the King of this affront, and told him,
with all the appearances of a real grief, that she was very unhappy in being an
object for the insolences of strangers, because she was loyal to his Love.
This way of changing the business, made the King so angry with the Earl, that
if the private Treaty of the Marriage which he carried on, had not caused the
Queen to raise all her Interest to support him, the King had sent him word he
might return. He Protested, and 'twas true, that he never so much as thought to
write those Verses, and that he had never seen them, except in the Dutchesses
Table Book; but circumstances being against him, and Madam de Valentinois
having rubbed them out as soon as the King had seen them, with a pretense of
being ashamed of them, 'twas impossible to know the Character, so that the Earl
was taxed with an Iniquity he was nothing guilty of.

The Eleventh Day.
LOvers cannot live long in good Intelligence, the excess of Love makes them
capricious, the most inflamed hearts being the most inclinable to anger; and we
had rather betray our own happiness, than to Love always without clashing: The
Duke and Duchess on the sudden looked not so kindly upon each other as they
were used to do, and Octavo being highly displeased with her disdainful usage,
was almost resolved to sacrifice his Interest to his Love, and return into
Italy. Those who in that time heard of Farnese's discontent, judged it caused
by Montmorency's proposing of him, to marry the young Princess Diana, Madam de
Valentinois Daughter by the King, (to which they say he could never be
persuaded;) but it is not like the Duchess, who knew very well the reasons he
had to scruple that Alliance, could be displeased with him for opposing it; and
having since in his stead given her his Brother Horatio, she had no reason to
be dissatisfied upon that score. 'Twas Love only could separate hearts so
firmly united, he only caused their disagreement, and he alone must reconcile
it. The fair Diana taxed the Duke with not being tender enough in the effects
of his passion, and for retaining too sovereign a power over the faculties of
his soul, in a time when pleasure should set free all its functions.

ONe Evening at a happy Lover lay,
In his dear Ladies bosom at a bay,
Finding her Amorous flames begin to dye;
And a thick mist over spread her twinkling eye:
'Must these sweet Pleasures too, enraged eryes he,
'Must these thus fleeting, and thus short-lived be?
'Use all those powerful Names which Love inspires,
'And with thy breath rowse these expiring fires.
Then lest he wanting to's own Laws should prove:
'My dear, he cries, my pretty rogue, my Love:
With thousands more that witty Loves invent;
Which, though the sottish world (and what they meant)
Never knew: Yet well by Lovers known they be,
Who understand Love's wondrous mystery:
And feel the power which in their charm do lie;
And s e the mighty wonders wrought thereby.
Then with a dying eye, speaking disdain,
With Love and Anger mixed, thus did complain
The Fair one. 'Ingratefull! thee now I hate:
'Hast thou yet strength to waste in idle prate;
'And whilst I in thy arms thus drooping lie,
'Thou Love or courage wantst with me to dye.
These are all the Memoirs are left of that great controversy, which divided
the opinions of the greatest Wits in Europe, and which made the Pope resolve to
join with the Duke of Milan, against the Duke of Parma; which he dared not have
done, had he not hoped the unkindness grown between him and Madam de
Valentinois, would cause the King of France to withdraw his assistance. But
it is not in this affair only, that things have been attributed to the Policy
and Interest of Princes, which were wholly caused by Love. Octavo's Crime will
seem but a small fault, to those who are commonly called the men of Reason; but
Love is governed by his own Laws, and according to them, this Lover was
exceeding guilty. Therefore the Duchess could no more be persuaded to pardon
him, than he to confess himself in a fault: witty Saint Brune did eminent
service in the appeasing this disorder; she entreated, and begged; but the
business being matter of Fact, the Dukes Reasons must lie in the proof; and
it is thought the skillful Italian persuaded Saint Brune by her own experience,
that she might with more facility convince her Mistress; it is further believed,
that this Knowledge strengthened her Eloquence, and not perceiving the Dukes
silence material in that affair, it helped her to inform the Duchess, that it
was no Crime not to observe her opinions: however 'twas, our quarelling Lovers
grew Friends again. But as these picques are generally the wrack of the Lovers
Prudence, the Duke could not hide his grief, so well as he had concealed his
happiness; the ordinary Judgments attributed his Melancholy, to the Popes
Alliance with Gonsagues, but the Scotch Earl discerned what the Court could
not. He had a faint remembrance of the Letters in the Madrigal, and finding
them to have some likeness with Farness's writing, and adding this suspicion to
several actions of the Duke in the time of this difference with the fair Diana,
he compared the melancholy of that time, with the gayety of this, and weighing
in his mind the Dukes advice concerning his conduct, he took that for the
effects of his passion, which was only in pursuance of the Kings orders; and no
longer doubted that Octavo was his Rival, and what was more, beloved. So that
the Friendship he had feigned the Earl, was a new motive to augment his fury,
which grew to an unparalled excess. He discovered his Jealousy to the Queen,
as he had also done his Love; this Princess was extremely glad of it, confirmed
it, and advised him wholly to employ himself, in the interception of some
Letter, which might evidently clear their suspicion.

The Twelfth Day.
THere was no great difficulty to accomplish their design, the fidelity of
Domestics is too weak of it self, to resist the power of an angry Queen, and a
man of Quality in Love, and liberal: the Earl corrupted that servant of the
Dukes, who used to carry his Letters to the Duchess, and bring him back her
answers: He knew of him, that the little Polander always left them in a hole,
which was in the Pedestal of a Marble Mercury, in a cross-way of the Forest,
whither the Duke sent him for them, and made him carry the answers. You may
easily think the Earl failed not to be there the next morning, being informed
by the bribed servant of the time he should carry his Masters Letters, where he
found this in Italian: the Earl understood not the Language well enough to know
the meaning exactly, but the Queen was his interpreter, and explained it to him
in these terms.

HOw I love your anger, for to it I own all my happiness. Favor me with
another Picque, I beseech you Madam, for you have more reason than you imagine,
since I am yet alive, and our last conversation has not yet made me Loves
Martyr. Punish this procedure, unworthy the excess of my Passion, and that you
may find a punishment equal to my crime, forbid me these ravishing joys when I
shall see you again.


This Letter produced such a mixture of joy and grief, in the mind of the
jealous Ambassador, as was like to have made him lose his wits. He would have
run to the King, and by showing him Octavo's treachery, revenge himself of the
Duchess, by the loss of her Lover; but the Queen being less transported, and
consequently more prudent, was of opinion to have a Letter of Madam de
Valentinois's own writing, before they undertook her ruin: The fair Diana had
so prodigious a wit, and the King so much possessed to her advantage, that she
had withdrawn herself from two or three as dangerous plots as this. And the
Queen ^earing her cunning might disappoint them, would not hazard any thing but
what might be effectual. Therefore she only took a copy of the Dukes Letter,
and sealing it up again as well as she could, made the Earl carry it to the
place from whence he brought it. He had hardly obeyed her commands, when the
Polander came to quit himself of his ordinary commission; and some hours after,
during which you may imagine the Post was watched, he brought this answer.

I Have yet a quarrel with you, if you love them; for I resolve to gratify
your desire. What made you write me a Letter so passionate and full of
transport, (fond Lover as you are) thus to surpass all mine so that I can no
longer boast of writing kinder things than you if it had been a Letter of five
or six pages, I could be better satisfied but in five or six lines, to say all
the sweetest things love can inspire. Well; I know how to be revenge for this
injury. And like another Artemisia, I will not make an end of dressing my self,
before I make you confess, I love you a thousand times better than you do me.
You may come with assurance to our rendezvous; (for I am not capable of deceit)
there you shall find me without other company than St. Brune.


The jealous Earl found his jealousy very much augmented, when he had read
this Letter; and according to the conduct of all Lovers, felt an extreme Joy to
see that there, which for his life he would not have found. He ran to the
Queen, agitated by two or three several passions, crying, Victory, Victory, at
her Closet door, and showing her the Letter he had intercepted; she felt a
purer joy to see it than the Earls was, immediately resolving to follow the
success she hoped from it, sending for an Officer of the Kings Guards, who was
absolutely at her devotion, whom she commanded so to order it, that the King
might see the Letter, and not imagine there was any design to show it him. For
this intent 'twas agreed amongst them, the Officer should pretend it dropped ou^
of the Duke Octavo's pocket, and presenting it him again in the Kings presence,
should let his Majesty see the hand. The Queen knew his humor well enough, to
be assured, that if he saw a part of it, he would read it all; and as that
jealousy is most violent that is gotten by chance, so by these means she hoped
to undo the Duke and Duchess, without being suspected to be the Author of
their ruin: while these things were transacting, the Duke was in his Chamber,
as much wondering at the cause of the Dutchesses silence, as she at his neglect.
He was informed by his servant, whom he ordered to fetch his Letters, there was
none in the usual place: And not knowing the true reason, he thought of twenty
false ones, which exceedingly perplexed him. On the other side, the fair Diana
being told her Lover was in the Kings Bedchamber, and intended to go with him
a Hunting that day, was so enraged at his proceedings, that immediately she
repented all her kindness to the Duke, calling him ungrateful, insensible, nay
Traitor it self; and to Punish him for all her former indulgencies, seigned
herself not well, and would not see him at his return: this niceness increased
Octavo's suspicions, and made him accuse the Duchess, of the same inconstancy
she thought him guilty.

The Thirteenth Day.
THe next day they were both in the Queens Lodgings, and looked very coldly
upon each other, speaking nothing of their discontent. Saint Brune was employed
again to interpret the business; which was soon done on the Dukes part, for
when he had protested he saw no Letter, he was no longer faulty. They called
the little Polander, who after his manner assured them he put the Letter in the
usual place; the Dukes Servant said, he found none there, and backing the
assurance of his fidelity with all the Oaths he could think on, put out two
Lovers in a great perplexity. Madam de Valentinois knew she had written an
Assignation very kind and passionate, the Duke was sure he received none, so
that they could not suspect any body but the Scotch Ambassador; and the
Duchess was so vexed to find her favors left to the discretion of a man of
his humor, that she could not be satisfied. If to interest him in the same
intrigue, would have charmed his tongue, she had soon resolved upon it; but she
thought not this way so certain as 'twas easy, knowing those favors seldom
teach Gallants the faculty of silence. Diana having a thousand thoughts in her
head, and not knowing which to choose, put the Duke in an unconceivable despair;
though he needed not have been so dejected, Love taking the care of their
preservation, without their knowledge: for whilst the Duchess thought her self
Ruined, and the Queen Revenged, the Officer that should have been the Minister
of her fury, was killed at the Castle-gates: he had a Quarrel with one of his
Camerades, which could not be determined but by their Swords. Fate would have
the lot fall upon the Queens Agent; and since the Marquess of Jarnac's dispute,
Duels were severely forbidden, which made the Friends of the deceased, carry
him two miles from Anet, where in a pit they covered him with Chalk, and with
him the Letters which caus's so much trouble, and were to produce such wonders.
You may easily think what effect this had upon the Queen and the Earl; they
abhorred their former precaution, and ever and anon twitted each other with the
loss of that advantage, being like to have parted Interests, when they had most
need of a stricter Union. The Duchess knew not yet what cause she had to thank
Love for this Murder, so necessary to her safety, but still looked upon the
Earl as the undertaker of her ruin, which robbed her of all quiet; some
nipping words he often let fall, confirmed her opinion, augmented her fears,
and made her change countenance whenever he began to speak. One day above the
rest, when the Duchess followed the Queen, who walked in the Castle Garden
with the whole Court, a sudden shower made them take shelter in a Gallery that
lay between the Apartments of the Duke Farnese and Montmorency; the Pictures in
it being admirable, and representing several effects of the Gods Justice upon
the wicked, were the subject of their discourse: One of them showed the torment
of Ixion, for letting his desires aspire to the Wife of Jupiter; another, the
burning of Semele, and this the Queen liked best: but the Duke of Parma was the
most pleased with the adventure of Diana and Actaeon; the Goddess was drawn so
lovely, the Landscape so natural, and the conformity between the Names of Diana
and Madam de Valentinois made him esteem it so much, that he could not grow
weary of commending it. But when from the praise of the Painter, they came to
the story of the Picture, For my part, (said he, pleasantly) I must beg pardon
of the Ladies severity, if I esteem not this so great an example of it as they
believe; I think it but equity to punish a Lover for undertaking an enterprise
contrary to his Mistresses commands, (for it is just disobedience should have
its due correction;) but to imagine it unlawful to take the advantage of
chance, or that a man may not enjoy the Caresses of Fortune, when she flings
her self in his arms, is past my understanding. This discourse putting the
Duchess in mind of the Kiss in the Grotto, and several other occurrences,
where he had practiced what he preached, made her smile, which passed not
unobserved. But pray (replied a grave austere Lady of the Court) what
interpretation do you make of so known a story, and so well received, if not
that 'twas the effect of Diana's modesty, and the punishment of Actaeon's
presumption? I conceive (said the Duke, continuing his raillery) that Diana
punished this Hunter, because he pursued not his good fortune; very like the
Goddess would have been well enough pleased Actaeon saw her naked, had his
transport at the sight of her beauty, effaied his crime against her modesty.
This is a new Moral to the Fable, (answered the Queen, smiling) and if you can
draw such from all the fictions of the Ancients, they have left us a terrible
doctrine. Madam, (replied Octavo) the Ancients were so wise, that one of their
thoughts may find matter for five or six of ours. Kings have an example in
this, of the respect we ought to have for the pleasures of Princes, where we
should take no greater share then pleases them to allow us. Your Majesty, who
is so modest and severe, may see an example of severity and modesty. A
Politician may find a Maxim, not to let them live long, who know more of our
affairs than we are willing they should; but a man of my age, makes no such
serious reflections, nor looks for any thing but Amorous Morals. You make very
curious distinctions for one that is Insensible, (said the Princess Claudia) and
Nature must needs be unjust, if she has joined a mind so able to understand
Love, with a heart so incapable to receive it. Ah Madam, (added the Earl)
perhaps the Duke is not so Insensible as he appears to be, a seeming
Indifference being many times the mask of a great passion: And if Madam de
Valentinois would speak her observations of the Dukes heart, to the Queen, I
dare be confident his disguise cannot escape her quick-sighted Judgment. This
discourse touched the Duchess so sensibly, that she could hardly conceal her
disturbance; but having a great power over her self, she was soon composed, and
told the Earl in an angry imperious tone, I am but a bad Voucher of what you
desire, and as I believe it injustice to look into others secrets without their
permission, so I think their curiosity detestable who are so inquisitive. If
the Letters he intercepted had been still in his hands, our Ambassador had not
stood mute in so provoking an opportunity; but the impossibility of proving his
malice, hindered his saying any more of it, but sighed for vexation, at the bad
success of his enterprises. The Queen who loved not to lose sighs so idly, like
a prudent woman took no notice of their discourse: Our Lovers had let fall a
thousand marks of the private correspondence that passed between them, which
they observed not; yet the politic Queen, thought they might be useful to her
in time. She commanded the illustrious Marot to write in Verse the story of
Diana and Actaeon, according to the Duke of Parma's opinion. This Poet being
greatly obliged to her, and finding the subject very pleasing, made this
following Fable.

The Fable.
IN the first dawning of the Worlds great day,
When the Infant Sun his tedious race begun;
Which he five thousand years, they say, has run:
And twice five thousand more he may,
For ought I know, ere it be done.
'Twas in those early days, when all the way
From Heaven to Earth, more bright, and purer was,
Than that we now the Milkie call; and boasts it self so gay.
Then with unstained seet the Gods might pass;
As yet the road was free,
From all those mirie clouds, and dirty mists we see,
Which from our sins do come;
Some from Drunkenness, from Luxury some;
And some from crimes that deeper stain,
The blood of faithful Lovers slain;
Some from the infectious blasts, which come
From the false Lover's perjured breath; with which the Trav'ling Sun,
As he his constant stage does run,
Bemires his gilded rays,
Which every moment shed it on the ways;
That by this means the are now impassable become.
2.
And often then the Gods did daign
To visit Mortals here below;
And by their presence, ease that pain,
(Though small it was, compared with what attends us now,
Since they no more that Heavenly aid, on us bestow)
That pain unhappy Man even then was born to know.
And as their Charity often lead 'um down;
So (as their sacred Priests the Poets sing,
Whose knowledge, or their truth none can in question
Like mighty Monarchs weary of a Crown, (bring)
And of those God-like pleasures, Power
On Crowned heads does shower;
Who wisely yet the meanest try,
And from the pompous noisie sports
Of Princes and of Courts,
TO a solitary Lawn, or some poor Cottage fly;
The best of soiles to set off Majesty,
Whose greatest part but in comparison does lie.
3.
So they often their Diviner joys laid by,
And courser Earthly pleasures try:
In pleasant shades they wantonly do roame;
Or to some silly Shepherds homely Cottage come:
Where they with easy Questions, sound
( But he as well the Delphic mysteries could expound)
His shallow wit; and sport themselves to see
(Ah cunning of self-flatterie!)
Their knowledge, in the poor Clowns simplicity.
Or in some Crystal Brook,
They Bathed; who secret virtue took
From his blessed Guests; and which some yet retain,
Who free from man's pollution under ground have lain.
No wonder then our Philosophers search proves vain,
Since they are grown so wise,
They do not only modern Priests,
By Envy too too much oppressed,
But the Ancient Priests the Poets too despise:
And strive to bind to Natures feeble Laws,
What to immediate acts of Power Almighty owes its cause.
4.
'Twas in those happy days when in a lonely Grove,
On a sweet flowery Bank,
Where every Herb one would have thought had strove
With smiling looks, (for they no less
Than thankful words a grateful mind express)
The bounteous neighboring Brook to thank,
For that sweet life which from his cup they daily drank.
Who loath to leave such pleasant company,
Chides his too hasty streams, and bids 'um stay;
And murmurs at that Law he must obey.
Yet though so rigorous it be,
Delays a while his Tribute to the Sea;
Winding his lithie streams even backward goes,
And fain within his arms would the loved place enclose.
5.
On this sweet Bank the fair Diana stood;
Her constant and beloved place,
When wearied with the toylsome pleasures of the Chase,
She used the well known virtue of the Flood:
Deprived of all those Ornaments which Art,
But all in vain, to Beauty does impart,
Since simple Nature sooner takes the heart.
And beauteous Woman, much more beauteous shows
In Natures naked dress,
Than when with Gold, the beauty of the Mines,
Or Silk, a poor Worms pride, she shines;
And like a painted Pageant goes:
Hiding those native Glories of her own,
To boast another, and much less,
Whose value only by opinion's grown;
Whilst Natures self on hers sets the Impress,
And has their real worth to all Mankind made known.
6.
And poor Actaeon a sad proof has given,
That this, though so neglected, Doctrine's true;
When by the scorching Sun he hither driven,
Instead of shades, found flames till then he never knew.
He often had seen before,
But must, alas! no more,
Gay Beauties trim and fine,
In Silks and Tessues shine;
In rich Embroyderies,
And costly dies.
These he, and unconcerned, had often seen;
But when he in her naked Glories all arrayed
The fair Diana saw: Lightning it self had been
A slower Minister of Fate; no aid
From helpful Reason could be brought,
Or trusty Morals sought;
She instantly made all her own,
And all his strength was straight over thrown:
His Tongue had quickly his known duty left,
And idly to his Palate cleft.
His heart the Enemies part too took,
And every sense her Master then forsook;
All but unhappy she,
Who must his utter ruin be;
And taught him only how to look.
Just like a senseless Tree he stood,
A new-made Denizon oth' Wood,
Who though he more did see, as little understood.
7.
Vexed at his folly, thus the angry Goddess cries;
Why has too easy Heaven
TO a wretch, who knows not how to use't, such fortune given?
Cannot he believe his eyes?
Or am I ugly grown? Or can he spy
A greater Beauty in some mortal eye?
The curse of hot desires,
And fond remorse's Hellish fires,
Prey on his soul eternally:
That he (though now too late) his loss may see,
Whilst silly Fame for this shall sing my Chastity.
8.
This said, she swiftly glided through the air;
But too deep rooted was the sad despair,
Which she in poor Actaeon 's breast had sown,
To die; though she the cause of it was fled, and gone;
That lived and prosp'rously, alas! did grow
To thousand branchy cares,
The unhappy Antlars
That now adorn his cloudy brow.
9.
In vain to pleasant Fields he does repair,
Where he was wont to ease his care:
As much in vain he homeward goes;
He in his hosome bears his soes.
Hot, fierce desires, and loud regret,
Still sounding in his ears a fresh recheat;
Till wearied out at longth he dies,
And unto injured Beauty falls a Sacrifice.
Since when, men by his sad example taught,
Need not by Beauty to be sought.
They are but very few who such sweet hours would lose,
And modestly such great good fortune could refuse.
The Fourteenth Day.
THe Queen had wound so handsomely into this Fiction, a Satyr against bashful
Lovers, with the description of the too presumptuous, she repeated to the King
the discourse which caused this Gallantry, in such a malicious manner, and the
Dutchesses looks betrayed her so often, that she hoped thereby to stir up his
Jealous humor, and make him evidently perceive his Mistresses unfaithfulness.
But Octavo's seeming Insensibility, his constancy at the Court, and the
stratagems of Madam de Valentinois, so blinded this poor Prince, that all
designs to make him see more clearly miscarried. Therefore the Queen resolved
to speak more plainly, and knowing Marots fidelity, engaged him to make Verses,
to be understood contrary to what they expressed, of the whole Court, and
especially of Madam de Valentinois; nor would she be omitted her self, that it
might appear with the greater plausibility. These are all that came to our
knowledge.

THe Duchess is as chaste as fair;
As cruel as fell Tigers are:
Of all the wounds she gives,
None ever could find relief,
Or but even pity for their grief,
Except our Prince, for whom alone she lives.
The Great Italian he has not
The least advantage on her got:
For him alas, poor sot!
As people now in private prate,
She pierced unto the very heart,
And made him play Actaeon 's part;
As Marot did relate.
If that the Queen her self should see,
In danger of the Regencie;
The Duchess, she no doubt would call,
To help to dry those tears would fall
At her dear Husband's Funeral.
The Constable's an honest man,
Let him get all the power he can,
Or wrape or wring in France;
For his great honesty,
And known integrity,
It Is a small recompense.
These mock-truths, as they were then called, were cunningly spread through all
the Court; and the Queen complaining the first of her affront, made them so
public by her seeming trouble, that they soon came to the Kings ear, who was
transported with Jealousy; and being astonished to think the two persons he
most esteemed, should be so guilty, he went to the Duchess, who saw in his
face the trouble of his mind: this politic Lady, who knew what had past, and
was prepared for what was to come, received the King with an appearing grief,
which suspended all his anger: and preventing what she thought his Majesty
would say, with a flood of forced tears, (which women of her humor have always
at command) she told him, she was very unhappy to be the mark of the Queens
malicious invention, and to see her innocence and virtue traduced by those
persons whom her Love to his Majesty obliged her to respect. Then showing him
the Verses, as if she knew not he had seen them, begged his permission to
retire into a Monastery, that so miserable a person might leave the world, of
which he had made her the scorn and sport. This was enough to persuade a Prince
blinded with Love, into a confidence of his Mistresses Loyelty. He lifts her up
with a great deal of tenderness, and after he had made her swear some of those
Oaths which the direction of the Will keeps from Perjury, he conjured her to
calm her grief, and sacrifice to him her just anger. The Duchess pretended she
could not bring her self to that moderation, and still desired leave to
withdraw; then cunningly bringing into their discourse, that the Queens hatred
to her and the Duke Octavo, proceeded from the alliance which his Majesty
intended for the young Diana, whom she styled, that poor forsaken Princess. The
tenderness of a Father and a Lover, joined so strongly to overcome our Henry,
that he went immediately from the Duchess to the Queen, to whom he complained
so sharply of the trick he suspected she had put upon his Mistress, as made
them see 'twas in vain to undertake her ruin.

The Fifteenth Day.
THis unexpected event did so incense the Queen, (who as we observed before was
an Italian) that she did all that lay in her power to be revenged; she obliged
the greatest part of the Counsel to oppose the Kings Intentions to assist
Octavo, and secretly spread amongst the people, that the Court had rather
sacrifice the lives of 40000 men to the Marriage of the young Diana with
Farnese, than succor a young Queen always in league with France, and who
offered the Dolphin that Crown they desired the King to preserve: these
stratagems and reports reduced the Dukes affairs to so low an ebb, as made him
even despair of any good success: But he had still left him the pleasure of
receiving the Dutchesses consolations; she offered not a tear to her policy,
but he privately wiped away; and this officious Lady did so countermine the
Queens intrigues, and confuse her designs, that she could hardly clear them.
The two Rivals hated each other to that extremity, as ever and anon made them
ready to cut one another throat; the Duke knew the Earl was the author, or at
least the instrument, of whatever happened contrary to Madam de Valentinois
interest; and the Earl knowing perfectly his Rivals happiness, would have given
his life to hinder his enjoyment. One day when they were both in the Kings
Chamber, attending the refult of the Counsel concerning their affairs, Octavo
having made the Earl a reply to something he spoke as Ambassador, and which
principally concerned him, there passed several sharp words concerning their
different qualities, which at last caused a quarrel. They went down the back
stairs into the Forest, as if they had gone to walk, where they presently
drew, and so furiously began the fight, as might justly have presaged a
dangerous event, if the Marquess de Jarnac and the Earl of St. Andre
(advertised by an Officer of the Chamber) had not run to part them. It Is not
imaginable what a noise this Duel made in the Court; two men of their quality
to go together by the ears at the Kings Chamber door, and in a time whilst they
were managing affairs of so great importance, seemed a thing too strange to be
believed; but the Queen and her faction made nothing of it, attributing that to
Love, which appeared to others an effect of their ambition; saying, 'twas no
new thing for Rivals to quarrel. This so powerfully awaked the Kings jealousy,
as obliged the Duchess to absent her self for some time from the Court, to
cure his suspicions: she retired to a little house she had upon a River, which
runs a French League from Anet; this place being designed for Bathing, she
feigned her self not well, and to have need of that remedy.

The Sixteenth Day.
THis compliance with what Madam de Valentinois called the Kings infirmities,
so calmed this Princes mind, that it seemed impossible to trouble it any more.
His Mistress left the Court without repugnance, the Duke and the Earl were with
him; and under a pretense of honoring the Duchess, she was so straightly
guarded, that he durst have answered for her as for himself. But of what use
are Guards, when Love undertakes to deceive them? the Duke saw the beautiful
Diana every night, witty St. Brune having found so great a convenience to
remedy the troubles of their absence, that neither all the Kings precautions,
nor the Queens snares, interrupted any of their enjoyments. The place where
Madam de Valentinois absented her self, was distant from any other habitation,
being built after the Model of the old Roman Baths, and which (as we said
before) served for no other use; and accordingly had a private way into the
River, that one might wash there when 'twas fair weather. Through this Passage
the happy Farnese was brought into the Dutchesses Chamber every night. He
always showed himself at the Kings Supper and Bed-times, as if he had nothing
to do but give his attendance; as soon as the King was in bed, he went to a
place in the Forest, where his Horse was ready, and from thence he went to the
River side, St. Brune having a morning Gown ready on the other side, where he
past through the Vault, and entertained the fair Diana two hours: These
nocturnal adventures lasted ten or a dozen nights, with a success for which our
Lovers could not give Love thanks enough. The King perfectly satisfied with his
Mistresses proceedings, began to propose her return; the Queens jealousy being
somewhat appeased by the Dutchesses absence, seemed weary of persecuting her;
but the jealous Earl fed not himself with these vain appearances, the Letters
he had seen taught him more of their affairs, than to imagine our true Lovers
kindness could be unactive. And the more the Duke was indifferent for Madam de
Valentinois absence, the more the Ambassador was persuaded it took nothing from
their pleasures: therefore he renewed his bribes and his promises to Octavo's
Servant, that helped him to intercept the Letters; and although since that
accident he was not so much in his Masters favor as before, yet by him he
discovered our Lovers private Journeys, and resolved to watch him, and not
trust the conduct of his affairs to any but himself; and following him at a
distance, to the place where he put off his Clothes, he saw him swim over the
River, and enter the Vault which led to Diana's Chamber. How unpleasantly the
jealous Ambassador spent that time his Rival past so agreeably! He had a
hundred temptations to follow him, and either participate the Dukes good
fortune, or stab him in those Arms where he imagined him. But besides that, it
was doubtful whether the door were not shut after Octavo came in: this rash
enterprise was difficult to be executed, the Earl being alone, without other
Arms than his Sword. And though it had been possible to kill his Rival, as he
thought, what he had experienced of Madam de Valentinois Policy, made him fear
the effect of what he had no witness to prove: he therefore went softly back
again, and rolling a thousand different thoughts in his head, chose that he
judged most profitable. He resolved then to be at the Dutchesses apartment the
next night, in Octavo's stead, and threaten her to tell the King all he had
seen, if she would not grant him the same favor with his Rival; and as it
neither became the respect he owed the Queen, nor favored her revenge, to
communicate to her this resolution, so he kept it from her as a great secret;
and taking no Counsel but of his Love, he expected the following night with
unspeakable impatience.

The Seventeenth Day.
WHen jealousy is dissembled, it is not half had, being an evaporation whose
first beginnings are hard to suppress, but when it has once overcome it self,
with ease vanquisheth the distrusts of others. The Earl appeared so calm at the
King's rising, as if his mind had not been in the greatest perplexity that
possible could be; and having lived quietly with the Duke of Parma, since the
King reconci^ed them, he took him to dinner that day; and when they rose from
^able, went to the Duke D'aumales, who kept his Chamber for a hurt he had
received in his foot the last Hunting. When the ordinary time of going to the
Queens apartment was come, they went together, and followed her a walking, then
saw her sup. The Duke was going his usual Voyage, when the Earl found a trick
to stop him, whispering the Queen, that for some reasons he would make known to
her the next day, 'twas necessary to the Dutchesses ruin, that she should
retain the Duke near her the greatest part of the night: This jealous Princess
embracing this occasion o^ revenge, without knowing more o^ the Ambassadors
design, after Supper proposed falling to Play, and desired the Duke to make one
this proposition caused so much trouble to the amorous Octavo, as it might be
observed in his face; but the King coming in and approving the Queens motion,
he durst not contradict it, but played with so much distraction, and told the
Clock with so great disturbance, as would have raised pity in any but a Rival.
But he had more cause to grieve, when the Queen upon a sign from the Earl,
seemed to grow earnest in her play, and resolved to pass with it the rest of
the night; the Duke thought he should have fallen from his Chair at this
discourse, answering the Queen, that without question she spoke in raillery,
and that sitting up so long, might prejudice her health; she replied, ^he found
no inconvenience in watching, and desired the King to gratify her in it: he
readily consented, being willing to please her in small things, that she might
give him his liberty in matters of greater concernment; Farnese not knowing how
to break off, since the King approved it, was forced to have patience, and pass
a night destined to so much pleasure, in an exercise ^he naturally loved not,
and which that juncture made insupportable to him. The Earl observed the
agitations of his mind, by the wildness of his looks, and felt a joy which
seemed to him a prediction of his approaching happiness. Then seeing all
secure, and not fearing any obstacle in his design, left her Majesty, and rid
to the same place where he saw Octavo the evening before. The happiness he had
already promised himself, flattered so agreeably his imaginations during his
Voyage, that he thought the hour already come he had so long and so ardently
wished for. He studied his Oration, and not believing that the Duchess would
sacrifice her favor and his private intrigue, to her loyalty toward the Duke,
(which she observed so ill with the King) looked upon his future happiness as
infallible; when he felt himself entangled in a net, which not only stopped him
in the middle of his course, but put him in danger of drowning. He strugled
with so much violence, that being strong he would have broke the net, had thy
given him time; but the noise he made in the River with his struggling, caused
some of the Sentinels to come to the water side, where they drew him out as
soon and as well as they could, and led him to the Guard, whither he scrupled
to go: this kind of proceeding surprising him, he thought they did it of their
own accord, and told his name, not fearing but that when they knew it, they
would give him his liberty to go whither he pleased. But his opinion deceived
him; the net that caught him, was not laid by chance. The King being
advertised by the Spies (which under the notion of Guards he had placed about
the Duchess) that every night they heard a noise in the water, he devised this
trap. The lot fell upon the unhappy, and not the guilty. The Earls ill fortune
being such, that the artifice he used to keep the Duke at Anet, was the cause
of his delivery from the snare laid for him.

The Eighteenth Day.
THe Play could not have been interrupted by a stranger accident, nor more
unlooked for than this. The King made an outcry when they brought him the
news, as if he had received some mortal wound; and as our first transports are
ordinarily indiscreet, he told that had happened to all about him. The Queen you
must think was surpised: All that heard the adventure, could not forbear
laughing in their sleeves, as at the pleasantest that e're befell. But the Duke
was so overcome with rage and jealousy, that he had rather have chosen the
deplorable condition of the unfortunate Earl, than that which the Dutchesses
seeming infidelity had put him in: he withdrew himself to his own apartment,
liberally nursing the whole Sex, and his Mistress more than all of them
together; no melancholy reflections but troubled his brains, nor reproaches of
a betrayed Lover that he uttered not; and having passed the rest of the night
without undressing himself, at daybreak he got on horseback, and wandered about
the Forest without knowing whither he went, or to what end he came out: one
while he would take Post and go so far, that he should never more hear of Anet
or Valentinois; then again, he would return to the King, and endeavor to
moderate his first displeasures, and defend the Duchess from his anger; then
from this thought, he passed to those testimonies of Love he had received from
that fair person, which some places in the Forest brought to his mind, when
persuading himself the Earl had enjoyed the same, he resolved to take from him
the remembrance with his Life: But perceiving these violent designs, like all
the products of hasty and tumultuous thoughts, bore but little show of reason,
he fixed upon that of seeing the Duchess, and to reproach her unfaithfulness
in the most extravagant terms his rage could inspire; and having evaporated in
this manner his first transport, contemn, forget, and were it possible, hate
her too, as thinking her unworthy the esteem or Love of so faithful a person
as himself. He no sooner took this resolution, than he hastened to execute it,
and rid to the Bath as fast as his horse could gallop; his fury not leaving him
any conduct, he came thither at broad day, and went straight to her Chamber,
without first asking her leave; she shouted for joy at the sight of him, and
lifting up her eyes to Heaven in sign of acknowledgment, Ah, my dear Duke,
(said she) your presence brings me out of a great perplexity. Yes, Madam, said
the Duke angerly, it shows you upon which of your Lovers the lot is fallen, and
as the provident care you always take, still keeps you one in reserve, the Earl
is only taken in the trap, and I am yet in a condition to take his place, the
Duchess knew not any circumstance of what had happened the night before, being
only informed by St. Brune, that the person she expected at the Vault, had met
with a snare in his passage; and the Kings express order having hindered her
further knowledge, she feared Octavo had been in the net where the Earl was
taken, But when the Dukes discourse gave her some insight into the truth, she
thought it so pleasant, that the imagination put her in a very pleasant humor;
and looking upon the Duke with a brisk airy smile, which exceedingly became
her, What think you, (said she to him) don't you find me a woman of great wit
to order things so well? a Lady of less prudence than I, would have lost by
this adventure the only ground of her pleasure, whilst I know yet where to be
recompensed for my loss. What, Madam! (cried the Duke, almost astonished) do
you make no greater scruple of carrying on two amors at the same time? That
would be a very pretty scruple, replied the Duchess, continuing her raillery;
pray tell me, does what you call infidelity, leave any marks behind it? does it
make the skin less fair, or the eyes less sparkling, for having extended the
bounds of our kindness to two several Lovers? No, no my good Lord, (said she)
it is just contrary; a multitude of Captives, is a mark of the conquerors
valor; and the more we are loved, the more are we charming; and I believe my
self enriched with as many new Graces, as I make new conquests. Ah Madam, cried
the Duke, (who could no longer suffer the continuation of this discourse)
there is no man that has a soul, or is any way capable of a true and noble
passion, will be of the number of your conquests, after this knowledge of your
conduct; I esteemed your compliance with the Kings desires, as the effect of
your Interest, which I could not blame; and was so prepossessed, that I thought
your inclination for me, produced by the influence of the Stars, which had not
power to do so much for any other; but since your favors are the weakness of
your constitution, which you cannot overcome, they are so many affronts to a
generous person. And though the respect I bear your Sex, hinders me from
divulging your procedure, it shall never hinder the conceiving an everlasting
contempt of them. The Duchess, who rejoiced exceedingly at his transport, let
him take his Carreer a good while, till pitying Octavo's trouble, My Lord
Duke, said she, I could never have thought 'twould have been so easy for you
to conceive such unreasonable Ideas of me; I imagined you had better known the
Characters of those kindnesses I have shown you, than to think them a habit of
constitution; Go, ungrateful as you are, (continued she, in a passionate
manner) you deserve not that I should disabuse you; but since I have more
goodness, than you injustice, I will let you know that I have no part in the
Earls enterprise, nor know any thing of it, but what you your self have told
me. By these words, she made him so clearly see the truth of what she said, and
accompanied them with so many Oaths and kind reproaches, that she obliged the
Duke to beg her pardon and excuse; which he had no great difficulty to obtain,
the transports of Lovers never passing for a crime with knowing Ladies, whether
they rise from their jealousy, or their passion, they make always a pleasant
figure in Loves intrigue. After they had spent what time was necessary to their
reconciliation, and had confirmed it with the greatest tenderness of Love, they
thought what means was necessary to settle the Kings mind, which they knew was
very much discomposed; the Duke went to employ Montmorency in this affair, but
the Duchess trusting her own charms, more than all other persuasions, hastened
to Anet to endeavor her self her own justification, and succeeded in this
design as well as formerly. The Earl could not deny that he had attempted this
enterprise without Diana's knowledge, and what he alleged of the example shown
him, having no witness, she made it pass for a fixion, calling the Earl base
unworthy fellow, and liar, with so much confidence, that she persuaded the King
he was really so. The ill conduct of this Ambassador, caused the Queen of
Scotland to call him home, whither he returned as ill satisfied with the
sincerity of the French Ladies, as the Duchess with the wilfulness of the
Scotch Gallants: he would have had recourse to the Queen of France, as he used
formerly to do, but she was so extremely angry, for his making her seem to have
been assisting to a part of his design, that she would never speak word in his
behalf.

The Nineteenth Day.
LOvers are never in more danger of being discovered, than when they are left
to themselves; whilst a Rival observes them, or an injured person troubles
them, they use all their wit to secure themselves from the traps which they
imagine are laid to catch them; but as soon as they leave their care, upon the
opinion of the public inadvertency, they never escape being surprised. Since
the Earls departure, the Court heard no more of Intrigues or Jealousies; the
King persuaded of his Mistresses faithfulness, and successful abroad, enjoyed
a solid tranquillity; the Duke learning every day the French Customs, augmented
his charms and also his enjoyments, his pretended Insensibility giving him
leave to complement all the Ladies in the Court, without having an obligation
to any, which made him pass a life whose joys had no alloys but the retarding
his concerns: But Love is a seditious fellow, and cannot live quietly, and seems
to renounce his nature when he is long in a place without giving notice of his
being there. One evening the Duchess was in an Arbor, covered with that sort
of Roses which blow every month, and are so remarkable for their pleasant
scent, a little Bank of grass loosely bespread with the falling leaves, made a
bed as it were of Roses; and the King being gone to Paris, about some important
affair, the kind Madam de Valentinois there expected the Duke of Parma, without
other disturbance than her impatience. St. Brune watched at the entrance of the
Arbor, and the Duchess being almost lulled asleep, rather by an amorous fit,
than sleep it self, expected no surprise but from the Duke Octavo, when the
King interrupted her rest; he returned from Paris sooner than she imagined, and
having met one of the Dutchesses Servants near Anet, who told him she was in
the Garden, he fancied it a pleasing piece of Gallantry to surprise her in her
solitude; wherefore he made all his Attendants stop, and causing a private door
of the Garden to be opened, that came into the Fields, he went as if he had
been guided by the God of Love, to the place where his Mistress reposed her
self. Though the day was almost shut in, St. Brune perceived him through the
Railes, but seeing the Duke arrive on the other side, all that she could do was
to feign a Cough, and run to meet Octavo, to hinder him from coming where then
he had nothing to do. The Duchess, who took St. Brunes advertisement for the
signal of her Lovers arrival, and her mind being filled with the thoughts of
him, fancied she saw him, and reached out her arm to embrace him, with a
transport that caused a very violent one in the poor Prince: Ah my dear
Farnese, (said she) how long have you made me expect you? The King trembled at
these words, and grew stiff in her arms, from whence he had torn himself if he
had had strength enough left him; but Madam de Valentinois looking upon this as
the trick of a cunning Lover, who sometimes by retarding his joy, makes it the
more violent, she redoubled her Caresses and embraces, accompanying them with a
thousand kind words as witty as passionate, which put the King into so violent
a rage, that there was no outrageous words but he said at his first emotion;
his voice supplying the want of light, Diana perceived her error, and promising
her self to repair it by her policy, she tried to stop the Kings going out; but
'twas impossible to do it, he got from her embraces, which he esteemed no
better than those of a Serpent, or something more dangerous; and his present
fury making him forget the moderation due to his dignity, it is said he began
his revenge by some blows with his fist, and testified plainly in that
Adventure, that Monarchs are men as soon as they become Lovers.

The Twentieth Day.
THis unexpected blow of fortune, so impossible to be foreseen by Madam de
Valentinois, so amazed her, that she sunk under it: she cried, tore her hair,
and according to the management of other imprudent Women, grumbled at St. Brune
till she talked idly; her fury passed from the Confident to the Lover, she
cursed the time wherein he appeared lovely to her, resolving never to love him
more; and being of a high spirit, and knowing Hypocrisy of great use to crafty
wantons, she talked of nothing but the great effects of Religion, and writ the
King admirable Sermons upon the instability of the things of this World; and
then making that retreat she had so often counterfeited, touched the King so
much by this mark of her Repentance, that he could not resist --

The End.

