THE DESIGNS OF FRANCE AGAINST England and Holland Discovered: Or, the
Intrigues of that Crown, for the utter Ruin of both those Nations, laid open.
WITH ALLOWANCE.

ADVERTISEMENT to the READER.
THESE Papers (which were intended to be published before this time, had the
Press been open for such Truths) plainly discover the cunning Intrigues, Wicked
Designs, and Unchristian Practices of the French King, for the Overthrow of
England and Holland, and with them the Protestant Religion. If this Account be
(as it is hoped) approved of, a further Information may be expected from the
same Hand.

A Discovery of the Designs of France against England.

HENRY VIII. King of England, did, in his time, cause a Medal to be stamped with
a Hand stretched out of a Cloud, holding a Balance in equal poise, whereof both
the Scales represented Spain and France, with this Motto, Cui adhaereo praeest,
My Alliance weighs it down. It seems that Prince well knew his own Might;
whereas now England may be compared to an Ox, who being insensible of his own
strength, quietly submits himself to the Yoke. Evident it is, That England has
many Advantages beyond other Kingdoms, but especially this, that being an
Island, it can easily secure it self against any Foreign Force; they that
intend an Invasion against it, must be obliged to cross the Seas, and struggle
with the Winds and Waves, and all the hazards and dangers of that unstable
Element, besides a very potent Fleet, which alone is sufficient to deter their
hardiest Enemy, from any such Design. Now this being so, it is manifest that the
King of England (having Peace and a strict Alliance with Holland) can
over-balance the Party he designs against.

This is a Truth, France is so fully convinced of, that notwithstanding the
great Antipathy there is between both Nations, he has hitherto spared nothing,
and is still turning every stone, to take off England from its true Interest,
and to engage it on his side, or at least oblige it to stand Neuter, and to be
an idle, unconcerned Spectator of the horrid Tragedy the French King acts upon
the Theater of Europe, because he well knows that England is better able to
prevent it, and spoil his Sport, than any other State or Kingdom whatsoever,
and rescue Europe from the Universal Slavery he prepares for it.

Would the King of England only be pleased to open his Eyes, fast closed with
the enchanted slumbers of the French Dalilah, to take a view of his own
Strength and true Interest, he should soon find himself making another Figure
amongst the Princes of Europe, than of late Years he has done, and with ease
mount that high degree of Power and Glory, of being the professed Umpire of the
Universe, the Sovereign Mediator and Decider of Controversies, and the Giver of
Peace to all Europe, which France, in a vain Bravado, pretends to, when indeed
he is the sole Troubler of it.

To arrive at this transcendent pitch of Grandeur and Authority, two things
only (which the King of England may do when he pleases) are requisite. The
first is, That his Majesty do comport himself so, as to engage the Love of his
People, and keep a right Understanding between him and his Parliament. And the
second, That he enter into a strict Alliance with Holland, living in sincere
Amity, perfect Union, and good Correspondence with them, in order to their
common Defense and Security* The former of these is very easy, and the King
will do it, as soon as he shall resolve to desire nothing of his Parliament,
but what is agreeable with the Laws of the Realm, which by his Coronation Oath
he is obliged to observe and maintain; and the latter will be found to be of
absolute necessity, as soon as the King of England shall please to stop his
Ears to the false Suggestions of France, and stifle those Jealousies and
Resentments which his Emissaries daily buzze into his Head; there being nothing
to fear for England from the States, whose desire is not to enlarge their
Dominions (as France does) by invading those of their Neighbors, but only to
keep what God has given them, and to maintain their Subjects in the Liberty
they now enjoy.

This France so well knows, that he leaves no Stone unturned to prevent it, and
continually sends forth some crafty turbulent Spirits, to sow the Seeds of
Division and Misunderstanding between the King and his Parliament. Thus the
Spirit of France was at work, to exasperate the Episcopal Party against the
Presbyterians, and again the Presbyterians, and other Nonconformists against
them, making them believe that the Bishops favored Popery, and would not fail
to prove Turncoats, as soon as a favorable Opportunity should be offered them,
and that the King did incline the same way, with a thousand like Suggestions,
which so set the People against the King, and filled the Parliament with such
Jealousies, that they often granted his then Majesty but very little of what he
demanded, and gave him so much work at Home, that he had no leisure to consider
what was done Abroad. It was France that first kindled the Civil Wars in the
time of Charles I. which cost England so much Blood, the French Ambassador that
was then at that Court, boasting at his Return from thence, That he had kindled
a Fire in England, which should not be quenched of a long time, and that the
English for 20 Years to come, would not be in a condition to claim any thing of
France.

To the kindling of this Unhappy Flame, one Father Joseph, a Capuchine Friar,
did much contribute underhand, by means of the Papists, especially those that
were in the Parliament's Army. But now since the King of England has thought
good to change his Religion, France also has altered his Battery, and turned
all his great Guns against the Church of England, and so far are the minds of
Men irritated against one another, that his British Majesty will not, this good
while, be in a condition to look any where else but at Home, where he is like
to meet with so many Crossings and Thwartings of the Designs he is carrying on,
that he will find it a hard matter to break through them, and accomplish the
thing he aims at, and so zealously affects. And whilst these Heart-burnings
continue between the King and his People, he will be forced continually to be
upon his Guard, and to keep his Forces about him, and cast about his Thoughts
how to raise a Fund to maintain them, and thereby give an opportunity to France
to possess himself of the Low Countries, and of Spain too, in case that King
should chance to dye, which happy hour, France, with a great deal of
Impatience, looks for.

As for the second point, viz. a League with the United Privinces, and a right
understanding and good Correspondence between those two Governments, to oppose
all Powers that would invade and trouble the Peace of Christendom, it is
certain that the States for their parts would most gladly embrace the Proposal,
if they saw any likelihood of engaging therein with safety, and being seconded
upon occasion; of which indeed there is but little probability as long as
affairs shall continue, in the condition wherein they are at present. This
indeed is the thing, which of all others France, would be very loath to see,
because the hearty Union of these two Governments, would in all probability put
a stop to the French Kings undertakings, overturn all his designs, and put him
into an utter incapacity of attempting any thing against the Peace of Nimeguen,
or the Truce with the Emperor. But France carries a watchful eye to prevent
this Capital inconvenience, and that by an assiduous fomenting and cherishing
feuds and animosities between those two Nations, and improving every occurrence
to this purpose: of which we have a fresh instance in the business of Bantam,
which had been long ago made up, but that France (who finds it best fishing in
troubled waters) thinks it more for his Interest, that it should remain
undertermin'd; which is the very reason why it was never made an end of, but
kept as a reserve for a quarrel upon occasion. That there can be nothing so
evidently destructive of the French Designs as this Union between England and
Holland is very apparent; England can when it pleases overturn the projects of
France against the Spanish Netherlands; neither could that King ever have taken
Luxemburg, if the late King of England had had the least inclination to oppose
him in that attempt, but the French King so well knew to take him by the blind
side, that he did not perceive the mischief, till the City was taken. It was a
Capital Error for England to part with Dunkirk; a place that opened a passage
for them to France and the Low Countries; but it would make the matter much
worse, if all those Countries should be fain to submit to the Tyranny of Lewis
the Great, and he by this means should join Newport and Ostend to Dunkirk; for
then would Flushing follow by Consequence, and that King be put into a
condition to dispute the Sovereignty of the Sea with his British Majesty, and
destroy the Navigation and Commerce of this flourishing Kingdom. Having got
thus far, he would proceed to an entire conquest of the United Provinces, which
point being once gained by him, England would have but little reason to flatter
it self with the hopes of a better Lot. Renowned Queen Elizabeth of happy
Memory, was so sensible of what is here alleged, that she told Monsieur de
Sully, the French Kings Ambassador at her Majesty's Court, that neither France
nor England, nor any other Prince or State whatsoever, ought to lay any claim
to the Low Countries, and that she would never suffer the King his Master to
make the least attempt that way. Upon which Monsieur de Sully sent word to his
Master Henry the Fourth, that notwithstanding the opposite sentiments of the
Queen, his Majesty might by means of great forces, keep his friends within
their own bounds, and possess himself of such Territories and Cities in the Low
Countries, as should be necessary to join France and the United Provinces
wholly and inseparably together: which was (said he) the only way to restore
France to its Primitive Grandeur and glory, and pitch it above the rest of
Christendom; for if by any means the Provinces of Luxemburg, Juliers, Mark,
Mons, Aix, and Cleves, were once United to France, there was no doubt, but the
rest of the Country would be forced to follow their example, being deprived of
all communication and correspondence with the rest of the world. Sure it is
France has always inclined this way, since they have observed that they could
not compass their design by Italy, as the Romans of old; which Conquest tho it
be the interest of all Princes of Europe to prevent, as much as in them lies;
yet it is evident that these two States who are nearer at hand, and can better
do it, are the most of all concerned to put a stop to the Progress of the
French in the Low Countries, which would not fail to be attended with dismal
consequences to them, as before mentioned. As for Spain, it is a Body deprived
of the use of its Limbs, and to which nothing remains but that of its Tongue,
viz. To pray and entreat its good Friends and Allies not to forsake it. But
none can do more than England, toward the Preservation of the Low Countries;
and if his British Majesty had not promised to stand still, Luxemburg would
still be in the State wherein it was formerly, and a Bone for France to pick.
The French King is so well aware of this, that he takes all the care he can to
keep the King of England on his side, or at least to remain Neuter, in case he
will not declare himself for him. To which purpose he spares nothing, neither
Presents, Pensions, nor Arts, to keep all safe on that side. But alas, this
Money and those Presents of France are like a Snake hid under Rose-leaves. This
is a Smiling Lip, which hereafter will prove a deadly Sting. They are Iron
Chains gilded over to deceive the Eyes of those who now admires what hereafter
they will have occasion to lament, if they do not betimes discover the Cheat of
him who designs to enslave them. England subsists by ballancing the Crown of
France and Spain, and keeping them in equal poise; wherefore it must needs be
the Interest of that Kingdom by all means possible to prevent the Low Countries
from becoming an occasion to the overweight of France, lest by this means it
should be incapacitated to maintain the Balance of Europe for time to come. For
if ever by ill Fortune the French King should make himself Master of all the 17
Provinces as it is his great Aim, and may easily be brought to pass if the
States be not seconded, what condition will England then be in? France will be
stronger than they at Sea and in the Indies, and consequently interrupt their
Commerce and Navigation, by keeping a great Fleet abroad, especially in the
Channel, so that nothing shall be able to stir out of the English Havens, but
by their leave, and upon the least occasion the total Conquest of England must
needs ensue, and that without Remedy, there being no body in a condition to
stave off their final Ruin.

Moreover the true Interest of England is to keep France low, as well to
preserve the Dominion of the Sea, as to find a favorable occasion to recover
those ancient Dominions the French King keeps from them, as are the Dukedoms of
Britany and Normandy, Poictou, Languedoc, nay France it self; for of the
Marriage of the King of England with Margaret Daughter to Philip the Fair, was
born Henry the Fifth King of England, who had the same Right to France as the
Dauphin has to Spain. The Three Sons of King Philip the Fair, viz. Lewis Hutin,
Philip the Tall, and Charles the Fair, died all without Issue Male: And it was
not till after this, when the King of England prosecuted his Right to the
Kingdom of France, that the Salick Law was made, upon a Speech of the Bishop of
Beauvais's in the Assembly of the States, in which he endeavored to make out
from an allusion to that place of the Gospel, The Lillies Spin not; that the
Crown of France ought not to fall to the Distaff. But that Law could not
prescribe to time past, but only to that which was to come, and consequently
could not invalidate the King of England's Pretensions. After this, Henry the
Fifth entering France with a powerful Army, and having defeated the French in
several Battles, Married Catharin Daughter to Charles the Sixth; and in the
Year 1441, it was concluded that Henry should be King of France. Isabella also
who was Queen of France, and Mother to Catharin Queen of England, made her last
Will in Favor of her Son in Law, declaring him therein the sole Heir of all
her Estate and of the Crown, which increases the just Pretensions, and
strengthens the Rights of England to the Kingdom of France.

Had the French King but half the Pretensions to England, which the King of
England has to France, the World would soon hear of nothing but Manifesto's to
prove them just, as he calls all he does.

So that the King of England ought upon all occasions and in all respects to
suspect France, and to beware of him as a most dangerous Enemy, who flattered
and humored his late Majesty, only to lull him asleep, that he might play his
game without being disturbed or interrupted by him, who, whenever it shall
please him to mind and be true to his own Interest, will undoubtedly carry the
greatest stroke in the Affairs of Europe.

It Is therefore no wonder that King Lewis the Fourteenth, spared nothing that
might supply the Necessities or provide for the Pleasures of the late King
Charles the Second, as Monsieur Barillon, and the Duchess of Portsmouth can
Witness. But I must tell you, that the French King confiders no Body, whether
Prince or private Person, any further than as they may be servicable to promote
his own ends; Yea Virtue it self is not esteemed by him, except it go hand in
hand with his Interest. Do but confider what account he made of the Princes and
Princesses of England in Cromwels time; were they not obliged to leave France,
and to seek for Entertainment elsewhere? And it is notorious that he never
contributed any thing toward the late Kings Restoration, till it was past his
skill to hinder it.

So that upon the whole, neither the Resentment of the Royal Family, nor the
Interest of England, will allow of such strict Alliances with France, as might
tie up the King of Englands hands, and make him an idle Spectator, whilst Lewis
the Great makes himself Master of the Low Countries; but on the contrary he
must always be ready to oppose any the least Attempt he shall make toward it,
making use in the mean time of the Six Regiments he has in Holland (which the
States will not deny him on that account) till he can send some other Troops
over to Flanders. I am persuaded that those Six Regiments will be able to make
Head against double the number of Frenchmen; and when England shall thus be
pleased but to show its Teeth, all Europe will thereby be safe, Resist the
Devil, and he will fly from you; but if you fear him, he will make you his
Slaves. France has cut out work enough for King James the Second, and the
business that he has taken in hand is so great, that many people fear, and
others hope, he will never compass it. It Is not a time to alter old Laws, when the
Enemy is at the Gates; it is not always seasonable for a King to act the
Missionary, but much more requisite that he show himself a brave Soldier and
good Politician. All the World was in expectation of great things from his
Majesty; his Courage put all Europe in hopes of an universal Relief, and some
Respite for Spain, but how has he frustrated and befooled their Hopes, whilst
his sole Study is to please the Jesuits, and to kindle a Fire in his own
Kingdom, which probably he will never be able to quench when he would, as long
as he dares not Convene a Free Parliament.

As Spain became depopulated by the departure of the Moors, so is France
greatly weakened and impoverished by the Dragoon Conversions, and flight of the
Protestants; and the French King would fain see England brought to the same
pass. It Is a high Presumption to rob God of his Right, it is to him the Honor
of Converting does belong, that work surpassing the Power and Activity of a
Creature. So leaving that care to God, the King of England ought to lay out his
Endeavors about preserving his Dominions from becoming a Prey to that
Ambitious Prince, by obliging him to keep within his own bounds, and not to
encroach upon his Neighbors Territories; and in so doing, the King will make
good the Hopes and Expectation Europe had conceived of him.

The Designs of France against the United Provinces.
AFter the States of the United Provinces had by their Powerful Arms
constrained Spain to acknowledge them a Free State, who owed Allegiance to none
but God alone; they were for a time the Object of their Neighbors Admiration
and Envy, every one endeavoring to Court and make Alliances with this growing
State, which began to be looked upon as the Umpire of Europe: But this high
Reputation of theirs has suffered a notable Eclipse since the War of 1672, when
France having brought them to the very brink of Destruction, pleased himself
with the thoughts of seeing them tumble headlong into the Pit he had dug for
them; neither would he have been mistaken in his hopes, had not the people
given a sudden and unlookt for turn to the face of Affairs, by declaring the
Prince of Orange Stadthouder; the Providence of Almighty God at the same time
concurring with their Endeavors to preserve that small Spot of Ground, by
confounding and daunting their Enemies, who after the taking of Naerden, were
struck with such a Panick Fear, that the^ ran away, none pursuing them. Now
what contributed most to the Mischiefs they were involved in at that time, was,
that besides the Treasonable Correspondences which France held with some
principal Members of that Government, they had neither any good Troops, nor a
Commander in Chief; and relying on the Peace and fair Promises of France, they
were well nigh lulled asleep by that fatal Melody, whilst that King was hard at
work to undermine the Foundation of their dear bought Liberties and Government.
We find in time of Peace the Soldiers grow Idle, as well as their Arms rusty.
Ease pleases and flatters us, and Men are soon persuaded to lay aside the
Exercise of Arms, to betake themselves to a more gainful way of Living; so that
when the Enemy approached, they are readier to embrace shame when joined with
Profit and Pleasure, than to strive for Glory surrounded with difficulties and
dangers -- France knew very well, that so long as the United Provinces had no
General, that Soldiery could not be but in a very bad Condition, and incapable
of defending them from the Attempts of a powerful Enemy; wherefore he took
special Care, by cunning Practices and false Suggestions (exasperating the
Minds of the opposite Party) to prevent the Prince of Orange's being advanced
to those places of Trust and Dignity His Royal Highness is now so deservedly
possessed of. By this means the States grew daily weaker and weaker, their
Troops were dissipated, their Fortifications neglected, their Strongest Holds
went to decay, their Magazins were unfurnished, whilst France was raising
Troops underhand, and making Secret Alliances with England, the Elector of
Cologne, and Bishop of Munster, in order to their final Ruin. Du Plessis is
much in the right, when he says, That a State is not to be judged strong or
weak, but with relation to the strength or weakness of its Neighbors, and that
it is upon that score that Wise Princes endeavor to keep themselves (as much
as they can) in equal potse with their Neighbors, to the end, they continue in
Peace and Amity together; for as soon as this fails, all Peace and Good
Correspondence are dissolved, as being only grounded upon a mutual fear or
esteem for one another. Which is so true, that a Prudent Prince is always
jealous of the least advance or motion of his Neighbor, tho in a time of Truce
or Peace, and is continually upon his Watch, endeavoring to be informed of his
Designs before they be brought forth; for by this means, he puts him by his
Measures, and frustrates his Purposes. In which point many Princes and States,
who are too saving, fail very often, and this Covetousness of theirs, costs them
and their People very dear, by occasioning a most Expensive War, which at the
first by Precaution might have been prevented with a small Matter. France is so
well Informed of this Truth, that they neglect nothing in such Cases, and their
Ambassadors in all the Courts of Europe are supplied with Moneys for that very
purpose, who knowing they cannot please their Master better, than by Corrupting
one or more of the Ministers of the Prince or State at whose Court they reside,
are Day and Night contriving for it, and spare nothing to bring it about. Yea,
when it happens that they cannot prevail with the Man himself they aim at, they
endeavor to gain his Wife, or in case they chance to be so unhappy as to fail
there also, they condescend to make their Application to some of their
Children; nay, so humble are they, and such Slaves to their Master's Ambition,
that they will not stick to bribe their Servants, and furnish them with Moneys
proportionable to the Service they are able and willing to do them. These are
the Maxims that speed their Designs wonderful well in such States as are
governed by many Heads, as the United Provinces, which are a great Bar to the
French King in his aim of Conquering the Spanish Netherlands, who very well
knows, that being Master of the one, he cannot miss of the other, His great
business therefore is, to lull the States of the United Provinces asleep with a
Truce, which he will break when he pleases, being in hopes that their Forces
will in the mean time be neglected, in laying out themselves wholly to
propagate and encourage Trade and Navigation. For that King is well aware, that
the States being awake and standing on their Guard, will never consent to his
possessing himself of the Spanish Netherlands, at least they ought not to do
it, since that it is the only Bar and Rampart which hinders France from
overwhelming them, which they ought therefore by all means to endeavor to
preserve whole and entire, as one would his Neighbors House from being set on
Fire. What pains did not Count d' Avaux take to set one Province against the
other, and to sow Divisions among the Cities of Holland, how busy was he at
Amsterdam? What Proffers or Promises did he spare to bring it about? Which is a
thing so publicly known from that Ambassador's frequent Journeys to that great
City, that the very Children were not ignorant of it. We must not imagine that
Mombas was alone engaged in his Treason against that State, but rather that he
escaping into France, has left several behind him, that walk in the dark, and
are not yet discovered. The best on it is, that Count d' Avaux begins now to be
known, and his Insinuations not believed, he having but too long imposed upon
the Credulity and good Nature of many, who now perceiving the Cheat, will
scarcely suffer themselves to be decoyed a second time. And as France was
diligent to sow these Divisions and Jealousies amongst them at home, so was he
no less Industrious in fomenting Differences between England and them, as
knowing very well that these Neighboring Powers when joined together, are able
to give check to his Pride, and set bounds to his Ambition. How pleasing a
sight is it to the French King to see them engaged against each other, and
pursuing his Interests at so vast an Expense of their own Blood and Treasure?
The last War betweeen those two States was some difference about Matters of
Commerce, and whilst the King of England was Arming, the French King offered to
engage in a Treaty with Holland, on purpose to amuse and divert them from
putting themselves in a posture of Defense, as they soon after perceived; when
France instead of concluding the Treaty, begun with them, declared himself for
England; and whilst the latter Attacked them by Sea, he Invaded their Country
with a Puissant Army; and supposing the Conquest of those Provinces
indubitable, they had aforehand divided them amongst themselves, England being
to have for his share the Maritime Places, and France all the rest: Amsterdam
only proved a Bone of Contention, and occasioned some Difference between them,
both the one and the other desiring it for his share: tho indeed they had no
reason to be in a heat about it, seeing all this was but reckoning without
their Host, God preserving it from falling into either of their Hands. Thus a
Peace being at last concluded with England, the Spirit of France was at work
again to with draw the States from their Allies, and finding that things were
about to change face, and that the Outch being row sed by a Discovery of the
Artifices and Treachery of France, began to look about them, and their Troops
having a good General at the Head of them, became considerable and formidable,
he thought fit for a while to dismiss the Lion and act the Fox, restoring
Maestricht unto them, in order to obtain the Peace of Nimeguen. Since which
time, that King has contented himself to bark afar off, and was so apprehensive
of the States raising the last 6000 Men, that Count d' Avaux spared nothing to
prevent it, and will do so still, as often as the States shall go about to Arm
themselves, because that would stop the Great Lewis in the full Career of his
Conquests, and make his Designs to prove abortive. I say again that it is the
great Concern of Holland, not to suffer the Spanish Netherlands to be lost,
except they desire at the same time to become a prey to the Usurper. For how
easily will he find an occasion of quarrel with them; and if all else fail, he
will make out his Pretensions and Right to those Provinces, for that they
formerly belonged to Mary of Burgundy, Philip the First, Charles the Fifth, and
afterward to Philip the Second, who were without Contest the lawful Possessors
thereof, and that afterward rebelling, they obtained by force an
acknowledgment of their being a free State. He will proffer to maintain them in
all their Liberties and Privileges; and the free Exercise of their Religion,
in case they willingly submit to him; which if they should hearken to, he will
by little and little clip their Franchises, and remove all Protestants from
places of Trust, as he has done at home; and if they yield not willingly, he
will attack them with an armed hand, as he did in 1672, being sure the Roman
Catholic Princes will not oppose him, because he has blinded their Eyes with
the false pretense of Religion. But if the House of Austria be not aware
betimes of the Snares he lays for them under these specious Pretexts, they will
find themselves deceived when it is too late to recall their Inadvertency. To
return to the United Provinces, I say, they ought, next to God, not to rely
upon any thing so much as their own Forces, and having nothing so much to fear
as France, they ought to provide and strengthen themselves against his Power
chiefly, who has, for this great while, been plotting and contriving their
final Overthrow, or, at least, the bringing of them so low, as to be forced to
depend solely upon, and truckle under him. It has some time since been
observed, that France has had a strong desire to make Holland listen to the
Proposal and Treaty, which the Wolf in the Fable made with the Sheep, Put away
from you (said the Wolf to those harmless Creatures) your Shepherd and Dog, and
we will make an Alliance, and live in Love and Amity together. In like manner,
says Lewis the Great, Dismiss your General, and Disband your Old Troops; for to
what purpose these unnecessary Charges in a time of Peace; especially being so
well assured of our Friendship, by the Truce I am engaged in, and the word of a
King, which you may safely rely on, that we will live in all Amity and good
Correspondence with you. But what says the Italian, Trust not, if thou would
not be cheated. So that it is still safest for Holland to rely wholly on its
own strength, and to have always a good Fleet at Sea, to serve for Convoy and
Cruising, besides a Reserve in readiness to join with them in case of need. A
good Navy may well be called the Right hand of that Government, being of great
use in dispelling many Clouds and ill Designs which France hatcheth against his
Neighbors. And if ever the States should come to a Resolution continually to
keep in Pay a certain Number of Seamen, to be ready to be put aboard their Men
of War at any time, this would produce a double good Effect. The first is, that
the States would always have Men ready at hand upon occasion (without the
Expense of Trouble and Time in raising them) who, by their continual
Employment, would be trained up, and well used to the Sea, and Naval Conflicts.
The second is, that by this means they would not fail to draw a great number of
Seamen from the Neighboring Coasts, continual Pay being no small Encouragement
to Mariners, to betake themselves to the Service of those that offer it, but
more especially the States Subjects in Foreign Service, would not fail to
return to their own Country, to enjoy the benefit of being maintained all the
year round. To effect which, the States need only to publish a Placaet,
strictly enjoining all Seamen, their Subjects, in Foreign Service, to return
home. True indeed it is, that the Navy of France will but be little the better
for it; for I dare affirm, they can fit out very few Men of War, without
putting some Dutch Mariners, especially Pilots aboard them, as trusting more to
their Knowledge and Experience than their own, who are often at a loss in a long
Voyage. Which good and wholesome Resolution, when ever the States shall be please
to take, you will presently see the Spirit of France strangely exasperated and
disturbed, and his Ambassador running from one City to another to represent his
Master's just Reasons against it. But it is hoped, that as the Count d' Avaux
has much laid open himself to an obvious discovery, by the small Effects his
Promises have had hitherto, as not being scason'd with the Salt of Truth and
Honesty, (the main thing that keeps up the Credit and Reputation of a Minister
in Foreign Countries) so he will do nothing but catch cold. However, I cannot deny
but the French King is beholden to that Creat Minister for his having inspired
a Fondness for France into the minds of several of the States Subjects, which
their Lordships have no reason to thank him for. Besides this, France receives
no small service from the Jesuits, and other Foreign Priests, residing in the
United Provinces, who have Pensions allowed them, to pry into, and engage the
Inclinations of many there. These Spies are in the Prince's Court, where they
have Friends that serve them on occasion, and have the Impudence to boast, That
they are informed of the very Secrets of the Cabinet. How many of this sort of
Cattle are there in the States Troops and Garrisons, who have their
Correspondents at the Hague, where the General Office of Intelligence is kept,
as being the Center of that Government. This is a thing that ought to be more
narrowly looked to, these Spies being no other but the Emissaries of France, who
is always restless, and spares nothing that may further his Designs. I remember
that not long since 4 Ducatoons a week were proffered a Servant of a Deputy of
the State, only to report what he heard from his Master, at Table, or in
Conversation with others; but the Servant, with sharp words rejected the
Proffer, as became an honest Man.

This Instance shows, that France sets upon People every way, and that
therefore one had need always to stand upon his Guard to avoid the Blow. I have
also observed, that there are another sort of petty Spies that run up and down
the chief Towns, especially the Hague, daily shifting their Ordinaries, except
they find occasion to stay longer, and are in prospect of some advantage to be
reaped there of whom those who are obliged to frequent such Houses ought to
beware. Others intrude themselves into Companies, or resort to the Court, and
go to see the Prince and Princess at Dinner and Supper, to hear and see what is
said or done there; and as soon as they have heard or seen any thing of
concern, you see them run like Foot boys to the French Ambassador's, who, for a
Reward, invites them to stay and eat with him, he now entertaining scarce any
but such at his Table. I could name a dozen of them who, to my knowledge, are
employed in this way, besides those that do it more secretly, and go to the
Offering only at Night, and through the Stable door. Count de Caravas, one of
these Spies of great Note, though (in my judgment) of as little use, was not so
cautious, who coming from Court, would go into the Ambassador's at the
Fore-door, in the middle of the day, to communicate to him his Collections. Two
persons, whom I know to be Jesuits, tho in the Garb of Officers, resort every
day to the Princes Rising, Dinner and Supper, and continually attend the Court,
where they have so many Friends, or at least so much cunning, as to be able to
procure their Catholic Friends some Employment who are all Emissaries of
France, and wholly devoted to the service of that King. Others have put
themselves to serve even in the Kitchen where such sort of Cattle are very
dangerous. Therefore I conclude, that both the States and Prince of Orange,
ought in all Respects, and at all Times, to be very cautious of the wicked and
unchristian Maxims and Designs of France, the King himself being a false and
perjured person, who, under pretense of establishing the Roman Catholic
Religion everywhere, (tho by his wicked Life and breach of Faith he denies all
Religion) has no other aim, but to extend his Dominion to the uttermost Bounds
of Europe, and to that end destroy first all the Protestant Princes, and then
the Roman Catholic too that so he may cause himself to be proclaimed, not the
Emperor of the Romans only, but of all Europe; and certain it is, that nothing
can serve him as a Bridge to the Universal Monarchy but Holland, which from his
Versailles he looks upon with a most envious Eye. So that the States and People
of those Provinces have great reason to mind the advice of our Savior to the
Jews, Watch, for you know not what hour the Thief will come. To which I add, Be
ready therefore to oppose him when he shall come to break into the House, and
usurp his Neighbors Territories: and be sure to look upon France as a sworn
Enemy to Republics, and the Plague and Scourge of all that will not yield
their Liberties up to him. True it is, he sears the States, more than he loves
them, care therefore must be taken to be always in such a condition as may
still keep him so, and to make him know himself, when ever he shall so far
forget himself as to meddle with what he has nothing to do. All the
Remonstrances made by Count d' Avaux, as soon as he sees the States putting
themselves into a posture of Defense, must not be minded, as being merely upon
design; for we may be sure that Minister would not make them, were it not for
the promoting of his Masters Interests.

FINIS.

