A DIALOGUE Between the POPE AND A PHANATICK, Concerning Affairs in ENGLAND.

By a Hearty Lover of his Prince and Country.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1680.

A Dialogue between the POPE and a PHANATICK.
POPE, Brother well met: How do all my Nephews in the North?


Phanatick. Through Mercy and Indulgence we are all in a very prosperous and
hopeful condition.


Pope. My Jesuits, Franciscans, Dominicans, Capuchins, etc. Salute your
Religious Orders, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, etc. And
especially my Societies of Mendicants present their most complying Respects to
your new Order of Petitioners. I can proceed no further than the first Scene of
a Plot, but I see Fate will reserve the last Act to be your part. My Armada
miscarried in Eighty Eight. The Powder would not fire upon King James; after
this I considered that the Wisdom and Piety of Charles the I. would have given
too much Luster to the British Church, and have been too great a Glory for the
Reformation, and therefore I did as much study the Destruction of Charles the
First, as ever I did the ruin of the Second.


Phan. I know you did, for I remember I was at a Consult with your Nuncio at
London in the last Holy War.


Pope. But all my Arts had been ineffectual without your Alliance, for I must
confess the carrying on of that War was your Merit, and your hand had the
Reputation to strike that blow which made a Jubilee at Rome.


Phan. We hate the Italian way of King-Killing, we have no Ruffians among the
Saints; there is more show of Conscience and Judgment in a High Court of
Justice, than in Poison and Pistol.


Pope. So we can but dispatch another Charles, it is indifferent to me whether
he falls after the English or the Italian mode.


Phan. Sir you have not well considered the matter, for the present Juncture
gives me a great advantage; the people are so fully possesst with the horror of
the Popish Plot, and are so vehemently prejudiced against the Romish Proselytes
and Religion, that I might dispatch the King with Bullet or Dagger, and the
Papists in England should die for the Fact, and Thames and Tweed would be
turned into blood, before your Friend at Edinburgh should arrive at St.
James's; nay, though I should be so unfortunate as to Kill the King with a
Witness, to be sure I should have the common Grace to deny it, and then persons
of the greatest credit upon Earth would be no Evidence, the Multitude would
believe they were as false Witnesses, as those that accused Jesus; nay, if a
voice from Heaven should give Testimony against me, the peole like the Jews
would say it Thundered, or think it only the cheat of a Speaking-Trumpet: most
would be persuaded that my Accusation was only a Popish intrigue to cast the
Plot upon the Presbyterians.


Pope. Well, if you will Assassinate the King, there would be so much Value and
Merit in the Sacrifice, it will be worth the adventure of a Massacre.


Phan. Nay, Sir, I confess, I am yet most inclined to the Precedent of an High
Court of Justice, for it is most honor for the Saints to bind the Kings in
Chains, and their Nobles with Links of Iron, to make them our Prisoners, to Cut
them off with the Pomp and Solemnity of Public Justice; and to this purpose we
are already provided of a President, and there is no fear of wanting Lawyers to
plead for the Commons, and to Arraign the King; the Scaffolds stand still at
Westminster Hall, and who knows for whom they wait? Besides, if you remark the
hints of Providence, or the signs of the times, you may observe, that Heaven it
self intends, we should Act over the same things again, for we have a
Parliament of the same Genius with that of Forty One, there is a Charles again
at Westminster, a William in Canterbury, an Earl Thomas in the Tower, and the
same Crucifying Lesson that happened upon the thirtieth of January, falls
exactly in Rubric upon the twenty ninth of May.


Pope. I wish the event of these fatal suggestions may confirm your
Interpretation, but the Kings mounting of his Guns, and doubling his Guards,
and bold Proroguing and Dissolving of Parliaments, looks as if he had no mind
to the Crown of Martyrdom; and I am afraid your observation of that Critical
Lesson in the English Calendar should have another importance, and should
portend that Charles tte Second was born to revenge the blood of the First. But
our Attempts from the South have been so unfortunate, that I begin to think
that there is in it some propriety of Fate, and that this Scottish Line must
only be ruined by the Northern Covenanters, and besides, you may do it with
more security, for I see a Phanatik may Murder with less noise, and greater
privilege, than a Jesuit: For when we puffed out of the world that mere shadow of
a Knight, Sir E. B. G. his death Alarmed the Nation, and made as great an
Earthquake as the fall of Charles the First; but you could Assassinate the
Primate of an whole Kingdom, one of the Chief Ministers of Church and State,
and this done too with greater Circumstances of Barbarity; and yet this Fact
was reported with soft whispers and kind palliations.


Phan. Well, after all this, by the Doctrine of our Casuists we are no
King-Killers, for when a Prince devests himself of Royal Power and Prerogative
by Concessions and Condescensions, or when a mighty Parliament have beaten, or
dethroned the King, then to destroy him; is no more Regicide, than to Shoot
through the sign of the King's Head, or Stab the Picture of His Majesty.


Pope. Well, I will say you outdo the whole world in Politics, if you can
bring two Kings to the Bar in one Age.


Phan. Alas! Your Cardinals Hats are shallow things, and your Triple Crown
looks like a Fools Cap; we have one single Head amongst us, that Wit enough to
baffle Twelve Caesar's, a Gentleman well studied in the Philosophy of
Alterations, and the Heroic virtue of affronting Princes.


Pope. I am glad to hear you have so great a Head, I hope you remember that the
primary intention of our League, is to destroy that Episcopal Church of
England, that Church which is rude to the Saints, and will worship nothing in
Heaven but God, and nothing upon Earth but the King and his two Idols of
Prerogative and Supremacy, those Pagan Teraphims, to which you and I will never
bow; it is the ruin of this Church, that I do chiefly intend, and if the King
falls in the Quarrel, he dies by accident.


Phan. Sir, you know I am obliged to this, both by Solemn League and Interest,
and though like you I can dispense with Vows of Baptism, and Oaths of
Allegiance, and such like Complements of State and Religion; Yet I make a
Conscience of the Covenant, and therefore never doubt my Fidelity, for I will
serve you a s faithfully as your Castle of St. Angelo, or the Knights of Malta.


Pope. I have no reason to question that, but I would gladly understand how far
matters are advanced, and what hopeful prospect you have of success in this
grand Affair; but first let me know by what Arts you have rendered your selves
so Popular; for I believe the English have a worse Opinion, and a greater
abhorrence, of me, than they have of the Devil, for they are so Civil to him as
not to torment him before his time, no, not so lmuch as in Effigy; there is
none of you would affront him so much as to burn his Sign at the Devil-Tavern,
but look upon it with a greater veneration than upon the sign of the Cross; but
the burning of the Pope is an Annual Triumph and Solemnity, and the people are
only sorry that it is but an Effigies, and that the Fire is not unquenchable.


Phan. My first Art is a Form of Godliness, the only Form I value in the world,
for I find that a dissembled Piety does more abundantly serve our interest,
than a strict sincerity, which is therefore justly called the simplicity of
Religion; public Sobriety is an excellent Stratagem, and wins upon the vulgar,
and the Style and Formality of Holiness have done me as much service in
England, as it does you at Rome; and I thingk I may challenge the Title as
justly as you, I prevail upon the minds of men by just such methods as your
Jesuits Converted the Chinese, not by strength of Reason or Argument, but by
Glasses and Clocks, Painted Maps and Books well gilded, thus I gain upon the
people with Spiritual Fancies, well sounding words, fine Enthusiasms and
Allegories, those Prismes of Divinity, and this will be an infallible Artifice;
for the common people of England have no more judgment in Theology, than the
Chinese had in Mathematics; and if the Preacher, like the European Clock at
Pequin strikes alone, and makes a noise without Book, whether he sounds true or
false, it passes for Inspiration, and the voice of God; one successful
Stratagem to betray and confound the Church is this, by our sure Patronatus we
Post within the Established Church as many Unconforming Ministers as we can,
with the Popular Title of Sober and Moderate men; and your Casuists and mine
have taught them Salvoes enough to dispense with Canonical Oaths and
Subscriptions; and by this Art we have reduced many hundred Parish-Churches
into Conventicles, whose Service and Assemblies look no more like the Church of
England, than the Cantons of Swisserland; and by this care and caution in
presenting, we have assured to our selves in every County some of the Clergy to
Poll against the Church: And you know in a Siege one Enemy within the Walls is
worth a Regiment without.

But we never present any High Conformist, except he be well qualified with
little Learning and great Immoralities, and then the Ignorance and Debauchery
of the one does us as much service as the Nonconformity of the other. But my
most effectual Artifice to ruin our common Enemy the Church of England, is to
clamor against her with the loud cries of Popery, and though this Church stands
upon the Old Foundation of its first Reformation, yet my bold Timariot Lewis
du-Moulin have made the people believe that she is advanced within one hours
sail of Rome; and the uneducated Commons of England, and the half-witted
Gentlemen, are so happily easy and credulous, that I can impose upon them what
I please, especially in the fears and jealousies of Popery; there is an Ancient
Law that looks like Nature and Morality, land I wish the Parliament would
Repeal it, and that is, That men should bow down and worship God, when they
come to address to him in their Public Devotions; now if any High Churchman of
England, when he enters a Cathedral, should pay this Homage of Adoration, if
there be a Candlestick, or an Eagle of Brass in the Quire, I make the world
believe that he worships the Brazen Serpent, or if there be at the East end
some fine Painted Faces with gilded Wings, then I persuade my Proselytes, that
the bowing that way, is the Superstitious Humility or Worshipping of Angels,
which the Apostle condemns; I can make them believe, without any further
question, that the Singing of Hymns and Psalms according to the Cathedral
manner, was a Popish invention, and Pointed by Antichrist and that Christ and
his Apostles Sung the Paschal Psalm in the Tune of Hopkins and Sternhold. Sir,
there is such an Omnipotence in your name, that you can be no less than the
Vicar of the Almighty; the mere word of Pope or Popery works Miracles in
England; if there stands in my way a Monarchical Gentleman of a flourishing
Reputation, I do but breath upon him, and say he is Popishly affected, and he
is as soon blasted and withered as the Fig Tree in the Gespel; it was that dear
word Popery, which once before blew up Church and State, whipped off the Heads of
King and Canterbury; nay, there is so much magic in it, that the very buzze of
Popery will Conjure up a Presbyterian Parliament; nay, there are such wonders
in this name, that I believe, the fears of Popery may be so cunningly managed,
as at last to bring it in without any jealousy at all, and all this time the
people believe that you and I are direct Antipodies, though we lie in the same
Parallel, and are equal Enemies to the Divine Right of Kings and Bishops.


Pope. In this consists the strength of all our Strategems, and to continue
this profitable delusion, I request you to continue me the friendship of your
Raillery, for you are never so kind to me, as when you clamor loudest against
me, for if once our Correspondence be discovered, all our Politics are
defeated.


Phan. I never Paint you without the Devil at your Elbow, and then I make you
look the worst of the two; never fear a Discovery of our Compliance, for it is
beyond the reach of Mechanics and half brained Gentlemen to understand the
finesses betwixt you and I; indeed the ill-timed motion of our Scottish
Brethren might have given the world an unlucky suspicion of our Confederacy,
for there being a Synchronysm in our Plots, and such an agreement in our
designs, it might have given a vehement presumption of our Compliance, if we
had not had a good stock of Friends and Confidence; But O that Critical and
unfortunate Prorogation of Parliament! when we took up Arms in Scotland, we did
not question, but our Allies had been safely Entrenched at Westminster, but
sure that fatal Council must either be the advice of Lucifer or Landerdale. But
to proceed, another Artifice, of ours consists in that Hogan Mogan word of
Protestant Religion, a name which the people esteem more Sacred than that which
the Disciples assumed at Antioch, if I do but cry out the Protestant Religion
is at stake, it is as great an alarm as firing of Beacons.


Pope. I would gladly know how far you extend that Title of Protestant Religion.


Phan. Why Sir, it is a Latitudinarian word, and so comprehensive, that it may
take in almost all the world except the Pope and the Devil.


Pope. Will that word reach from Tweed to Bosphorus? and will you make the
Grand Turk to be a Protestant?


Phan. I see no reason why he should not be reckoned in our Communion, for he
disowns your Infallibility and Supremacy, and scoffs at your Miracle of the
Mass, and is as great an Enemy to Images and Idols as any Jew or Protestant in
Holland, and he is very Orthodox in the Decrees of Predestination, the great
Doctrine of Protestants, and what is more than all this his Priests were no
Surplice, Lawn Sleeves nor Rochets, they neither use the sign of Cross, nor
place any Rails at the East end of the Mosch, and the Mufti is of the same mind
with our Presbytery concerning Princes, That whatsoever Prince obey not the Law
of God, he is no true Muscelman or Believer, and being become by his filthy
Actions an Infidel, he is opso facto, fallen from his Throne, and no further
capable of Authority and Government, See Paul Rycaunt, Turkish History.
and with his Divinity our Turkish Brethren Strangled Sultan Ibrahim, in the
same year Forty Eight, when we by the same Maxim cut off Charles the First.
That in which we most disagree, is, that our Brethren in Turkey still retain
that old Natural Superstition of Adoration, and when they enter their places of
Devotion will with low Prostrations worship God, and for that Reason, because
he is Monarch of the whole world; but yet this does not so much scandal me,
because I think they do not worship to the East, but I cannot approve of their
Praying so much and Preaching so little.


Pope. Truly no more do I; for their frequenting their Moschs, their Praying
five times a day, their humble Devotions and Adorations preserve in their minds
an awful notion of a Deity and a Sovereignty, and I wish, like you, they would
Preach twice a day, and appoint Lectures twice or thrice a week, this would so
distract and amuse them with Varieties and Novelties, that I believe a good
Society of Lecturers would sooner destroy the Turkish Empire, than all the Arms
of Persia and Christendom, or the Mutinies of Janissaries; well, you have
convinced me that the Turks ought to be admitted into the Poll-Book of
Protestants, and if the Pasha's of Buda and Babylon, with all the Beglerbegs,
Spahee's and Janissaries, be in the list of Protestants, I must confess you to
be the most formidable Body in the world. But don't you take in the Greek
Church too into your Protestant comprehension?


Phan. No: They are no more true Protestants than the Church of England; for
they have Bishops and Liturgies, Rites and Ceremonies, and such kind of
Greekery, for the mischief is I cannot call it Popery in them, but they and the
reason too are so far off from England, that I hope the Argument will not be
discerned; but to conclude this, the Thaumatergick word of Protestant Religion
have done our Cause such eminent service, that in the next Revolution, when we
give new Charters to State and Religion, we design to expunge that Popish
Article of Catholic, and put the Protestant Church into the Creed, if it shall
be thought needful to retain any Creed at all.


Pope. Well, I am satisfied you have bravely undermined the Church of England,
whose Ruins will help to Repair the Walls of Old and New Babylon, our Church
and yours, but pray, what approaches have you made upon the State?


Phan. You must know that the Monarchy and Church of England, as they are now
Established, are but one Work, and stand upon the some bottom, and therefore if
the Mine Springs well, both must blow up together; but yet I have my peculiar
Engines to Assault the Throne, as First, powerful Libels, which have more effect
than your Bulls, and it will not require so much of the Black Art to render
this King odious, as it did to sully the Reputation of his Father.

I have already prepared the people for Rebellion by fears and jealousies of
Arbitrary Power, if any High Sheriff appears with Buff and Carbine, I tell the
people, they are a Troop of Spahee's, and the Lord Lieutenant is a Pasha, and
that Charles designs to be a Sultan.


Pope. Methinks it is so lately since your Oliver the First was a Grand a
Signior as Amurat the Fourth, that that Stratagem should have no force upon
this Age, for the Cavaliers, by a late Experiment, have more reason to fear
Arbitrary Government from you, than from their Hereditary Kings, whose Interest
it is to secure the Liberty and Property of their Loyal Subject.


Phan. It Is true, the Saints have a right to an absolute Dominion, and those
who shall judge Angels may surely condemn Kings and Nobles too, and I grant that
there shall be no Parliament in the Fifth Monarchy; but this Arbitrary Power
must not be allowed to the Kings of the Earth: but however I find that this
State Mormo of Arbitrary Government, does still fright the Populacy of England,
and most of the Cavaliers are such unconsidering Animals, that though I lately
imprisoned them for the maintaining of Liberty, and sequestered them in defense
of Property, and put many to death by High-Courts of Justice preserve them from
Tyranny, yet they don't believe I will do so again, and seem to dread Arbitrary
Power in none but Lawful Kings; besides I have a great advantage, for the
people of England will easily credit a Popish-Plot, and are very apt to think
the worst of you, but they are not so ready to suspect any evil designs from
me; if I should raise a report, that you had by your Conjuring Power of
Transubstantiation transformed an Hundred Thousand men into Rooks and Crows,
and ordered that Flying Army to Rendezvous at Black Heath, and there to shake
off their Plumers and appear in Arms, I am confident there are thousands would
believe the story; but they will not believe I have any design to Kill the
King, till they see him upon the Scaffold.


Pope. I am satisfied you have Planted your Batteries: with great advantage,
and have made wide Breaches both upon Church and State, but you want your five
hundred Veterans to enter the Breach and complete the Conquest.


Phan. It Is true, if I can but once again Quarter a Parliament at Guild Hall,
or Post them at Westminster, with the Guard of the City Auxiliaries, the
business were done; for I confess we can do nothing in State or Religion
without the power of an Ordinance, and I grant you that a Rebellion will not
have its due colors or standing force without the Levy and Authority of
Parliament; but we are secured of a House of Commons of our own Temper, for we
have baffled the Gentry and Clergy, and are become the grand Electors of
England; for by Polling all Cottages and Almshouses (the frankest Tenure of
England) by a little pardonable Perjury, and splitting our Freehold into Atoms
for four and twenty hours, we have rendered our selves Masters of Elections; and
thus by an immortal opposition betwixt King and Parliament, we have rendered the
Constitution unpracticable, and reduced the Government to this Dilemma, that
either we must have a King without a Parliament, which is an English
impossibility, or else a Parliament without a King, and for that, you know, we
have a Precedent, and therefore the hopes and advantage lies on our side.


Pope. If you could give these Elect Creatures of yours a fixed being or a
Politic immortality, all were done; but the King perversely retains that
Reprobating power of Prorogation and Dissolution, and begins to learn how and
when to use it.


Phan. This indeed is the greatest difficulty of our affairs; but to master
this we must use all imaginable Arts to distress the King; for as we cannot
have a Parliament without the King, so he can have no money without us; now to
bring him into necessities, we will invite our friends in Barbary to infest the
Seas; and our Protestant Neighbors have lately furnished them with Ammunition
for that purpose. You must by your Nuncio at Paris prevent the League with
France, and I do not question but my Friends and Interest to hinder an Alliance
with the Dutch. But if all these methods should be defeated, I have one
Stratagem left, which must effect our designs, and that is the Artifice of
Petitioning, and though I would not have the Nation agree in one common Form of
Prayer to God Almighty, yet I will persuade all the Counties of England to
combine in one Petition to the King for the Session of a Parliament. Now for
Subjects to Petition their Prince seems at first sight such a plausible Right,
and so just a Liberty, that it would be thought Tyranny to disgust it, and I do
not question, but to court one Hundred Thousand Hands into a Subscription, and
thus I have listed a Formidable Army without beating of a Drum, and if the
Gentleman at White Hall shall affront our leading Petitioners, the whole
association will be obliged to take the Field in Defense of Liberty, Property,
and Petitions.


Pope. I acknowledge your proceedings are brave, and something hopeful, but I
think you did commit an error in Politics, by your too bold and open affronts
upon the Throne, for when you had a Parliament of your own Family, you should
have sweetly dissembled your designs and wrought the Mine under ground, and not
given such open defiance to Prerogative; there was a time when the King cast
himself into the Arms of his Parliament, and then you might have Killed him
with embraces, you should have Worshipped him, clothed him with Purple, and
Pourted him with flattering Addresses, but you should not have showed him the
Crown of Thorns, till you had brought him to the Judgment-Hall, for now your
barefaced affronteries have rendered him jealous of your designs, and may put
him upon some desperate Counsels to obviate your contrivances; for your Plots
against the Government are now more manifest than mine; but this I will say; if
you can Ruin three Kingdoms twice in one Age, you deserve the Triple Crown as
well as I.


Phan. Hold, Sir, Now use your Omnipotence of Transubstantiation, vanish into
Air, transform your self into a Wafer, (for sure that is as easy as to change
a Wafer into a Man, or which is more, into a God;) here comes an Unconverted
Cavalier, a Worshiper of Kings and Bishops, and if he discovers my Company and
Conrespondence with you, we are undone.


Pope. I see him, and he is so far advanced already that he must have observed
us; and there is no remedy left, but to delude him with the wonted Artifice of
Railing upon each other, and begin as soon, and as loud as you can.


Phan. You Antichrist the Great, the Spiritual Pasha of Mystical Babylon, the
great Hocus Pocus of Christendom, Son of the Scarlet Whore, the Incendiary and
Deceiver of the Nations, you man of sin and Pandor to the Devil.


Pope. You Apocryphal Spawn of Bell and the Dragon, you ill-looking, ill-natured
Phanatick, the shame of Humanity, the scandal of Christendom, the Plague of
Governments, you are the Beast and the false Prophet, and your Numbers are the
Locusts that came out of the bottomless Pit; you are the perfection of
Impudence, Impiety and Hypocrisy.


Cavalier. Very fine in troth! Do you think me to be so blind, that nothing can
restore my sight but a Miracle? No, you are mistaken, I have a long time
suspected your compliance, but now both mine Eyes and mine Ears have assured me
of your Confederacy: I know which is the eldest, but it is not easy to
determine who is the greatest Knave of you two; You, Mr. Pope, damn me for a
Heretic, and your Brother Phanatick Blasphemes me for a Papist, but though the
next Successor to the Crown should come from Rome or Leyden, I would never be a
Rebel, nor should all the Power or Prerogative upon Earth, ever oblige me to be
a Papist or Presbyterian; I am of the same Church and Religion with Polycarpus,
St. Ignatius, St. Gregory Nazianzen and Nyssen, St. Basil, St. Chrysostom and
St. Cyprian; Who were Friends to Bishops and Liturgies, Decent Rites and
Ceremonies in Public Worship, and yet were neither Papal nor Phanatical, and I
hope, it will not be long, before all the Princes of Christendom will see it
their Interest to be Enemies to you both. As for your present Intrigue of
Petitioning, you have told the people in plausible Cant, that it is one of the
excellencies of the King of Kings to hear the Prayers of them who are but Dust
and Ashes, and that the King would but resemble a Deity in a Gracious Receiving
and Granting Petitions, but like your old Friend that tempted our Savior, you
conceal the most material part of the Divinity; for sure according to the due
restrictions of Religion and Allegiance we are obliged to ask nothing from God
or the King, but what is essentially Good and Just, and agreeable to their
declared Will and Pleasure; but for men or subjects to confine Providence or
Prerogative to the Modes and Measures of their private humors, is neither
Devotion to God, nor good Manners to the King.

And if Popular Petitions be so just a Right of the Subject, I would fain know
why we might not as lawfully Petition the King for the Dissolving of this
Parliament, as you do for the Sitting of it. I am sure we have as much Reason
and Liberty as you, only we have more Manners and Submission, and think it not
Dutiful in Subjects to impose upon their Sovereign with Impudent and Tumultuous
Suggestions. By this Method of Petitioning you would render His Majesty's
Government Precarious in the most literal sense; and when he has granted your
Petitions, it will not be long before you requite his Grace with a Vote of
non-Addresses. I confess your Factious Conspiracies have rendered our happy
Constitution Unpracticable, and brought the Government into such a Dilemma,
that there is no Medium to be fancied betwixt Empire and Commonwealth, and the
King must either resolve to take up the Imperial Crown, or prepare to lay down
his Head, for he must either suffer the eternal affronts of ill humored
Parliaments, or by his Supreme wisdom contrive some more quiet or safer method
of Elections. I have seen an Oration made by Mecaenas to one of the Popes Pagan
Predecessors. Augustus Caesar; wherein he advised him to assume the Monarchy,
but wisely suggested to him that he should not make his sudden passions and
single will, the Laws and Edicts of his Empire; but to provide a Graver Senate,
that should be his Grand Council in the important affairs of Government, a
Consulting with whom would add Weight and Solemnity to his Imperial Sanctions,
but then he added this Politic caution, that he should never grant the people
that dangerous favor to Elect the Members of this Senate; for then, says he,
your Empire will be exposed to Popular Factions and Tumults; every Election
will ferment the humors of the Populacy, and occasion such Convulsions in the
State, that you will never be secure of any safety at home, or Glory abroad;
and therefore to prevent those fatal mischiefs, it was his Counsel to Caesar,
that he should by the strictest enquiry search in all parts of his Dominions
for men of the greatest Wisdom, Integrity, and Merit, who could not be supposed
to be Friends, either to Tyranny or Anarchy, and by his Imperial Authority to
constitute these his great Council, without any noise or ruffle to his Empire.

You know I am a Member of the Un-rebelling Church of England, and if your
amusing prospects of Futurity can suppose such a Monstrosity in Government, as
a Prince should use his Prerogative to destroy his Peaceable Subjects, yet I
would rather be ruined by the Diviner hand of a Monarch, than be worried by the
baser Tyranny of a Phanatick Common wealth.

Now since you have made Covenants and Associations to Ruin, the Government of
Church and State, we are resolved to unite in the defense of both. It is,
evident enough by your Plots and Petitions that you design another War, and
seeing nothing can be expected from another Triumphant Phanatick Army, but the
utter extirpation of the Monarchy, and all the Loyal, Nobility Clergy, and
Gentry; we do therefore declare that we will speedily surnish our selves with
Arms and Ammunition for us and our dependants, and upon the first notice of a
Rebellion, we will repair to the Royal Standard, resolving to make a short end
of the Controversy, and either to die in the Field, and not to behold the
Second Ruin of Church and State, or else, by a final Conquest, to Purchase to
this Nation an everlasting freedom from Phanatick insolence and disturbance;
and may that hand be held up at the Bar of an High-Court of Justice, that will
not subscribe this Union and Resolution.


FINIS.

