A DIALOGUE between Sophronius and Philobelgus, The Second PART.
Phil. WEll met, Sophronius! Where have you been lurking these ^wo long Years,
and upwards?


Soph. I have been to take care of my Concerns in Vtopia, and (as it happened)
^o transfer my Effects from thence.


Phil. When I last parted with you, I ^emember you raised a Discourse
concerning that Place, which has run in my Head ever since, and made me
extremely desirous to see you again.


Soph. Then I hope you have considered of that Discourse, as I desired you.


Phil. Considered, say you? I think it is high time for us all to consider, if
it be not too late to consider: Things are here at a strange pass, I wish I
could say, not in a desperate condition. But pray what made you leave Vtopia at
this time? I have heard that place highly commended.


Soph. Indeed I have known the time I could have commended it as much as any
Man; the Soil pleasant and fruitful; the People just, hospitable, and
generous; the Courts of Judicature honorable for Justice, and nothing wanting
to make Life comfortable: But now all things are turned topsy turvy, and it is
nothing like the place it was.


Phil. Why? Pray what is the Matter? Sure they can never be so mad in any other
place, as with us.


Soph. How Matters are with you I yet know not; but some years since none there
would have thought such a Change possible. The very Earth seems to mourn; there
is neither Truth nor Honesty amongst the Inhabitants; no Promises or Oaths can
bind them; you go in most danger from your bosom Friend; all Persons are
jealous of each other; and the greatest part with all their Might and Main are
pulling Destruction on their own and all others Heads, and are fond of it; and
(which seems to make the Matter remediless) a shameless Usurper and Foreigner
is made their King, who hates them, and can never be safe but in their Ruin,
or Slavery at least.


Phil. This is bad indeed; but I warrant you think you have mended the matter
with coming over hither.


Soph. I hope so; for certainly a Man cannot find out a worse place than that
is now.


Phil. I will not be your Security for that. I rather fear that by that time
you have been here some while, you will think you have leaped out of the
Fryingpan into the Fire.


Soph. God forbid! But pray, Sir, inform me a little how Matters go with you
here.


Phil. That is needless; for a little Conversation will soon inform you of the
state of our Affairs, better than any Relation can do: But in the mean time let
me advise you to keep a close pair of Chops; not to trust either your Father,
or your Child; look well to your hits, and in a short time you will see Reason
for this Advice, and a great deal more.


Soph. God defend me! What a mad World is this, when a Man knows not where to
go to live safely or honestly! But, good Sir, explain; for I am all on fire to
know what new World I am come into, though it be my own Country.


Phil. No, no; you will hear and see it every day; you may learn it from every
Fool, but beware of Information from a Knave. Besides, the Story you were
telling of Vtopia has been hitherto so like it, that I begin to grow
suspicious, that the Progress of your Tale will prevent me and every body else.


Soph. But you ought to be so civil to a Stranger, as to grant his Request in
the first place.


Phil. I am not uncivil, nor would you be pleased that I should grant it; for
you know it is the Prerogative of Travelers to have all the Talk, and the
Curiosity of others makes them impatient, till they are gratified with the
Stories of their foreign Observations; therefore in short I am resolved I will
have it out of you: But since in your former Discourse you told me much of the
Revolutions in Vtopia, which seemed to you to be as impious and unjust, as they
were strange and wonderful; before you proceed I would entreat you to discover
(what you can) the Springs and Causes of that Revolution.


Soph. Well, since you are resolved, I think it will be most for my Ease to
satisfy you as speedily as I can: But you put a hard task upon me; for the
Cause of such a prodigious turn of Affairs lay deep under Ground; and there are
many which Time has not yet brought to light.


Phil. Do not think I would put such an unconscionable Task upon you, as to
require more than you know, or can with fair probability conjecture.


Soph. Well; since you are become pretty reasonable, take what Account I can
give you thus. Benignus, King of Vtopia, was well beloved by his People,
(except it were by a brood of Republicans, who of late much infest that
Kingdom, and love no Kings,) and indeed he was a Man of admirable Parts, vast
Experience, but given to his Ease, and by all means avoided the Fatigue of
Business, though no Man did it better, nor more dexterously, when he would look
toward it: But he dying suddenly, and without any legitimate Issue, left all
his Dominions to his Brother Constantius. There never were a pair of more
loving Brothers, though of strangely different Tempers; for Constantius as much
gave his mind to Business, as his Brother had done to decline it; a better
husband with the Revenues never sat upon the Throne, a Lover of Justice,
punctual to his Word, ambitious to advance the Honor and Interest of his
Kingdoms, and in short a Prince endowed with all Royal Qualifications, and
seemed born for Government; so that for some time all Persons were as big with
Expectations from him, as from any Person who ever came to the Crown.


Phil. You amaze me: How could such a Prince miscarry?


Soph. One would not think it could be easily; but they have a Saying in
Vtopia, That one Drachin of Colloquintida spoils the whole Pot of Pottage.
There had been in his Father's time the most unnatural Rebellion that ever the
world knew, wherein the best of Kings was barbarously murdered by his own
Subjects, and Constantius, then very young, to preserve his Life was conveyed
into a neighboring Kingdom, where of course, and unavoidably he was instructed
and brought up in the Religion of that Nation, which was irreconcilable with
the Religion established in Vtopia, and indeed hateful to the generality of
all Persons in all the Dominions belonging to it; but being early imbibed, and
having taken root with time, he was as tender of his Conscience, as jealous of
his Honor; and when he came to to the Throne would not change his Religion,
though so hateful to his People.


Phil. What then? So far as I can gather by the circumstances of your Story,
though that was his Misfortune, yet it was his Peoples Fault; and could it seem
reasonable to depose him for his Conscience, and their own Crime?


Soph. I am glad to hear you talk so much like a Christian, whose Principles at
our last Meeting you seemed either to have forgotten, or never well learned:
But though his Religion gave too advantageous an opportunity to Knaves, and
their Instruments, weak Men, to undermine him; yet that alone had never done
it, had not other fatal Circumstances concurred; and therefore I must entreat
your Patience whilst I relate them, till I can bring them to this again.


Phil. I am willing to have Patience; but I must confess I devour your Story
with so much Greediness, that some would call it Impatience.


Soph. Pray contain your self what you can, and I will be as short as I can,
though shorter than the Nature of the Thing will well bear.


Phil. Pray, Sir, go on.


Soph. Well; then you must know that the unfortunate but brave Constantius had
two Wives, the latter at this time bearing her share in his Afflictions, the
other was an Vtopian Subject, and by her he had two Daughters, Astorge and
Placidia; and these being so near of kin to a Crown that could have mated any,
if not all the Princes in that Quarter of the World, had been Matches for the
greatest Princes whatsoever, but that both their Uncle Benignus, and their
Father Constantius, seemed likely enough to have other Children. But whilst
these things were doubtful, by the kindness of their Uncle Benignus they were
both married, Astorge to Philotimus, Prince of Angero, and Placidia to
Gregorio, Prince of Nadia.


Phil. It seems then that Philotimus had the Honor to marry the eldest; pray
what was he?


Soph. Your Question is not impertinent, for on him depends the greatest part
of our Story: He had little to recommend him to that Match, save that he was
the next Relation of the Family; for his Territories, from whence he derived
his Title, were in the Possession of another Prince, his other Possessions were
not very considerable; he was indeed by far the greatest and most powerful
Subject of the Gallimaufrians, and was with-all a Man of boundless Ambition,
barbarous Cruelty, implacable Malice, pernicious Contrivance, and (which you
will say is a Riddle, though the poor Vtopians at this time find it true by
Experience) a Person both insatiably covetous, and prodigiously profuse.


Phil. You do not give the kindest Character of him that ever I heard: But pray
what are those Gallimaufrians, among whom you said he was the most powerful
Subject?


Soph. Truly they are every thing, any thing, whatever is for their advantage.


Phil. Hey day! I am never the wiser for this: Pray give me such a Description
as may at least give me some little understanding of them.


Soph. Why then you must understand, that these Gallimaufrians were Subjects to
the Predecessors of Pauperantius, King of Thinland, and pretending Breach of
Privileges, by that (which some are unwilling to call Rebellion) cast off the
Yoke, abjured their Master, and formed themselves into a popular State; which
is not one entire thing, but several States, or petty Republics, like
Sampson's Foxes tied Tail to Tail, and firmly united by Necessity and Iniquity.


Phil. And odd sort of Government; and yet methinks it looks like that of a
People cross the Water, for whom not long since I had no small kindness, and
can scarce forget it yet.


Soph. It may be so; but to proceed: These Gallimaufrians in all their
Distresses were relieved and upheld by the inconsiderate Vtopians, till in the
end by Industry and Knavery they arrived to that height as to become their
Competitors, and are now in a manner their Masters. Without Trade the Vtopians
cannot live well, but the Gallimaufrians without it cannot live at all; and the
Vtopians having Advantages enough (if they had either Wit or Courage to use
them) to keep them under, the Gallimaufrians, who are sufficiently sensible of
it, are for that very reason, both by Interest and Inclination, their eternal
Enemies, and as well in Peace as War, are ever laboring to supplant them; for
nothing binds them but their Interest. Religions they have of all sorts among
them; but it is believed they are of none; for it is never suffered to stand in
the way of their Profit: And yet they have this Advantage; let them do what
Mischief they will, you can never fasten it on the whole Herd, many of which
will pretend either Ignorance or Opposition to it, though they will certainly
take the benefit of it: But as for particular sets of Rogues among them, they
will commonly shuffle it to and fro, till they have lost it.


Phil. Certainly, Sophronius, you are romancing; for I cannot think there are
such a People on Earth, at least they deserve not: But pray pass to something
else, I desire to hear no more of them.


Soph. You must not hear my Story then; but to humor your queamish Stomach at
present, I Will leave them a while, and return to Philotimus, who having (as I
told you) married Astorge, he was continually buoyed up by Benignus and
Constantius, and by the help of his own Arts, added to their Favor and
Assistence, he soon arrived to that Interest and Power amongst the
Gallimaufrians, as to procure two of greatest Eminency among them, of whom he
was jealous, to be torn in pieces, in a more barbarous manner than can well be
related; after which, notwithstanding his Protestations and Oaths to the
contrary, he had, in a manner, swallowed up their Freedom, and become their
Master: But his Ambition not stopping there, he at the same time played Tricks
with Benignus and Constantius, (who too much favored him,) by cherishing
Factions in Vtopia, and encouraging ill and false Representations of his Uncle
and Father-in-law among the Subjects of that Kingdom, which he did hope in time
might work those wicked Ends he has since obtained.


Phil. You tell a strange and wonderful Story; but could not People see through
such palpable ill Artifices?


Soph. Some few did, and some could not; but none so blind as they that would
not see: For such Reports seeming to make for the Designs of Discontents and
Republicans, they against their own Consciences vouched them, and industriously
spread them: But all this prevailed little, till the fatal Scene of Affairs
opened, wherein all things concurred to effect the Ruin of the unfortunate
Constantius.


Phil. Oh! pray let me know what that could be, and be as short as you can; for
I am variously* affected with your Story, greedy to hear it, and grieved at the
Villainy of it.


Soph. I am afraid I shall seem tedious, though I lose the greatest part of
the Story. To use then all possible brevity, know that Constantius coming to
the Crown with all Advantages imaginable, another Blessing befell him, which
might have crowned all the rest, had a right Use been made of it; his Queen
Tolerantia was delivered of a Son, the only thing the Vtopians could have
wished to have made them happy; for thereby they were not only secured from
the Reign of Foreigners, who neither understood their Constitutions, nor could
have that kindness for them as a natural born Prince of their own; but his
Education being granted to them, their Religion (which they have in a manner
lost for fear of losing it) would have been secured, and the Interest both of
Prince and People would have been the same. This Philotimus knew, and seemed to
carry all fair, whilst his Blood boiled within him; and never was Tiger robbed
of her Whelps in a more furious Rage, than he to see himself thus cut off from
the hopes of a Crown, which he had already devoured in his Thoughts: And now
underhand he sets all his Pioniers at work to undermine his Father and Brother,
when on a sudden Circumstances on all hands happened to farther his Designs,
even beyond his hopes: For about that time Magnanimus, K. of Slavandria, a
Prince of large Dominions, vast Treasure and Revenues, undaunted Courage,
strong Judgment, and indefatigable Industry, at once makes War both upon
Perplexus, Emperor of Regomania, and Pauperantius, K. of Thinland, and several
other petty Princes, whom I will not trouble you to name.


Phil. But how affects this Constantius?


Soph. Have patience, and you shall presently perceive it. Almost all the
neighboring Princes enter into a Confederacy to oppose Magnanimus, and break
his formidable Power and Strength; and to this End they had all cast their Eyes
upon Constantius, as the only Prince who was able to turn the Balance, and put
a stop to the Proceedings of that might* Monarch; nor did they guess amiss.


Phil. Well; and would he not undertake this?


Soph. No; and he was much in the right of it.


Phil. How so?


Soph. Why, he was in perfect Peace with all his Neighbors; and it seemed
unjust to him to make a breach upon Magnanimus, who not only gave him no Cause,
but courted his Friendship. He had also other strong Inducements; for he
thought it imprudent unnecessarily to engage in a War, wherein he might hazard
much, but could gain little: Besides, by preserving a Neutrality, the greatest
part of the Trade of the World must of course have fallen into Vtopia, which
would have prodigiously enriched his Kingdoms and People, and much increased
his own Revenues; and by this means being plentifully stored with Men, Money,
Shipping, and Ammunition, and all things requisite for War, in case Magnanimus
had gone on too successfully, he could with more Honor and Advantage have put a
stop to his Proceedings, when Necessity seemed to require it.


Phil. I cannot see but that this was wisely enough projected.


Soph. Truly I think so too; but there were other Failures spoiled all: For the
confederated Princes seeing they should be disappointed of his Assistance, that
they might by any means gain Vtopia to their side, conspire with the
discontented Philotimus to raise him to the Throne, and depose his Father. And
it is there confidently reported, that even the Mufti of Lavinia, whose
Religion Constantius had espoused to the extreme Distaste of his Subjects, was
at the bottom of this Plot against him.


Phil. This seems to be a most hellish Design; but how could they effect it?


Soph. Why, truly neither their Tricks nor their Force had been able to move
him, had not he himself unfortunately made the Work too easy, by losing the
Hearts of his Subjects, which was thus: He manifested a strong Zeal for the
Muftaean Religion, to which his Subjects were bitter Enemies, upon which
account they grew extremely jealous of his Resolution; and to help this
forward, whereas his Brother toward the latter end of his Reign had overcome
great Difficulties, and left the Kingdom in a kindly Disposal toward an entire
Uniting, both in Religion and Interest, Constantius unhappily unravels all, and
lets the whole Herd loose, without any Order or Keepers, who in the end to
requite his kindness turn upon himself; which shows how dangerous a thing it
is, either quieta movere, or to lay the Reins on their Necks, who can neither
govern themselves, nor are willing to be governed by others. But it was not the
least Evil that befell him, that the Escopaean Party, who had all along been
the most faithful Subjects to him, and all his Predecessors, and whose
Religion was established by the Laws of Vtopia, were utterly averse to these
Proceedings: But to bring them to his Bow, he imprisons several of the Escops
themselves; and it was wonderful to see how Crowds of People, who at other
times could not afford them a good Word, were ready to adore them as petty
gods, when going to Prison; so ready were that giddy People to take all
advantages to reproach their Sovereign: And still to increase the Discontents
he displaced the ablest Ministers of State, and many considerable Officers in
the Army, who would not comply with his Desires, and entertained others that
were nothing acceptable to his Subjects. And though there were many good and
able Men about him, yet he was chiefly led by them whom he favored for their
Religion, who for the greatest part were Persons that had neither Interest nor
Honesty, neither understood the state of the Kingdom, nor had Brains to manage
it, but were wholly bent to compass their own Ends, though to the manifest
hazard of his and their own utter Ruin.


Phil. Foolish and ungrateful Wretches! But do you think that he designed to
have established their way.


Soph. No. Beside, I think it impossible for him to have done it; and so it
appeared, the Point being plainly gained against them, even while he sat on the
Throne. Some particular Favor I am apt to think he designed those of his own
Way, but his real Design I believe was Liberty to all; partly in Tenderness,
partly in hope of Inviting in all sorts of Persons to increase Trade: But he
took his Aim amiss; for the generality of the People looking on it as a Design
to introduce Muftaeanism* and being continually instigated by Persons engaged
in the Plot, who perpetually affrighted them with most dreadful
Representations of it, though he at last did all he could to undeceive them,
yet they would never believe him; which was the principal thing that cost him
his Crown, and had like to have cost him his Life.


Phil. A doleful Story! But were all Men affrighted, both out of their Honesty
and Understanding? Did the Escopaeans* who you say had been always loyal,
forsake him?


Soph. No. Many honest Men stood in a Maze, and utterly at a loss; and by
reason of a Jealousy or Defection in all parts, the Revolution coming on like
a Whirlwind, those who were most desirous, were not able to afford him any
considerable Assistence: As for the Escopaeans, those who were truly such, were
firmly loyal to him, and still continue so, and many of them have lost their
Estates on that account; and when I lately left Vtopia, they were the only
harassed and persecuted People there, even the hated Muftaeans themselves being
infinitely better used. But to be plain with you, the former Troubles in Vtopia
had spawned a mongrel Brood of Shifters, which some called Latitudinarians; a
sort of Men of whom you would think that Butter would not melt in their Mouths,
and yet Cheese will not choke them; these crowded in among the Escopaeans, when
restored, and having possessed themselves of Places of Trust, and the best
Preferments, they kept a watchful Eye over all the loyal Escopaeans, to keep
them at an under; and those that were above them they deluded by their
dissembling Arts, till by letting in only Men of their own Way, and debauching
the Understandings of others, they had in a manner corrupted the whole Vtopian
Church; and these and their whole Gang, even when they might have stemmed the
Tide, in the plain field forsook their King, and all the loyal Escopaean
Principles, and presently declared for the Worship of the rising Sun; and now
having got all into their hands, they impudently in their Pulpits preach away
God's Commandments, and bespatter and persecute every thing that is good or
honest.


Phil. Shameless Villains! May divine Vengeance overtake them. But yet you do
not tell me the Fall of that unfortunate Prince.


Soph. I am just now come to that dismal Scene, which would make even an Heart
of Stone to ache, that had any Remains of Honesty or Pity in it. Whilst the
Nation through the Miscarriages of some, and the Wickedness of others, was thus
working into the highest Ferment, so that nothing moderate could be expected,
Philotimus was not idle, but plied his opportunity with all advantage, and with
him combine vast numbers even of the most considerable Persons in the Kingdom,
who were either enraged with Discontents and Disappointments, or possessed with
Jealousies and Fears; so that Philotimus was got into the very Councils of
Constantius: The most powerful Officers of his own Army (than which none were
ever paid better, nor more kindly used,) were in the Plot against him; and
those whom he had raised from nothing to great Dignities, those whom he took to
be his fastest Friends, those who protested, promised, vowed, and made show of
the greatest Fidelity to him, were at that very time contriving and impatient
to betray him. As soon as things were brought to this pass, Philotimus takes
the Nick of Time, and being assisted by the faithless Gallimaufrians with a
large Fleet, and some Landforces on Board, sets sail for Vtopia.


Phil. But had Constantius no Fleet to oppose them.


Soph. Yes, a sufficient one to have made the young Spark dearly repent his
Attempt, if the Men had behaved themselves like true Vtopians; but partly by
Miscarriage, partly by a Conspiracy of the Officers against the Admiral (who
was honest) to throw him overboard if he offered to sight, nothing was done;
so that Philotimus safely landed in the occidental parts of Vtopia, but with
such a par^el or Tatterdemallions, such Foot as were sitter to make Scare-crows
for Gardiners, than Soldiers for a Prince; and such Horse as were not much
better than Vtopian Asses; so that Constantius's own Guard were able to have
trampled them to death, without ever drawing Sword; and the Inhabitants of any
Comt ( i.e. a division much answerable to your Shires) in Vtopia might have
knocked them o'th Head with Stones.


Phil. God forgive me! You represent this Philotimus as a kind of a foolhardy
Fellow: What! Had not Constantius enough to quell these?


Soph. Yes; and those who would have done it presently, if he could have known
honest Men and Knaves asunder, and not trusted most to the most faithless. But
you mistake the Matter as I am apt to think, that as things then were, and
Matters were then managed, if he had not brought over with him an hundred Men,
it had been the same thing; for with the first opportunity most of the great
Officers of Constantius's Army go over to Philotimus, and carry with them as
good Forces as any the World had, till being in a manner quite forsaken, he was
forced to retire to his Metropolitical City; but finding there no Succor, he
first sent away his Queen and the young Prince, and after a small time, being
thoroughly assured by his own and his Ambassadour's ill Usage, and the rough
Treatment of all his Friends, that no less than the Crown would satisfy his
good Son-in-law, notwithstanding all his false Protestations and Declarations
to the contrary, he endeavored to convey himself away, as being sensible, that
they would not long endure him to live to their Reproach, whom they had
deprived of all things but Life.


Phil. He that usurps a King's Throne, is obliged to take away his Life to
secure his own, which can never be safe whilst the lawful Prince survives, to
whom some time or other the Hearts of the Subjects most certainly return; But
is it possible that he got out of their hands?


Soph. He did at last, but after so many Difficulties, Dangers, and ill Usage,
that I look upon his Escape as little less than miraculous, and a good Presage
of his Return.


Phil. Pray how was it?


Soph. In short thus: His first Attempt was frustrated, he being taken at Sea
by his own Subjects, and brought back a Prisoner on shore to a Port called
Febrivill, where the rude Seamen were his Guards, puffing stinking Tobacco in
his Face, (which he extremely hated.) And the coming in of the Gentry did not
much mend the Matter, for they rather encouraged than checked their
Incivilities, especially two of the Equestrian Order, Bovinian and Benedict;
the one a proud, stately, political Coxcomb, who overruled and ordered all
things; the other a busy active Tool, made use of to abuse the King in all
things; and whilst these gave him up to his Enemies, and suffered not his
Friends to come at him, it wanted but little that his Brains were not knocked
out: But being relieved out the hands of these Rascallionee, he returned to his
Metropolis, where being received with all joy and kindness imaginable, it so
allarmed Philotimus, that he forbad his stay there; so retiring to a small
City, under a Guard of Gallimaufrians, before a cleanly Contrivance to take
away his Life could be invented, by the help of two Friends he made a very
dangerous and yet fortunate Escape into the Country of Magnanimus, where he,
his Queen, and his Son were kindly received; and there they were when I came
from Vtopia. One thing there is which ought not to be forgotten; under all
these Troubles, and barbarous Indignities, such was the admirable Patience and
Evenness of Temper of the forsaken Constantius, that you cannot believe it,
unless your Eyes had seen and your Ears heard it.


Phil. Who would much value any thing in this World, when he sees so great a
Prince so quickly and easily reduced to Nothing?


Soph. I forgot to tell you the horrid palpable Lies, which helped forward this
great turn of Affairs; and indeed I am ashamed to repeat them: As how the young
Prince was confidently reported (notwithstanding never any Child's Birth was
more clearly proved) to be an Impostor, and that Philotimus had brought the
true Mother along with him; how the People were allarmed in all parts of the
Land at once, that the Ieronians were coming to cut their Throats, who were a
handful of Men in dread of their Lives, and not able to defend them; how
Rumors prevailed, that the Muftaean Religion was to be introduced by Fire,
Faggot, and barbarous Massacres, and a thousand other Stories, the Impossibility
of which were enough to convince any understanding Man of their Falsehood, but
that the Vtopians under such Ferments are a People who greedily swallow the
most fulsome palpable Lies that can be invented.


Phil. Well; now I suppose that Philotimus has gained his Ends.


Soph. Not so easily as you imagine; for there were three before him, who by
the Constitutions of Vtopia (though ( Constantius had been slain) were to
succeed in their turns, of whom one was his own Wise Astorge, though not the
first; when this was debated, the Friends of Constantius began a little to hope
and work; but finding it impossible at that time to do any thing for him
directly, they moved for a Regency, which took with many, as most plausible and
moderate course: Now though I think a Regency is allowed by the Laws of Vtopia,
only in case of some natural Incapacity, as Infancy, Lunacy, Dotage, etc. yet
their Design was well and wisely laid in such an ungovernable Confusion; for
their Aim was thereby partly to keep up the Name and Authority of Constantius,
and shackle Philotimus, by making him accountable; partly that they might gain
time to let the Ferment settle, and the People return to their Wits, not
doubting but that then an useless and chargeable Regency would soon be laid
aside; so by this means they hoped both to restore their King, and also to
preserve their Constitutions; but Philotimus, either by the help of those about
him, or by his own malicious Sagaciousness, smelt out the honest Plot, and with
Indignation rejected the Offer: So when nothing else would serve his turn, the
Rabble growing impatient; and the Endeavors of all honest Men baffled, Astorge
for fashion sake was named with him, and both (forsooth) triumphantly crowned
King and Queen, contrary to all the known Constitutions of the Kingdom; but the
Invalidity and Nullity of such Proceedings you and I discoursed at our last
Meeting, and the Reasons then given are every whit as firm for the Vtopian
Constitution, as our own; and therefore I shall not enter again upon that
Discourse.


Phil. But could his Daughter be easily brought to it, not only to consent to
the driving away her Father but in Person to enter upon his Throne?


Soph. Those are week Arguments indeed, which will not persuade an ill Person
to accept a Crown, though none of his own. There were some that dreamed better
things of her, but she was so far from expressing any Duty to her Father,
(though perhaps it was in her power to have recalled and restored him,) that
she kept and managed the Kingdom of Vtopia, whilst Philotimus drove him out of
another; for you must know, that the King of Vtopia has two other Crowns, as
being also King of Caledonia and Fernia. Soon after that Philotimus had trickt
him out of Vtopia, the Hyperephanians betrayed Caledonia, upon Promise that
their Dagon, the Kuriack Government, (as they call it,) should be settled. But
still one Kingdom was left to Constantius, to which he repaired; but Philotimus
had the Impudence to pretend that to be an Appurtenance to his other Booty, and
that having robbed him of the principal Kingdom, he ought to give up the other
as an Appendix to it; and accordingly in good earnest sent an Army against him,
and afterward went himself; and the Ieronians being poor, and for some Ages
being accustomed to the Yoke of the Vtopians, they did not well quit
themselves; and so partly by Arms, partly by Money, were too soon reduced, and
the just Constantius dispossessed of all.


Phil. Well; but pray what were the Effects of this brave Feat? Did the
Vtopians much mend themselves; or did the Confederated Princes take Magnanimus
a Pin lower?


Soph. It did give Magnanimus some Trouble; but Vtopia is not able to do that
under a green Usurper, which it can do under a lawful and settled King. But
all those Difficulties Magnanimus broke through, got ground on them all, and is
now arrived to that Strength, that when I left Vtopia, the People there began
to talk, that if the combined Princes did not do something very considerable
against the next Summer, he would either constrain Constantius's Subjects to
recall him home, or restore him whether they would or not.


Phil. Why, by this I guess, that the Vtopians have been no great Gainers by
the Bargain.


Soph. Gainers, say you? Infinite Losers! For during the Reign of Constantius
they had perhaps but too much Liberty, no Taxes, great Trade, and a fair
prospect of greater; both King and People were rich, and had not their own
Wickednesses and Jealousies drawn Mischief upon them, they were then perhaps
the most flourishing Kingdom in the World: but now it is quite contrary, scarce
less than forty thousand of those who so basely rebelled against Constantius,
squirted out their Lives in Iernia; great Sicknesses fell into their Naval
Forces, and it is said, many were little better than starved for want of
Provisions: Those who were sent to aid the combined Princes were ill paid,
worse used, and no small part of them either languished away their Lives, or
were slain by the Enemy; so that not less than the Lives of a 100000 Men have
been sacrificed in this super-brave Adventure.


Phil. They have made a sine Market of it.


Soph. Nay, worse yet; They are harassed with all sorts of Taxes, and so heavy
as was never under any Prince's Reign; but which is worst of all, the Money is
not raised for their own Defense, nor spent in their own Country, but sent
abroad, whence it never comes back again; so that if this Trade hold, they in
the end must be drained dry, and there is some hopes they may live to see
Leathern Money again. As for that little Money that is left, it is so clipped and
cropped, that it has lost above one third of its Value; and yet after all this
no body is paid; and it is very pleasant to see how this new Prince runs into
the Tradesmens Debts for all Commodities, and makes the Soldiers and Seamen
serve him without Pay: And though by this you would think he had no occasion
for Money, yet he borrows of all their rich Fools he can find, and by that
means he has raised vast Sums of Money, which they are to be repaid at
Latter-Lammas.


Phil. If these be the Blessings of Rebellion, they alone (one would think)
should be enough to make Men out of love with it.


Soph. Hold, good Sir, not too fast; you have not half their Blessings yet,
which are so great, and so many, that I am not able to reckon them; but that I
may not be too troublesome, I will only give you a taste of some few more, and
so leave you. Trade, without which Vtopia cannot well subsist, is in a manner
lost, the greatest part of which is engrossed by their mortal Enemies the
Galimaufrians, who abuse them at their own Doors; and indeed they are become
the Scorn and Reproach of all Nations: And it is not their least disadvantage,
that in this Revolution they have not lost fewer than forty Ships of War, which
were enough to make a Navy Royal for some other Kingdoms; and then for Merchant
Ships, they have either perished, or been taken without number; nor does a Week
pass, wherein there is not news of some great Loss or other. And whilst all
things thus seem to conspire their Ruin, Philotimus plays the Devil and all
among them, not only hanging, imprisoning, and fining at pleasure, but making
them swear and forswear, as if he were resolved not to leave one honest Man
among them; and this they think the only way to make them God's Favorites, by
which you may perceive with how great Reason one of his bold Levites, just as I
left Vtopia, styled him, Their Deliverer from Slavery both of Soul and Body.


Phil. Heavens bless me! Were ever Men arrived to that height of Wickedness, as
to outface God, and make him the Patron of unheard of Villainies? Though these
People are so far remote, that they are scarce known to us but by name, yet I
cannot but comiserate their woeful condition: But is it possible that such a
Complication of Miseries, and evident prospect of Ruin, should not make them
consider, and think of returning to their Duty, if it were but for their bare
Interest's sake?


Soph. Not too much of that, I pray: For Rebellion in this is but too much like
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, that Men rarely or never repent of it; if you
should offer to dispute the Case, and desire them to consider, all you get is
some such return as this; one cries, a Curse on all Consideration, it is enough
to make a Man mad; over Shoes, over Boots; I am in, and must go thorough.
Another cries, What should I consider for? I don't care to trouble my self; I
cannot help Matters; if I may be as I am, I do not hope to be better.


Phil. Though you represent their Condition as hopeless, yet by what you say,
that People seem not to be altogether insensible that they have done amiss; for
refusing to consider is a tacit Confession of Guilt; For why should they refuse
to consider, but that they are afraid to awaken their Consciences, which they
are aware is ready to fly in their Faces, as soon as ever they look back upon
their Actions? But such a Temper is an Argument of a lost People. God himself
intimates his Peoples Condition as desperate, when he complains, that they
would not consider; and indeed it is impossible, that ever Men should return
and repent, if they will not consider of the evil of their Ways; and
consequently such must inevitably perish.


Soph. I am afraid their Ruin is nigh; for quos Deus vult perdere dementat
prius.


Phil. But pray what do you think may be the Reason, that a People should see
themselves in such evil Case, and yet not lay it to heart?


Soph. Truly I think the greatest Reason to be their Aversion to the Religion
of Constantius, and their Fears that he will impose it on them, and settle it
there, if he should return.


Phil. But do you think that he would do so?


Soph. I do not think that he either will or can; for if they themselves call
him home, there can be no fear of it: Nay, they would gain this farther
Advantage, that the Prince his Son would be bred up in the Religion of the
Country; which would scure them for the future, and which is a thing he has
offered. All the danger is, if upon their obstinacy he should return by Force;
but even them I think he could not do it: For besides that the People are so
naturally averse to that Religion, that they would never receive it, the
Endeavors to enforce it would render them so desperate, that he could never be
safe: To plant that Religion there thoroughly, would cost more Blood than was
spilt in all the heathen Persecution; and I cannot imagine, that a Prince
should desire to reign in a Wilderness, and destitute of Subjects. Beside, this
is least imaginable as to him of all others, whose peculiar Ambition seemed
always to have been to have enriched his Subjects, and make his Kingdoms strong
and flourishing.


Phil. Well; I thank you for this Account. I wish they may not stand in their
own Light, but repent before it is too late: I confess I had once a kindness
for such kind of ways, but your Discourse has thoroughly cured me.


Soph. Nay, pray stay: Now I am come home, did not you promise me to acquaint
me with the state of our own Country?


Phil. I think not; but this I will tell you, I have heard Men philosophically
prate of a Sympathy in Animals, Vegetables, and even the most insensible
inanimate Creatures; and though I thought my self not much wise for their
Discourse, yet I did believe there was such a Thing; but now I begin to suspect
there is more, even a Sympathy between Countries and Kingdoms.


Soph. What makes you talk at this rate?


Phil. A little time will expound the Riddle; by that you have conversed some
time here, you will better understand me; but what if at our next Meeting you
should tell me, that Hypocrates's Twins were not more like each other, nor more
sympathizing in all things than are your own Country and Vtopia.


Soph. God forbid! I would not again be in such a Bedlam as Vtopia, for all the
World.


Phil. I wish you may find your own home any better; but my Business calls me
away, and that must be left to your Experience. Farewell.


Soph. Beshrew your Heart for me; your cautious Suggestion has put me into a
Fright; but my Occasions also want me. Adieu till we meet again.


LONDON, Printed in the Year, M.DC.XCII.


