Imprimatur, Liber cui Titulus, The Salvation of the Protestants Asserted and
Defended, etc.

Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D. Whihelmo Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris Domest.
October. 1. 1688.
THE SALVATION OF PROTESTANTS Asserted and Defended, In Opposition to the RASH
and UNCHARITABLE SENTENCE OF THEIR Eternal Damnation Pronounced against them by
the ROMISH CHURCH.

By J. H. Dalhusius, Inspector of the Churches, in the County of Weeden, upon
the Rhine, etc.

Newly done into English.

LONDON: Printed for James Adamson, at the Angel and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.

THE PREFACE.
Health to the Reader from the Fountain of Health.
Courteous Reader,
IT is sit thou should in the first place be acquainted with the Occasion of
the following Discourse; which was this: From Heddesdorff, where my sacred
Calling gave me an Abode for almost five years together, lies distant, about an
hours Riding, that celebrated Abbey in Rommersdorff, belonging to the Friars
called Predemonstrators, who affirm to be Founder of their order, in the Year
1120, one Norbert, first a Canon in the Church of St. Victor of Santen, near
the City of Cleve, which, as they say, laid the first Foundations of Santen;
afterward Chaplain to Lotharius of Saxony; and lastly, by the Authority of
this Emperor Primate of Germany, that is to say, Archbishop of Magdeburgh,
according to the Verses,

Anno milleno centeno bis quoque deno,
Sub Patre Norberto fundatur Candidus Ordo.
They are called Praemonstratenses, or Predemonstrators (if we may believe the
Story) because the Place for the first building of the Abbey, was showed
beforehand to Norbert, as he was at his Prayers. And they wear a white Habit,
for that the Mother of God brought him a Habit of that color, as the
Norbertines not long since vaunted, thus bespeaking their Founder;

Cruce locus Praemonstratus
ubi struas Regiam.
Sancta tibi Virgo Matter
vestem praebet niveam.
Sanctus Augustinus Pater
auro praescribit regulam.
Where thy Palace thou should build,
the Cross the Place does show;
The Holy Virgin Mother brings
thy Habit white as Snow.
Holy Austin does unfold
thy Order's Rule in Gold.
The foresaid Norbert held the Sea of Magdeburgh seven Years and ten Months. He
died in the Year of Christ 1134,upon St. Peter and Paul the Apostles day; and
was buried in the Church of the Blessed Virgin; where, in the Year 1625, by the
Command of the Emperor Ferdinand II, his Stone Sepulcher was broken open, and
his Relics thence translated in great Pomp to Prague. And so dead Norbert was
made the living Saint and Patron of Bohemia.

Now in regard the Successors of this Norbert, among which are the Abbots of
Rommersdorff, frequently visit our Court of Weeden, and this Village of
Heddesdorff, either to look after their Farms and Rents, or as any other
Occasions draw them; and by that means were often wont to be in my Company, I
thought it not only Decent, but most Christianlike, at all times and in all
places to show them all the Civility and honest Friendship I could; and from
thence forward hitherto so continued to do, as faras lay in my Power. They, on
the other side, observing this, made reciprocal Returns of Bounty, Respect and
Love; as often as I went to visit them.

Confiding therefore in this mutual Amity and Familiarity, I presumed, upon the
last of December, to send to the present Right Reverend Lord Abbot Charles
Wurstius, my kindest Wishes of Prosperity for the ensuing Year. Nevertheless,
to this Civility of mine, the next morning, such was the rudeness and barbarity
of his Prior, that for Answer he sent me the subsequent Letter, the Contents of
which are verbatim as follows.

The Inscription.
To the Reverend and Learned Mr. John Herman Dalhusius, for the time Curate in
Heddesdorf, and Inspector of the County of Weeden, his much respected Friend.
Heddesdorff. Rommersdorff. Reverend and much respected Mr. Inspector,
BY the Command of my Lord Abbot, now upon business abroad, against the
approaching New Year, according to your Calender, I pray for, and heartily wish
you a good Beginning, Progress, and a fortunate Couclusion of it. Moreover I
have sent you, according to your desire, Oats for your Money, together with
your Treatise imparted. to us against the Anabaptistical Heresy (sufficiently
and clearly formerly refuted and condemned by the Roman Catholic Church.) We
have perused it, and are pleased with your Zeal, but we should have liked it
much better, if after you had implored the Grace of the Holy Ghost, the only
Enlightner of obdurate Hearts, you had bin first a Convert to the Lord God, by
abjuring the Errors of your Faith, and returning to the Ship, and (which is the
Roman Catholic and only saving Church) St. Peter's Net; out of which, by reason
of the vast multitude of the Fish, the Authors and first Founders of the
Anabaptistical and other Errors, fell down, according to the Catholic Belief,
into the profoundest Sea of Hell; of whom the Ringleader was Luther: Whose
success, I grieve to speak it, so fatal to hundreds of thousands of Souls,
encouraging Melancthon, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Menno, Calvin, and several
others, to the End they might raise to themselves a great Name in the World,
and serve their Carnal Desires, coined and forged several other Opinions
repugnant to Truth, nevertheless condemned by the Roman Catholic Church,
according to the Custom observed from the very beginning of it, as the Authors
of them were Excommunicated. I could wish your Reverence would more studiously
peruse the Catholic Writers with sounder Judgment, that you would foresee your
last End, and while you live, consult the Good of your own Soul, lest after you
have run the race of this Mortal Life, in Company with those sublime Doctors,
as you style them in your Treatise against the Anabaptists, you be not only
deprived of Eternal Felicity, but burn in the Infernal Everlasting Fire.

This wholesome Admonition, more precious then Gold and all the Kingdoms of the
World, patiently and kindly accept instead of a NEW-YEARS-GIFT, and live
eternally the Favourer of him, who is thy Brother most desirous of thy
Salvation,

Prior for the time.

John Gaspar Baldem,


Truly I was amazed at the sight of such a merciless Monster, that instead of
the Roses of desired Friendship, cast before me Baskets of Thorny Briars; and
rejecting the Salvation of Christ, Pax Vobis, denounced a Laborious War against
me, yet Glorious for the Truth of the Catholic Evangelical Faith. For now, as
the Case stood, my Pen was to be drawn in defense of That, and to wipe off
pretended Stains. Wherefore I returned an Answer, though overwhelmed with the
Duties of my Calling during the several Holy Days at that time of the Year; and
within the space of a few days, I finished the following Apology for the
SALVATION of CHRISTIAN PROTESTANTS, and took care to have it conveyed to the
Lord Abbot of Rommersdorff, by means of this short Epistle.


Most Reverend, Famous and Learned Lord Abbot,
YOur Reverend Mr. Prior, in the late absence of your Lordship, sent me a sharp
Letter full of thundrings of Eternal Damnation against me and all those, who
forsaking your Church, embrace ours. Truly I trembled at so rash a Judgment of
a prudent Man.

But in regard it is lawful at all times and in all places to repel Force by
Force, to resist an unjust Aggressor, and to Answer modestly to one that
proposes a hard Question. Nay, since it is our Duty to convince Gainsayers,
Tit. 1. 9. I could not think it a piece of Injustice to oppose the foresaid Mr.
Prior, with the Treatise annexed, that he may be certainly assured, that he has
judged of our Differences, as a Blind Man does of Colors, or as the Shoemaker
did of the Picture drawn by Apelles. All that I beg of your Reverend Worship is
this, That you will be pleased so to order the Matter, that this necessary
Answer may be delivered to his hands; by which he may understand, that it is
the part of a Fool, to Triumph before the Victory; and of one that is far from
a Christian, to Judge so prepost'rously of the Salvation of his Neighbor. I had
Answered sooner, had I not bin hindered by my public Duties, and Transcribing a
Copy of this Original Writing, which I intend shall shortly wear a German
Cloak, to the end that all People may understand it. Farewell, and continue your
Favor to,

The most faithful Observer of your Lordship in all good Offices, J. H.
Dalhusius.


In the mean time, the Lord Abbot having Intelligence of my Design, that he
might remove the impending Burd'n from his Prior, the strength of whose
Shoulders he did not well understand, was at first unwilling to receive this
Answer of mine, till tired with the Importunity of the Messenger, he took it
and retired into the next Room: Where he did not keep it long, but by his
Servant sent it me back the same day, with these words upon the outside Paper;

BY reason of Strangers that are with me, and other necessary Occasions, I have
not leisure to Answer the Enclosed as it ought to be; be pleased therefore to
receive back again what you have thought good to write, but what is not
convenient for us to read. So may the Reverend Inspector live to the years of
Nestor.

Your Brother, Charles, Abbot of Rommersdorff.


But the Lord Abbot was not so fearful to keep the Answer, as an Abbot of the
same Order, of the neighboring Abbey of Seinen, Gulichius, was daring to
accept it with a cheerful Mind, and willing Hand, after I had addressed him in
the following short Oration, writing after this manner:

Most Reverend, most Famous, and most Learned Lord Abbot, my most esteemed
Favourer and Friend.
TOward the beginning of the Year, I found my self involved in new Contentions,
of which the Author and Beginning is the Worshipful Prior in Rommersdorff,
whose Name is John Casper Baldem, who in Answer to a Writing, which ought to
have bin instead of a pleasing New-Years-Gift, gave me to understand, That my
self more especially, and all those whom you unjustly call Vncatholic, are
unavoidably subjected to Eternal Damnation. It was but just therefore that I
should Answer him, according to the Matter which such a rash Judgment required.
Presently I did that which is just; and this day took care that the Original
Writing, at my urgent Request, might be delivered to the Prior himself by the
Lord Prelate Charles Wirtzius, in hopes the Lord Abbot, as my singular Friend,
would have bin so favorable and sincere, as to have delivered him the Original
Copy which I sent. But Right Reverend Abbot, seeing the Consideration of your
most Exquisite Learning, and the Justice of your Friendship contracted four
years since, may seem to demand so much, that I should inform you, at least by
a Copy, of your business in some measure importing the Honor of your Order;
and that you should not remain Ignorant, according to the Greek Proverb in
Homer, (...), what Good or Ill is done within our Houses, I thought it
necessary to impart to you the Nature of our Quarrel. In the mean time, by the
love of Jesus Christ I conjure you, that laying aside inveterate Prejudices,
you would peruse this present Treatise; and afterward with an Answer first to
be communicated to the Brothers in Rommersdorff, to oblige the longing
Expectations of him, who am, was, and will be to the end of my Life,

Heddesdorff, Jan. 14. 1681. The sincere Observer of Your Worship, in all good
Offices,

Here we stopped, most Worthy Reader, proceeding no farther; for the Reverend
Abbot of Seinen, Gulichius, has hitherto left me nothing but the desire of a
future Answer.

But to the end the Church of the Protestants, so often, nay daily, after the
manner of Baldem, in the Desks and Pulpits of the Monks, abandoned to the
Infernal Devils, may be furnished with farther Arms against such a Customary
Damnation; and that the Innocence and Eternal Salvation of it may be more and
more asserted and established with Triumphant Arguments and Reasons, we thought
it worth our while to publish this Orthodox Answer, wrested and extorted from
us by the Force of a Fire-breathing Quill, and drawn out of the dark shades of
my Study.

I will not here meddle with any Man, besides the Prior my Antagonist, who
because he has spoken what he pleased, shall hear perhaps what he will not like
so well. I shall only speak of Errors, I shall spare Persons, and, which is the
chiefest thing of all, I shall examine and correct all things by the Rule of
Christian Charity, and Invincible Truth. In the mean time, Reader, make use of
this necessary Answer, to the Advancement of God's Glory, the Establishment of
thy own Faih, and the Increase of the true Catholic Church.

May it please the God of Peace to heal these Divisions, that so Christians
being recal'd to Truth and Charity, may once more constitute one Sheepfold
under one Shepherd Christ, Not Antichrist. Amen.

To the Right Reverend the BISHOPS, The Reverend and Learned PASTORS, And, To
All and Singular the MEMBERS Of the Reformed English Church; The AUTHOR wishes
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, The Love of God the Father, And the
Fellowship of the Holy Ghost.
Most Honored Lords, and Dearly Beloved Brethren in Christ,
IN like manner as the Jews of old, when they past their little Children
through the Fire in Honor of Moloch, that they might not be moved with their
pitiful Outcries and Lamentations, endeavored to deafen and silence those
doleful and ruthful Moans and Shrieks of the distressed Infants with variety of
Sounds and Noises loud and shrill; such are the labors of the Followers of the
Church of Rome, to leave no Stone unturned, to stop the Mouths of the Detectors
of their False Doctrins: And in regard they are not able to compass their Ends
by the way of Truth, they not only rage with Fire and Sword against the
Orthodox, but persecute them with Clamor and Judicial Sentences; and which is
more, fill every corner of the World with their Thundering Writings, to prevent
the Voice of Truth from being heard; nay, which is more then all this, like
Ahab himself, they make it their business to throw the guilt of the Troubles
which themselves have raised, upon the Faithful Preachers of the Truth; and
which is most horrible to hear, make it their glory to condemn them all to the
Punishment of Infernal Fires.

The same ill Fate has befallen me. For when it was my late hap to officiate in
the Function of Ecclesiastial Overseer, in the County of Weeden, upon the
Rhine, one of the Popish Prelates, a certain Neighbor of mine, was not
ashamed, instead of a NEW-YEARS-GIFT, to send me word, That not only my Self,
but also all the Protestants in general were eternally Damned, and to be
infallibly Burned in the everlasting Fire of Hell. But in regard that by the
Testimony of the Apostle, We can do nothing against the Truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8.
but for the Truth; and that it is the chief Duty of a Preacher of the Gospel,
To hold fast the faithful Word which is according to Tit. 1. 9.
Doctrine, that he may be able both to Exhort in wholesome Doctrine, and to
Convince them that say against it; I thought it my Duty, not only to Translate
into the German Language the Catechism of Controversies, written by Monsieur
Moulin, and by that means to arm my Auditors against the daily Attacques of the
Monks; but also to refel such an inconsiderate and unchristianlike Letter, and
by this my ANSWER to vindicate the Salvation of the Protestants against so
horrible a Condemnation. Wherein I have chiefly made it my business to
encounter my Antagonist with the Sword of his own Brethren, as having brought
in Aid of our Cause, the Testimonies of the most Famous Popish Doctors against
him. Not that I would have it so to be understood however, as if the Suffrages
of Men that wander in the Paths of Error, were necessary for the support of our
Doctrine, but only that as vanquished Enemies, following the Triumphal Chariot
of Truth, their Necks laden with Chains, and compelled to submit to the
Victress, they might give all the World an unquestionable Testimony of her
Conquest; or else, that if after the first Rout, they should adventure to make
a second Attempt upon her, being by this Stratagem set together by the Ears one
among another, and distracted in their Minds, or at least in their Sentences,
they might by mutually wounding each other, destroy themselves; thereby
affording us this pleasing Spectacle, as if the Lord had set every Man's Sword
upon his Neighbor throughout the Host; and had so brought it to pass, that they
should kill one another with the Weapons which they had made themselves; and
that the Heads of these new Goliah's should be cut off with the Swords which
they had girt upon their own Loins. For thus we see that the Papists in many
things are like Samson's Foxes, having their Tails in such a manner tied
together to set on Fire, that with their Heads they draw two contrary Ways; or
else like certain Monsters, whose Bodies are not united together till about the
Navil or the Belly.

But as Fawning creates Friends, and Truth begets Hatred; so neither could I
avoid the Hatred and Persecution of the Papists. For their Revenge transported
them to that degree, that they sent several Soldiers to apprehend me, and to
have punished me with eternal Captivity; who because they could not overtake me
flying away on Horseback, discharged two Pistols at me, to have killed me
outright; but in vain, while God in his Mercy protected me.

Constrained therefore by these and other Persecutions, and continual
way-layings of my life, some Weeks ago I threw my self into the Bosom of your
Church, that under your Protection I might live in more safety; and so soon as
opportunity should permit, that I might be ready to employ the utmost of my
Abilities and Sedulity in your Service.

But in regard, that according to the Proverb, There is no Desire of that which
is to Men Unknown, I thought it might be worth my while most devoutly and
humbly to offer and dedicate this my Answer to all and singular both Shepherds
and Sheep, High and Mean, Ecclesiastics and Laity, Magistrates and Subjects, as
having no other means to excite and kindle in your Hearts, when once made known
to your Christian Pity, so much of generous Goodness, as to receive me into the
Arms of your Charity, and make me Partaker of your Labors.

Accept, I beseech ye therefore, most Honorable Patrons, with courteous Mind
and Hand, this little Treatise of mine; and open to me the doors of your
Benevolence; and what you would should be done to your selves in the same case,
that do to me. Be not weary in well doing, for in due season ye shall reap, if
ye faint not. While we have Gal. 6. 9, 10.
therefore time, let us do good unto all Men, especially unto them that be of
the household of Faith.

In the mean time, our Merciful God, who has begun a good work in you, will
perform it until the day of Jesus Christ; that being Phil. 1. 6, 11,
filled with the fruits of righteousness, ye may speak the Word of God without
fear, and continue in one Spirit, and one Soul, holding together 14, 27,
in the defense of the Faith of the Gospel; and in nothing fearing your
Adversaries, which is to them a Token of Perdition, but to you of 28, 29.
Salvation, and that of God. For to you it is given for Christ, not only this,
that ye believe in him, but also this, that ye suffer for his sake. Having the
same sight which ye saw in me, and now hear in me. My Brethren, count it all
joy, James 1. 2,
when ye fall in diverse temptations. For blessed is the Man who endures
temptation, because 12.
that when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has
promised to those that love him.

May it please the same Almighty God, That fighting a good fight, ye may hold
Faith and a good Conscience, which some having put away, as concerning Faith,
have made Shipwreck. So shall ye remain faithful unto death, and a Crown Apoc.
2. 10.
of Life shall be given unto you. So that when the time of your dissolution is
at hand, you may gladly and truly say, We have fought a good 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8
Fight, We have fulfilled our Course, We have kept the Faith. Henceforth there
is laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness, whicb the Lord, the Righteous
Judge, shall give at that day; and not only to us, but to them that have loved
his appearing.

Now unto the King Everlasting, Incorruptible, Invisible; To God only Wise, be
Honor and 1 Timothy 1. 17.
Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

So farewell, most Honored Patrons, and benignly favor,

Your most Humble Servant And Exile, J. H. Dalhusius.

THE SALVATION OF PROTESTANTS Asserted and Defended, etc.
The Salvation of Body and Soul comes from one Fountain of Salvation, which is
Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever, Amen.
Reverend and most Learned Mr. Prior,
THere has been an idle report spread up and down, that the Reverend Abbot of
the Monastry of Seinen proposed to me several things concerning the Catholic
Religion, if not in Writing, yet by Word of Mouth, which I either am or was not
able to resolve. From which trifle of a Report, those of your Party have
thought to gain a Petty Laurel Wreath; and those of our side have been in a
deep Suspense, not knowing what was done, or what was to be done; for that Fame
is as well an obstinate Retainer of what is feigned and bad, as a Divulger of
Truth. I am not willing to believe that the Prelate aforesaid is the Father of
this Abortive Birth, in regard that since a Nonentity can have no Accidents,
He could never in the Truth of the Matter divulge, that he propounded any thing
to me to be resolved, when assuredly I remember it no more then I do an Act
that never was done. This indeed is true, that about three years since,
returning from the Visitation of the Church of Grentzhausen, and going into the
Monastery in my road, at what time my Fellow-Brethren, Mr. William Simonis, and
Mr. Arnold Schnabel, the one Pastor of the Church of Alsbach, the other of
Ruchroeten, both most vigilant and learned Persons were with me, he read to us
many and various Manuscripts taken out of our Doctors, and Arguments against
those Authors, and highly vaunted them to be invincible; but we Three so well
at that time defended the Truth, that your Party had no reason to boast of
Advantage. But now that the Reverend Prior not only extends his Prayers for my
Health, but also heartily wishes and desires, That after I had adjur'd and
forsaken my Religion, I should consult the good of my Soul, by returning to
Peter 's Nett, which is the Roman and only Soulsaving Church; lest after I had
finished this life, I should not only be deprived of Eternal Felicity, but with
the rest of my Doctors burn in the Everlasting Fire of Hell; truly as upon the
sight of the first, I return him many Thanks; so in respect of the latter, I
cannot forbear but that out of Duty and Conscience, and for the love of Truth,
I must Answer as follows, that I may not be again reproached to have thrown
away my Buckler when the Duel was offered me, which was infamous among the
Romans, or to have sought for Safety by ignominious Flight. And I sincerely and
constantly adjure you, Reverend Prior, together with your Companions, that with
impartial Minds, and laying aside all fore-conceived Opinions, you would
vouchsafe to read and weigh what shall be here written. Therefore that I may
hasten to the thing it self, the whole Hinge of your Epistle turns upon this,
to persuade me that the Romanists (give me leave to call you so throughout this
Writing) are only worthy and fit to obtain Salvation: On the other side, that
all the Protestants are damned, nay, irrevocably consigned to a sad Eternity.

Is not this your Thesis? Nay, most certainly it is. It will be my part
therefore to Prove and Assert the Salvation of the Protestants, and to Examine
and Correct your rash Judgment by the Rule of Charity, with regard however to
the Civil Friendship of both; more especially of that which is between me and
your most reverend and famous Master, Charles Wertzius, whom I here name with
Honor. I wish he had bin at home; for then you would not have presumed to have
dealt so disingeniously by me. But the Proverb says, When the Cat is gone
abroad, the Mice play. But to the purpose.

There is nothing which the sacred Scriptures more frequently recommend to us
then Charity. This is that sacred and perpetual Fire, which it behooves us more
religiously to keep burning, then that which formerly was entrusted with the
Vestals in Rome, or with the Priests in the Temple of God. For Charity (says
St. Paul) is the bond of perfection, Col. 3. 14. The end of the Commandment, 1 Timothy 1. 5. Nay, The fulfilling of the whole Law, Romans 13. 10. And if a
Comparison should be made between the three Theological Virtues, there is no
question but the Palm would be given to Charity as the Principal, 1 Cor. 13.
13. Faith represents the Porch of the Temple, in regard it holds forth to us
the Propitiation of our Sins upon the Altar of the Cross. Hope represents the
Holy Place, as being that which shines out to us with the sevenfold Lamp of
Evangelical Promises, in certain Expectation of Eternal Beatitude. But Charity
representing the Holy of Holies, and glittering on every side with pure Gold,
is only worthy to be the Seat of the Deity; for as God is Love, 1 Job. 4. 16.
so the Empyrean Seat, and the fiery Throne of Charity in our Minds, have a
mutual Resemblance. Now there may be numbered several Duties of this Christian
Charity, the Queenof all Virtues, as well toward God as toward our Neighbor.
Toward God, there are two sorts of Duties incumbent upon every Man by the
Command of Charity; of which some are Positive, others Negative. By the one a
Christian is obliged to Exercise Benevolence and Bounty toward his Neighbor, as
much as in him lies, affectionately and effectually in Word and Deed. By the
other he is deterred from all manner of Ill Will, and doing Injury to his
Brother, not only directly by hurting him, but also indirectly by throwing
Scandals upon him; not only openly and outwardly with Hand or Tongue, but also
covertly and inwardly, by bearing Malice, Envy, Hatred, or by unjust Suspicions
and rash Censures, as St. Paul witnesses, 1 Cor. 13. 5. For Charity thinks no
evil, suffers all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all
things. More particularly the Scripture, in more places then one, condemns rash
Judgments, by which Men, for the most part violating the Laws either of Divine
Truth or Christian Charity, judge evilly of the Actions or Persons of their
Brethren. To which purpose that Sentence of our Savior is express and positive,
Mat. 7. 1. Judge not, lest ye be judged. Such were the Judgments of the
Pharisees formerly concerning others; so that they looked upon all others beside
themselves as Idiots, profane and polluted Sinners. And at this day, there is
nothing more frequent among Men, then these unjust Censures, who are often wont
to receive with the Left Hand, what is reached forth with the Right; and to
interpret all things in the worst sense, according to the variety of their
Passions. For Example; if any Man grows Rich through the blessing of God, he is
adjudg'd to have acquired those Riches by evil means: If he fall suddenly into
extreme Calamity, this is presently deemed to befall him by the secret Judgment
of God revenging his secret Transgressions: If any one be averse to
Superstition, he is accounted Profane: If he professes Piety, he is said to be
an Hypocrite: If Liberal, he is taxed for a Prodigal: If Frugal, he must be
Covetous: If Prudent, he is a Coward: If Magnanimous and Sedate in the midst of
the raging Waves, he is pronounced Rash and Bold. Such is that Judgment of
yours, most Learned Mr. Prior, which you give in your Letters of Me and all the
Protestants, rather with a blind Fury, then a quick Understanding: That is to
say, that we are all Damned to Eternity; and that unless we return to Peter's
Ship, by submitting our selves to the Pope, we are adjudg'd in this Life to the
Torments of Hell. You are not the only Person who lie under this Mistake, for
there are not wanting among ye those that in their Harangues to the People, in
affrighting terms do pawn their own Salvation upon it, that all the Protestants
are Damned. By virtue of which precipitate Condemnation, the hatred of many is
kindled against us; for it is a difficult matter to love those whom they
believe to be so hated of God, that they are already destined to the Flames of
Hell: And in regard there is but little difference between a Damned Person and
the Devil, it is but rational that they should abhor such Persons as the Devil,
who by an anticipated Sentence are already numbered among the Damned. Nay, those
of your Party, who either out of Duty or Inclination are better and more
tenderly affected toward us, are wont to look upon us with Horror and a kind
of Commiseration, saying, That they are very sorry that Men of such excellent
Endowments, and otherwise born to Virtue, should be out of the way of
Salvation, and willingly throw themselves headlong into Hell. For these Reasons
therefore I thought it necessary to examine by the Rule of Charity and Truth
this Judgment so frequently given and inculcated against us; to the end that if
it be found to be rash and prohibited by the Sentence of Christ, not only you,
Mr. Prior, may be brought to remit somewhat of your rigor, and blush at what
you have so unjustly written, but that we our selves also slighting and
contemning this preposterous Judgment, may continue cheerful and constant in
the Truth of God, saying to our Prior, and such like supercilious Censurers as
He, what St. Paul said to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4. 3. With us it is a very
small thing that we should be judged of you, or of man's judgment. It is better
to be condemned by a Physician, then a Judge; by Men, then by God. Wherefore as
no Man can be a Judge in his own Cause, it is not for the Accuser to pass
Sentence upon the Guilty: So that it might be sufficient to plead in Opposition
to this unjust Judgment, that Mr. Prior would sit Judge in his own proper
Cause; and that being carried away with various Affections, he never regarded
what was true and honest, but what was profitable and convenient. This Judgment
certainly is not to be imputed to Equity and pure Reason, but to Anger and
Hatred. As Parents are wont to love their Children though Maimed and Lame, so
your Doctors are so preposterously devoted to their own pre-conceived Opinions,
that they hate all Men who go about to impugn or correct them; and that so much
the more, by how much the greater force they find in the same Opinions to
establish their Authority in the World, and to increase and preserve their
Earthly Riches.

The Condition of the Protestants in this respect, resembles the Condition of
our Savior, while he was upon the Earth. For because he opposed himself against
the Corruptions both of Manners and Doctrine which abounded in the Church, and
propounded a sort of Justice quite different from the Pharisaical Pride, and
rejecting unwritten Traditions, labored to cleanse the House of God, and
restore all things to the Primitive Fountains of Purity and Truth; therefore he
was accounted a Samaritan, and proclaimed a Seditious Person, a Demoniac, a
Blasphemer, Turbulent, and an Innovator. The same things befall the Reformed;
for therefore are they unjustly condemned, because they desire that the Temple
may be cleans'd, that Abuses and Corruptions may be reformed, which Time,
Ambition, Avarice, Negligence, Ignorance, and other Pests have brought into the
Church; that the Justice of our Savior may be fully acknowledged; that
unprofitable, intolerable and superstitious Traditions may be cut off, and all
things, as much as may be, restored to the Primitive state of the Church, and
the Exemplar and Pattern of purest Antiquity. And indeed if you would but lay
aside your Affections, and give never so little attention to the Word of God,
you would there find how unlawful it is for you to give any such Judgment upon
Christians, and to devote them to Maledictions whom Christ has redeemed with
his Blood, whose Faith is conformable to the Scripture, and who repose their
whole Confidence in the Grace and Mercy of God, and the Merits and Cross of
Christ. Certainly the Point of Eternal Salvation is of a higher Nature then to
be wrested away by little blind miserable Animals to their Tribunal; or that
any Man should presume to pronounce any thing concerning it, beyond the
revealed Will of God. For God has assumed it to himself, his Sentence is to be
expected, and not to be anticipated by our Judgment, For what Mortal was ever
privy to his Secrets, or whom did he ever permit the perusal of the Book of
Life, and the Catalogue of Election? St. James, c. 4. of his Epistle, v. 11,
12. positively admonishes us, to condemn that Law which condemns his Brother,
and that he who judges of the Law, is not a Doer of the Law, but a Judge. And
that Men for this reason should not invade the Laws of God, he adds, There is
one Lawgiver, who is able both to save and to destroy; who art thou shat
judge another? Excellent also was the saying of the Ethnic Poet; Those things
which it concerns us not to know, let us not take care to believe; let Secret
things be left to God. Many are numbered among Wolves in this World, whom
Christ will join to his Sheep at the last Judgment. Many who are weighed in the
Balance of human Censure, are rejected as Brass, which the Touchstone of
Divine Judgment will demonstrate to have bin fine Gold. First therefore I would
fain know of you, Mr. Prior, upon what ground you come to be more certain of
the Damnation of others, then of your own Salvation. For if it be a piece of
Arrogance as you commonly teach against us, for any Man to assure himself that
he is the Son of God, and Heir of Heaven, certainly it must be a great piece of
rashness to determine as to others, that they are the Sons of Wrath and Hell. I
rather am of Opinion, that the Religion of the Protestants is so far from being
an Obstacle to Salvation, that it rather serves in a high measure to promote
Salvation. I confess, there is no hope of Salvation beyond the Pale of
Christian Religion; so that Salvation cannot be obtained in the Communion of
Ethnics, Mahometans and Jews; no, not in the Society of those who retaining the
Name of Christ, nevertheless subvert the Foundation of Salvation, such as
formerly were the Ebionites, Borborites, Manichaeans, Arrians, and at this day
the Socinians; or if there be or were any other such like Monsters in Religion.
But in our Religion, what is there to be discovered that subverts the
Fundamental Articles of Christianity, but rather, on the other side, what
serves in a high degree to support them? Does it not admit the Scriptures of
the old and New Testament to be of Divine Inspiration, and the Three more
solemn Creeds, the Apostolic, Athanasian and Nicene, together with the Four
Oeconomic Councils of Nicaea, Chalcedon, Ephesus and Constantinople? Does it
not adore in truth One God, Three in One, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost? Does
it not acknowledge one Christ, God and Man, for the Mediator between God and
Men, the Redeemer of Souls, a Prophet, Priest, and King of the Church? Does it
teach any thing concerning God, which is repugnant to his Majesty, his Glory,
and his Power? Can it be accused of any Opinion that subverts good Manners, or
that sins against the Law of God or public Honesty? The aim of Religion is to
inform Men how to live well and bear Death with confidence, to the end that
after they have lived in the fear of God, they may die in his favor. And this
is that which a Christian may easily attain in our Religion; for it most
powerfully excites a faithful Man to fear God and love his Neighbor. It
propounds no Article of Faith from whence various Corollaries may not be
deduced for performance of our Duties, and Reformation of our Lives; and
administers most sweet and those most effectnal Consolations to a Christian
against the assaults of all Temptations, and Death particularly; advancing the
Certainty of Redemption, through Christ, into the number of the Sons of God, by
his Merit and Favor; so that they themselves, who deal so rigorously by us, so
often as any one is to be prepared for Death, insensibly come over to our side,
and tacitly renounce their own Opinions, as is to be seen in Conson. Agoniz.
written by Viguerrus. For then they do not comsort the dying Person with heaps
of his own proper Merits, but exhort him to put all his hope and confidence in
the Mercy of God, and the Satisfaction of Christ. Nor do they scare their
doubtful Consciences with the Terror of Purgatory, but comfort it with the
hopes of soon obtaining Everlasting Rest; and admonish the sick Person often to
repeat the words of David, Into thy hands I commend my Spirit. The Bishop of
Toledo is reported to have written to the Pope, that the Emperor Charles V,
declared upon his Deathbed, that he placed all the Hopes of his Salvation in
one Redeemer and Savior Jesus Christ, and in his Merits, adding withal, that
he looked upon Luther's Opinion concerning Justification, to be very true. To
which, as the Famous John Crocius, my Tutor formerly at Marpurgh, reports in
his Anti-Wigelius, p. 451. they make the Pope to return this Answer; That he
would not celebrate his Funeral Obsequies, because he held with Luther in such
a Principal Point of Religion. Maximilian II, when the Bishop of Naples D.
Lambert Gruterus came to him, then lying under the Pangs of Death, would not
suffer him to be admitted, but upon promise first, That he would talk of
nothing else, but of the Merits of Christ, his Blood and S^eat; The Bishop was
as good as his word, and made a long Oration concerning the Merits of Christ
full of Consolation; and when the Emperor was asked, Whether he intended to die
in that Faith? He made Answer, I shall do no otherwise: As Crato relates in his
Funeral-Oration; and Chytraeus Chron. Sax.

The Head and Sum of Christian Religion, is Christ Crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2.
Other Foundation can no Man lay then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ,
1 Cor. 3. 11. So that for the obtaining of Salvation, there is no other Rule of
Faith to be acknowledged then the Word of Christ resounding in Scriptures; nor
any other Merit to be pleaded before God, but his Death; nor any other
Purgatory but his Blood; nor any other Propitiatory Sacrifice for our Sins, but
that which he offered once upon the Cross; nor any other Head of the Church,
nor any other Mediator with God, but Himself. Behold the Foundations of our
Faith: Why should you deny us Eternal Salvation?

Moreover it would be very cruel, and altogether repugnant to Christians, to
condemn to the Torments of Hell so many Myriads of Christians, living in the
East, under the Patriarchs of Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem and
Constantinople; The Georgians, Armenians, Abissines, Egyptians, Greeks, whose
Churches the Apostles founded, Martyrs watered with their Blood, the most
Learned of the Fathers cultivated with their Instructions, so many Councils
honored with their Decisions, and which are able to vye their Titles of
Antiquity and Succession with Rome it self. Now if the way to Salvation is not
to be denied to these Christians dispersed over the East, and retaining the
Foundations of Christianity, though believing nothing of the Fire of Purgatory,
the Pomp of Papal Dignity, Transubstantiation of the Bread into the Body of
Christ, Communion under One Kind, the Use of Latin or a Foreign Tongue in
Public Worship, the necessary Celibacy of the Ministry, Auricular Confession,
and the like; why may not Salvation be obtained in the Society of the Reformed
Churches, which are gathered to Christ in the West, tho as to those Points they
have renounced the Roman Communion? Then there is another thing which you
Romanists confess of your own accords, that our Church Reformed according to
the Word of God; leads all the Members of its Communion directly to Christ;
that they may obtain Salvation in him and by him; that they feed the starving
Consciences with the Spiritual Bread of the Divine Word, and Sacramental
Eucharist, call Sinners to Repentance, and recommend to every one Piety toward
God, and Charity toward our Neighbor. There is also another thing which they
acknowledge, that our Reformed Church both has and administers the true Baptism
of Christ, and by means of that, Spiritually begets Sinners which are to be
Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven; seeing that by their own Confession, our
Children dying after Baptism received in our Churches, ascend to Joys
Celestial, as may be collected from Bellarmin, lib. 1. de Bapt. cap. 11.

In the mean time, I beseech you, Venerable Sir, can you tell me what Motives
they were that lead you headlong into so absurd a Precipice? Or what, I beseech
you, were the Impulsive Causes and Pregnant Reasons of so preposterous and
unseasonable a Damning of our Souls?

If you are Ignorant, as I shrewdly conjecture you are, I will tell you what
they are from your own Doctors, who have written variously concerning this
Question, that is to say, That we are therefore to be Damned, and are Damned to
all Eternity. First, Because we are guilty of Blasphemy against the Omnipotency
of God, in the business of the The usual gruonds of the Papists uncharitable
Judgment.
Eucharist. Secondly, Because we make God the Author of Sin. Thirdly, Because
we fasten Despair upon Christ, when he was upon the Cross. Fourthly, Because we
are injurious to the Virgin Mary and the Saints. Fifthly, Because we oppose
Chastity, Sobriety, Mortification, Good Works, the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, and every pious Institution. And Sixthly, Because we are Heretics, or
at least, Seventhly, Schismatics.

These are the Imputations which I find in Bellarmin, Becanus, Tirinus and
Stapleton, all Jesuits, the great Props of your Cause, and the Pillars of this
cruel Sentence. Nevertheless know, Mr. Prior, that these Accusations are no
more then mere Imaginations, and feigned Dreams, which have no real Foundation;
as I shall with all possible brevity demonstrate in order, both for your own
and the sake of others; and if these Pretenses of yours be found to be
groundless and unreasonable, there needs no more to convince you of your Error,
and your straggling from Truth and Charity.

First therefore we are accused, as if we would limit Divine 1. Of Protestants
bounding God's Omnipotence
Omnipotence; and that we plainly deny it, while we assert, that it is
impossible for the Bread to be Transubstantiated into the Body, or that any
Body should be actually in diverse places; or that Accidents should subsist
without a Subject; or that there should be some Bodies allowed of that fill no
space. But far be it from us to limit the infinite Power of the most Infinite,
or in the least to call it in question. We are ready with our Blood to
subscribe to the Apostles Creed, in the first Article whereof we profess to
believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth. And this we
generally add for a Conclusion to our ordinary Prayers; For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever, Mat. 6. 13. Then also our
Savior taught us, That those things are Easy and Possible with God, which
seem to Men Impossible. Let him be Anathema, that calls in question the Power
os the most High; who existing of himself, because, according to the common
Axiom, There is nothing in God which is not God; it is impossible for him to be
limited or bounded. And this Infinity we could as certainly believe in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, in reference to the destruction of the Bread, and
substituting the Body of Christ in the room of it, as it is certain and
perspicuous from the Word of God, that our Bodies should rise at the Day of
Judgment; our Faith would be directed by the Cynosure of Divine Will; nor can
we doubt but that God both could and would have done it, had he so decreed the
thing to be done, as profitable and necessary for our Salvation. But as to
this, we find, First, That those Sacred Mysteries which are distributed to us
from the Table of the Lord, are and remain both in Substance and Name what they
were, as to the Substance, before the Consecration. Nor need we to produce the
Testimony of Senses for it; our Seeing, Tasting, Feeling, Smelling, which
according to the Opinion of certain Philosophers, are rarely deceived about
their proper Objects; the Authority of St. Paul is sufficient, and beyond all
Objection; 1 Cor. 10. 16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? And then again, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup.
Secondly, We find that the eating of his Flesh, and the drinking his Blood, is
recommended to us by Christ, Joh. 6. But there, there is nothing spoken of Oral
feeding, by which the Body of Christ is actually swallowed into our Bodies; but
he speaks of Spiritual and Mystic Eating, by which he remains in us, and we in
him; which does not come to pass by Chewing, but by Believing; not in
swallowing down into the Stomach, but by receiving him with the Heart and with
Faith, as Christ in the same place clearly and frequently explains himself; as
when he says, ver. 35. He that comes to me, shall never hunger, and he that
believes on me, shall never thirst. And thus all Antiquity has expounded this
Context of St. John. And several Testimonies might be produced of St. Austin
alone, among all the rest of the Fathers, to the same purpose; whose following
words were taken out of his Commentaries upon St. John by Gratian. Distinct. 2.
Consil. Can. 47. Why do thou make ready thy Teeth and Belly? believe, and
thou have eaten: For to believe in him, is the same as to eat the living Bread;
who believes in him, eats him, is invisibly fed, because he invisibly grows
again. Now that we ought to understand the words of Christ in this place of
Mystical and Spiritual Feeding, the constant Rule proposed by the same Father,
constrains us, l. 3. de Doctrine. Christ. c. 16. If the Scripture (says he)
seems to command an unlawful and wicked act, and to forbid a profitable and
good deed, then it is Figurative. Unless you eat the Flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his Blood, you shall not have Life within you. Here it seems to
command a wicked Act. Therefore it is a Figure, commanding its to communicate
the Passion of our Savior, and to remember profitably and sweetly that his
Flesh was crucified and wounded for our sakes. But I abstain for the nonce from
farther Explication of this Matter, unless occasion shall be given of
vindicating this Epistle by a Reply.

In the mean time, the sole Omnipotency of God is usually opposed to so many
effectual Arguments, by which we are constrained to assent to the Opinion of
the Ancients concerning the Sacrament, as if God were bound to display his
Power to do whatever Men fancy to themselves; or that we must be said to
Blaspheme his Omnipotence, because we do not consent to their Dreams and
Miracles; whereas if those new and unprofitable Opinions were approved by the
assent of the Divine Will, we should never meddle to contradict this Argument
taken from God's Omnipotency. But since there is nothing that can be produced
in their favor out of the Testament of God; but on the contrary, so many
Demonstrations fighting against them, we dare pesume to descend to the
Examination of this Argument; Not to limit the Omnipotence of God, but to show
that those things that you Romanists would defend by virtue of that, are of the
number of those things which fall not under the Power of God, not through
Impotency or want of Strength, but through the Excellency and Perfection of his
Power. For though God be Omnipotent, yet he can neither Walk, nor Sleep, nor Die;
for that these things would contradict the Perfection of his Eslence. In this
sense, the Scripture testifies that God cannot lie, nor deny himself. Hence it
comes to pass, that though the Divine Power extends it self to Infinity, yet is
it agreed among all Christians, that God cannot do those things which imply
Contradiction, because he cannot lie nor deny himself. To this Truth your
Bellarmin gives his Assent, lib. 3. de Euch. and all your Doctors subscribe to
his Opinion. And upon this Ground we dispute with you, alleging, I. That it is
impossible that Accidents should exist without any Subject; in regard it is
Essential to all Accidents to inhere in their Subjects. Insomuch, that by
virtue of that inherence it is, that an Accident is distinguished from
Substance. Nor can any Accident be fancied without some Subject to which it may
adhere, and by which it may be supported; but that some such Accident must be
fancied which is no longer an Accident, which implies a Contradiction. II. It
is impossible that the Body of Christ sholud be in infinite places remotely
distant one from another, in Earth, though he do not descend from Heaven, whether
nevertheless he ascended after his Resurrection; as it could not then have bin
that he should have bin in Heaven, unless he had locally and visibly ascended
thither from the Earth. III. It cannot be that any Body should be any where
actually and properly, but that it must be in the same place corporeally and
locally; because the manner of being somewhere, must correspond with the manner
of being simply, which is the proper manner of the thing in dispute: And as a
Spirit cannot be any where actually present, unless definitely and spiritually;
so neither can a Body be any where actually present, but corporeally and
circumscrib'dly; for if it were actually in any place where it were not
corporeally, then it would cease to be a Body. IV. It cannot be that the Body
of Christ should at the same moment of time, be visible, palpable and
circumscribed in Heaven, and in infinite places of the Earth, after another
manner invisible, impalpable, uncircumscrib'd, without Extension, and Latent
under a Point. V. It is impossible that any singular or individual Thing should
be multiplied in infinite places, and yet the Singularity and Individuality
remain entire, without having its Unity destroyed by that multiplication. VI.
It is impossible that the Thing contained, should be greater then the Thing
containing: And that the Body of Christ should lie hid under a small Morsel of
Bread, or be straightened within the Bowels of a Mouse, in the same stature as
he had when he was upon the Cross. These and such like Miracles as these, all
sprouting out of the Opinion of Transubstantiation, we oppose as
Impossibilities; not that God wants Power, but because these things imply a
Contradiction. And therefore we cannot be accused of any Blasphemy against
Divine Omnipotency.

About Three hundred years ago flourished Durandus. de Apud Bellarm. de Euchar.
l. 3. c. 5.
Sancto Portiano, Bishop of Meaux, of the Dominican Order, of great repute
among the Scholastics, and one that Rome never yet declared a Heretic. He
affirms Contradictory Penetration of Dimensions to be impossible, by means of
which two Bodies shall be able to possess one and the same place; and argues
against whatever has bin produced to the contrary, though taken from the Nativity
of Christ, his Ent^ance among the Disciples, the Doors being shut, and his
Ascent into Heaven; affirming, That it is much more just and rational to say,
that the Creature gave way to the Creator; so that the Heavens if they were
solid, parted asunder, to give free passage to their Lord; and that the Doors
of the House where the Disciples met, miraculously opened before him, that so
he might more easily come to them; and that the Womb of the Virgin was divinely
dilated to facilitate his Nativity; then that they should oblige the Creator to
penetrate other Bodies, and so to receive a Law from their Nature, rather then
to give it Them. All which Expositions of Durandus may be defended and
maintained out of the Word of God, Psalm. 14. 7, 9. The Gates of Heaven are
commanded to lift up their Heads, that is, to fly open to Christ ready to
ascend into Heaven, then under the name of the King of Glory entering in.

Joh. 20. 26. It is not said that Christ came to his Disciples through the
Doors shut, but at what time the Doors were shut, (...). Now suppose they might
be opened to him by the Ministry of Angels,, as the Prison-Doors flew open to
Peter, Act. 12. 10. And as Mat. 28. 2. the Angel descended from Heaven which
removed the Stone laid upon the Sepulcher. Luke 2. 23. relates, That the
Blessed Virgin brought her Offering to Jerusalem, and that there Christ stood
before the Lord; As it is written in the Law of the Lord, That every Male
opening the Womb, shall be called holy to the Lord. By which Law the Holy
Virgin had not bin obliged, unless Christ at his Birth had opened her Womb:
Neither is it any Obstacle to her perpetual Virginity, in regard she never knew
Man; and for that this Gate through which the Lord of Hosts past, according to
the saying of Ezekiel, c. 44. 2. remained from that time always constantly
shut. Now if the Crime of Blasphemy were never imputed to Durandus, nor any of
his Followers, for these seeming attacks upon Divine Omnipotency, why are we
reproached as Enemies of the same Omnipotency, for only averring the same
things? Thomas Aquinas, listed among the number of the Saints, vulgarly called
the Angelical Doctor, and to whom they feign that the Statue of a Crucifix
should speak these words at Naples; Thou have written well concerning me, what
Reward dos^t thou expect? This Aquinas, Part 3. Quest. 76. almost quite through
the whole Question, affirms it impossible and contradictory for the same Body
to be locally and circumscrib'dly in two several places; and alleges, That the
Glorious Body it self of our Savior, cannot be locally, visibly and
circumscrib'dly but in one only place; That in this manner now he is not in any
other place then in Heaven; That he never is moveable and visible in the
Eucharist, or after any other manner then only Sacramentally. And whereas it
has bin said, that he has bin seen in this most August Sacrament, under the
Form of a Boy, or of Flesh, or of Blood; That it was neither the Body nor the
Substance of Christ. Now if Thomas could not persuade himself, that it was
possible for the Body of Christ to be locally in two different places, with
whom Vasques the Jesuit, and all the rest at this Time agree; and which is
more, if he did not believe that that which was sometimes said to be seen in
the Eucharist, was the Body and Substance of Christ, or proved the local
Presence of his Body in the Sacrament; must we be called Blasphemers who are of
the same Belief, and consequently assert, that the same Body cannot be actually
present in two different places, in regard the actual Presence of any Body of
necessity must be Corporeal, Local and Circumscribed? It Is true, I acknowledge a
certain Sacramental Presence in the Eucharist, but different from that which
Thomas has invented; not Physical and Real, but Moral and Significative, which
is agreeable to the Being and Nature of the Sacrament; as also Super-physical
and Real through Faith, in Virtue and Operation; which does not require a
Physical and Real Presence in the Substance either of the Person or of the
Thing, Joh. 8. 56. 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4.

As we are undeservedly accused of Blasphemy against the Omnipotency, so are
the Accusations that follow mere Calumnies invented to inflame a hatred against
us; yet the main Pillars to support the most learned Mr. Prior's Damnation of
our Souls. It is a Capital Crime This, and highly deserving to Whether
Protestants teach that God is the Author of Sin.
be immediately ranked next to the former. For in the next place you assert,
Mr. Prior, that we teach, That God is the Author of Sin; whence you infer that
the Devil is our God, and that the Reformed go about to recall from Orcus the
long since buried Heresies of the Florinians and Manichaeans. Nay, the Calumny
was carried so high, that Becanus the Jesuit, in his Manual Controv. propounds
this Question; Whether God be the Author of Sin? as one of those which are
controverted at this day between You and Us. And though we denied it, and
complained of the Injury done us, wishing Anathema's to all that teach, That
God is the Author of Sin, yet the Imputation continues, and our Adversaries
would fain persuade us that we believe otherwise then really we do. As Mercury
in Plautus would have persuaded Sosias that he was not the same Person he took
himself to be. However, do but turn over the Confessions of Faith, the Forms of
Consent, the Public Catechisms of our Church, and try whether you can find in
them any thing that ^avours in the least of that Impiety. Come to our holy
Assemblies, vouchsafe to hear our Sermons, and try whether you can find any
such thing there; nay, whether we do not openly and professedly teach the
contrary, as often as occasion offers. So far are our Churches from this
Blasphemy, that they expressly and in formal Terms reject this Proposition, That
God is the Author of Sin, Confess. Gal. Art. 8. and Belg. Art. 13. They who lay
this to our Charge, acknowledge that it is Affirmed by none of us; only by
certain Consequences they would Wire-draw it from some Sentences of our
Doctors; acknowledging nevertheless, that Zuinglius, Martyr, Calvin and Beza,
whom you have charged as guilty of this Crime, expressly and in formal Terms
have condemned that impious Axiom in their Writings; and whose Testimonies also
your Doctors produce, as is to be seen in Bellarmin de amiss. great. l. 2. c. 2.
and in Becanus after him, l. 3. Manual. Cont. l. 3. c. 5. quaest 6.. 4. Nay,
Calvin himself, against whom nevertheless you have the greatest Peek, is
acknowledged by your Doctors, to have most effectually confuted the same
Impiety against the Libertines that upheld it.

Truly since the Romanists at this day will not allow that to be an Axiom of
Faith, which is not to be found literally in Scripture, but is only deduced
from a certain kind of Consequence, That which is not cannot be, that they
should justly attribute to some of ours this Assertion, That God is the Author
of Sin; because it seems to be consequentially deduced from some of their
Sayings, seeing it is not only any where expressly Extant in any of their
Writings, but is also expressly in plain words refuted and rejected by the same
Authors. So that if every one ought to be the Interpreter of his own words, we
are rather to believe our own Authors as to their Sense, then their
Adversaries; who do not condemn them for what they have said, but with envious
Eyes industriously search and pry into their Writings to find out Flaws and
Pretenses of rejecting and condemning them.

Ours therefore are desirous to maintain that all the Works of God were known
to him from Eternity, Act. 15. 18. that nothing lies concealed from him, and
that nothing happens in the World without some secret Dispen sation of his.
That he is not what Epicurus dreamed him to be, a slothful Spectator of those
things which are transacted in the World; but that his Eternal Providence sits
at the Helm, and that he steers and governs the Ship as he pleases himself. In
him we have our Being, live and move, as St. Paul teaches us, Act. 17. 28. Also
that our Sins and Transgressions of his Law are subjected to the Government of
his most secret Counsels; as Poisons may be wholsomly and profitably
administered by a prudent Physician; and as the Sunbeams diffuse themselves
over Mud, and penetrate rotten Carcasses, without being defiled. That God often
punishes Sins by Sins; and that not only the Hearts of Kings are in his hands,
as Solomon tells us, Prove. 21. 1. but universally of all Mankind, like a stream
of Waters, so that he may incline them which way he pleases. Lastly, after a
wonderful and most ineffable manner, as St. Austin speaks, Enchirid. c. 120.
That what is done contrary to his Will, is not always done without his Will;
because it could not be done, if he did not permit it; neither does he permit
against his Will, but voluntarily. As he is Good, he would not permit Evils to
be done; unless as he is Omnipotent, he could bring Good out of Evil. Now though
some of ours, desirous to explain themselves concerning these most constant and
perpetual Truths, have made use of some Expressions somewhat harsh, they are
not therefore presently to be condemned; much less are others to fasten upon
them whatever may be squeezed from their Sayings by certain violent and
malicious Consequences.

But what Sayings of our Divines will you Romanists produce, to give credit to
your Calumnies, the like to which I will not show you in Scripture? Joseph, Gen
20. 50. said to his Brethren, That the same evil which they had contrived
against him, God had contrived for the best, to the preservation of a mighty
People; that is to say, Divine Providence concurring with their Theft, and
making use of it to a wholesome end. The Lord himself testifies, Exodus 10. 1.
That he exasperated and hardened the heart of Pharaoh and his Servants, though
Moses had wrought all his Miracles in the midst of them. By Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.
11, 12. he declared to David, That he would stir up evil against him out of his
own house, and that he would cause his Wives to be ravished before his face,
and deliver them to his Servants, who should lie with them in the open Sun;
adding also these words, Thou did this secretly, but I will do this thing
before all Israel, and before the Sun. Such like Expressions are to be met
with, Isai. 6. 10. and 63. 17. Act. 4. 27. Romans 1. 24. And would I be prolix, I
could demonstrate, that there has been nothing said by Ours in this Matter, but
that much harsher has fallen from the Pens of the most learned Men in your
Church; nay, what whole Societies maintain at this day in the very Bosom of it.
Let one serve for all; that is to say Bellarmin, who, l. 2. de amiss. Great. c.
13. thus goes on; God does not only permit the Wicked to commit many Evils,
neither does he only forsake the Godly, that they may be constrained to suffer
what ever injuries the Wicked shall offer them; but also he presides over those
evil and malicious Wills, rules and governs them, twists and bends them by
working in them invisibly; so that although they be evil out of their own vicious
Inclinations, yet they are disposed by Divine Providence more to one sort of
Mischief then another.

III. As it cannot be without extreme Injury said of us, That we make God the
Author of Sin; so it is no less maliciously fixed upon us, in your Church, to
the end you may have a Pretense the more freely to condemn us, that we
maintain, That Christ despaired upon the Cross, and that the grievous
Concerning Christ's Despair on the Cross.
Torments which he felt in his Body, would have little availd, unless he had
also suffered in his Soul the Pangs and Torments of the Damned. But look upon
the Tenth Section of the Gallican Catechism, where the contrary is expressly
asserted; that is to say, that Christ still hoped in God in the midst of all
his Agonies, even then when he cried out in the depth of all his Woes, My God,
My God, why have thou forsaken me? As i^ his Father had bin in wrath with him,
and had deserted him. It behooved Christ, to the end he might free the Souls
together with the Bodies, to suffer the Punishment of our Sins, as well in his
Soul as in his Body. The most Learned among you in this Point, are of the same
Opinion with us. Cardinal Cusanus, Exercit. Spirit. l. 10. ex Sermon. Qui per
Spiritum, has uttered those things upon this Subject, without any Censure of
your Church, which would have been adjug'd Blasphemous and Impious in the
Reformed, had they dropped from their Pens. The Passion of Christ (says he) then
which none could be greater, was like that of the Damned, that cannot be more
damned; that is to say, even to the Torments of Hell. In his behalf says the
Prophet David, The pains of Hell compassed me about, nevertheless thou have
brought my Soul out of Hell. But he is the only Person who through such a Death
entered into that Glory. That same Pain of Sense conformable to the Pains of
Hell, he was certainly resolved to suffer, to the Glory of God the Father; that
he might show, that he was to Obey him to the extremity of Punishment. For this
is to glorisie God by all possible manner of means. And thus our Justification
comes solely from Christ. For we Sinners in Him discharge the debt of Infernal
Torments which we justly deserve, that so we may attain to the Resurrection of
Life. Suarez also, of the same Order, in 3 Thom. Quaest. 52. Art. 4. Disput.
43. Sect 1. relates out of Medina, That some Catholics believed, that Christ
suffered outwardly some Pains of the Damned in Hell, yet not in the same manner
as the Damned suffer; that is to say, against their Wills, or with Disorder and
Confusion, but out of extraordinary Charity. What more have ever any of Ours
said, not to offend Christ, but out of a desire to seek the Fountain of
Sweetness in the Bitterness of his Woes; the Harvest of Joy in his Sadness,
Security of Heart in his Horrors, and the^eby to acknowledge his Victory the
more Illustrious, by how much the Combat was more Terrible which he undertook;
and the Triumph the more Glorious, by how much the more Dreadful the Labors
were that he sustained? But from the Pens of which of Ours dropped any thing like
that, which John Ferus both taught and wrote upon this Subject? By Birth a
Teutonic (says Sixtus Senensis, a Dominican Biblioth. l. 4.) of the Order of
Minors, Preacher in the Chief Church at Mentz, a Person highly learned in
Theology, endu'd with a singular Eloquence, whose Equal in the duty of
Evangelical Preaching the Catholic German Churches at this time have not to
show, because he wrote in a more free and polite style Pious and Learned
Meditations, according to the Catholic Doctrine. This Man therefore upon Mat.
27. discoursing of Christ's Exclamation upon the Cross, has these Expressions;
Christ at this hour put off God, not by Exposing himself, but by not Feeling;
he set aside the Father, that he might act the Man. Thus God the Father now
does not act the part of a Father, but of a Tyrant, though in the mean time he
had a most tender Affection for Christ. And in another place; Christ, that he
might set Sinners free, put himself in the place of all Sinners; not Stealing,
nor committing Adultery, nor Murder, etc. but translating to himself the
Wages, Punishment and Deserts of Sinners, which are Cold, Heat, Hunger, Thirst,
Dread of Death, Dread of Hell, Despair, Death, and Hell it self; that he might
overcome Hunger by Hunger, Fear by Fear, Horror by Horror, Despair by Despair,
Death by Death, Hell by Hell, and in a word, Satan by Sitan. Go then, Reverend
Mr. Prior, and bring me any Reformed Doctor that ever talked at this rate,
which nevertheless in Ferus the Monk never any of your Party censured for
Blasphemy.

IV. These more grievous Calumnies being thus wiped off, the rest that remain
behind are too slight for me to spend much time in refuting them. The most of
your Party cry out, That we deserve to be damned, because we are Of Protestants
being Enemies to the Blhssed Virgin and Saints
Enemies to the Blessed Virgin and the Saints, as also to Mortification, etc.
Are we to be traduced as Enemies to the Blessed Virgin, who understand that we
cannot be so, but we must cease to be Christians, who believe her now in
Heaven, enjoying Celestial Glory near her Son? Who know that on Earth she was
the truly happy and blessed Mother of our Lord and Savior? Are we to be
accounted the Saints Enemies, who boast of their Communion in our Creed, and by
the Imitation of their Examples, as much as in us lies, labor up the same Hill
to the same Reward? But you will say, That we Reformed do not adore the Blessed
Virgin, nor the Shrines of the Saints, etc. I Answer, That we abstain from that
sort of Worship, not out of hatred or contempt of the Blessed Virgin, but lest
we should offend them, by paying to them that Religious Worship which is only
due to God. The Faithful in the Old Testament, never gave these Honors to the
Prophets and Patriarchs deceased, and yet they were never accounted their
Adversaries. For four hundred years together there was no such Adoration used
in the Primitive Church. And Antiquity anathematized the Collyridians leaning
that way, and saluting the Holy Virgin by the Title of Queen of Heaven, as we
find in Epiphanius, Haeres. 79. cont. Collyrid. The Body of Mary was really
Holy, but no God. She was really a Virgin, and an honorable Virgin; but not
intended for our Adoration, in regard that she adored him that was begot of her
Flesh. And moreover by the Example of the Angel refusing Adoration and Worship
from John, he proves, That much less the Virgin Mary either desires or ought to
be Worshipped. But what he said particularly of the Virgin, that did St. Austin
affirm at the same time concerning all the Saints; that is to say, That they
are to be Honored in respect of Imitation, not to be Worshipped in respect of
Religion; l. de vera Relig. c. ult.

V. Neither can they find any thing in us, that is repugnant Of Protestants
being Enemies to Chastity, Sobriety, etc.
to Chastity, Sobriety, Mortification of the Flesh, and Study of Good Works.
For to all these things we Pastors frequently and seriously in our Pulpits
exhort our Flocks. Nor by the Grace of God do we so live, that we should be
thought to have proclaimed open War to all Virtue and Godliness. For our not
allowing that Law of Celibacy, so burthenson to the Clergy, is no hatred of
Chastity, when Celibacy it self is that which has turned away so many, and
still hurries multitudes from the true Paths of Chastity. Insomuch as Pius II,
as Platina relates in his Life, was wont to say, That Wedlock was denied the
Priests upon good Grounds, but that for better Reasons it ought to be restored
them.

We are not averse to Sobriety and Fasting, because we reject those
superstitious Observations; upon the Prescribing of which the same thing is
said to us, as formerly they used to say, against whom the Apostle writes, Col.
2. 21. Eat not, taste not, touch not; and to which, upon the score of our
Consciences, we cannot submit. Not that we are so addicted to luxurious Lives,
or so studious to indulge our Appetites; but because they put a Bridle upon our
Consciences, contrary to the Liberty purchased us in Christ; and constitute the
Essence of Fasting, not in humbling the Mind before God, and Veneration of his
Deity; but in the nice Choice of some sorts of Meats, and Rejecting others; and
because they affirm, that by such bodily Exercises, and such kind of Diet, our
Sins may be Expiated, and that Men thereby merit Eternal Life. We do not hate
the Mortification of the Old Man, while we reject the public Whippings and
affected Macerations of those who had rather exercise Cruelty upon Nature, then
correct the Corruption of it, and who seem to bear a hatred to their own Flesh,
contrary to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 29. Whereas they ought rather to
submit the Affections of their Hearts to the Will of God. For if it were so
much a Duty to Chastize and Enslave your outward and visible Bodies, the
Baalites, Brachmans, Priests of the Syrian Goddess, the Mohammedan Monks, and
those Whipsters which about Two hundred years ago the Roman Church numbered in
the List of Heretics, have outdone and still outdo you in those Rigorous
Exercises. But the Body which thou art to subdue, is the Body of Sin; and the
Members to be extirpated, are the Vices of it, as the Apostle says, Col. 3. 5.
Mortify your Members which are upon earth; Fornication, Uncleanness,
inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry.
Lastly; it is no hating of Good Works, to pronounce them necessary for
Salvation; yet so, that they may but only be the way to the Kingdom, and not
the Cause of Reigning; the cause of our Salvation being solely ascribed to the
Mercy and Grace of God in Jesus Christ, and by no means to our own Merits,
joined with his, as if they could be Assistant toward so great a Benefit. But
would to God, that setting aside these Controversies about the Use of Good
Works, we could but give our Minds both of us to practice them with a sincere
Charity; then Mr. Prior would not be so highly exorbitant in his
Unchristianlike Judgment concerning us. Then again, how can any Hatred of the
most sacred Eucharist be affixed upon the Reformed, who urge nothing so much as
the entire taking of it under Both Kinds, in conformity to the Institution of
Christ; and who believe concerning it, both what the Scripture holds forth, and
what the Fathers of the Ancient Church deliver? But it is no hatred of this
most August Sacrament, to refuse to Kneel to it, and to pay the highest degree
of Veneration to it, as it is the Custom in your Roman Church. We abstain from
this Adoration of the Eucharist, lest we should pay to the Creature, what is
only owing to God. The Sacraments are Holy Things, which are to be looked upon
with Decency and Reverence, but not to be Adored. The Brazen Serpent among the
Israelites was a sacred Thing, and as it were the permanent Sacrament of our
future Redemption by the Cross of Christ; but yet the Israelites were
Idolaters, so soon as they began to Adore it and Worship it with Frankincense.
We do not read that the Apostles Worshipped this Sacrament. Christ indeed is to
be Adored in the Use of this Sacrament, as in every Religious Performance; and
in that sense it is true what St. Austin says upon Psa. 98. Let no man eat his
flesh, unless he have first adored; which words, Gloss. decret. in Can.
Accesserunt and distinct. 2. of Consecration, are interpreted of Spiritual
Eating; so that he thence infers an Argument, That no Mouse can receive the
Body of Christ. But the Sacrament it self cannot be the Object of our
Adoration, nor can the Presence of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament be the
Ground of it. Such is the miserable Servitude of the Soul to take Signs and
Symbols for Realities; so that it cannot lift up the Eye of the Mind above the
Corporeal Creature to receive Eternal Light, as St. Austin says, lib. 3. de
Doctrine. Christ. c. 5. Without doubt Antiquity never knew what Adoration of the
Sacrament meant; and as little known to them was that Modern Practice of
carrying it about the Streets, or of erecting to it, in the Highways, Altars
hung about with Tapestry, or of showing it to the People at certain Hours of
the Day, when the Mass is not celebrated. At that time it was distributed to
the People either Sitting or Standing, generally upon the Lord's Days, when it
was chiefly administered; as appears out of Justin, Apol. 2. but never Kneeling;
because it was a Crime among the Primitive Christians to Kneel upon the Lord's
Day, as all the Learned agree. Nor do the Romanists deny but that there is some
danger of Idolatry in this Adoration; because that many things are required in
Transubstantiation, which whether they are really so as they ought to be, is
not evidently apparent to any Man. Therefore the Famous Biel, lect. 50. in Can.
letter O, proposes to himself this difficulty; Because an Error may happen in
Consecration, by means of which the effect of the Consecration is hindered; as
if the Person that Consecrates be no Priest; or because he errs in Form, or
because the due Intention is wanting; nor can he that stands by, be sure that a
Transubstantiation is made; no nor the Priest that celebrates; because he is
not absolutely certain whither he be a Priest or no, in regard the Intention of
his Ordainer is not positively known to him; all which things considered, how
can he that Adores the Sacrament, avoid the danger of Idolatry? For if he
adores an unconsecrated Host, which he thinks to be consecrated, he commits
Idolatry. Nor does he propound any other Remedy to escape this danger of
Idolatry, then a Conditional Adoration; which whether it pleases your modern
Doctors or no, I know not. These are his words, Litt. R. Resp. Secundum Alex.
part. 3. quaest. 30. memb. 3. art. 1. sect. 3. and after him Bishop Thomas, and
St. Bonaventure in 3. distinst. 9. That the Host or Eucharist upon the Altar
ought to be adored, upon condition, that all things requisite to the
Consecration, are so as they ought to be. Since then the Adoration of the
Sacrament is dubious and dangerous, we of the Reformed Church are not to be
accounted Enemies of the Sacrament, because we do not adore it, following that
course which is safest and voidof all danger, lest we should adore what we know
not, like the Samaritans of old, John 4.

Lastly, We cannot be traduced for being Enemies to any professed legal Order,
whether Political or Ecclesiastical; since it is our desire that all things
should be done decently and regularly in the Church, according to the Apostolic
Precept, 1 Cor. 4. 40. And for that we press nothing more urgently in the
Public Government, then due Obedience to the Magistrates, ignorant of the
dangerous Axioms of your Roman Church, which tear up by the Roots the Authority
of Princes, and subject the Heads and Diadems of Kings and Emperors to the
Mitre and Feet of the Pope. Nay, we are in this Point so rigid in our Duty,
that Bellarmin complains, That we give too much Power to Magistrates, c. 17. de
Laicis. But because we hold, That the Laws of Men do not bind the Conscience,
it is not to be taken in such a sense, as if we denied, That Men were to be
obeyed, because of our Consciences; but only as making this difference between
Human and Divine Laws, That the latter only bind and subject the Consciences
immediately and of themselves. And Bellarmin, c. 9. de Laicis, confesses; John
Gerson, Chancellor of the Academy of Paris, de vit. Spirit. Lect. 4. and
Jacobus Almain, a Doctor of the Sorbonn, de Protestat. Ecclesiae, quaest. 1.
cap. 10. both Famous Men, and neither of them taxed with any Error in Faith.

We do not allow so many Rites and Ceremonies in the Church, not out of any
hatred of Order and Decency, but out of a just abhorrence of Tyranny and
Susperstition. The more Night comes on, the more the Darkness increases.
Multitude of Ceremonies are so far from helping, that they stifle Piety. If the
Roman Pontiff pressed no more then only a certain Primacy among the Bishops of
the West, for Orders sake; and that by a positive Human and not Divine Law, he
might then perhaps have some Pretense to complain of us, for refusing to
acknowledge such a Primacy, as Enemies to Order in the Church; and yet there
might be a Decency observed therein, without any such Primacy, as is apparent
from the Example of our Churches. But we are not to be accused of Despising
Order, while we only reject his Authority; in regard he arrogates to himself an
absolute Primacy in the Universal Church, not only of Order, but of Power,
Authority and Jurisdiction; by virtue of which he pretends to be Monarch of the
whole Church jure Divino, contrary to the Saying of St. Cyprian, de Simpl.
prael. A Bishopric is that, of which a part is held by several in particular
to make up the whole.

Thus far we have discussed the more weighty and more heavy Calumnies which are
cast upon the Protestants by the Romanists, on purpose to render them odious to
the People, and that they may have some Pretense to deliver them up to the
Flames of Hell. Now there are some other Motives of this rash Judgment to be
examined, that there may not the least shadow of Reason remain to support it.
There is no Name by which we are more frequently marked out, then that of
Heretics; and under this Title you, Mr. Prior, Anathematize us, though not the
First. For the Pope every year, in his Bull entitled, Caena Domini, brandishes
his Thunder of Excommuication over our Heads, and Interdicts us from all
Society with Roman Catholics; so that they dare not either read our Books, or
hear our Sermons. Wherever the Rigor of the Inquisition reigns, our People
are hurried before its cruel Tribunal, as to the Altars of Busiris, and the
Roman Doctors presently Preach to us the Axioms of their School; That Heretics
and Excommunicated Persons, ipso facto, lose the Dominion and Property of their
Goods and Estates; That they are incapable of all lawful Jurisdiction; That
they do more harm in a Commonwealth then Whores; nay then Jews and Turks; so
that it is better to tolerate Brothel-houses and Synagogues then their Meetings:
That for this reason the Pope has Power to deprive Kings of their Dignity; to
absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity given to the Magistrates: That a
Husband may forsake his Wife upon this account, if she presume to bring up the
Children, common to both, in Heresy, although the Husband had condescended and
engaged his Promise upon the Contract of Marriage. Lastly, That Faith given to
Heretics, may be violated without any remorse of Conscience.

However I maintain this Crime of Heresy to be unjustly, and out of mere
Calumny fixed upon Us, the word being Whether Protestants be Heretics.
taken in that Sense, wherein the Scripture condemns Heresy; as when St. Paul
reck'ns it among the Fruits of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 20. and commands Titus to
reject a Heretic, Tit. 3. 10. I say Protestants are no Heretics in that sense
wherein Heresy is condemned in Scripture. Certain it is, that the
Signification of this word is in general more diffused among the Ancients, and
in particular more largely used among the Romanists, and that among both they
are frequently taxed of Heresy, who according to the Scripture are very remote
from it. First in general among the Ancients: For Philastrius Bishop of
Brescia, Contemporary with St. Ambrose, reck'ns for Heresy the Opinion of
those that attributed the Epistle to the Hebrews, to Clement or Barnabas; also
the Opinion of them that affirmed the Stars to be fixed in their Celestial
Globes. Whether or no were the Quartodecimans justly deemed Heretics, because
they would have Easter to be precisely celebrated upon the Fourteenth Moon? For
this was the Opinion of all the Churches of Asia the less, and which
Polycrates, a holy Man, stiffly maintains from Apostolical Tradition. And when
Victor Bishop of Rome, presumed, about Two hundred years after Christ, for that
reason to Excommunicate the Asiatic Churches; that is to say, to renounce
Communion with them; Irenaeus of Lions sharply reproved him, as the Epistles of
Polycrates and Irenaeus extant about this Matter in Eusebius, declare, Hist.
Eccles. l. 5. c. 23. and 24. Was Aetius deservedly numbered among the Heretics,
because he acknowledged no difference, jure Divino, between a Bishop and a
Presbyter? For it is not evident that the Scripture acknowledges any such
difference; and that St. Jerome upon cap. 2. of the Epistle to Titus, was
plainly of the same Opinion; nay, and according to Medina in Bellarmin, That
St. Ambrose, St. Austin, Sedulius, Primasius, and other the most Famous Fathers
of the Church, were all of the same Judgment.

Then again, without question, Rome does no way approve the Ancients for
numbering the Angelics among the Heretics, because they gave Religious Worship
to Angels, which she herself defends; or those who by St. Austin are called
Nudipedales, or Pattalorynchites; against the former of which it is objected,
That they went Barefoot, seeing that at this day this is one of the greatest
Marks of extraordinary Sanctity among you Romanists. The other are taxed to
have professed a certain sort of Religious Silence, which the Carthusian Monks
however make no small part of their Glory. Or the Collyridians of Epiphanius,
Here Is. 79. who offered to the Blessed Virgin little Cakes or Wiggs, in Greek
called (...), and gave her the Title of Queen of Heaven: Which they that now
refuse to do, are all accounted Heretics. Or the Starolatrae of Nicephorus,
Hist. l. 18. c. 54. who, as the Name imports, worshipped the Cross; which most of
you assert is a Duty to be done; Gretser the Jesuit affirming, who in that,
follows Thomas, Cajetan, Valentia and Vasquez, that it is the more common
Opinion among those of his Religion, l. 1. de Cruce, c. 49.

More paricularly among the Modern Romanists under Gregory VII. The Collation
of Benefices by Princes, and by Caesar, was called the Simonian and Henrician
Heresy. And as often as in Matters merely Political any difference happened
between the Kings and Emperors and the Bishops of Rome, they declared them
Heretics. Thus Boniface VIII, declared Philip the Fair, King of France, a
Heretic, because he sent none of his Soldiers to the Holy War. Thus John
Albret, King of Navar, was declared a Heretic by Julius II, because he took
part with Lewis XII, though the Quarrel was not about Matter of Faith; and by
virtue of that Condemnation he lost his Kingdom, which the Spaniard has kept
ever since. John XXII, pronounced Lewis of Bavaria, the Emperor, a Heretic,
because he defended the Cause of the Franciscans, at that time out of the
Pope's Favor; but more particularly that of Ockam. I forbear to mention any
more.

We must therefore restrain the Signification of this word, and a little more
diligently examine who is properly a Heretic, to the end we may the more easily
prove the Protestants not to be guilty of this Crime. An Heretic (in my
Opinion) is one who for the sake of Temporal Profit, but chiefly of Honor and
Supremacy, or of Lordship, either founds or follows False and New Opinions.
Thus St. Austin, de utilitate ad cred. Honor. c. 1. Now in this sense we are
not Heretics: For though the Opinions were False which we uphold, yet we could
not be said to follow them for the sake of any Temporal Profit, more especially
of Honor or Supremacy, but only for the obtaining of Salvation, and upon the
only Motive of our Consciences; in regard it is plain to all the World, that
God has annexed to our Profession Reproach, the Cross and Poverty; and that the
Protestants often experience the Truth of that Sentence of St. Paul, All that
will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. Let
Cardinal Bellarmin come in for a share too. Why? Because he has lit upon a most
powerful means for me to demonstrate to Mr. Prior, That We are no HERETICS. He
therefore, c. 8. de not. Eccles. going about to prove, that there is no Church
among the Greeks, notwithstanding the continued Succession of their Bishops
from the Apostles time; at least from the Reign of Constantine the Great, under
whom he believes the Constantinopolitan Church began, says, That the Greeks
were lawfully convicted in three full Councils, the Lateran, that of Lions, and
the other of Florence, of Heresy and Schism, more especially of the Heresy
about the Proceeding of the Holy Ghost from the Son. This Question about the
Proceeding of the Holy Ghost, I do not pretend to enter into; nor do I see any
great difference between the Latins, affirming the Holy Ghost to proceed from
the Father and the Son; and the Greeks, alleging that He proceeds from the
Father through the Son. This is that which I think worthy Observation, That
after all the Tridentin Decisions, whereby the greatest part of the Opinions of
our Churches were condemned for Heresies, Bellarmin attributes no other Heresy
to the Greeks, besides that of the Proceeding of the Holy Ghost. Whence it
follows, that among the Greeks, the Marriage of Priests, Communicating under
Both Kinds, and with Leavened Bread; the Rejecting Extreme Unction, Auricular
Confession, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and Pontifical Monarchy, were no
Heresies; in all which the Orientals agree with us* Now if these Articles of
the Greeks had bin Heretical, how comes it to pass that the Lateran, Lions and
Florentine Councils, which inquired into their Errors, past them by? But if
they were not Heretical among the Greeks in the East, why should they be so
among the Protestants in the West? If among the Greeks it be no Heresy, but
only a Schism to reject the Papal Authority, and to shake off his Yoke, why
must it be a pernicious and capital Heresy among the Protestants? Neither is
it to be doubted, but that if the Greeks would have subjected themselves in the
Lateran Council to the Sea of Rome, all the abovementioned Articles, except the
denial of the Pope's Supremacy, had been allowed them. Whence it is apparent
that those Articles are neither Heretical nor pernicious in Faith, nor
destructive of Salvation; since it was possible that the Greeks retaining them,
might nevertheless have bin true Members of the Catholic Church, and
consequently capable of Eternal Life.

But that no Man may think I am overcuriously romaging for my Justification in
the Thesis's of my Adversaries, that I may slip out at length at some
Backdoor, I shall add some direct Reasons for our Innocence, which cannot be
Answered.

First therefore, no Man can be traduced as a Heretic, and branded with an
Infamous Crime, unless it be sufficiently apparent, that He, as the Scripture
says, has receded from the Holy Command of God, and suffered Shipwreck of his
Faith. For as St. Austin says, de unit. Eccles. c. 5. No Man is to be branded
with an ignominious Mark, unless it be first proved by most manifest Proofs,
that the Mark belongs to Him. And therefore formerly Councils were assembled,
as well Provincial as General, for the Conviction of Heretics; wherein it was
lawful for the Offenders to defend themselves, and the Cause was seriously
examined by the Rule of Faith, and the Documents of Sacred Scripture. Neither
did Passion prevail among Them, but Truth and the Fear of God. But in respect
of the Protestants, no such thing was ever observed; for against them they
began preposterously with Execution. The first Arguments of their Adversaries,
were Halters, Fire and Sword, according to the Dystich affixed to the Bed of
Charles V, at the Augustan Diet, in the Year 1530.

Vtere jure tuo, Caesar, servosque Lutheri
Ense, Rota, Ponto, Funibus, Igne neca.
Caesar, use thy own Power, and Luther's fry
With Halters, Swords, Wheels, Fire and Sea destroy.
Whence it came to pass, that after a thousand sorts of Executions, and
numberless Martyrs consumed by violent Deaths; at length a Council was
assembled, but packt, and consisting of none but the Capital Enemies of the
Protestants; not to hear them calmly and mildly, nor to discuss their Cause
with Charity and Meekness, but to brandish and rattle over their Heads the
Thunder os Anathema's. Neither were they ever admitted or heard in this
Council, I mean that of Trent; the History of which, if read, is sufficient to
display the Justice of it. Nay, Rome it self was ashamed of this Council; for
she only published the Canons and Decrees, but diligently suppressed the Acts;
which nevertheless were afterward, through the singular Providence of God,
brought to lightby Paul Sarpio, a Venetian, of the Order of the Servites, under
the Name of Pietro Soave Polano, to the great astonishment and detestation of
all Men, whose Judgments were more sound and impartial.

In the Second place, there is no Heresy, where there is no stubborn
Obstinacy, nor wilful persisting in the Error. This St. Austin teaches us,
Epist. 162. They who defend not their Opinion with any stubborn Animosity, though
false and perverse, more especially if not brought forth by the boldness of
their own Presumption, but having received it from their Parents, either
seduced or fallen into Error, seek after the Truth with industrious Care, ready
to be corrected when they have found it, are not to be numbered among Heretics.
Now the Reformed are far from any such Stubbornness; nothing retains them in
their Religion, except the force of Conscience through the evidence of Truth.
We daily offer those who accuse us of Heresy, to forsake the Error, if we are
in any, so they show it to us with the Light of Truth. For with that only
Daughter of Heaven we are enamored even to death, who alone can recover and
assert our freedom. If we discover any extraordinary Zeal and Fervor (I wish it
were more fervent) in our Profession, that is not to be imputed to any Spirit
of Contradiction, but to that most firm Persuasion of our Hearts, through the
Celestial Illumination of the Divine Word, that we are in the way of Truth. But
yet a little farther.

Thirdly, As a Cat has an enmity against a Bat, and will Whether Protestants be
Sehismatics.
eat it, either because she takes it for a Mouse, or a Bird; so you Romanists
prosecute us Protestants with an implacable Hatred, and damn us to the Flames
of Hell, either as Heretics, or, if that Pretense fail, as Schismatics. For
they who deal most gently by us, can afford us no better then to lay to our
Charge the Crime of Schism, the Rending of the seamless Garment of Christ, the
Viper's Skin, and the breach of the Churches Unity. But as far as we are from
Heresy, so far likewise are we from Schism; and of this Crime it will be as
easy to clear our selves as of the former.

First therefore, though the first Authors of the Reformation had overhastily
deserted the Roman Communion; which cannot be said, in regard that they tried
all ways to preserve themselves in it, with safety to their Consciences;
nevertheless they who were born after the Schism, and prefer the Protestant
Communion before the Roman, because they find Satisfaction of Conscience in it,
which they have no prospect of in the other Communion, cannot be accused of
Schism, nor can be censured to have lost the hopes of Salvation, because they
persevere in the Protestant Communion. This perhaps, Mr. Prior, you look upon
as a Paradox, and yet it may be proved without any great difficulty. Certain it
is, that formerly, under Jeroboam, ten entire Tribes, a Schism happening,
deserted the Communion of the Church and Temple of Jerusalem, of which God had
said, My Name shall abide there; and having made choice of Dan and Bethel for
the places of Public Worship, joined Idolatry to their Schism. For the Calves
at Dan and Bethel, under which they adored God, were most assuredly Idols.
Nevertheless it is a Question whether the Posterity of these Schismatics, born
in the time of the Schism it self, and as it were carried away with the Torrent
of it, are to be excluded from Salvation; so that they abstained from the
Worship of Idols at that time. The reason of the Doubt seems very great; for
that God, long after the Schism, still acknowledged the Ten Tribes for his
People; sent his Prophets to them, and entrusted them with his Extraordinary
Oracles. If then it cannot be said of these Ten Tribes, so notoriously
Schismatical, that there was nothing remaining of the Covenant of God, and
Light of Nature for them, who were as it were swept away with the Torrent of
Schism; much less are the Modern Protestants to be excluded from Salvation, and
formally to be accounted Heretics, though it should be granted, that the first
Authors of the Schism did sin against the Rules of Charity, and overhastily
broke the Bond of Unity, especially seeing that the Divine Worship under the
New Testament is not fixed to Rome and the Quirinal Mount, as it was to Sinai,
and the Temple of Jerusalem.

But there is no necessity that we should over earnestly desire the Assistance
of the Ten Tribes; our Cause would be but in a desperate Condition, should it
stand in need of their Aid. I must confess, we did depart from the Church of
Rome, and that another Worship was set up in the West as to External Rites,
then was publicly received before the time of that departure. But I deny that
this departure, so far as concerns our selves, to be a Schism; rather I averr,
on the other side, that it was lawful and just, and that they are to be
accounted Schismatics who were the occasion of so necessary a departure, that
caused the Wound to Gangrene, and shut the Gate against all Peace and Reunion
of the Church. For sometimes it may be convenient to desert some Societies that
profess the Name of Christ, if there be taught among them any other Gospel then
what we have received from the Apostles. This is a thing not to be questioned.
Hence Apoc. 2. 6. the Ephesians are commended, because they hated the
Nicolaitans. On the other side, the Pergamenians are reproved, ver. 15, 16.
because they gave them a Toleration. Hence in the Ancient Church, the Orthodox
and Catholics always very sedulously deserted the Communion of Heretics. Rome
it self, which now accuses us of Schism, in the very Infancy of the Christian
Religion departed from the Asiatic Churches upon a slight difference about
Easter Day. And it is long since that the Romanists broke the Bond of Unity
with the whole East. But it is not long since, that the Commonwealth of Venice
being Excommunicated by Paul V, the Jesuits were seen openly to desert the
whole Territory; so that they rather chose to renounce their Temples, their
Altars, and their Ordinary Worship, then remain in the least Communion with the
Venetian. So that they are not simply to be blamed who separate, but they that
separate unjustly and rashly. Let us see then whether or no our Separation were
just and necessary, that we may free it from being Schismatical.

Certainly it cannot be said, that we separated willingly and of our own
accords, but constrained and expelled by all manner of violences. In the very
Bosom of the Roman Church, we importunately desired a Reformation of Abuses,
which process of time had multiplied, as well in Doctrine as in Discipline; and
which the Grandees and People in the Churches of Germany, France, England, and
the Low Countries, most earnestly longed for, both in the Head and Members. But
what was done? They were not only not heard, much less heard in so just a
Petition, but all severity was exercised against them with Temporal and
Spiritual Arms; Fire, Sword and Halters were made use of to extirpate out of
the World those whom Anathema's and the Thunder of Excommunication had expelled
from all Public Communion. Thus Excommunicated, Expelled, and liable to dire
Persecution, what should we do? It was not safe to redeem your Communion at the
Price of our Consciences, by subscribing to the Errors themselves, and by
receiving all those School-Assertions which we deemed contrary to the Rules of
Christian Doctrine, as Articles of our Faith. Therefore it was necessary that
another Worship should be set up, that other Pulpits should be erected, and
that other Congregations should be assembled together, which was every where
done by the Authority of the Magistrate, whose Duty it is to protect the
Church, and sedulously to take care for the Reformation of Doctrine and
Discipline therein, if corrupted through the neglect of the Ordinary Pastors.
Becanus the Jesuit, Analog. Vet. and Nov. Test. c. 26. number. 4. reck'ns up
several Reformations made in the Jewish Church by Pious Kings, such as were
Asa, Jehosaphat, Josia, Ezechia and Joas, who most certainly had sufficient
Authority to reform the Worship of God, and to restore it to its Primitive
Purity. Therefore it cannot be denied, but that those Christian Princes and
Magistrates, who in the times of our Forefathers, put their helping Hands to
the Reformation, had a Right to labor the Institution of another Worship, more
Pure, more Holy, and more Plain then that from which they were forced to make a
Separation, because they had required a Reformation of it. Moreover, though Rome
had not forsaken us, yet there was a necessity of forsaking her; because she
refused to reform her own Abuses, and long contracted Corruptions. We have in
this particular a most express Command, Apoc. 18. 4. Come out of her my people,
that you be not partakers of her crimes, and receive not of her punishments.
Which Command is of so much the greater moment, because the Jesuits
themselves, Ribera upon the 14. and 18. Apoc. and Viegas upon the 18. interpret
that to be meant of Rome, not the Ethnic, but the Christian Rome, and such as
it is in Scripture foretold it shall be under Antichrist. To us also (says
Viegas, sect. 1. in 18. Apoc.) it seems that the same thing ought to be said
with Aretas, Primasius, Ambrose, Jerome, and others, (observe what Testimonies
he cites and how many) that the Idolatry of it is here meant, and that Rome
shall depart from the Faith, and so shall become the Habitation of Devils, and
of every unclean Spirit, and every unclean Bird, by reason of her execrable
Enormities, and Superstition of Idolatry, which at that time shall rage far and
near in the Roman City and Empire. But you would say, Mr. Prior, if you had any
Wit, how comes it to pass that you have now more nice Consciences, then your
Forefathers had before the Reformation, who died in the Communion of the Roman
Church, and of whose Salvation you are unwilling to make any doubt?

I Answer, first; That the Consciences of others are no Rule to ours, and that
every Man ought to follow his own and not another. Would you have me, as you
desire in your Letter, that I should embrace the Roman Communion? What if I
should press you to embrace Ours, wherein so many Men enjoy the Tranquillity of
their Consciences?

Secondly, I say that our Forefathers might with safety to their Consciences
persevere in the Roman Communion, notwithstanding they abominated the Abuses
and Corruptions of it, because God had not shown them a way to depart; nor were
the Abuses as yet so palpably intolerable, because they had not as yet
obtained the force of Law, nor were established under the Penalties of
Excommunication. But the Example of our Ancestors cannot be applied to us,
because that God set up the Standard of the Gospel in another place to Us. He
called to Us to come out of Babel, when the Opinions of the Scholastics were
changed into Articles of Faith. So long as the time appointed for their
Captivity lasted, the Israelites might securely abide either in Egypt or Babel:
But it had bin a Crime for them to have remained there any longer, when God
called them forth to Liberty. He would be very ridiculous indeed, who having
rich and fertile Pastures, should neglect them, and rather choose to carry his
Flock into noxious Grounds, in hopes that his Sheep would let alone the hurtful
Weeds, and only feed upon the wholesome Herbs. So were he deservedly to be
derided, who should prefer the noxious and dangerous Pastures of the Roman
Church, before the well Wooded Gardens of the Reformed Churches, in hopes of
discerning the poisonous Weeds from the wholesome Herbage, as it is very probable
our Ancestors did.

Lastly, I add this farther; That I do not here dispute, Whether the Roman
Communion may be retained, without the loss of Eternal Salvation? This Question
belongs to another place. But, Whether we are Schismatics, because we have
deserted it? Now I maintain the Negative, because that Conscience alone
summoned us to the Separation, without any other Consideration; nay, contrary
to all other worldly Considerations which persuaded us to adhere to it. Some
there are, who to convict us of Schism, reproach the Calling of our Pastors,
but with an Argument too weak for the Proof of so great a Crime. Formerly the
Novatians and Donatists made a Schism in the Church, because they would not
submit to Bishops of Places Canonically instituted, but set up Bishops of their
own choosing, who, for that they were destitute of Canonical Election, wanted a
lawful Calling. But there was no such thing could be said of our first Pastors
in the Work of Reformation. For they were not elected and constituted hand over
head, in Opposition to others already Canonically instituted, as the Novatians
in the Roman See opposed Novatus against the Council; but were lawfully and
canonically constituted in their Functions, according to all the Ceremonies
then used in the Church, and by the nature of their Calling, by which they knew
themselves bound to propagate the Truth, were constrained in their Consciences
to oppose themselves against the Abuses and Corruptions at that time crept into
the Church, and to apply themselves to a Reformation. But as they were lawfully
Called, so they could impart that Calling to others; and by that means it is
derived to us, and so by us may be derived to our Successors. For they are not
to be thought to have lost their Calling, for opposing themselves against the
Abuses of that Church wherein they received it. Nay, they had bin unworthy of
it, had they not opposed themselves against those Corruptions that were so well
known to them. For every Church that confers upon any Man the sacred Function
of the Public Ministry, seems to say to him, what Trajan the Emperor was wont
to say to the Person whom he created Master of the Horse, by the delivery of a
Sword, Use this in my defense, if my Commands are just; but if unjust, make use
of it against me. Thus a Pastor Canonically ordaind, ought to make use of his
Calling, to support the Doctrine of the Church wherein he received it, if it be
conformable to Truth; but if not, to oppose it.

Nor does their being Excommunicated, deprive them of their Calling; because it
was unjust, and made use of to support the Errors which they impugned, and to
keep up in the Temple the Money Changers Tables, which they endeavored to
overturn. Nay, the very Romanists themselves confess, that the Character of the
Clergy is indelible, and that an Excommunicated Person may Consecrate, Preach,
and administer the Sacraments effectually. Neither is it to be said, that the
first Reformers were mere Presbyters, that could not confer their Calling upon
others, in regard that Ordination belongs only to the Bishops. For in regard
the sacred Scriptures do not so plainly teach us what is the difference between
a Presbyter and a Bishop; and that some of yours, particularly Medina, confess
that the Function of Ordaining may as well belong to a Presbyter as a Bishop,
you ought not to make any great difficulty in this Case, in regard the Dispute
is not yet determined.

To which I add, That in several places the Reformation began from the Bishops,
who therefore held their former Dignity in the Reformation, which they held
before. And it is a wonder, Mr. Prior, that you and yours should carp at the
Calling of our Pastors, to prove our want of Succession of Pastors, when your
selves acknowledge, that any Man without Orders, without a Character, without
any Call, may Consecrate the Eucharist. I am contented with one unanswerable
Argument. Your Durandus, in his Rationale, lib. 4. cap. 35. 7. also the Author
of the Curates Manual, de Sacr. Eucharist. cap. 10. and many others, give this
Reason for the Secreta, (i. e. the speaking the words of Consecration so low as
not to be heard) being introduced in the Canon of the Mass: Because that
formerly, when the Canon was repeated with a loud Voice, the People readily
learnt the Rites of Consecrating; whence it came to pass, that the Shepherds in
the Country, laying the Bread upon a Stone, and repeating over it the Canon and
Words of the Consecration, presently changed their Bread into Flesh. Now either
this must be a Fable, which however you frequently make use of to establish
your Figment of Transubantiation; or else you must allow that any Man may
Consecrate and Celebrate the most August of all Sacraments, though neither Called
nor Ordained, as we cannot believe those Shepherds to have bin.

But as the Crime of Schism is falsely laid to our Charge, so are we most
falsely said to be without the Church, without which there is no Salvation. We
have separated indeed from the Roman Communion, but it does not thence follow
that we are out of the Church of God, in regard that by the Grace of God we are
Members of the Catholic Church, professing Christianity, baptized in the Name
of the most holy Trinity, in all things adhering to the Head and Foundation,
Christ Jesus. Cardinal Hosius, in his Confession, acknowledges, That the Church
is there wherever the Belief of the Mediator is. We have a Belief of a
Mediator, through the favor of God; and therefore we are hated at Rome,
becaose we acknowledge Christ to be the only Mediator. Besides that, we have not
departed from your Roman Church, unless in such things wherein she first
departed from the Word of God, and the Purity of Antiquity, adhering still to
the same Communion of Faith and Charity with Her in the Fundamentals of
Christianity; and knowing that we and the Members of your Communion are
Brethren in Baptism, as the Israelites and Jews were Brethren in Circumcision,
though in External Worship they differed very much.

Nor can any probable Reason be invented to convince us, that any Man ought to
be subject to the Bishop of Rome, and retain his Communion, to the end he may
be in a Church out of which there is no Salvation. So many Christians as are
within the ancient Patriarchates of the East, and who exceed you Romanists far
in number, are not rashly to be said to be out of the Church of Christ, because
they refuse to be under the Pope's Yoke. The Churches of Asia were not excluded
from the Covenant of Christ by the rash Excommunication of Pope Victor, because
they separated from him upon the difference about Easter Day. The Roman Clergy
separated from their Pope Liberius, who had subscribed to Arianism, without
incuring the blame of Schism, or the loss of Salvation. The Famous St. Cyprian
Bishop and Martyr, whom your Church afterward worshipped among the rest of her
Saints, died out of the Communion and Subjection to the Sea of Rome, divided
from her both in Faith and Affection, by reason of his Doctrine of Re-baptizing
Heretics, was very hardly thought of by Stephen Bishop of Rome; and yet no Man
hitherto made any doubt but that he obtained Salvation. And therefore it is an
idle thing to exact from us Subjection to the Sea of Rome, to the end we may be
in the Church, and obtain Salvation, especially if the Papacy be now Extinct,
and that there has bin no lawful Pope for a long time.

Now this is easily proved: For that I may pass over in silence so many Schisms
by which the Succession of the Popes was interrupted; So many Simoniacal
Elections into that See, which are recorded in History; so many Popes in the
Tenth Age to be called Apostatic, and Renouncers of Christ, rather then
Apostolic (upon the Testimony of Genebrade) I use a new Argument to which you
Romanists can make no Answer. It is confirmed as well by the Canon Law, as by
Custom time out of mind, That a Pope may constitute a new Law, and a new Form
for Choosing a Successor; which not being observed, an Election otherwise made,
is void. Hence Julius II, grieving that he had invaded the Supreme Authority by
Simony, made a new Law concerning the Simoniacal Election of the Pope for the
future; whereby he ordained, That any Pope who after him should be Simoniacally
elected, should be looked upon as an Intruder, a Magician, a Publican, an Arch
Heretic, and that he should by no means be acknowledged for a lawful Pope. But
that Sixtus V, was chosen Simoniacally, is a thing which almost every Body
knows.

For that he might be elected, he bought the Suffrages of Cardinal d'Este, and
the Cardinals depending upon him, and covenanted with him in a Writing drawn up
and subscribed with his own Hand, that during his Pontificate, he would never
make Jeronymo Matthei, who was de'Este's Enemy, a Cardinal, upon condition that
by d'Este's means he obtained the Pontificate. Upon which being made Pope by
d'Este and his Faction, he confessed himself to be the work of his hands.
However Sixtus forfeited his Faith to Him, and created Matthei Cardinal for all
that; which Cardinal d'Este took so ill, that he sent the Contract between him
and Sixtus to Philip II, King of Spain, who in the Year 1589, sent the Duke of
Sessa his Extraordinary Ambassador to Rome, to give Notice to Sixtus of his
Intentions to call a General Council upon the Information of a Simoniacal
Election, and to require the Cardinals created by the Predecessors of Sixtus,
and other Ecclesiastics, to be present at a Council to be assembled at Sevil;
but because upon intimation of the Council Sixtus died for Despair, the
business went no farther. This is related in a certain Book, entitled Papatus
Romanus, cap. 10. page 200, etc. Seeing then that Sixtus was an Illegal and
Simoniac Intruder, certain it is that the Papacy ceased in him; so that they
who succeeded were no true Popes, because they were elected by the Cardinals
which he created; who being Intruders, as created by a Simoniac, wanted Right
of Election, as well according to the Council of Constance, as for that
according to the Rule of the Lawyers, No Man can transfer more Right to
another, then he has himself.

And therefore the whole World ought not to be shut up in one City. Some are of
Cephas, others of Paul, others of Clement; let it suffice a Christian to be of
Christ. Whoever fears God, and works Righteousness in whatever part of the
World he is, is acceptable to God. If two or three are gathered together in the
Name of Christ, he will be in the midst of them. The Supernal Jerusalem, which
enjoys her Liberty, is the Mother of us all. We shall not be Judged by the
Roman or Popes Communion, but by the Communion of Saints, and of Christ.
Therefore we cannot be Schismatics, upon this just, necessary and sound
Separation of ours.

There are still remaining, Reverend Mr. Prior, some other Motives of yours to
this rash Judgment which you give of us, which are now to be brought to the
Touch with the rest. There are some who believe, a Posteriori, that we are
deservedly to be listed among the number of the Damned, because we stand
Excommunicated by the Pope and the Catholic Church: But in regard these
Excommunications do not strike us, but either as Heretics or Schismatics, they
do us no hurt, in regard we are neither Heretics nor Schismatics, as has bin
already shown. If they are necessarily to be numbered among the Damned, whom the
Pope has Excommunicated, of necessity all in Asia the less, who died during the
Excommunication of Victor upon the Paschal difference, must be by all
Christians excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven; and that the Sacraments, which
you our Adversaries nevertheless will allow, preserve their Excellency by way
of Physical Cause, and in general all Public Worship must be deprived of their
Efficacy in all Provinces which are sometimes subject to Papal Interdiction.
Nor ought we to pass over in silence that Observation of St. Jerome upon that
place of Mat. 16. wherein the Keys of Heaven are promised to St. Peter. This
Place (says the holy Man) the Bishops and Presbyters not understanding, assume
to themselves something of the Pride of the Pharisees, even to Damn the
Innocent, and Absolve the Guilty; whereas God regards not the Sentence of the
Priest, but the Life of the Offender. But according to this Saying of St.
Jerome, all Casuists and Canonists acknowledge that an unjust Excommunication is
Invalid; and that such an Excommunicate may both Administer and Receive the
Sacraments with a good Conscience.

An Excommunication without a just Cause, is not valid in the Interior Court;
therefore such a one may Celebrate, where it is no Scandal (says the Jesuit
Emanuel Sa, voce Excommunicat. 4. But Toletus, lib. Instruct. Sacram. cap. 10.
number. 7. more positively asserts, That there is no unjust Sentence of
Excommunication can bind, either as to God, or as to the Church. But it is
unjust (as he says again 1.) from some defect; which if it be Essential, makes
it no Excommunication; and then it is not to be dreaded, neither does it bind
either in the Court of Heaven or Earth: Which he confirms by the Testimony of
several Canonists. If therefore we are unjustly Excommunicated, and as the
Schoolmen Phrase it, Clave Errante, or with an Erring Key, and that these
Excommunications are of no force, Our Damnation cannot be inferred a Posteriori
from such Sentences; but that they are unjust and null, I shall easily
demonstrate. An Excommunication is said to be null, says Toletus, ibid. 4. if
it contain an intolerable Error, etc. Now then a Sentence is said to contain an
intolerable Error, when any one is Excommunicated; because he does that which
is Good in it self, or does not do that which is in its own act Unlawful. Why
then are we Excommunicated? Surely because we do that which is good in it self,
applying our selves to the Word of God, and will not adhere to those who would
have us to be wiser then the Scripture can make us, and refusing to do what is
evil in it self, or at least what we judge in our Consciences to be so, and
because we adhere not to a Worship unlawful and contrary to Scripture.

An Excommunication is void, if it be pronounced by one already Excommunicated
or Suspended from Jurisdiction, or Interdicted, or after a lawful Appeal, says
Emanuel Sa, as above, 1. And Toletus has the same words. Now such is the
Excommunication which is thundered over our Heads. For it is long ago that the
Bishops of Rome through their Simonies have according to the Canons incurred
the Penalty of most dreadful Excommunications; so that they are incapable of
all Jurisdiction. For an Excommunicate cannot exercise an act of Jurisdiction,
without sinning; nay, if it be a public Excommunication, all his Sentences are
void, says Toletus, lib. 1. Inst. Sacerd. cap. 13. 4. And who can question,
since the first Punishment of a Simoniac is, ipso facto, Papal Excommunication,
as Toletus asserts, lib. 5. cap. 93. but that he is notoriously and publicly
Excommunicated, who is notoriously and publicly Simoniacal, as I have
particularly made it appear of Sixtus V, who was nevertheless the Author of
that Bull, entitled de Coena Domini, in the Form in which it is now Extant,
whereby the Protestants are solemnly Excommunicated every year by the Pope?

To this I add, That they two can have no Jurisdiction over Us, who Curse us to
the Pit of Hell, and so their Excommunications, though they two were lawful
Bishops, are void. For if a Bishop cannot Excommunicate one that is out of his
Diocese, or in a Priviledg'd Place, as Emanuel Sa affirms, as above, Sect. 12.
By what Right does the Bishop of Rome pretend to Excommunicate us, who never
belonged to a Diocese? Or to arrogate a general Jurisdiction and Authority over
the whole Church of God, which he had never any thing to do with? In a word, we
value not their inconsiderate, unjust and void Excommunications.

They are dull and silly Thunders that hurt no body. Such sort of Curses, God,
for the benefit of his true Adorers, turns into Blessings, according to that of
David, Psalm. 109. ver. 23. From such Tempests the Damnation of the Protestants
is no more to be inferred, then of theirs who formerly professed Christ,
because the Scribes and Pharisees Excommunicated them after their Solemn manner.

No less ridioulous are they who allege, that the Protestants Concerning want
of Miracles among Protestants.
are therefore damned, because they profess a Religion which wants the Seal of
Miracles. Truly you Romanists do very well to put us in mind of your Miracles.
For most Learned Men of your Communion complain, that the Golden Legends of the
Saints are stust with Fables, and Couterfeit Miracles, as you may read
particularly in Melchior Canus, producing the Testimony of Ludovicus Vives,
lib. 2. Locor. cap. 6. Their Frauds and Impostures are everywhere obvious; by
which the saying of Lyranus upon Dan. 2. before the Reformation; Sometimes
there was in the Church a notorious Delusion of the People by Miracles
counterfeited by the Priests and their Adherents for Temporal Gain. Those
Imaginary Miracles, with which the Protestants were to be convinced, in regard
they are Signs for Unbelievers, are not only very seldom wrought before us, but
are many times said to be hindered by our presence.

The Mexican and Japanic Prodigies, of which the Jesuits so loudly boast, are
but Imaginations, since Acosta, Victoria and Canus expressly acknowledge, that
no Miracles are wrought in India to promote Conversion. And Acosta denies that
there is any use of Miracles there, lib. 6. proc. Ind. Salut. cap. 17. In those
places (says he) there is no need of any more then good Works, and of shining
so before Men, which the Natives beholding, may glorify the Father which is in
Heaven.: This is the most potent Miracle to persuade. But Francis Victoria,
Relect. 5. Prop. 5. is of Opinion, That the Christian Faith is not so
sufficiently preached to the Barbarians, that they should be bound to believe
under New Sin: For I hear of no Miracles and Signs, no Examples of a Life so
Religious, but of many Scandals, and many Impieties. Insomuch that Canus
applies those idle Relations to the common Spanish Proverb, Long Ways, long
Lies; as if they might lie by authority, who tell Stories done or counterfeited
in remote and distant Regions. So that if Xaverius the New Apostle of Japan,
had had the Gift of Miracles, which is so easily believed of him, he ought
chiefly then to have exercised his Gift in the Ship, which carried him from
Malaca to Japan, where he was forced, nolens volens, To behold the Mariners
sacrificing to an Image of the Devil, after the manner of their Country, and
imploring the Answers of the Image touching the Success of their Voyage, which,
as the Barbarians said and believed, were sometimes favorable, sometimes
terrible. Nor would he have needed, had he received the Gift of working
Miracles from Heaven, to have spent so much time in learning the Japan
Language. The words of Xaverius are these; So soon as we have obtained the
assistance of Language, we hope that by the assistance of God the business will
proceed much better; for now we only converse among them like a sort of Images
(as not long ago, in the Tract of the Rhine, the Capuchin Marco de Aviano, to
put off his Miracles, ran about, like a Barbarian, among the Germans, for no
body understood what he said) they talk much concerning us, and turn and look
one upon another, while we are mute, and are constraind as it were to go to
School again, till we have learnt the Elements of the Language. Is here, I
beseech you, any Apostolic Character to be found? Yet all these are Extant,
Epist. lib. 1. Epist. Japan Adject. Com. Eman. Acosta, of the Transactions of
the Jesuits in the East, and by Maffaeus the Jesuit, set forth at Delingtren,
Anno Dom. 1571. The Epistle is written by Xaverius to the Society from
Congoxima, on the First of November, 1549. Afterward the same Maffaeus, for
what reason I know not, left out this Epistle, from whence I faithfully
transcribed the Quotations abovementioned; unless it were that he was ashamed
of the Truth in his select Epistles written from India, which he added to his
Indian History, Printed at Cologn, Anno Dom. 1589.

Moreover, not to say any thing of the Work of Reformation begun and
propagated, then which a greater Miracle can hardly be imagined, I would fain
oppose the two following Observations to those that reproach us with want of
Miracles.

I. Miracles are not always among them, with whom they are wrought, as a mark
of Truth, when Heathens and Heretics formerly could boast of Miracles, and many
shall say to Christ in that day, Lord, have we not cast forth Devils, and
wrought many Wonders in thy Name? To whom he shall answer, Depart from me, for
I know ye not, Mat. 7. 21, 23. And there shall come false Christ's and false
Prophets, armed with Signs and Wonders, by which the Elect themselves, if it
were possible, shall be seduced, Mat. 24. 24. Thus Allius Naevius, the Augur,
cut a Whetstone with a Razor, in the view of all the People of Rome. And one of
the Vestal Virgins, as a confirmation of her untainted Chastity, took up Water
in a Sieve, and carried it away. And Claudia, another of the same Order, alone
without any help, with her Girdle drew along the Ship which carried the Mother
of the Gods, which many Mariners, hawling all together, could not stir.
Plutarch also, in Coriolanus, relates that the Image of Fortune spoke; and
often, as the same Author relates, in the same Life, the Images and Statues
were seen to Sweat, Bleed and Weep. St. Austin likewise tells us of many such
Portents that happened among the Gentiles, lib. 10 de civitate Dei. Tacitus
also. Hist. lib. 4. relates of Vespasian, that by his single Touch, he restored
Sight to the Blind, and Strength to the Lame. Bellarmin. cap. 14. de Not.
Eccles. That both their Diseases proceeded from the Devil, who having seized
the Eye of the one, and the Leg of the other, hindered the Use of their Limbs,
to the end he might seem to heal when he ceased to hurt. I do not see why the
Protestants may not use the same Exception against so many Miracles which the
Romanists seign by the Touch either of their Images or their Relics. But I
shall here furl my swelling Sails, Mr. Prior, being ready to explain and
enlarge my self, whenever you shall be pleased to reassume and examine this
Matter.

II. Miracles do not of necessity follow Truth. For though they were necessary in
the time of Infant Christianity; yet the true Religion being now established
and settled over all the World, if not manifestly profitable, they cease however
to be absolutely necessary. So that St. Austin, lib. 2. de civitate Dei, with
very great reason said, Whoever still enquires after Prodigies, to confirm his
Belief, is himself a great Prodigy. I forbear any more; let it suffice me only
to produce the Fathers of the Second Nicene Council, act. 4. Why do our Images
at this day work no Miracles? I answer with the Apostle; Miracles are not for
Believers, but for the Unbelievers. Now then if the Protestants embrace the
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles are
sufficient for them: Which would be necessary again, were they to follow some
new and never heard of Gospel before.

Nor does the difference, whatever it is, between the Reformed Churches and the
Lutherans, whatever it be Concerning the Differences of Protestants among
themselves.
either in Ceremonies, or some Points of Doctrine, savor a jot more your
precipitate Judgment concerning the Eternal Damnation of the Protestants. For
you Romanists your selves acknowledge, that the Greek and Eastern Christians
would be in the way of Salvation, would they but submit to the Empire of the
Pope, though they retained their Ceremonies and Opinions differing in many
Circumstances from the Rites and Doctrine of the Roman Church. It is apparent
from the Epistle of St. Austin to Januarius, that all the Churches did not make
use of the same Rites and Ceremonies. In the Apostolic Churches also, soon
after the first dawn of Christianity, Disputes and Contentions arose; to pass
by those that fell out between Cyril and Theodoret, Chrysostom and Epiphanius,
St. Jerome and St. Austin; nay, between those very Men themselves that reproach
the Lutherans and the Reformed with their differences, which I would to God
they were closed up, There is the greatest difference among these Upbraiders,
not only as to Ceremonials, as is apparent from so many Orders of Monks varying
among themselves in Habit, Rules and Public Worship; but also as to Opinions;
as is evident from those most terrible Controversies about which your
Theologists most sharply contend and quarrel one with another; of the Authority
of the Pope above a Council; of a Council above the Pope; of the Infallibility
of the Bishop of Rome; of his Power over Kings and Secular Princes; the
Conception of the Blessed Virgin; of the sort of Adoration due to the Cross and
Images; of Predestination, Grace, Free Will, and the like. So that the Doctors
of your Communion split themselves into various Sects; according to which some
are Thomists, others Scotists, others Real, others Nominal, others love to be
called Jansenists, and others Molinists. Nay, there is not any Article of the
Christian Faith, about which you have not raised Contentions and Disputes, if
not more sharp and eager, yet of no less moment then all those which are
stirring between the Reformed and the Lutherans. And that diversity which you
object against us, is far inferior to your Dissentions; nor is it concerned in
the Fundamentals of Christianity, in which the Reformed of both Parties are
plainly agreed. So that it is a kind of Miracle, that there should be so little
variance between so many Reformed Churches dispersed all over Europe, composed
of various People and under several Princes; though among them there is no Church
which commands over others, nor any intervening Political Tie to constrain them
to such an Agreement in Matters of Faith.

In the mean time, there is no Schism between ours and the Lutheran Churches,
seeing that we neither separated from Them, nor they from Us. In Poland, the
Brethren of the Helvetian, Bohemian and Augustan Confession, setting a laudable
Example, communicated before together, by virtue of the Decree of Sendomir. And
in the Year 1631, in the National Synod of France, a Decree was made for
admitting the Lutherans, as Brethren in Christ, and Members of the same
Mystical Body to our Communion of the Lord's Supper, and for allowing them
Brotherly Toleration in those Points wherein they differ from us. And though they
in their Anger pretend that we Err in Fundamentals, which, through the Mercy of
God, they will never be able to prove; yet we judge more tenderly and better of
them, so disproving the Opinions which they obstinately defend, that we deny
them to be in themselves deadly or pernicious to Salvation; or that they are
such as ought not to hinder Christian Peace between us and them, or prevent an
Ecclesiastical Communion which might be obtained between Churches not agreeing
in all things, if the Foundation were sound. Now we believe that to be a
Fundamental Error, wherein there is, according to the ancient Phrase of the
Synagogue, a Denial of the Foundation, which cannot comply with true Faith and
Holiness. For neither all Truths, even those that are revealed, are of the same
necessity: Neither are all Wounds which are given to Truth, Mortal; nor is
every Disease, an Epelipsie or the Falling Sickness. St. Paul distinguishes
between the Foundation and the Superstructure, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. He
that meddles with Fundamentals, is liable to an Anathema, Gal. 1. 8. In others
there is room left for Exhortation, Romans 14. 1. Phil. 3. 15, 16. Here the Gnat
is not scrupulously to be strained at, as there the Camel is not to be rashly
swallowed. We break Friendship with those that are openly Wicked, but we bear
with the blemishes and infirmities of Friends. Nor is that presently to be
thought of the necessity of Faith, which yet may have a near Relation to it.
And therefore you cannot blame us for offering our Communion to the Lutherans,
and rejecting the Papal. For that between us and them there is not only a
Harmony in the Foundation of our Faith, and all the most solid and necessary
Points of Christian Religion, but also in common Protestancy against the
Idolatry, Tyranny and foul Errors of the Church of Rome; both Sides impugning
the Adoration of the Bread, Transubstantiation, Sacrifice of the Mass,
Communion under One Kind, Justification by Works, Traditions not written,
Purgatory, Worship of Images, Infallibility of the Pope, etc. So that it would
be much better for us to arm our selves with mutual and brotherly forbearance
against the continual Conspiracies of Antichrist, then to lay our Sides open to
them through our unhappy Discords and Wars by which neither side can hope for
Triumph.

Far more absurd it would be to upbraid the Protestants Concerning the Number
of Protestants who do not submit to the Church of Rome.
with their small Number, or to infer their Damnation from that. For much more
numerous is the Number of Christians under the four Patriarchs in the East, and
the Great Duke of Muscovy and Russia, then of those who in the West adhere to
the Sea of Rome. Without question the Number of the Orthodox was very small, at
what time, as St. Jerome testifies, The whole World groaned, and admired to see
it self all Arian.

Scarcity makes things valuable; we are not to adhere to a multitude in Evil;
nor is the broad Way to be trod, but the narrow Path which leads to Life, not
pervious to many. If we must be excluded from Salvation for the smallness of
our Number; By the same reason the Pharisees of old might have damned the
Apostles, and the Heathens the Christians. In the mean time, they who reproach
us with our small Number, and glory in their own Multitude, when they come to
view the face of Europe, are compelled to talk after another rate. Bellarmin.
praefat. in Tom. 1. Controver. cannot restrain his fury. Who is ignorant (says
he) of that same Lutheran Pest (for Truth was a Plague to the Seat of
Pestilence, as Christ was the Death of Death, and a Pest to Hell) that sprung
up not long since in Saxony, and soon after overran almost all Germany; then
spreading to the North and East, deluged all Denmark, Sweadland, Norway,
Gothland, Pannonia, Hungary; and then with equal rapidness shooting to the West
and South, poisoned all England, France and Scotland, flourishing Kingdoms
once; and at last crossing the Alps, extended it self even as far as Italy?

Nor are we to be condemned, because we call our selves Reformed or
Protestants, rather then Catholics. For we were first called Protestants in the
public Diet at Spire, Anno Dom. 1529. because our Electors and Princes there
protested against the Errors and Superstitions of the Romish Church, plainly in
the fame sense as in the old Old Version of the 2 Chronicles. 24. 19. they who after
the Death of Jehoiada opposed themselves against Idolatry, were marked out and
differenced by the same Name.; but those Idolaters would by no means give ear
to the Protesters. So that there being no Satisfaction given to our Consciences
upon that Protestation, deservedly we deserted that Communion, which we
believed to be pernicious to our Salvation. Nor are we therefore to be thought
to have deserted the Church: For, as St. Chrysostom says very remarkably, Hom.
46. in Mat. He does not separate from the Church who separates Corporeally, but
he who Spiritually relinquishes the fundamental Truths of the Church. We have
left them Locally; They have forsaken us in Point of Faith: We in departing
from them, have left the Foundation of the Walls; They in forsaking us, have
forsak'n the Foundations of Scripture. We are called Reformed, not because we
reformed the Religion delivered us by Christ and the rest of his Apostles; but
because we cleans'd it from the Rust of Abuses and Corruptions which that holy
Religion had contracted through length of time, the Subtilty of Satan, and the
Vices of Men. And this Reformation the People, the Princes and Magistrates, and
those not a few, most earnestly and importunately longed for all over Europe:
So that the Tridentine Fathers, to satisfy the public Demands, at least in
outward show, were compelled to add something of Reformation to every one of
their Dogmatical Sessions. However we do not renounce these Names of Catholic
Protestants, Reformed, or Lutherans, seeing that addition of Catholic belongs,
of right, rather to Us then to you Romanists; for that the Doctrine which we
profess, is the Sincere, Orthodox and Catholic Doctrine of the Christian Church,
as the Apostles delivered it from the Beginning. Reformed we are, in reference
to the rejecting Abuses, and human Inventions; but Catholics, as we retain the
fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion. Nor can this Name suit with
them from whom we have departed in any other respect, then as they retain some
fundamental Truths, which as yet are common both to them and us; but not in
respect of their Additions and Traditions in which we dissent from them.

In vain do you glory against us, of retaining this Name by Force. For, as
Salvian of Marseilles says, lib. 4. de Provid. What is a holy Name without
Merit, but an Ornament in the Dirt? All the particular Assemblies of Heretics
(says Lactantius, lib. 4. Divin. Institut. cap. ult.) believe themselves to be
the chiefest Christians, and their Church to be the Catholic. The very Turks
would be called Musselmanni, that, is the Faithful or Catholic; but it suffices
us to be really Catholics. Good leave therefore have you from us, O Romanists,
to usurp this Name; as we call the Saracens Mahumetans, who nevertheless derive
not their Original from Sarah, as Sons of the Promise; but from Agar, the
Egyptian Bondwoman.

Thus all the Prejudices and Foundations of your precipitate Judgment being
repelled and removed, Venerable Mr. Prior, you constitute at length the only
Foundation of your Opinion upon this, That in regard that Of the Newness of the
Reformed Religion.
Ours is a new Religion, it is impossible we should gain Salvation by the
Profession. But those things which now are old, were formerly new. The
Christian Religion is at this day New to the Chinese and Japanners,
nevertheless they ought not to reject it for that Reason. For this very sake of
Novelty, the Heathens refused Christianity; but in vain. There is nothing more
Ancient then Truth, which beheld the true World in its Infancy: But false
Religion, the Older it is, so much is it the more Mischievous.

True it is, the Reformation which we profess, is New and newly done; but the
Rule of it, which is comprehended in the Word of God, is of great Antiquity;
according to which, whatever was added of Human Invention, is separated from
the Orthodox and Catholic Doctrine, to the end that true and refined Antiquity
might be retained. Hence the famous Peter Moulin, a Frenchman, in a large
Treatise against Cardinal Perron has more then sufficiently demonstrated the
Novelty of Popery, and the Antiquity of the Reformed Religion. Therefore our
Religion cannot be called New, since that alone propounds to us things to be
believed, which were believed by all Men, and every where from the Time of the
Apostles, according to the Rule of Vincentius Lyrinensis, and produces over and
above out of the Treasury of the Scripture, her most certain Documents: Where
it is apparent, That all those things which we disprove in the Roman Communion,
are really new and unknown to the Apostles and their Primitive Successors.

It is a New thing, and never heard of by the Ancient Church, that the
Christian People should be forbid the Use of the Cup in the sacred Eucharist.
It was a New thing, that Boniface II, above Six hundred years after Christ,
should be the first who called himself Universal Bishop, and Bishop of Bishops;
and long after him, that Gregory VII, or Hildebrand, should presume to lay
violent hands upon the Rights of Emperors and Princes. Nothing Newer then the
Papal Indulgences, which first gave occasion to the Modern Controversies at
Wittembergh and Zurich; Anthony Archbishop of Florence acknowledging, part. 1.
Tom. 10. cap. 3. That as for Indulgences, we have nothing in the Scripture
concerning them, nor from the Sayings of the Ancient Fathers; and the Jesuit
Valentia agreeing, cap. 5. de Indulg. That there were certain Catholics before
Luther, (of whose Opinion Thomas makes mention, part. 3. quest. 15. art. 5.)
who said, That Indulgences were pious Frauds.

Moreover, that the Eucharist was celebrated of old without Communicants, no
Man can find in the Writings of the Ancients. The Adoration of Images was not
established till near Eight hundred years after Christ, in the Second Council
of Nice; and that so slenderly, that the Decrees of that petty Council were
condemned and rejected in two Synods assembled at Paris and Frankford by
Charles the Great. And though these Synods were only National, hence nevertheless
it appears that all the Churches of Germany and France, of which Nations those
Synods consisted, had not then admitted the Public Worship of Images. Nay, even
George Cassander infers from St. Austin upon Psalm. 113. That Images and Statues
were not set up in Churches in St. Austin's time. Moreover Bellarmin reports of
Scotus, That he did not believe Transubstantiation to be an Article of Faith
before the Lateran Council; that is, before Five hundred years ago. The Law of
Celibacy, enjoined the Clergy and the Priests, is a very New thing, and to
which the Clergy of Liege and the Germans would not yield Obedience till about
Five hundred years since. At length Calixtus II, who was created Pope in the
Year 1119. constraind them all to submit, which produced these Verses upon him:

O bone Calixte, jam omnis Clerus odit, te,
Quondam Presbyteri poterant uxoribus uti,
Hoc destruxisti, postquam tu Papa fuisti,
Ergo tuum nomen merito habent odio.
The Clergy hate thee, Good Calixtus, why?
The Presbyters of old with Wives did lie;
This thou destroy'dst, when thou were Pope created,
Therefore thy Name is now deserv'dly hated.
The Apostles never knew what Monkish retirement meant, which came into the
World about Three hundred years after Christ, under Antony and Paul; but the
Church was utterly ignorant of Monkish Beggary, till the times of Francis and
Dominic, who, as all Men know, were but of late years.

I will not undertake here to unravel your whole History, otherwise there would
appear very little of Antiquity in it. For all those Opinions of the Romish
Church which we have rejcted, are not only new, but so new, that as the Abuses
multiplied, they were disliked and reproved by all good Men long before
Luther's time; among whom there were some, who being offended at such kind of
Innovations, and consulting the good of their Consciences, openly deserted your
Communion; as the Wicklevians in England, the Hussites in Germany, the
Waldenses or Albigenses in France and Germany, whose public Confessions are at
this day Extant, conformable to Ours in the principal Heads.

Nor can I forbear to add in this place a remarkable Testimony concerning the
Waldenses (whose Names for above Six hundred years has bin terrible to the
Roman See) given by one Rainer, an Inquisitor of the Faith against them, about
Three hundred years ago, and not long since published by Gretser the Jesuit:
Among all the Sects (says that same Rainer) that are or ever were, there is not
any one more pernicious to the Church (meaning the Roman) then that of the Poor
of Lions (meaning the Waldenses) for Three Reasons. First, because more
lasting; for some say, that it has bin ever since the time of Silvester, and
others deduce it from the time of the Apostles. Secondly, because more general;
for there is hardly any Country into which this Sect has not made a shift to
creep. Thirdly, because all others are abominable to God for the Immanity of
their Blasphemies, but this of the Waldenses only carries with it a great show
of Piety; because they live justly before Men, and believe truly of God, and
all the Articles of the Creed, only they blaspheme and hate the Roman Church.
But so much for Them.

Thus, Mr. Prior, you have what, as I was willing, so it was my desire to
Answer to your insipid and inconsiderate Letter. Do you see by what has bin
said, that you have violated the Divine, Civil and Public Laws of the
Instrument of the Peace of Munster; nay, which should first have bin said,
against the Rules of Christianity, which proscribes and abominates all such
Censures of our Neighbor worse then a Dog or Snake? What now remains of
Counsel or Remedy for such an unjust Judge? I will tell you:

Implore of God, and beseech your injured Neighbor, through whose sides you
have wounded such infinite numbers of Christians, to forgive you, and to pardon
these Transgressions of yours that are of so great weight.

Endeavor industriously for the future, like the smitten Fisherman, to Traffic
at a better rate, and to be transformed by renovation of Mind to this, that you
may be able better to prove, what is the good Will of God so pleasing and so
perfect.

Beware of being wiser then it becomes you to be; and with an unfeigned Charity
for the future, detest so wicked and perverse a Judgment, adhering to that
which is more solid; and if it may be, as much as in you lies, live at Peace
with all Men, that you may not be overcome by Evil, but may overcome Evil by
Good.

This pious and sincere Counsel if you slight and disregard, through Contumacy
and Despising it, assuredly there will nothing more certainly befall you then
this, That being deprived of Eternal Felicity (I repeat your own words) after
you have finished this Mortal Course, you will for ever burn with your Seducers
in the Everlasting Fire of Hell. From which however the Great God of his
infinite Mercy preserve you. Amen.

Farewell, and instead of a New-Years-Gift, meekly and with patience accept this
wholesome Answer and Admonition, more precious then Gold, or all the Kingdoms of
the World. Live soberly, and live eternally the Favourer of him who is

Visitor of the County of Weeden.

Most desirous of your Salvation, John Herman Dalhusius,

FINIS.

